THE LIVES OF EPAMINONDAS, OF PHILIP OF MACEDON, OF DIONYSIVS THE ELDER, AND OF
OCTAVIUS CAESAR AUGUSTUS: COLLECTED out of good Authors.

Also the lives of nine excellent Chieftaines of war, taken out of Latin
from EMYLIVS PROBVS, by S. G. S.

By whom also are added the lives of Plutarch and of Seneca: Gathered together,
disposed, and enriched as the others.

And now translated into English by Sir THOMAS NORTH Knight.

ANCHORA SPEI.



Imprinted at London by Richard Field 1602.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCESS ELIZABETH, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, OF
ENGLAND, France, and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc.
THE Princely bounty of your blessed hand (most gracious Sovereign)
comforting and supporting my poor old decaying life, of right challenges the
travels in my study, the labors of my body, and the prayers of my devotions
to be wholly employed for your Highness, and altogether dedicated to your
service. Wherein whilst I strive to bring in open show some small performance
of my most humble duty to your sacred Majesty, mine own unworthiness
amazeth me with trembling fear for my presumption, but that your Highness
matchless grace to so many your most admirable virtues offer my pardon. Under
which I present in all humbleness into your Majesty's sacred hands this my
second translation of the late addition of fifteen other lives, unto those
former in Plutarch, published for benefit of my country, under protection of
the most royal name of your most gracious Majesty. And albeit in respect of
my self I offer but duty, which I wish I could in other and better sort
perform: yet I am the rather emboldned herein, for that the famous memory of
renowned Emperors, mighty Kings, worthy Chieftaines and Generals of armies
yea and of two famous Philosophers Plutarch and Seneca, being the whole subject
of this second translation, is worthily published under your Majesty's
patronage. Whose rare virtues and wonderful wisdom, neither former mighty
kings, nor learned Philosophers might equal: from whose blessed fortunes many
oppressed Kings, and distressed kingdoms have sought and found their succors:
and whose most honorable and most happy peaceable government, is worlds
wonder to all posterity.

Wherefore most gracious and most blessed Sovereign, I beseech your Princely
favor to accept with grace the simple performance of your poor unworthy
servant his most humble service, whose soul with heartiest prayer according to
his most bounden duty, continually calls unto God for preservation of your
most royal person, in all honor, health, and happiness, and so still to
reign over us.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient servant. Thomas North.

THE LIFE OF Epaminondas.
(...)



O only like thy self, the world always
Admireth thy great valor, grace and wit:
And thinking to have all good parts in it,
By having thee, triumphs in thy praise.
WRiters of histories report that Cadmus the son of Agenor having taken sea
out of PHENICIA into EVROPE, by commandment of an Oracle he left the country
of THRACIA where he had dwelt, and came into BOEOTIA, where he had great doings
against a certain neighbor-people called SPARTANS: of whom having overcome
part of them by subtilties, he made alliance with the chief of those that were
left alive, and grew into such favor with them, that he drew them and their
people unto THEBES, where these great men which were of noble house took them
wives, and so had a great number of worthy men of noble race descended from
them. Of which some of them were very rich men, and attained to the tipe of
royal dignity: as Creon and Iocastus. Now because they were divided into two
principal houses, it is hard to judge out of which of the two families of the
Chronians or Echionides, Polymnis the father of Epaminondas was descended. Some
are of opinion that he came out of the house of another chief man of the
SPARTANS, called Vdaeus, from whom descended the divine Tiresias. But howsoever
it was, he descended from one of the most noble and ancient houses of the
THEBANS, of whom they report this notable thing: that the most part of this
noble lineage carried upon their body even for a natural birth-marke from their
mothers womb, a Snake: and so did they bear it in their arms in the device
of their Scutchions. Touching this matter, I hold the saying of the Poet
Euripides to be true: that the honor of noble houses falls to decay, if once
their goods fail the^. For the poverty whereof some of Epaminondas ancestors
made virtue and profession, seemed to be the cause that they were made small
account of. Otherwise I cannot allow that the said Poet spoke of, that a noble
and virtuous man is no body, if he be poor. For one Epaminondas only
thoroughly confuteth this opinion, who notwithstanding he was exceeding poor,
obtained nevertheless the chiefest places of honor in the common wealth: for
he was one of the best learned and most excellent Philosophers of the world,
being Platoes follower and familiar, and the most renowned man of all the
GREEKS, as appears by the discourse of his life. Now Polymnis had two
sons, to wit, Caphisias, and Epaminondas, whom he was very careful to see
well brought up and taught all the liberal and honest sciences, especially
Epaminondas: who had the most stayedst wit, and best inclined to virtue,
desirous to hearken and to learn, humble, obedient, and wonderful apt and
docible. And according to the discipline of the THEBANS, he learned of one
Dionysius to be very skillful in song and playing upon instruments. And as for
learning, and in Philosophy chiefly, it happened well for him that he fell into
good men's hands by such a mean. When the colleges and companies of the
Pythagorian Philosophers that were dispersed through the cities of ITALY, were
banished by the faction of the Cyloniaus: they that kept still together, met in
council at METAPONT to determine of their affairs. But some seditious persons
rose against them, set fire in all parts of the house where they were, and
burnt them all together, saving Philolaus and Lysis, who being young and lusty,
saved themselves through the fire. As for Philolaus, he recovered the country
of the LVCANIANS, and kept there with his friends: but Lysis went further, and
got to THEBES, where when he was arrived, Polymnis received him, and prayed him
to be Epaminondas schoolemaister, who was but a young boy, but yet of good
capacity, and of very great hope. This Philosopher employed his endeavor to
manure this noble and quick wit of Epaminondas, and in short time made him
ready and perfect in all science and virtue: so that it is hard to find a more
wise, grave, and virtuous person then he was, of whom it is fit we should say
somewhat more at large. When he was but fifteen years of age, he gave
himself to all manner of exercises of the body, as to run, wrestle, play at
the weapons, and to practice all manner of arms: and being quickly skillful in
all these, he then gave himself to his book, being naturally silent,
fearful to speak, but never wearied to hear, and to learn. Whereupon
Spintharus the TARENTINE having been a long time with him in THEBES, said he
never spoke to any man that knew so much and spoke so little as Epaminondas. If
he fortuned to be in any company where there was talk of Philosophy, or of
state matters: he would never from thence till he saw the matter ended that was
propounded. Furthermore, he had no great liking of these dark and mystical
arguments of some, that think to hide virtue in the obscurity of their words,
but he gave himself wholly to the true practice thereof: though otherwise he
was as pleasant a man to give a fine slent in discourse, as could be possible
to be found. As the disputation betwixt him and Theanor, touching poverty and
riches does witness, which worthily deserves to be mentioned here, as in his
proper place.

Lysis after he had lived a long time in THEBES, died, and was honorably
interred by his disciple Epaminondas, who had honored and entertained him
whilst he lived, and at his death omitted no ceremonies requisite at his
funeral. Arcesus, one of the chief of the Pythagorian Philosophers that
stayed in SICILIA, understanding that Lysis was at THEBES, through age not able
to go to him: appointed by his will and testament that they should bring Lysis
alive again into ITALY if it were possible, or at leastwise the rest of his
bones, if it so happened he were dead. The wars that fell out in the interim
were a hinderance that that could not be done so speedily. But when the ways
were open and free, the Pythagorians sent Theanor of their sect to THEBES,
where he found Lysis dead and buried, and so coming to Epaminondas, after
salutations and preambles, told him before Polymnis and Caphisias that his
companions which were very rich, willed him to give Polymnis and his children a
good sum of money, in recompense of their courteous entertainment which they
had given to Lysis. Whereupon after pleasant excuses made, Epaminondas
concluded, that none could be received: and added further, that Iasona Captain
of the THESSALIANS thought I had given him a rude and uncivil answer, when he
having earnestly entreated me to take a good sum of gold which he gave me, I
sent him word that he did me wrong, and began to make war with me: for that
he aspiring to make himself a Lord, would corrupt me with money, a plain
citizen of a free town, and living under the law. But for thee, Theanor, I
commend thy good will, because it is honest and virtuous, and I love it with
all my heart: but I tell thee, thou bring physic to men that be not sick.
Admit then that thou hearing we had been in wars, had brought us arms to
defend us, and then in the same place thou had found us quiet, and in good
peace and amity with our neighbors, thou would not have thought it good to
have bestowed these arms, and left them with those that had no need of them.
Even so thou art come to relieve our poverty, as if it were a grief unto us:
whereas to the contrary it is an easy and pleasant thing for us to carry, and
we are glad we have it in our house amongst us: and therefore we need no arms
nor money against that that does us no hurt at all. But thou shall tell thy
brethren there, that they do use their goods very honestly: and also that they
have friends here which use their poverty well. And as for Lysis entertainment
and burial, he himself has fully recompensed us: having taught us amongst
many other goodly things, not to be afraid of poverty, nor to be grieved to see
it amongst us. After Theanor had made some reply touching the good or evil of
riches: as that if poverty were not evil of it self, neither was riches to be
had in contempt, and despised. No truly said Epaminondas, yet considering with
my self that we have a world of covetous desires of many things, some natural
as they call them, and borne with us, bred in our flesh for the lusts
pertaining to it: others strange unto us grounded upon vain opinions, which
taking a settling and habit in us by tract of time, and long use through evil
education, ofentimes do pluck us down, and withdraw our souls with more
force and violence, then those that be natural unto us. For reason, by daily
exercise of virtue and practice thereof, is a mean to take many of those
things away from us that are borne and bred within us: yet this
notwithstanding, we must use continual force and exercise against our
concupiscenses that are strangers unto us, to quench them in us, and by all
possible means to repress and subdue them. Now having made sufficient proof
of that, there is also, said he, an exercise of Justice against greedy
covetousness of getting, which is not, not to go rob and rifle his neighbors
houses in the night, nor not to rob men on the hie way side, nor if any man
betray not his friends nor his country for money: such one does not exercise
himself against covetousness, for law possible, or fear, bridleth his
covetous desire to offend any man. But that man that oftentimes willingly
abstaineth from just gains, which he may lawfully take: he it is that by
continual exercise keeps himself far off from unjust and unlawful taking
of money. For it is impossible that in great pleasures, yea wicked and
dangerous, the soul should contain it self from coveting of them, unless
before being oftentimes at his choice to use them, he had not contemned them.
And it is not easy to overcome them, nor to refuse great riches evil gotten
being offered, unless he had long before killed in him this covetous desire of
getting, the which besides many other habitudes and actions is still greedily
bent shamefully to gain, pleasing himself in the pursuit of injustice, hardly
sparing to wrong another, so he in any thing profit himself. But to a man that
disdaineth to receive liberality and gifts of his friends, and refuses to take
presents offered him by kings, and that has rejected the benefits of fortune,
putting by all covetous desire of glistering treasure laid before him: he
shall never be assailed to attempt him to do that is unjust, nor his mind shall
never be troubled, but will content himself quietly to do any thing that is
honest, carrying an unright heart, finding nothing in it but that that is good
and commendable.

But his life is far more excellent then his discourse: and as touching that,
I will yet speak somewhat of it. Diomedon DYZICENIAN, at Artaxerxes request,
promised to win Epaminondas to take the PERSIANS part. To bring this to pass,
he came to THEBES, and brought a great mass of gold with him, and bestowing
three thousand crowns, he bribed a young man called Mycithus, whom Epaminondas
loved dearly. This young man went to Epaminondas, and acquainted him with the
occasion of the other man's coming to THEBES. But Epaminondas straight answered
him, Diomedon being present: I have no need of money: if the king wish well to
the THEBANS, I am at his commandment without taking one penny: if he have any
other meaning, he has not gold nor silver enough for me: for I will not sell
the love I bear to my country for all the gold in the world. As for thee that
have now attempted me, not knowing me, happily thinking me to be like thy self,
I pardon thee: but get thee away quickly out of the city, lest thou seduce
some other, having failed to corrupt me. And for thee Micythus, deliver him his
crowns again: and if thou do it not presently, I will send thee before a
Justice. Thereupon Diomedon besought him he would let him go away with safety,
and carry that with him he brought thither. Yes mary, said Epaminondas, but it
shall not be for thy sake, but for mine honor: being afraid that if thy gold
and silver should be taken from thee, some man would accuse me that I had a
share in that which I refused to take openly. Then he asked him: Whither
would thou I should cause thee to be conveyed? Diomedon said, TO ATHENS:
which was done, and he had a very good conuoy with him: and because he should
not be troubled by the way betwixt the gates of THEBES, and the haven where he
should imbarke himself, Epaminondas gave Chabrias the ATHENIAN charge of this
man, that he should see him safe at his ways end, and so he straight returned
back again.

Now though he was very poor, yet he would never take any thing of his city
or friends, he was so well acquainted with poverty, which he bare more
patiently through his study of Philosophy. For on a time he having the
leading of an army of the THEBANS into the country of PELOPONNESVS, he
borrowed about five crowns of a citizen for his expenses in his iourny.
Pelopidas being a man of great wealth, and his exceeding good friend, could not
possibly ever make him take any part of his goods, but rather Pelopidas learned
of him to love poverty. For Epaminondas taught him to think it an honor to
him to go plainly apparelled, to eat moderatly, to take pains willingly, and
to make war lustily. But to relieve others, he would make bold to use his
friends goods, and in such a case their goods were common to him. If any of his
citizens were taken prisoner with the enemy, or any friend of his had a
daughter to be married, and was not able to bestow her: he called his friends
together, and sessed every man of them at a certain sum, and afterward
brought him before them that should have this money, and told him how much
every man had bestowed upon him, that he might thank them all. But on a time
he went far beyond this: for he sent a poor friend of his to a rich citizen
of THEBES, to ask of him six hundred crowns, and to tell him that
Epaminondas willed him to let him have them. The citizen being amazed at this
demand, went unto Epaminondas to know what he meant to charge him so deeply,
to make him disburse these six hundred crowns unto him. It is, says he,
because this man being an honest man, is poor: and thou that have robbed the
commonwealth of much, art rich. He lived so soberly, and was such an enemy unto
all superfluity and excess, that being on a time invited to supper to one of
his neighbors, when he saw great preparation of fine meats, baked meats,
made dishes and perfumes: he said unto him: I thought thou had made a
sacrifice, not an excess of superfluity, and even so went his way. Even the
like he spoke of his own table, saying, that such an ordinary never received
treason. On a time being at a feast with his peers and companions, he drank
vinegar. And when they asked him what reason he had to do so, and if it were
good for his health? I cannot tell, says he, but well I wot it is good to put
me in remembrance how I live at home. Now it was not for that his nature
misliked sweet meats, that he lived thus strictly, and did love and embrace
poverty, for he was marvelous high and nobly minded: but by his straight and
unreprovable life he led, he thought to bridle many insolences and disorders
then reigning amongst the THEBANS, and to reduce them to the former temperance
of their ancestors. As upon a time a cook giving up an account to him and his
fellows of their ordinary expenses for certain days, he could find fault
with nothing, but with the quantity of oil that was spent. His companions
maruelling at it: Tush, says he, it is not the expense that offends me, but
because they have powered in so much oil into their bodies. The city of THEBES
made an open feast, and they were all of them in their banquets, feasts, and
great assemblies one with the other: but Epaminondas to the contrary, he went
dry up and down the town very sad, without being anointed with any oil of
perfume* or decked with brave apparel. Some of his familiar friends met him in
this estate, and wondering at him, asked him why he walked so alone, and ill
apparelled through the city? Because, said he, you might in the mean time
safely give your selves to drink drunk, and make merry, taking thought for
nothing. Thus have we spoken enough touching his temperance: and as for his
other virtues they are most famous in arms, the which he with great good
fortune and happiness managed for the good of his country.

Now his modesty would in no wise suffer him to seek his advancement, but
contrariwise he withdrew himself from government, only to give himself
quietly to the study of Philosophy. Howbeit it happened that the
LACEDAEMONIANS on a time prayed aid of the THEBANS, at that time being in
league with them, who sent them certain foot-bands. Epaminondas being about
five and thirty years of age, armed himself, and went with the rest. Then it
was that that friendship began betwixt Pelopidas and him, which constantly
continued even to the end. For they both being in battle ray the one by the
other, against the ARCADIANS, whom they had in front against them in the plain
of MANTINEA, it chanced that one of the points of the battle of the
LACEDAEMONIANS in the which they were, retired, and many of them left their
ranckes: but they being resolute, determining rather to die then to fly, stood
to it like men, until that Pelopidas being hurt in seven places, fell down
upon an heap of dead bodies: then Epaminondas, though he took him to be but a
dead man, stepped manfully before him to defend his body and arms, and he
alone fought against many, resolved to die in the place, rather then to leave
Pelopidas among the dead men, until that himself being thrust into the breast
with a pike, and wounded in the arm with a blow of a sword, (ready to give
over) by good fortune and in a happy time, king Agesipolis came on with the
other point of the battle, and saved them both. Afterward the LACEDAEMONIANS
finely wanne the castle of THEBES called CADMEA, put in a strong garrison
there, and gave the government of the city unto Archias, Philippus, and
Leontidas, authors of all the mischief. Whereupon to avoid their violence,
Pelopidas and many others with speed fled and saved themselves, and were
banished by sound of trumpet. And as for Epaminondas they said nothing to him,
but let him alone in the city: for he was contemned as a man of no reckening,
because he was so given to his book: and if he should have had any will to
have stirred against them, he could have done them no hurt for his poverty.
Now whilst Pelopidas and his companions being at ATHENS, had laid a plot to
free THEBES, Epaminondas making no show of any thing, had long before devised
another practice, which was: to lift up the hearts and courage of the young men
of THEBES. For when they went out to play and exercise their bodies, he always
found a way to make them wrestle with the LACEDAEMONIANS. Afterward when he
saw the LACEDAEMONIANS fiercely throw them, and give them shrewd falls they
being the stronger, he rebuked the THEBANS, and told them, it was a shame for
them for want of courage, to suffer the LACEDAEMONIANS to set their feet upon
their throats, that were not half so strong, rough, and boisterous as they
were. All this while Pelopidas and his followers went on with their complot,
and they had so good success in their purpose, that one night they got privily
into the city of THEBES, and met at Charons house, where they were to the
number of eight and forty. Epaminondas knew all well enough, and some toward
night taking him aside, went about to persuade him to join with them in this
enterprise, and to take arms with them to set upon these tyrants: maruelling
much, that he would be so backward, the liberty of his country standing upon
it. He answered, that he had taken order with his friends and Gorgidas, that
they should put themselves in readiness upon any occasion, howbeit that he
would put none of his citizens to death, unless they were condemned by law:
yet if you will make an attempt for delivery of the city, so it be without
murder, and shedding the blood of the citizens, I will help you (said he)
with all my heart. If you will not believe me, but persevere in your
determination, I pray you let me alone, pure and undefiled with the blood of my
citizens, and so blameless to attend occasion, whereby I may justly take hold
of that which may turn to the good of the commonwealth: for the murder that
will be committed, cannot possibly be contained within reasonable bounds. I do
certainly believe that Pherecides and Pelopidas peradventure will specially
set upon the authors of the tyranny: but Eumolpidas and Samiadas, both
choleric and fierce men, taking the liberty of the night, they will never lay
down their arms, nor put their swords up into their sheathes, before they
have filled all the city with murders, and slain diverse of the chief
personages. Moreover, it is very convenient for the people of THEBES, that some
be left free, and blameless of this murder, and guiltless of all that shall
be done in this fury of action: for so the people shall least suspect that we
give any encouragement to their rising, although to good end. Notwithstanding
all this the enterprise was executed, and the tyrants put to death, the city
restored to her ancient liberty, and the castle of CADMEA rendered up by
composition, and Lysandridas the LACEDAEMONIAN and other commanders within,
suffered to depart, with safety of their goods and the soldiers.

These were the beginnings of the long wars of the LACEDAEMONIANS against the
THEBANS, with whom the ATHENIANS joined in league. For Epaminondas, he quietly
gave himself to his book: notwithstanding he was put forward by Pammenes, a
principal man of THEBES, and he began to follow the wars very hotly, and in
diverse encounters made great proof of his wisdom, hardiness and valor:
insomuch that by degrees he attained at the length to the highest charges of
government in the commonwealth. And his citizens having made no further
reckoning of him, being a man of forty years old: after that they came to
know him, and had trusted him with their army, he saved the city of THEBES
that was like to have bin undone, and freed al GREECE from the servitude and
bondage of the LACEDAEMONIANS: making virtue as in a clear light shine with
glory, showing her effects when time serves. Furthermore, Agesilaus being
entered into BOEOTIA with an army of twenty thousand footmen, and 5. thousand
horse, preyed and spoiled all the plain country, and presented the THEBANS in
open field that which they would not accept, finding themselves the weaker:
howbeit they defended themselves so well, through the aid of the ATHENIANS,
and of the wise conduction of Epaminondas and Pelopidas, that Agesilaus
returned home with his army. But after he was gone, the THEBANS went with
their troops before the city of THESPIES, where they surprised and put to the
sword two hundred men of the garrison, and afterward gave diverse assaults one
upon another unto the wall, and seeing their labor lost, they returned with
their army back again to THEBES. Howbeit Phoebidas the LACEDAEMONIAN, he that
had taken the castle of CADMEA by treason, (whereupon rose all this war that
followed) and was then governor of THESPIES, made a sallie out of the town,
and rashly went to give a charge upon the THEBANS in their retreat, where he
lost five hundred of his men, and himself was slain in the field. Not long
after, the LACEDAEMONIANS with the self same power returned again to make war
with the THEBANS, who having won certain streights and places of advantage,
so blocked up the way, as they could not ouerrunne the country, and spoil it
as they had done before. Nevertheless, Agesilaus had so harried and troubled
them, that by little and little they came to a maine battle, which held very
long and cruel. Now though Agesilaus at the first had the better, yet the
THEBANS charged him so hotely, that at the length he himself was hurt, and
constrained to retire, being well paid for teaching the THEBANS military
discipline. And this was the first time that the THEBANS knew themselves to be
as strong and lusty as the LACEDAEMONIANS: whereupon they triumphed in sign
of victory, and from that time forwards, they waxed more courageous to make
head against the enemy, and to present them battle. But the only thing that
did most encourage them, was the presence of Epaminondas, who counseled,
commanded, and executed very wisely, valiantly, and most fortunately. A
certain time after that, they went with a great number of good chosen men
before ORCHOMENE, where they prevailed not, because there was a strong garrison
of the LACEDAEMONIANS, that sallied out upon them to give them battle, which
was very sharp between them. And yet, albeit the LACEDAEMONIANS were many
against one, the THEBANS gave them the overthrow, which never happened to them
before: but what nation soever they had been, they thought they had done a
great feate, if with a greater number by many, they had overcome a small number
of the LACEDAEMONIANS. But this victory, and the encountering of TEGYRE, where
the THEBANS obtained another victory under the conduct of Pelopidas, lift up
their hearts on high, and made their valor more famous then before.

The next year following, Artaxerxes king of PERSIA, meaning to make war in
EGYPT, and therefore to retain diverse strangers, determined to appease the
wars against the GREEKS in hope that they being at peace, would more easily
be contented that soldiers should be leauied in their country: and thereupon
sent his Ambassadors to all the towns of GREECE, to persuade and entreat them
to be at peace together. The GREEKS were very willing to hearken unto it,
being wearied of all sides with so long a war, and were easily drawn to
treat of peace: whereby it was especially agreed and concluded, that all the
cities of GREECE should be free, and use their own laws; and commissioners
were sent all about to withdraw the garrisons in every place where any was
kept. Unto this the THEBANS only refused to agree, that every town should by
it self severally capitulate in this treaty, requesting that the towns in
the country of BOEOTIA should be comprehended under the city of THEBES.
Thereunto the ATHENIANS mightily opposed themselves, and there was one of their
Orators called Callistratus, that touching this matter made a notable oration
before the assembly of the states of GREECE. And Epaminondas on the other side
also, made a wonderful and vehement oration in defense of the right of the
THEBANS: insomuch as this controversy was left undecided, and the treaty of
peace was universally agreed and concluded amongst all the other GREEKS, the
THEBANS only excepted, who were not comprised within the treaty. So through
the motion of Epaminondas, they were bold to withstand the decrees of all the
rest of GREECE. For the ATHENIANS and LACEDAEMONIANS that many years before had
contended for the principality of GREECE, made then division together: so that
the one should command by sea, and the other by land. Thus they could not like
in no wise, that the THEBANS should aspire to be chief, and therefore they
sought to dismember the other towns of BOEOTIA, from the city of THEBES. And
the rather for that the THEBANS being strong and lusty of body, and encouraged
for that of late they had oftentimes beaten the LACEDAEMONIANS, would strive
with them for the superiority of GREECE by land, but specially they had a
wonderful confidence in the wisdom and prowess of their Captains, but
especially of Epaminondas. Matters resting thus doubtful, the citizens of
PLATAEES, a town of BOEOTIA, desirous to be at league with the ATHENIANS, they
sent to request some soldiers of them, promising to put the town into their
hands. The governors of the country of BOEOTIA having intelligence of it,
desirous to prevent the garrison of the ATHENIANS, brought a troop of
soldiers against them, and they all came before PLATAEES, before the towns
men had any knowledge of their coming: insomuch that part of them were
surprised in the fields by the horsemen, and the other fled into the town. But
having no body to aid them, they were compelled to receive and accept such
composition as it pleased the THEBANS to grant them: which was, to leave their
town, and to go safely with bag and baggage, and never to return again
into the country of BOEOTIA. After this, the THEBANS razed the city of
PLATAEES to the ground, and had the sack of the town of THESPIES enemy unto
them. All the GREEKS solicited again by the Ambassadors of PERSIA, thought it
good to make a general peace, and so assembled the commissioners of all the
towns at SPARTA. Epaminondas that was yet scant known, because he loved not
to show himself, and in all his exploits of war had ever preferred the
advancement of his great friend and companion in arms Pelopidas, before
himself: yet famous among the GREEKS for his great knowledge and experience,
was sent thither by the THEBANS. Epaminondas finding that the other
commissioners did lean to Agesilaus, began to speak boldly and plainly, and
made an oration, not only in the THEBANS behalf, but for all GREECE also:
making them plainly see, that war did still increase the greatness of the
city of SPARTA only, and keep all the rest of the towns of GREECE under.
Therefore he gave counsel to all to establish a firm peace indifferently
betwixt them, that thereby it might have the longer continuance, when all
comprised within the contract should be equals. Agesilaus perceiving all the
GREEKS assistant at this assembly to give very attentive ear unto him, and to
be tickled, hearing him speak so freely of peace: he asked him aloude if he
thought it just and reasonable, that all BOEOTIA should be set at liberty.
Epaminondas on the other side, did presently and boldly ask him again, if he
thought not also that it was just and reasonable that all LACONIA should be set
at liberty. Thereupon Agesilaus in anger stood up on his feet, and commanded
him to answer plainly, if they should not restore all the province of BOEOTIA
to her liberty. Epaminondas returned the self same speech again unto him: if
they should not also put that of LACONIA in her liberty. This did so anger
Agesilaus, besides that it did him good to have this color for an old grudge
he bare unto the THEBANS, that forthwith he put the name of the THEBANS out of
the list of those that should be comprised within the peace, and immediately
proclaimed open war against them. But this being done had evil success
afterward, and by reason of the sudden and rash enterprise of the
LACEDAEMONIANS, it turned to their utter overthrow. For the THEBANS, there was
no remedy but they must bear the whole brunt alone: for there was not a town
that durst send them any aid, because they were all agreed and sworn to this
peace, insomuch as every one thought them utterly cast away and undone. Many
pitied their estate, and they that loved them not rejoiced: they made so full
account, that the LACEDAEMONIANS should find nothing that could stand before
them.

So the LACEDAEMONIANS made king Cleombrotus march with his army toward
THEBES: and being come near to CHAERONEA with ten thousand footmen, and a
thousand horse, he pitched his camp there to stay for the rest of his allies.
The THEBANS having intelligence of the approach of the enemy, chose Epaminondas
to be captain general, giving him the charge of this war, with six other
Councellers, whom they call Beotarches, as who would say, Governors of
BOEOTIA, to be of his counsel, and to assist him. Now there came Oracles to
the THEBANS from all parts: some promising victory, others threatening
overthrow. He commanded them to set those on the right hand of the chair for
Orations that promised victory: and those that threatened overthrow on the left
hand. They being thus disposed of, he got up to the chair for Orations, and
said to the THEBANS: If you will be obedient to your Captains, and courageous
of heart to encounter your enemies, these here, (showing the good Oracles on
the right hand) are yours: but if for faint hearts you refuse danger, those
there (showing the bad on the left hand) shall be for you. Thereupon enrolling
all the THEBANS names that were of age to bear arms, and of some parts of
BOEOTIA those that he thought fittest for wars: word was brought him that a
very honest and valiant man of his person died in his bed. O Hercules, said he,
what, had this man leisure to die in all these troubles? His presence rejoiced
and made all his army lively: also all the time he was Captain of the
THEBANS, they never saw any of these terrors happen in his camp without
manifest cause, which they call sudden fears. He was wont to say, that there
was no death more honest, then to dye in the wars: and that the body of a
soldier should not only be kept in exercise like the champions that fight for
maistrie, but rather more hardened to endure any labor or pains meet for a
good soldier. And therefore he could not abide very fat men, but cassered a
whole band of them for that cause only: saying that scarce three or four
targets could cover so great a belly, as did keep him that he could not see
his own priuities. So he drew his army out of THEBES, having in all but six
thousand fighting men. Even as they were marching away out of THEBES, diverse of
the soldiers thought they had had many unlucky signs. For as they were going
out of the gates, Epaminondas met on his way a Herald, that following an
ancient ceremony and custom of theirs, brought an old blind man as if he had
been run away: and the Herald crying out aloud, Bring him not out of THEBES,
nor put him not to death, but carry him back again, and save his life. The
old men took this meeting and cry for an evil sign: but the young men kept
silence, and spoke never a word, for fear it should be thought that their
hearts failing them, they would seek to dissuade Epaminondas from going the
journey he had undertaken. And he himself, unto some that were bold to tell
him, that it were well done before he went any further, to consider first what
success the flying of the birds did promise unto him, answered this verse of
Homer: It is a happy sign, to fight for his country.
Such a present and francke resolution stopped the mouths of all those that
were not very constant. But there happened yet another sign worse then the
first. For there went a Secretary before him carrying a Iauelin, unto the which
was tied a scrole to make the soldiers know that they should do what the
General commanded them. The wind rose and blew off this scrole and carried it
away, folding it upon a square pillar that stood upon a tomb of certain
LACEDAEMONIANS, and PELOPONNESIANS, that had been slain in that place when
Agesilaus brought his army thither. Also there came again certain old men
unto him to speak with him, persuading and protesting that he ought not to go
any further with his army, since the gods were so manifestly against it. All
this notwithstanding he never ceased to march with his camp, thinking that
the conscience and resolution to fight in a good cause, ought to be much
stronger and of more force to put him in good hope, then these evil signs
that appeared to make him mistrust the worst. And as in marching to meet with
the LACEDAEMONIANS they heard it thunder: they that were near unto him, asked
him, what that thunder meant? That, faith he, betokens that the enemies
brains are troubled and astonished: seeing they having hard by them so
commodious places to campein, they now lie encamped where they are. Indeed they
halted, staying for diverse of their allies that came not: all of them having at
better leisure considered of the discourse Epaminondas made in SPARTA in open
assembly of all the commissioners of every town, against the ambition of the
LACEDAEMONIANS. For him therefore applying to good purpose at that time all the
goodly discourse he had learned by the study of Philosophy, for the present
time the common people blamed him much: but after the fortunate success of his
intention, every man then judged him to be a man ripely understanding the duty
of a wise and valiant chieftaine of war. For making his army march with
speed, he wanne the straights hard by the city of CORONEA, and camped there.
Cleombrotus on the other side, understanding that the THEBANS had gained that
passage, dispairing he could not pass that way: made his army go a great
compass about by the country of PHOCIDE, and marching along the sea side in
a very troublous and dangerous way, at the last he pierced into the country
of BOEOTIA without aany danger. And as he went also he took in little towns,
and certain galleys that lay alongest that coast, and in the end arrived at
LEVCTRES: and there set down to refresh his men a little, ouer-wearied with
travel in their journey. The BOEOTIANS marched presently that way to meet with
them, and so passing over some little mountains, they discovered them in the
plain of LEVCTRES, which did amaze them, seeing so great an army.

The Boeotarches thereupon came together to consult whether they should go
forward, and to fight one against many: or else retire, and find out some
better place of advantage. In this counsel their opinions fell out to be
equal: for three of them thought it good to retire: the other three with
Epaminondas, said, they must tarry and fight. So the conclusion of this
counsel being doubtful, and the Boeotarches disagreeing, Pelopidas captain
of the holy band came to the^, who was of the second opinion: so that they all
agreed together to put it to the hazard of battle. But Epaminondas seeing
their soldiers afraid through the superstition of these signs, devising by
some like remedy to put this mistrust out of their heads: to bring this to
pass, some being newly come from THEBES, he willed them to say and give it out
every where, that no man could tell at THEBES what was become of the arms that
hung up in Hercules temple: but that the voice was all the town over, that the
ancient demigods their ancestors had come and taken them away, for the aid
of their descendants at this present time. He suborned another also, that gave
it out he was newly come from Trophonius truncke or hole, and that the god
which gives the Oracles in the same, commanded him to tell the BOEOTIANS that
after they had overcome their enemies in the plain of LEVCTRES, they should
celebrate yearly plays in the honor of Jupiter. And thereof it came that the
BOEOTIANS long time after that did yearly celebrate a feast, which is made in
LEBADIA. Now to end the painting of this artificial devise, Leandrias a
SPARTAN, being a banished man out of his country, and fighting at that time
for the BOEOTIANS, being brought before the soldiers, whom they encouraged to
fight like men the day of the battle: he did swear unto them that the
LACEDAEMONIANS had an ancient Oracle, that said they should lose their
principality, when they should be overcome by the THEBANS in a pitched field,
in the plain of LEVCTRES. It is true indeed that the LACEDAEMONIANS had had
many oracles and forewarnings to bid them beware of the anger of LEVCTRES: but
the common people understood not what this warning meant, but were deceived by
the equivocation of the word: for that there were three LEVCTRES: to wit, in
LACONIA, ARCADIA, and BOEOTIA. Howbeit, the vision of Pelopidas, whereof is
made large mention in his life, and the sacrifice he made of the young Filly
that came into his camp, confirmed all the former inventions, and made them
bold that were most discouraged. Adding withal, that Epaminondas having
assembled all his army, began to encourage them with these strong and lively
reasons to show their valor: insomuch, that being freed from this
superstitious fear, they longed for nothing more then to come to blows.
Epaminondas ever concluded all his orations in this manner: O worthy men,
embrace sacred death, aduauncing your selves to the most honorable and famous
fight for your country, for the tombs of your ancestors, and for the holy
things. Even at the same time came to the THEBANS an aid of five hundred
horse, and fifteen hundred footmen THESSALIANS, conducted by Jason: who
practiced with both sides to make a peace for certain days, telling them he
was not wise that feared not the events. Some judge it was not at that time
that Jason traveled between them both, but rather that it was after the
journey of LEVCTRES. Howbeit, I have followed that which Diodorus the SICILIAN
writes, as a thing most likely. Now as Cleombrotus retired with his army out
of BOEOTIA, he met with a great supply of natural LACEDAEMONIANS, and of some
of their allies, brought to him by Archidamus, Agesilaus son. The
LACEDAEMONIANS seeing the THEBANS so resolute, and fearing their desperate
boldness: sent these two troops the easilier to daunt the courage of their
enemies. These two being joined together they were ashamed to be afraid of the
BOEOTIANS, and whether it was that the truce taken was near expired, or that
they forced not of it, they returned on the sudden again into the plain of
LEVCTRES fully bent to fight. The BOEOTIANS also for their part shrunk not an
inch back, and so on both sides they set their men in order of battle. For
Epaminondas, he set his battle after a new fashion, never before showed by any
other Captain. For having chosen out of his army the best men and valiantest
soldiers he had, he placed them together in one of the points of his battle,
where he should be himself and fight in person, seconded with Pelopidas, with
his three hundred chosen men, called the holy band: and in the other corner he
placed his weaker men, commanding them expressly not to abide the charge of the
enemies that should come to assail them in front, but fair and softly to
retire when they saw them come near them. So the matter fell out as he wished:
and he hoped to determine the battle by the virtue and prowess of that point
where he had placed all the flower and choice of his army.

Now the sign to fight being given, the LACEDAEMONIANS marched of even hand
with the two horns of their battle, ordered in form of a Cressant. On the
contrary part, one of the wings of the battle of the BOEOTIANS began to give
back, and the other with great fury ran to charge the enemy in the
flancke: straight they were both come to the sword together. And at the first,
because either side fought very desperately, the victory was doubtful for a
certain time: but at the length Epaminondas troops brake in amongst the
LACEDAEMONIANS, and killed the most part of them that were about king
Cleombrotus. So long as the king was alive, he kept back the THEBANS from
victory, because he was accompanied with all the most valiant men of his army,
valiantly fighting about him. But after he fell down dead on the ground,
having received an infinite number of wounds, and stricken down many of his
enemies: then they thronged together on all sides, and there was a cruel fight
about his body, where were heaps of men's bodies slain one upon another. And
although Epaminondas did sharply follow his point, yet the LACEDAEMONIANS made
such resistance at the last, that they did a little repulse the BOEOTIANS and
cleared the body of the king out of the press and multitude: but that held
not long. For Epaminondas through his persuasions did so lift up the hearts and
courage of his men, that they gave a second and so fierce a charge upon them,
that they wholly overthrew the LACEDAEMONIANS, and made them fly for life.
Then Epaminondas fiercely pursuing the flying enemies, made great slaughter,
and wan one of the most gloriousest victories that ever Captain did: having in
a pitched field overcome the most noble and warlike nation of all GREECE, with a
far smaller number of men then his enemies had. Also he took more glory of
that above all his other exploits, and especially because it happened unto him in
his father Polymnis life time. And oftentimes he had these words up in his
mouth: that of all the honest and happy fortunes that ever chanced unto him,
nothing ioyed his heart more, then that he had vanquished the LACEDAEMONIANS at
the battle of LEVCTRES, his father and mother that begat him being both alive.
And to say truly, he that day preserved the life of his father and mother, and
of his whole country besides: for the LACEDAEMONIANS were fully resolved
utterly to destroy the THEBANS. Now he using at all other times to show
himself amongst them, fine and neat, with a pleasant countenance: the next day
after the battle at LEVCTRES he came out openly very sad, heavy, and pensive.
Whereupon his friends asked him presently if he had heard any evil news, or
some misfortune had happened to him. None, said he, but I perceived by my self
yesterday, that ouerioyed with the victory I obtained, I lift up my self more
then became me: and therefore to day I correct this joy, which yesterday was
too exceeding in me. He knowing that it was the manner of the SPARTANS to hide
and cover (as well as they could possible) all such misfortunes, desirous
openly to suppress and show the greatness of the loss they had sustained: he
would not suffer them to carry away their dead bodies by great all together,
but every city one after another: and so by this means it appeared that there
were above a thousand LACEDAEMONIANS. Some make the number of the dead to be
greater, and say they were four thousand natural LACEDAEMONIANS, but that
must be understood of them and their allies: and of the BOEOTIANS, there were
not above three hundred or thereabouts found dead. This battle of LEVCTRES was
stricken at the beginning of the 2. year of the hundred and second Olympiade.

The LACEDAEMONIANS having at that battle lost the greatest part of their
honor and greatness, which men had seen before in their estate, lost not
their courage for all this: but to keep their youth still in heart, and to
take away all fear which had possessed them that had escaped from this
overthrow: Agesilaus entered ARCADIA with an army, and was contented to take a
small town of the MANTINEEANS, and to prey and spoil the country, which done
he returned home again. Some think that this was the cause that brought
Epaminondas into LACONIA. Othersome report it otherwise, and say that Agesilaus
would not suffer the MANTINEANS to reedifie their city. And there be that are
of another opinion, which is: that Lycomedes Captain of the ARCADIANS having
made a rode hard to ORCHOMENE, he slew upon an encounter Polytropus Captain of
the LACEDAEMONIANS, and 2. hundred SPARTANS with him, his purpose being to win
ORCHOMENE: and that thereupon they finding themselves too weak to stand
against the LACEDAEMONIANS, they sought the alliance and aid of the THEBANS.
How soever it was, the LACEDAEMONIANS and ARCADIANS being enemies, by reason of
their chief city of MANTINEA: that was the cause the THEBANS joined with the
ARCADIANS, and being followed with their allies, led by Epaminondas, they
entered into LACONIA with an army of forty thousand men of war, and with
thirty thousand others that followed the camp. The ATHENIANS sent Iphicrates
Captain with twelve thousand men to aid the SPARTANS: but before his coming
Epaminondas entered into LACONIA in diverse places, and sacked all the whole
country, which had not been laid wast by any enemy in six hundred years
space before, when the DORIANS came to inhabit there. The SPARTANS seeing
their country wasted and destroyed before their eyes, were desirous to go out
with all the force they could make: but Agesilaus would not suffer them,
telling them how dangerous it was to leave the city, to set upon such a
mighty enemy. So they were quiet, and Epaminondas in the mean space
descended the mountain Taugete with his army, toward the river of Eurotas,
the which at that time was risen very high by reason of the winter. He sought
what he could to draw Agesilaus to fight, who beholding Epaminondas a great
while, marching in battle ray along the rivers side at the head of his
troops: he wondered at his boldness and valor, but would by no means come
out of his fort. Insomuch as after this army had preyed and foraged all
LACONIA, Epaminondas led them back again laden with booty. And though
Agesilaus had won himself great honor for his wisdom, in looking to the
safety of his city: yet Epaminondas had made his country so poor, with the
former losses sustained, especially at the overthrow at LEVCTRES: that SPARTA
could never afterward recover that loss again, nor grow into that reputation
and power it had before. Furthermore, notwithstanding all the aid of the
ATHENIANS, and the experience of Iphicrates, Epaminondas returned with his
whole army as he came. And the more to keep the LACEDAEMONIANS still under
their feet, and to heap new troubles upon them: he gave counsel to the
ARCADIANS and other their allies, to reedifie and replenish the city of
MESSINA with new inhabitants again, which the LACEDAEMONIANS had long before
that destroyed. All the whole council giving their consents unto it, he made
diligent inquiry forthwith to seek out all those that till that time had been
ancient inhabitants in MESSINA: and in the space of fourscore and five days
having reedified the ruined houses, he set a foot again one of the noblest and
most ancient cities of GREECE, and left there a strong garrison: for the which
he was as much esteemed and rather more, then for any other service he had ever
done.

The LACEDAEMONIANS being lightened of a marvelous great fear, made an
agreement with the ATHENIANS, and left them the chief command by sea,
reserving to themselves that by land. Afterward through the aid of the
ATHENIANS, and the supply that was sent unto them out of SICILIA, they wan
their towns again by little and little. The ARCADIANS to stop their course,
assaulted the city of PALLENE in LACONIA, put all the garrison there to the
sword, razed the town, and preyed all the country thereabout: and doubting
that the LACEDAEMONIANS would be revenged, they prayed aid of the THEBANS, who
sent Epaminondas thither with the other Boeotarches, six thousand footmen, and
five hundred horse. The ATHENIANS having intelligence thereof, sent their army
before under the leading of Chabrias, who marched directly to CORINTH, and
there had supply of soldiers, of the MEGARIANS, PALLENIANS, and CORINTHIANS:
so that he had made up a regiment of ten thousand men. And afterward the army
of the LACEDAEMONIANS and of their allies, being arrived at the very place of
CORINTH, they made all together the number of twenty thousand fighting men. So
they determined to repair and fortify all the passages and entrances into the
country of PELOPONNESVS, to stop the passage of the BOEOTIANS. And beginniug
from the city of CENCHREES unto the haven of LECHEVM, they shut and blocked up
all the ways from the one sea to the other, with mighty great pieces of timber
a cross, and with a marvelous deep ditch. And this great piece of work was
followed with such speed, both by means of the great multitude of people, as
also through the goodwils of those that labored it hard: that they had
finished and done all before the BOEOTIANS could arrive there. Epaminondas at
his coming having diligently viewed and considered this fortification,
perceived that the easiest way to be forced, was that which the LACEDAEMONIANS
themselves kept. So he sent to give them defiance, though they were thrice as
many men in number as his own. For all this that they had the defiance, they
durst not come out, but kept them close under this fortification, which
receiving certain assaults, they were repulsed. Now all of them doing their
best endeavor, being occupied, some assailing, other defending, Epaminondas
chose out the best men in all his army, and lustily charging the guard of the
LACEDAEMONIANS enforced them to give him way, and in despite of them he entered
into PELOPONNESVS, which was a wonderful and memorable exploit of all others.
From thence he marched toward the cities of EPIDAVRE and TROEZEN, and so
foraged all the country: howbeit he could take none of the towns, because
they were defended with strong garrisons. Nevertheless he put SICYONE,
PHEVNTE, and some other towns in such fear, that they yielded themselves unto
him. That being done, he went to CORINTH, and there overcame the CORINTHIANS in
a set battle, and bet them home fighting even to the walls of their city.
There were some of his men so rash, and presuming of their valor, that they
entered hand over head with those that fled, even within the gates of their
city, which put the CORINTHIANS in such a terrible fear, that they ran with
all speed possible to get their houses over their heads. Chabrias beat them out
again, and killed some of them. Whereupon he caused a token of triumph to be
set up, as if it had been an overthrow. Epaminondas laughing him to scorn for
it, said he should not call it a Trophee, or token of triumph, but rather
Hecatesie, as one would say, a statue of Proserpina: because in times past they
commonly set this image of Proserpina at the first gallows they found before
the gate of any city. The BOEOTIANS therefore came on with their battle as
near unto CORINTH as they could, and Chabrias with his troops camped without
in a very strong place of advantage for him: so there were many skirmishes
between them, in the which Chabrias showed such valor, that he wan great fame
and reputation, even of Epaminondas himself. Who being asked on a time whom he
thought the greatest captain, himself, Chabrias, or Iphicrates: It is hard to
judge, said he, whilst we are all alive. Another brought him word that the
ATHENIANS had sent an army again into PELOPONNESVS, furnished with new
armours. Well, answered he, does Antigenidas weep when he knows that Tellin
has new flutes? This Tellin was a very bad player of the flute, and
Antigenidas excellent good and skilful. Touching the supply of this army, they
were ten thousand SPANIARDS and GAVLES, whom Dionysius the tyrant sent out of
SICILIA to aid the LACEDAEMONIANS, having paid them for five months. They
had served reasonably well in this war, and so in the end of summer returned
home again.

Now it fortuned in these last encounters, that Epaminondas having forced the
LACEDAEMONIANS that stood to the defense of the fortification above mentioned,
and having them in his power to have slaughtered a great number of them at his
will: he contented himself only with this glory, that in despite of them he
had entered into PELOPONNESVS, and sought to do them no more hurt: which gave
those occasion that did envy his glory to blame him, and to accuse him of
treason, as having willingly spared the enemies, because they should
particularly thank him only. But now that we have begun to speak of this
matter, we must see how he behaved himself among his citizens, and the
wisdom he used in defense of his integrity. Among all those that could not
endure the glory of his virtues, was Meneclides the Orator, an eloquent man,
but withal most wicked and malicious. He finding that Epaminondas wan such
honor by wars, never left persuading the THEBANS to embrace peace, and to
prefer it before war: because they should not live always under the
obedience and command of one man. Epaminondas told him one day in open
council: Thou will deceive the THEBANS, going about to counsel them toleaue
wars: and highly commending ease, thou go about to put iron bolts upon
their feet. For war begets peace, the which cannot hold long but among
those that know how to seek and keep it with the edge of the sword. Then
speaking to the citizens: If ye will have the principality and command of all
GREECE, before all others: you must shroud your selves in your tents and
pauilions in the open field, and not follow games and wrestlings here at home.
Also he knew well enough that the BOEOTIANS spoiled and undid themselves by
ease and idleness: which was the cause that he constantly bare this mind to
keep them continually in wars. Whereupon when time came that they fell to
choosing of Captains, and that they went about to choose him Boeotarche: he
said to the citizens: My masters, I pray you consider of it now you are at
leisure, before you choose me: for I tell you plainly, if I be chosen your
captain, you must to the wars. He called the country of BOEOTIA, which is
all plain champion, the scaffold of war: saying it was impossible to keep
it, unless the inhabitants had their targets on their arms, and their swords
in their hands. This was not because he did not love peace, and solitariness
to study Philosophy, and that he was not more fearful of them he had in his
charge then for himself, using always to watch and forbear his meat, when
the THEBANS were at their banquets and feasts giving themselves to all
pleasures: but he knew them well enough, and he was never more careful of any
thing, then to keep his army from idleness. For on a time the ARCADIANS
entreating that his troops might enter into one of their towns, to lie dry
there in covert all the winter, he would by no means yield to it. For now
(said he to his soldiers) that they see you exercise your selves in arms,
they wonder at you as brave and valiant soldiers: but if they should see you at
the fire side parching of beans, they would esteem no better of you then of
themselves. No more could he endure covetousness: for if sometime he gave his
men leave to go a booting, his meaning was, that whatsoever they got should be
bestowed in furnishing of arms. For if any man went about to fill his purse
with money, he thought him unworthy to be a soldier. As on a time when he
perceived that his Target-bearer had received a great sum of money for the
ransom of a prisoner, he said unto him: Give me my target, and go thou thy
ways, and buy thee a Tavern to lead the rest of thy life there: for I
perceive thou will no more like an honest man put thy self in danger in the
wars, as before thou have done, because thou art now rich and wealthy. Now
Epaminondas being such a one as you have heard, Meneclides notwithstanding
would never cease controlling of him: and one day he went so far as to reproach
him that he had no children, that he was not married, and that he magnified
himself more then ever king Agamemnon had done. Epaminondas answered him, thou
have nothing to do to counsel me to marie: for in that respect there is never
a man here in all this council whom I would less use then thou. And this he
spoke, because the other was suspected to be an adulterer. And where thou
think that I do envy the glory and fame of Agamemnon, thou art foul
deceived: yet I tell thee he was not a little troubled to win a town in ten
years: where I to the contrary putting the LACEDAEMONIANS to flight in one
day, have delivered our city and all GREECE from them. But thanks be to you,
my Lord THEBANS, (speaking to all the whole assembly:) through you I did it,
and overthrew and ruined the power and government of our enemies.
Nevertheless, Pelopidas and he were very evil recompensed for this good
service of theirs: for at their return from LACONIA, they with some other of
the Boeotarches were accused, for that after the time of their charge and
government was expired, they had kept it four months beyond the time the law
had appointed them. With much ado Pelopidas was absolved: but Epaminondas
willed his companions to lay all the fault upon him, as being forced unto it by
his authority: and that for his part his words could be no better then his
deeds. So upon this he being called before the Judges, and after he had
justified that he had passed the time limited of his authority: in stead of
excusing himself, he went and told bravely his worthy exploits he had done in
this journey at that time, adding withal, that he was willing and ready to
die, so they caused his condemnation to be written upon the pillar of his
tomb, to the end the GREEKS should understand that they had put Epaminondas to
death, because he had compelled the THEBANS against their wills to burn the
country of LACONIA, the which in five hundred years before had never once been
spoiled: that he had restored the city of MESSINA with inhabitants again, two
hundred and thirty years after the LACEDAEMONIANS had laid it wast: that he
had brought all the people and towns of ARCADIA to be as one body in league
together, and had set all the GREEKS at liberty: and all these things, said
he, we did in our journey. The Judges understanding this worthy and true
defense, they all rose from their seats and laughed a good, and would never
take their bals to ballot against him.

But as for this second accusation, that he had showed favor unto the
LACEDAEMONIANS for his own particular honor, he would make no answer before
the people of THEBES to this false imputation, but he rose out of the Theater,
and passing through the assembly walked into the park of exercises. The people
being in uproar against him, made no choice of him again as they were wont to
do, although there was great need: but created other Boeotarches to go into
THESSALY. And the more (as they thought) to despite Epaminondas, they
commanded him to go that voyage as a private soldier: the which he refused
not, but went very willingly, and upon this occasion. Pelopidas being sent the
second time into THESSALY, to make accord betwixt the people and Alexander the
tyrant of PHERES, was by this tyrant (not respecting the dignity of an
Ambassador, nor of his country) made prisoner with Ismenias. Whereupon the
THEBANS being justly offended, sent thither an army of eight thousand footmen,
and five hundred horse, howbeit under the leading of unskillful Captains, who
wanting judgment to use the time, thought it good to return home again
without doing any thing. But as they went their way, Alexander being stronger
in horsemen then they, followed them, and gave charge upon the rere, killed
some, and grievously wounded others. So they knowing neither how to go forward
nor backward, were in great distress, and the rather because their
victualsfell shorter every day then other. But being now almost out of all hope
to retire home with safety, Epaminondas being then amongst the foot, was
earnestly entreated by the soldiers and Captains to help to redress this
disorder. Thereupon he chose certain footmen light armed, and all the
horsemen, and so falling himself amongst them in the rereward of the army, he
so lustily repulsed the enemies, that the rest of the army afterward marched
in great safety: and did so well, fighting at times, making head as occasion
served, and keeping his troops in so good order, that he brought them all away
safe. This act crowned him with a new glory, confounded his enemies, and wanne
him great honor every where, besides the love and good will of his citizens:
who set great sines upon their Captains, because they had hehaued themselves
so evil in this journey. Again, the people seeing that by so many worthy
deeds Epaminondas razed out all the slanders and accusations which his evil
willers had vomited out against him: they chose him a new their Captain
general, to return into THESSALIE with another army. At whose coming all the
country straight rejoiced for the reputation of so great and famous a Captain,
and there wanted little even to break this tyrants neck* altogether, his
friends and Captains stood in such fear, and his subjects in good mind to
rebel, and very joyful for the hope they had shortly to see the tyrant at one
blow well recompensed for all his cursed and wicked deeds he had done long
before. Nevertheless Epaminondas* setting aside the consideration of his
honor and glory, in respect of the deliverance and safety of his friend
Pelopidas, and being afraid that Alexander, when he should see his estate in
danger to be overthrown, would take revenge in his madness upon Pelopidas:
he purposely drew this war in length, wheeling about in every place,
refraining to set on him in earnest, dissembling to make his preparations, and
still delaying, because he would prepare and soften the heart of this tyrant by
this device, not to leave him too much to his bold unbridled will, neither to
stir up (to the danger of Pelopidas) the sharp and inhumane anger of this
bloud-sucker. Who being a monster, compounded of cruelty and cowardice, was so
afraid only of the name and reputation of Epaminondas, and hanging the wing as
they say: that he presently sent men unto him to excuse and justify him. But
Epaminondas would not that the THEBANS through his slacknesse should make peace
and alliance with so wicked a man, but only he was contented to take a truce
with him for thirty days, taking Pelopidas and Ismenias out of his hands. So
with them he returned back again to THEBES, and always continued faithful
friendship with Pelopidas, refusing ever to have any part of his goods, but did
still persevere in his wonted simplicity and discipline. Now speaking of this
friendship, they report that Epaminondas having committed a man of base
condition for some light fault to prison, Pelopidas prayed him to set the poor
man at liberty, but he denied him: and yet afterward being entreated by a
woman he kept, he did it at her request, saying that harlots were to be
granted such requests, not Captains.

This boldness he showed in all places, and to all men, yet mingled with a
great sweetness, and with a good lively grace: whereof we will bring many
examples, besides that he spoke at SPARTA against the LACEDAEMONIANS and
Agesilaus, in the presence of all the commissioners of GREECE. The ARGIANS
having made league with the THEBANS, the ATHENIANS sent their Ambassadors into
ARCADIA, to see if they could gain the ARCADIANS to be their friends. So these
Ambassadors began roundly and hotly to charge and accuse both the one and the
other: insomuch as Callistratus speaking for them, reproved the other two
cities, ORESTES and OEDIPVS. Epaminondas being present at that assembly of
counsel, stood up, and said: My Lords, we confess that in times past we had a
man that killed his father in our city, and in ARGOS one that killed his
mother: but for us, we have driven out of our country, and banished all such
wicked murderers, and the ATHENIANS have received them both. And to the
SPARTANS that had laid many great and grievous imputations upon the THEBANS:
If they have done nothing else, my Lords of SPARTA, answered Epaminondas, yet
at the least they have made you forget to speak little. The ATHENIANS had made
league with Alexander the tyrant of PHERES, mortal enemy of the THEBANS, who
promised the THEBANS that he would let them have a pound of flesh for an half
penny. Epaminondas hearing of it, Well said he, and we will find them wood that
shall cost them nothing to sees this flesh withal: for we will go fell and
cut down all the trees they have in their country, if they go about to make
any alteration other then good. So when he went into THESSALY, and brought
back Pelopidas again, the ATHENIANS made no great stir against him: and the
tyrant that promised flesh so good cheap, had much ado at that time to keep
his skin whole. But afterward he had his payment, as you may read in the
latter end of Pelopidas life. But that which did excel in Epaminondas, and did
cut the throat of envy it self, was his moderation and temperance, knowing how
to use any state or condition offered him, and never to rage against himself
nor others, always bearing this mind, that howsoever they took him, and in
what place soever they set him, he was well contented, and all for the good of
his country: for proof whereof I will show you this example. His evil
willers on a time thinking to bring him in disgrace, as they say, for spite
they made him superintendant and ouerseer of all the customs, whilst others
his inferiors, unworthy to be compared to him, were placed in the most
honorable offices. This notwithstanding he despised not this office, but did
discharge it very faithfully: for, said he, office or authority shows not
only what the man is, but also the man what the office is.

But now further: shortly after Epaminondas return out of THESSALY, the
ARCADIANS were overcome by Archidamus and the LACEDAEMONIANS, and they lost not
a man: and therefore this days journey was called for them, the tearelesse
battle. Epaminondas foreseeing that the ARCADIANS should yet have a storm,
gave them counsel to fortify themselves: whose counsel they following, they
built the town which afterward was called MEGALIPOLIS, situated in a very
convenient place. Whilst they made war with the ELIANS their neighbors,
Epaminondas heart never fainted, but his mind was always given to high
enterprises for the good of his country: where being respected and honored
above all others, he made an oration unto his citizens, persuading them to make
themselves strong by sea, and to attend the conquest of the principality,
making themselves Lords of it. This oration of his had been long thought of
before, being full of lively reasons, which did show and prove unto them that
the enterprise was both honorable and profitable, as well by other arguments he
alleged, as also for that he told them it was an easy thing for them that
were now the stronger by land, to make themselves also the strongest by sea:
and the rather for that the ATHENIANS in the war against Xerxes,
notwithstanding that they had armed and set forth two hundred galleys well
appointed with men, they nevertheless willingly submitted themselves unto the
LACEDAEMONIANS. So alleging many other reasons to this purpose, he prevailed
so much, that the THEBANS inclined to undertake the enterprise by sea.
Thereupon the people gave present order they should build a hundred galleys,
and withal an arsenall with so many rooms to lay them under covert in the
docke: and that they should send to them of RHODES, of CHIO, and of BYZANCE, to
pray them to further them in this enterprise. And for this purpose Epaminondas
was sent with an army unto these cities. So in his course he met with Laches, a
Captain of the ATHENIANS, and a good number of ships in his fleet, sent of
purpose to hinder the intention of the THEBANS. Notwithstanding, Epaminondas
made him so afraid, that he drove him back again: and he holding on his
voyage, brought the cities before named to make league with the THEBANS, who on
the other side were at war with the city of ORCHOMENE, which had done great
hurt and mischief in their estate. So they having won it by assault, they slew
every man that was able to bear arms, and moreover made all the women and
children slaves.

Some time after Pelopidas death, certain private men of MANTINEA, fearing to
be called to account for their bad behauiours and robberies they had done, if
the ARCADIANS and ELIANS fell to agreement: they practiced so, that they raised
up a new quarrel within the country divided into two factions, of the which
the MANTINEANS were chief of the one side, and the TEGEATES on the other part.
This quarrel went so far, that the parties would try it by arms. The
TEGEATES, they sent to demand aid of the THEBANS, who chose Epaminondas their
Captain general, and sent him with a good number of men of war to aid the
TEGEATES. The MANTINEANS astonished at this aid coming out of BOEOTIA to their
enemies, and at the reputation of this Captain: they immediately sent unto the
ATHENIANS and LACEDAEMONIANS, the greatest enemies of the BOEOTIANS for aid,
which both the cities granted. Whereupon there fell out often and many great
skirmishes in diverse parts of PELOPONNESVS. Epaminondas being not far off
MANTINEA, understood by the same country men, that Agesilaus and the
LACEDAEMONIANS were come into the field, and that they wasted all the territory
of the TEGEATES. Whereupon imagining straight that there were few men left in
the city of SPARTA to defend it, he went about a great exploit, and a
wonderful stratageme of a man of war: and had brought it to pass, if the
marvelous great good fortune of SPARTA had not hindered it. So he departed from
TEGEA by night, the MANTINEANS knowing nothing of it, and taking another way
then Agesilaus, he had taken SPARTA without one stroke stricken, but for a post
of CANDIA that with speed brought Agesilaus word of it: who forthwith sent out
a horseman to give them intelligence that were left at SPARTA, that they should
beware they were not surprised upon the sudden: and he himself came speedily
after, and arrived there a little before the THEBANS coming thither: who being
very near the city by break of day, gave assault to them that were within to
defend the town. Then Agesilaus bestirred him thoroughly, beyond the power of
an old man. But his son Archidamus, and Isadas the son of Phoebidas, fought
valiantly of all parts. Epaminondas seeing the SPARTANS in order of battle,
began then to mistrust that his enterprise was discovered. This
notwithstanding, he left not off to force them all he could, albeit he fought
with great disadvantage for the inconvenience of the places he occupied: and
continued always courageously doing and receiving hurt, until the army of the
LACEDAEMONIANS came on, and the night also: whereupon he made them sound the
retraite. Now he being advertised that the MANTINEANS came on also with their
forces, he drew his troops somewhat further off the town, and there camped.
After that he caused his men to refresh themselves with victuals, and having
left certain horsemen in the camp, he commanded them to make fires in the
morning, and he himself went in the mean space, to surprise those that
remained at MANTINEA before any man wist he was gone. Nevertheless he failed
of his purpose, albeit he had forethought him of all misfortunes that any man
possible could have considered in so weighty a cause. But the prosperity of the
THEBANS was come to his height, and the course of Epaminondas life drawing
near to an end, would very shortly deprive GREECE of this noble and famous
person, from whom was taken a most notable victory, and that twice, by a most
strange accident. For at this second time, when he was near unto MANTINEA,
left without guard and defense; on the other side of the town there arrived six
thousand ATHENIANS, led by their Captain Hegelecus: who having put sufficient
force into the town, he ordered all the rest in battle without the town
walls, as though he meant to have fought a field: and immediately after them came
also the LACEDAEMONIANS and MANTINEANS together, who prepared themselves to put
all to the hazard of a battle, and therefore sent for their allies out of all
parts. They were in all five and twenty thousand footmen, and two thosand
horse. The ARCADIANS, BOEOTIANS, and their partakers, made the number of thirty
thousand footmen and above, and three thousand horse. First, the horsemen
charged with so great fury as was possible, insomuch as the horsemen of the
ATHENIANS finding the THEBANS in front, were the weaker: not because they were
less valiant and hardy then the other, but because they had not so good
leaders, and had few archers among their troops. The THEBANS on the other side
they were well appointed, and specially of THESSALIANS amongst others, men very
skillful in their bows, who so plied the ATHENIANS, that they brake them, and
put them all to rout. Yet they did not fly amongst their footmen, which made
them somewhat recover their honor they had lost by running away, and all
because they had not broken the ranks of their allies. On the contrary part,
as they fled they met with certain troops of soldiers of NEGROPONT, whom the
ARCADIANS sent to take in certain hills hard by the plain where the battle
was fought, and they put them all to the sword. The men at arms of the THEBANS
seeing them turn their backs, did not pursue them at all, but gave charge
upon agreat battalion of footmen, forcing them all they could to break and run
through them: so the fight was very cruel and sharp, but in the end the
ATHENIANS left the place. This notwithstanding, the Colonel of the horsemen of
the ELIANS being appointed for the safety of the reregard, defended them, and
coming to the encounter of the BOEOTIANS he resisted them, and made them
speedily give back: and this reformed the fault again of the left point of
their army. But in the right point, after the horsemen had charged one upon the
other, the fight was soon tried. For, by reason of the great number of the men
at arms of the THEBANS and THESSALIANS, the partakers of the MANTINEANS were
presently put to rout, and after they had lost a great number of their men,
they succored themselves about the battalion of their footmen. And this was
the success of the fight of the horsemen. As touching the battalions of the
footmen, after they came once to the sword, it was a marvelous bloody and
most cruel fight: for never before that time was there so great a number of
GREEKS in battle one against the other, nor so great Captains, nor of better
fighting and more valiant men. The two nations that at that time bare the name
to be the brauest soldiers for footmen of all the world, to wit, the THEBANS,
and LACEDAEMONIANS, they were set in front in the battle one directly against
the other. So the first began to charge, neither sparing life nor limme. The
first charge they gave was with their pikes, which being broken by force of the
great blows they gave to each other, then they fought with their swords, and
laying about them body to body, there was no kind of slashing and wounding but
they both gave and received: and neither part shrunk nor gave over, but stuck
to it manfully. And so continuing this dangerous fight a long time, by reason
of the valiantness of either side: the victory stood doubtful a great while,
and could hardly be judged which side were like to have the upper hand. For
every one that fought had this resolution in his heart, not to fear death what
soever happened: but rather desiring to make proof of the valor of his person,
worthily gave his life in pray, to win honor in exchange. By reason whereof,
though the fight was most sharp and violent, the event of it remained a long
space betwixt two irons, not to be discerned of whether side the victory
should fall. Until such time as Epaminondas seeing that there was no remedy,
but that the resolution of this doubtful fight depended upon his own virtue
and valor: he resolved with himself to venture his life upon it. So he
presently gathered about him all the best and choice men of his army, and of
them having made a company of resolute men, he ran with great fury into the
greatest press of all the enemies, marching himself the formest man before
his troop, with a spear in his hand, with the which at the first blow he
gave, he slew the Captain of the LACEDAEMONIANS, straight way the other began
to assail their enemies. But Epaminondas killed so many in the place with his
own hands, and did so terrify the others, that at the last he opened the
battle of his enemies, and laid on them so lustily, that they not able any
longer to defend themselves against the valorous force of himself and his
followers, were enforced to give back, and to leave the place to the
BOEOTIANS: who were straight at their heels, beating and following them so
eagerly, that in a short space all the field was covered with dead bodies,
lying on heaps one upon another. But in the end, the LACEDAEMONIANS seeing
they could by no means save themselves, because Epaminondas followed them so
near (given over too much to his passionate courage) they gathered a troop
together, and running all on heaps they set upon him, throwing infinite number
of darts at him, of the which he put by some, and received others upon his
target, but yet there were many that stuck in his body, which he pulled out
himself, and with the self same weapons fought with them that had thrown
them at him. At the last, when he had fought more then a man, and beyond all
the force a man could use to give his country the victory: a LACONIAN called
Anticrates thrust him into the breast with a dart with such a force, that the
wood brake, and the iron with the tronchion remained in his body. Having
received this great wound, he suddenly fell down to the ground: but then was
there a more cruel fight about him then before, with great slaughter of both
sides: until that the THEBANS, which had much stronger bodies then the
LACEDAEMONIANS, made them fly for life, and after they had followed them a
little way, they returned again to the camp where the battle was fought, to
the end they might have the dead bodies in their power, and so the whole
victory. Thereupon they sounded the retraite, and thus the battle ceased, for
the which both of them set up tokens of triumph, either side pretending they
had the better. For the ATHENIANS having overthrown those of NEGROPONT and
their adherents which were sent to take the hills of that plain: they kept the
bodies in their power. The THEBANS on the other side having overcome the
SPARTANS, had the bodies of those that were dead in that battle in their
power, being the far greater number also: wherefore they said that they were
victours. So standing in these terms, it was a good while before they sent
trompeter or herald the one to the other, to bury their dead: until that the
LACEDAEMONIANS sent first of all, and then they all took their dead bodies and
buried them. And furthermore, he that had killed Epaminondas was so well thought
of, and highly esteemed for this valiant act of his, for the great fear all
the SPARTANS had had of Epaminondas in time past: that they gave him many great
presents and honors, and besides, made those that came after him free from all
public charges and contributions in the common wealth. And Plutarch also
said, that in his time one Callicrates, a nephew of Anticrates above named, did
then enjoy that freedom. Touching Epaminondas, he was brought yet alive into
his tent: howbeit the physicians and surgeons being called together to dress
him, they all agreed, that so soon as ever they pulled out the head and splent
of the dart out of his body, he must needs dye. So he made a most worthy and
noble end of his life: for first he called for his target-bearer, who was
always at his hand in battle, and asked him, Is my target safe? He brought it
straight to show it him. Then he asked who had the victory? The BOEOTIANS, said
the target-bearer. Then he commanded they should bring him Diophantus and
Iolidas: but being told they were both dead, he willed his citizens to make
peace with their enemies, for that now they had no more Captains of skill to
lead them to the wars. Adding further to that above spoken, It is now time I
dye, and so commanded them to pluck this spell of the dart out of his body. At
that word all his friends about him fetched grievous sighs and cried out: and
one of them weeping, said unto him: Alas Epaminondas, thou die now, and
leauest no children behind thee. No that I do not, said he: but I leave two
fair daughters behind me, whereof the one is the victory of LEVCTRES, and the
other that of MANTINEA. Immediately they pulled out the spell of the dart, and
at that instant he gave up the ghost, without showing any sign or token that
he was troubled in his mind. And thus did he embrace that blessed death: that
fortuning unto him which he often had in his mouth: that war is the bed of
honor, and also that it is a sweet death to dye for his country. Now may we
well see, that he excelled all the Captains that ever were before him, did
accompany, or follow him. For whosoever would compare all their virtues, with
the deeds and glory of Epaminondas, he shall see that the virtue of him was
more noble and excellent, then any of theirs. For in them will appear at the
first sight some special thing more eminent then all the rest, which has made
their fame great and glorious: but in this man only were joined together all
the virtues and good parts that could be wished for in a grave, politic, and
a great Captain, to make him perfect and complete in all things. For in the
liberal sciences, in experience, ripe understanding, force of eloquence,
strength of body, disposition of his person, in height and greatness of
courage, in temperance, wisdom, watching, sweetness and courtesy: and
moreover in hardiness, prowess, good judgment, and sufficiency in military
discipline: I know not where there is to be found so complete a man. For my
opinion, I compare Epaminondas to himself. Also in his time he wan to his
country by force of arms, the principality of GREECE: but after his death his
citizens lost it immediately, and fell daily to decay: that at the last
Alexander the great utterly overcame them, made them that were alive slaves,
and destroyed their city to the very ground. To conclude, before, and after
Epaminondas, THEBES was under foot, and yet commanded all others whiles he
stood on his feet. And so we must conclude, that THEBES was utterly
overthrown in the battle of MANTINEA, and that Epaminondas at that time wan
an immortal glory. And as in his life time he had carried himself modestly,
and always detested covetousness: so after his decease the THEBANS brought
him to his grave at the common charge of the town, because they found no money
in his house to defray the least charges of his funeral.

The end of Epaminondas life.
THE LIFE OF Philip of Macedon.
(...)



Philip: that wisdom booteth not at all,
Which scorning justice, hopes to climb on high.
Let Princes that behold thy sudden fall,
Love right and meekness, least like thee they dye.
AMyntas, the second of that name, and seventeenth King of MACEDON, of the race
of Temenides or Caranides, descended from Hercules, and that reigned four
hundred and ninety eight years, reckoning from Caranus unto Antipater, in
whom began another race: he had three sons by his first wife called Eurydice,
borne in ILLYRIA: to wit, Alexander, Perdiccas, and Philip. Alexander having
succeeded his father, reigned but one year, during which time he made war
with his base brother Ptolomaeus Alorites. But to appease the strife betwixt
them, they sent for Pelopidas, who was at that time in THESSALIE. He took up
all their quarrels, restored those that were banished unto their houses, and
(because this peace should be more surely kept) he took of them for hostages,
Philip, and thirty other of the noblest men's sons in MACEDON, and brought
them all away with him to THEBES. Now during the time that Perdiccas reigned,
which was the space of five years, Philip kept at Pammenes house, with whom
Epaminondas was very great: and hereof it came, that some thought Philip was a
hearer of Lysis Epaminondas schoolemaister, and that they conferred together in
Philosophy. Howbeit Epaminondas was then much older then he, and surely it can
hardly be that they were scholars together: except they will say that
Epaminondas continuing all his life time to profit by the study of wisdom,
made Philip desirous to hear him sometime, and to follow him also. And it may
be well enough also that he had learned of Epaminondas to be so quick and
sudden of execution in the wars, as he was: which was but one of the least
parts of Epaminondas virtues. But as for his continency, justice, magnanimity,
and clemency, which were the parts that in truth made him great: Philip,
neither bv nature, nor by education, nor by study, ever attained unto it: for
all this, he wanted not great gifts of body and mind, as shall appear in the
discourse of his life: and as Theophrastus testifies, he was greater then any
other of the kings of MACEDON, not only in prosperity of fortune, but also in
wisdom, bounty, and moderation of manners. So it came to pass that Alexander,
notwithstanding the accord Pelopidas had made, was traitorously killed by
Ptolomy surnamed Alorites, who usurped the kingdom, and was slain himself by
Perdiccas: who after he had been overcome in a great battle by the SLAVONS, in
the which he was slain: Philip which was the last of the three brethren,
stealing away from the place where he was in ostage, fled into MACEDON, and
came to succeed in the kingdom, the which he found in great trouble. For there
were slain at the last battle above four thousand MACEDONIANS, and those
that escaped were so beaten and astonished with blows, that they thought of
nothing less then to take arms against the SLAVONS. On the other side the
HVNGARIANS made inrodes into MACEDON, and the SLAVONS mustered again to
return thither. There was one Pausanias also that aspired to the kingdom, by
the support of the king of THRACIA. And the ATHENIANS also, they would
establish one called Argaeus, and to this end sent a great fleet by sea, and
three thousand footmen well armed by land, led by Mantias. Philip taking heart
to him in these rude beginnings, began to embolden the MACEDONIANS by wise
persuasions: he reestablished military discipline, furnished his soldiers
very well, making them arm themselves, and gave order they should be
continually trained and exercised. It was he that amongst other things devised
how to close his footmen, and that framed the square battle, which ever since
was called the MACEDONIAN Phalange. He was very gracious in his words, and by
his promises and gifts he wan the hearts and goodwill of his subjects.

Now finding himself strong, although he was yet but young of years, he
resolved to make head against all his enemies, yet not by open force, but where
there was need: being always of this mind, to buy time and men as much as he
could possible. So perceiving that the ATHENIANS did their uttermost endeavor to
win the city of AMPHIPOLIS again, and that by this means they sought to bring
the kingdom of MACEDON into the hands of Argaeus: he made them leave it, and
thrust out their garrisons. As for the PANNONIANS (others read PAEONIANS) or
HVNGARIANS having sent ambassadors to them, he corrupted some with money, and
wan others by fair promises: insomuch that they were all contented to live in
peace with him. And by the same means he brake the hope of Pausanias, having
by presents gained the king of THRACIA that aided him. And for the regard of
Mantias captain of the ATHENIANS, he marched with his army unto the city of
METHONA: but he remained there, and sent Argaeus with the soldiers strangers
whom they had brought with them, unto the city of AEGES. Argaeus approaching
near the town with his troop, sent to feel the inhabitants, if they would
receive him, and be the first that should be cause of his entry into the
possession of the kingdom of MACEDON. But perceiving they cared not for him,
he returned again. Philip that followed him hard at his heels gave him
battle, killed the most part of his men, and drove the rest unto a little
mountain, where he did besiege them so straightly, that they were forced to
deliver him all the banished men of MACEDON amongst them: whereupon he let them
go their lives and goods saved. This first victory of Philip put the
MACEDONIANS again in heart, and made them bold to enterprise any thing
afterward. Hereupon he made peace with the ATHENIANS, and understanding that
the king of HVNGARIE was dead, he entered into their country with a maine
army, overcame them in battle, and made them subject unto him. Of all his
enemies there were left none but the SLAVONIANS, whom he went to assail with
ten thousand footmen, and six hundred horse. But since they could not agree
together, Bardyllis their king trusting in the victories he had gotten before
time of the MACEDONIANS, and in the valiantness of his SLAVONS, he came into
the field, and presented battle. The which having been fought a long time,
Philip behaved himself so valiantly with his men of arms the MACEDONIANS,
that he overthrew the SLAVONS, leaving seven thousand of them dead on the
ground: and the rest escaped by flying away. Shortly after they were agreed
together, and restored to Philip all the places they held pertaining unto
MACEDON. Now the AMPHIPOLITANS had of long time borne Philip evil will, and
whilst he was occupied in other places, they did him many inuries: wherefore he
determined to make a sharp war upon them. He having besieged them with a
puissant army, and having brought his engines of war hard to their walls, he
beat them with such fury, that he made a sufficient breach, and entered the
town by force: out of the which he drove those afterward that were his
enemies, and very courteously used and entreated the rest. This town being
seated in a very commodious place, upon the frontiers of THRACIA, and of the
countries near adjoining thereto: stood him afterward in great stead for the
furtherance and increase of his greatness. For by means of that he presently
had the city of PYDNE, and made league with the OLYNTHIANS, of great power at
that time: by reason whereof he and the ATHENIANS, envying one the other, they
both practiced to win them. But Philip having won POTIDEA, drove out the
garrison of the ATHENIANS and used them very honestly: for the sent them home
to their houses their lives and goods saved, not because he loved the people of
ATHENS, but for that he feared the power of their city. After he had taken in
the city of PYDNE, he gave it to the OLYNTHIANS, with all the territory
belonging unto it. Then he returned to CRENIDES, the which he having augmented
with a great number of inhabitants, he changed the first name of it, and called
it by his own name, PHILIPPI. Within that territory he had mines of gold, the
which he opened and dug so diligently, that he drew out yearly new made,
about the sum of six hundred thousand crowns. By this means in a short time
he gathered together a great treasure, and daily the kingdom of MACEDON grew
great, because it had one of the chiefest sinews and props of war. So he
coined a number of pieces of gold called Philippus, wherewith he waged a great
number of men, and bribed many private GREEKS: who afterward sold him for
ready money the towns of their country, as we shall see hereafter. In all this
business, Alexander the tyrant of PHERES in THESSALIE, having been slain by
his wife Thebe, and by her brethren called Lycophron, and Tisiphonus, at the
first they were honored as men that had delivered their country of a cruel
tyranny: but very shortly after, these two men changing their minds, by money
wan the soldiers whom Alexander kept for the guard of his person, and put
themselves in his place whom they had killed, putting many citizens to death
that withstood their enterprise: and having gathered together a great number of
soldiers, they made themselves Lords of PHERES. The ALLEVADES, men of
authority and greatly followed in the country for the ancient nobility of
their house, would have opposed themselves against this new tyranny. But
finding themselves to be too weak, they made means to Philip: who entering into
THESSALIE with his army, overcame the two tyrants, and setting the towns at
liberty which these tyrants held in subjection, he showed great love and favor
to the THESSALIANS. By which occasion, in all his conquests he obtained
afterward, he found the THESSALIANS always ready to do him service, and to
aid him in all his affairs, and not himself alone, but also his son
Alexander. But the greatness of Philip grieved his neighbors, insomuch as the
kings of THRACIA, HVNGARIA, and SLAVONIA, not being strong enough of
themselves, they joined forces together to make war upon him, and to be
revenged. Whilst they were preparing to join their forces, Philip went
before, and compelled them to do what he would.

About this time, to wit, in the last year of the hundred and fifth Olympiade,
fifteen years after the battle of MANTINEA, the holy war began amongst the
GREEKS, which continued ten years space: and this was the occasion. The
THEBANS not being contented with the victory they obtained at the battle of
LEVCTRES, framed a complaint against the LACEDAEMONIANS in the assembly of the
Estates of GREECE, which they call the council of the Amphictyons: and followed
the matter so hard, that the LACEDAEMONIANS were condemned in a great sum of
money, because they had in time of peace surprised the castle of CADMEA. The
PHOCIANS also, they having plowed up a great deal of a certain land sacred to
the gods, called the land of CIRRHE, were condemned by the Amphictyons in a
great sum of money: and because they would not pay it, the council pronounced,
without longer delay and refusal, all their towns and lands to be confiscated
to the gods: and that all other which were condemned (of which number were the
LACEDAEMONIANS) should be compelled to pay their fines, and if they refused,
they should be taken for excommunicate, and the other GREEKS should make war
with them as against accursed and execrable men. Philomelus, a man of great
authority among the PHOCIANS, did so much, that he persuaded them not to pay
it, but contrariwise to defend their country with arms, and to win DELPHES.
Whereunto they giving their consents, he gathered together a great army, and
in despite of all hindrances made himself master of DELPHES: cut asunder with
sheares the decrees made by the Amphictyons engraven upon marble pillars:
possessed all the gold and silver that was in the temple: and afterward rendered
a reason of his fact, and prepared himself to make war against the THEBANS,
THESSALIANS, and LOCRIANS, and wanne three great battles of them. But being
overcome at the fourth battle, he threw himself down off a high rock. In
the mean space, Cersobleptes, the son of Clotis king of THRACIA, having
rendered up to the ATHENIANS the towns of CHERRONESVS, partly for the good will
he bare the ATHENIANS, and partly for the hatred he had to Philip: the people
of ATHENS sent inhabitants thither to keep and defend the towns. Philip
perceiving that those of METHONE lent out their town to all them that would
make war against him, went and laid siege before it. They that were besieged,
did valiantly defend it for a time: but in the end finding themselves too weak
to make resistance, they yielded upon condition, that the inhabitants should go
out every man with one only gown. As Soon as ever Philip had the town in his
hands, he razed it even to the hard ground, and gave the country all about unto
the MACEDONIANS. At this siege he was wounded with an arrow, that put out one
of his eyes. Afterward he led his army also at the instance of the
THESSALIANS, into the country against Lycophron, that began again to tyrannize
those of PHERES: who having demanded aid of the PHOCIANS, they sent thither
Phayllus with 7000. fighting men, whom Philip overcame, and drove them out of
THESSALY. Then Onomarchus that succeeded Philomelus in the charge of general,
hoping to have won THESSALY, made great speed thither with all his army, under
color to bringaide unto Lycophron. Philip went against him with the
THESSALIANS, but because Onomarchus had the greater number of men, he overthrew
him, and killed many of the MACEDONIANS, insomuch that Philip himself was in
great danger. For his men also were so afraid, that they would have forsaken
him, and he had much trouble to keep them together* and in the end was
constrained to retire home into his kingdom. Onomarchus departing from thence,
entered into the country of BOEOTIA, overcame the BOEOTIANS in battle, and
took the city of CORONEA. But Philip returned immediately with a great force
into THESSALY, to drive out Lycophron: who having called in the PHOCIANS,
Onomarchus returned thither, followed with 20. thousand footmen, and five
hundred horse. Hereupon Philip persuaded the commons of THESSALY, that they
must all together undertake this war. And he could so well solicit them,
that he assembled in one camp twenty thousand footmen, and three thousand
horse. Then was there fought a most cruel battle, whereof the victory fell to
Philip through the valiantness of his THESSALIAN men of arms. For Onomarchus
and his men, they fled on foot toward the sea, where was by chance Chares the
ATHENIAN Captain sailing all along the coast with certain galleys. There
was great slaughter of the PHOCIANS there followed by the victors. Others to
fly with more speed, threw down their arms, and leapt into the sea, by
swimming to get to the galleys of the ATHENIANS. There were slain in battle
and flight as well of natural PHOCIANS, as of strangers that came for pay,
above 6000. men, and there were taken prisoners to the number of 3000.
Onomarchus that was one of them, was hanged, and all the other drowned as
sacrilegers, by the commandment of Philip: unto whom Lycophron yielded the
town of PHERES, and so retired out of THESSALY, which by this means was set at
liberty.

As for Philip, he marched with his army toward the way of THERMOPYLES, to
make war with the PHOCIANS, within PHOCIDE it self: but the ATHENIANS stopped
his passage. Wherefore he was constrained to return back into MACEDON, where
he staid not long at rest, but determined to bring the towns of CHALCIDE in
subjection to him. So he took by assault a fort called Gyre, the which he
razed. But this was such a terror to the other small towns, that they put
themselves under his obedience. Passing from thence into THESSALY, he drove
away Pytholaus that had made himself master of PHERES. And intending to bring
the towns of HELLESPONT under his subjection, he took in without pain or
danger (rather by treason) the towns of MICYBERNE, and of TORONE. Afterward
he went with a great army against the city of OLYNTHE, the greatest and of most
power that was in that marches: where first he overcame the OLYNTHIANS in two
great fights, so that he made them leave the field, and shut them in within
their own town, unto the which he gave many assaults, and lost a great number
of his men there. But having with great sums of money corrupted Euthicrates and
Lasthenes governors of the town, at the length he had it by treason: and
having sacked it, he sold the townsmen for slaves by the drum. The taking of
this town brought him a great quantity of silver to help to defray the
charges of his war, and did also make the other towns afraid, which had taken
arms to resist him. Now after he had bestowed many rich presents upon his
captains and soldiers, that had done him good service in this war, he gave
also all about great sums of money to the heads of the towns, and found
merchants also among them that sold him their own country and fellow
citizens. Insomuch that he himself confessed he had enlarged his kingdom more
through gold and silver, then he did by force of arms: according to an answer
that was made him, when he began first to put himself forward: for being
desirous to know how he should carry himself, the oracle answered: With
silver spears begin and end thy war,
So shall thou topsie turuy turn all things what ere they are.
Now the ATHENIANS being jealous of his greatness, did ever help them whom he
would hurt, and sent Ambassadors to all the cities to persuade them to
maintain and preserve their liberty, and to put their townes-men to death
whom they found willing to betray the Commonwealth: promising them to aid them
all, and declared themselves open enemies unto Philip. He that set them most
against him, was Demosthenes: the most eloquent man of all GREECE at that time,
and that did more trouble and hurt Philip with the blows of his tongue, and his
continual motions then all the Captains of GREECE did him besides. All this
notwithstanding, with all the diligence and labor ATHENS could use, they could
never bridle the wicked disposition of some private persons, but they still
sought to sell their country: for he that bought, sowed silver without any
spare, and there were a great number of traitors at that time through all
GREECE. And touching this purpose, they say, that he being desirous to win a
very strong hold, he sent some men before to view it: who returning, reported
that it was impossible almost to approach it, and did by description set it
down in all points impregnable. Then he asked them if the place were so hard
to come to, that a poor Ass laden with gold could not come near it: for he
had oftentimes with silver very easily won that which otherwise was not to be
had by force of arms. And this was the cause that he practiced to have
traitors in every town by gifts and pensions, calling them that received him
his hosts and friends, corrupting men's manners besides by unworthy and
dishonest means. As after that he had won OLYNTHE, he made sumptuous and
magnificent sacrifices to his gods, to thank them for the victory they had
given him: and so having set down a day of triumph for tilting and tourneying,
and common sports: thither repaired a great number of strangers that came to
see the feast. So keeping open court, he invited many of these strangers to
come to his sumptuous feasts he made, and in them he showed all the
familiarity and courtesy that might be to entertain them. For he drank to
some, and then gave them the cups wherein he drank to them: to others he gave
great presents, and unto all generally he gave good words, and large promises*
insomuch that many sought how to obtain his love and favor. So it is
reported, that one day at a banquet he espied Satyrus, an excellent Comedian
and player, that he was very sad: and that he asked him why he did not crave
some thing of him, that he might show his liberality unto him. Satyrus
answered him again, that he would be glad to obtain a suit at his hands, but
he durst not ask it him, being afraid he should be denied. Philip liked his
answer well, and bad him ask boldly. Then he told him, that a friend of his
had two daughters among others prisoners, both of them mariageable, and
besought him that he would bestow them upon him: not for any other pleasure or
profit he should have of them, but because he would marie them both at his
own charge, before they should be forced to their dishonor. Philip thanked
him for his honest petition, and presently caused these two maids to be
delivered unto him. Thus he bestowed many such courtesies every where, whereof
he made his profit afterward with great usury. For a number being drawn by
the sent and odor of so many good turns, studied with themselves, envying one
another, which of them might do him best service, and find out most means to
deliver towns and countries into his hands.

But now to return again to that we had begun to speak of the holy war.
The PHOCIANS that had three very strong holds in BOEOTIA, to wit, ORCHOMENE,
CORONEE, and CORSIES, did ordinarily from thence make incursions into the
country of the BOEOTIANS with great number of soldiers strangers whom they
kept in pay, and did burn and lay wast all the territory thereabouts, and
ever had the upper hand in all their inrodes and skirmishes they had with the
countrymen. Upon this occasion the BOEOTIANS being weak of men, and wanting
money, sent in the end to demand aid of Philip: who was not a little glad to
see them brought so low, for he desired their pride might be pulled down,
which had lift them up so high since the battle of LEVCTRES. So he sent them a
good number of soldiers, not for any desire he had to aid them, but to make
them think that he made great account of the temple of DELPHES, which the
PHOCIANS had spoiled. After diverse exploits of war, the one side and the
other seeing themselves weary and bare, the BOEOTIANS prayed Philip to come
and aid them: which he granted them, and taking a supply of THESSALIANS with
him, he came to LOCRIDE with a good army, and put himself in order to end
this war at one battle. But Phallecus General of the PHOCIANS, finding
himself not strong enough to fight with him, sent unto him to treat a peace:
so he was suffered to go safely with his men whither he would. Whereupon under
the assurance of this peace, he retired with eight thousand men into
PELOPONNESVS. The PHOCIANS then left without all hope, yielded themselves to
Philips discretion. Thus having ended this holy war without stroke stricken,
beyond all men's opinion, he called a council of the BOEOTIANS and THESSALIANS:
in the which it was determined that there should be an assembly of parliament
of the Amphictyons, unto whom they would wholly refer themselves for deciding
of this matter. Whereupon the Commissioners for the parliament of the
Amphictyons were assembled, and there among other acts it was ordained, that
from thencefoorth it should be lawful for Philip and all of his race to sit in
this council of the Amphictyons, and that they should have the two voices
which the PHOCIANS (by him lately conquered) had before. Also, that he and his
thencefoorth should have the government and superintendancie of the sports
PYTHIANS, with the BOEOTIANS and THESSALIANS. Because the CORINTHIANS had been
partakers with the sacrilege of the PHOCIANS. The rest of their decrees
concerned those of PHOCIDE, the safety of the temple of DELPHES, and the union
of the GREEKS. Philip having broken up the armories of the PHOCIANS and of the
strangers that had fought in their pay, he defaced their towns, and made them
sell their horses. After he had received of the Amphictyons the greatest honor
and thanks they could devise, he returned into his realm of MACEDON, having
won him the name of a devout and valiant Prince, and laid the foundations of
the greatness unto the which his son Alexander came afterward. For he
singularly desired to be chosen Captain general of all GREECE, with full power
and authority to make war with the king of PERSIA, as he did. Furthermore,
the hereditarie quarrels he had against the SLAVONS, being as irreconciliable,
he entered with his army into SLAVONIA, where having spoiled a great part of
that country, and taken many towns, he returned back into MACEDON laden with
booty. After that he went into THESSALIE, and drove out the tyrants there,
which held the towns in subjection. By this means he wanne the hearts of the
THESSALIANS, whom indeed he had great care to use well, hoping that if the
THESSALIANS remained his faithful friends, he should easily gain the other
GREEKS to desire his friendship, and so it happened: for the people neighbors
to THESSALY, did presently enter into league with him. Soon after that, he led
his army into THRACIA to repress Cersobleptes, who troubled all the towns of
HELLESPONT next adjoining to his realm. When he had beaten the THRACIANS in
diverse encounters, he compelled the vanquished to pay yearly unto the
MACEDONIANS, the tenth part of their revenues, and fortifying a few good towns
in the best parts of the country, he bridled the boldness of these barbarous
people: whereupon the towns within those marches being delivered from wars,
they very willingly entered into league and alliance with Philip.

Thus waxing greater every day then other, he led his army before the city of
PERINTH, because that stood against him, and took part with the ATHENIANS. So
he laid siege unto it, and brought his engines of battery before it, among the
which there were rams of 80. foot long, and built up towers of wood higher then
the highest towers of stone that were within the town: upon the top whereof he
maruellously annoyed the besieged: and battering the walls with these rams, he
made them fall down in diverse places. The PERINTHIANS on the other side very
lustily defended themselves, and reared up other walls within, in place of them
that were fallen down. He plied them continually with wonderful assaults, the
assailants and assailed showing all their possible force and endeavor. Now
Philip had great Crossebowes and other engines of all sorts to kill far off,
great arrows long and sharp at the end, which did wound those that came to
the cranewes of the walls, and those that were besieged lost many of their men
every day. But at the length, they were supplied with arms and men whom the
BYZANTINES sent unto them: whereupon equalling their enemies, they began to
be courageous again, and resolutely offered themselves unto any danger for
defense of their country. For all this, the battery begun discontinued not,
and Philip dividing his men into diverse troops gave them many assaults,
continued by turns one in the neck of another night and day. Which he might
easily do, considering he had thirty thousand fighting men in his camp, with
an inestimable number of missile weapons, with engines to bestow great shot a
far off, and of all sorts of engines to beat down towns, with the which he
wonderfully plagued and hurt the besieged. Nevertheless, the siege drew on in
length, and many of the towns men died, besides those that were hurt and
wounded: and because that victuals also waxed scant amongst them: so that they
hourly looked for no other thing, but to take PERINTH. But it fell out clean
contrary: for the fame of Philips greatness being blown abroad throughout
all ASIA, the king of PERSIA being affrayed of such a power, writ unto his
Lieutenants upon the sea coasts, that they should aid the PERINTHIANS all
they could possible. Thereupon his Satrapes having consulted of this matter
together, sent unto the besieged a great supply of men of war, store of gold
and silver, plenty of corn, of arms, and of all other necessary provisions
for the wars. The BYZANTINES on the other side sent them the best experienced
Captains and soldiers they had. By this means the two forces of the
besiegers and the besieged being equal of new again, the war began to be
hotter then before. For Philip beating at the walls without cease with his
rams, made very great breaches, and with his engines to shoot far off, kept
them that none durst stay at the cranewes of the walls: and at one instant
made his men to give an assault at the breaches of the walls thrown down,
and caused others to scale the walls that were yet standing whole, and so
fighting with their swords, many were slain in the place, and others sore
wounded, both valiantly fighting for the reward and honor of victory. The
MACEDONIANS hoped to have the sack of a rich and wealthy city, and more then
that, to have goodly presents of the king. They that were besieged on the other
side, setting before them all the calamities and miseries of the taking of a
city, did lustily endure any pains and danger to prevent so great a
mischief. Besides that, the situation of the town was a great help unto
them, not only to hope well, but also that in the end they should be masters.
For the town of PERINTH stood all upon the sea side, upon a haven of half an
Island that stood of a great height, and this haven was about half a quarter
of a league long. The houses there were very narrow and high, and because they
stood high upon the hanging of the coast, all the town being underneath it on
the ground, they were built much higher then those that stood beneath: so to
see them above, they showed like the degrees of seats in a Theater. And
although that they without did still beat down some part of the wall: that
vantaged them nothing for all that. For those within did nothing else but mure
up the entrance into the streets which were narrow, and they always defended
themselves making rampers before the low houses, as if they had been the best
walls in the world.

So Philip having gotten the outward walls of thetowne, with all the troubles
and dangers possible: he found other walls ready built stronger then the
other, as if they had been done of purpose, besides that the BYZANTINES did
always furnish them with any thing they wanted. Philip considering this,
divided his army into two, and left the half of them to continue the siege,
under the charge of the best captains he had: and taking with him the other
half, he went to besiege BYZANCE it self, and gave it a most brave assault:
whereat the BYZANTINES were amazed, because their soldiers, their arms, and
all other their necessary provisions for war were in the city of PERINTH.
But the ATHENIANS sent them immediately an army by sea to aid them, as also
those did of CHIO, of RHODES, and out of other places. Chares went thither sent
by the ATHENIANS, but he did nothing of worth, nor worthy of the fleet he
brought thither: because he was suspected of his friends, and despised of his
enemies. So that they sent Phocion thither, who before that time had fought
bravely with Philip in the I Will of EVBOEA, (which he thought to have won by
means of traitors) had overcome the MACEDONIANS in battle, and had done many
other notable exploits. Howbeit after his departure, Philip being the stronger,
departing from thence came to besiege PERINTH, and after that BYZANCE, into the
which Phocion entered with his troops: who did so valiantly in all fights and
assaults, that Philip (who before that time was thought so terrible in arms
that none could resist him, neither durst any man present himself in battle
against him) rose from besieging of PERINTH, and retired from BYZANCE and out
of HELLESPONT, and did nothing but lost much of his reputation. For, besides
the men that were killed at these two sieges, he lost some of his ships, and
many strong holds, out of the which his garrisons were thrown, and his friends
forraged by the ATHENIANS. This was the cause why he offered articles of peace,
fearing the forces of the ATHENIANS, desirous to forward his affairs some
other way, or rather to meddle no more with them. Phocion counseled the
ATHENIANS to hearken unto it, and to accept the conditions unto the which
Philip submitted himself. But the Counselors (especially Demosthenes) that
bare the sway at that time, moved the ATHENIANS to a new league, the which
Demosthenes prepared against Philip: who bethinking himself, determined to
employ all his means to subdue the cities all at once, to the end that he
might afterward pass further. So he leauied an army with great speed, and
having overcome certain troops of the towns in league together near unto
AMPHISE, he marched into the country of ELATIA, and afterward wan PHOCIDE,
and being lift up with such prosperous beginnings, he resolved to go to ATHENS.
Whereof the ATHENIANS having intelligence, they were straight in arms every
where, the people being so amazed, that none durst be so bold as to speak, and
they knew not what to do. They rejected the wise counsel of Phocion, of which
Demosthenes was the cause. Wherefore to repair his fault, he stepped out and
counseled the ATHENIANS to seek the friendship of the THEBANS. So thereupon
they sent him to put it in practice, and happily he obtained it,
notwithstanding all Philips oppositions to the contrary: who being astonished
more then before with these crosses, which the eloquence of one man did against
him: he sent again to offer the GREEKS peace. But they kept themselves close,
and made strange of it, expecting the event of all this great tempest: not
being disposed at that time to hearken to pacification. But as if the time of
their bondage had been at the gate, they refused all conditions, yea contemned
the very oracles of DELPHES, and Demosthenes had it often in his mouth, that
the Prophetess did Philippizate, to wit, favored Philips affairs. These
oracles threatened both the one and the other, and especially the GREEKS. Now
Philip, though he saw he was deceived of the friendship of the BOEOTIANS, yet
he resolved to fight with the one and the other. Therefore keeping his camp
certain days, looking for the forces of his friends that were not yet come
unto him: he entered into BOEOTIA, with thirty thousand footmen, and about two
thousand horse. So both camps being ready to give charge upon each other, they
both had like courage and resolution to do well. But as touching the number of
men, and skilfulnesse of Captains, Philip did pass them far: for having done
in many places so many worthy exploits of arms, he was become very expert in
military discipline. To the contrary, on the ATHENIANS side, their best
captains, as Iphicrates Chabrias, and Timotheus, were dead. Phocion also, he
never thought well of this war: and the factious, they had hindered the best
they could that he should have no charge. Then was there but Chares and
Lysicles, that were too weak to take such a great charge upon them, and were
much inferior to many of the Captains Philip had then with him.

The day being broken, and both armies set in battle the one against the other
in the plain of CHAERONEA: Philip placed his son Alexander, coming but
newly out of his infancy, in one of the points of his army, attended upon by
the best captains he had: and he placed himself in the other point, with the
valiantest men in his army, giving order and direction in all things according
to time and place. The ATHENIANS, having taken one of the points of their
battle, left the other unto the BOEOTIANS. So the fight began very sharply,
and many were slain on both sides, and it could not be discerned yet whether
side had best occasion to hope of victory: until that Alexander at the length,
desirous to make his father see some proof of his valor, and many other
valiant men seeing the courage of this young Prince following him, they with
him brake into the battle of the enemies, and there was a marvelous cruel
slaughter. Philip on his side also giving charge upon the greatest press and
multitude of his enemies, not enduring that any should take the honor from him,
no not his own son: set upon them so fiercely that withstood him, that he
put them out of order, and made them fly for life. There died in this battle
above a thousand ATHNIANS, and there were taken prisoners to the number of two
thousand. And of the BOEOTIANS in like manner there were many killed in the
field, and a great number taken. After this battle, Philip caused a token of
triumph to be set up, and suffered the enemies to take away the bodies of their
dead, and to bury them. He made sumptuous sacrifices unto his gods, to give
them thanks for his victory: and honored them that had done good service in
this battle, every one according to his degree and desert. Howbeit he
committed certain insolences: for after he had drunk well with his friends,
he went to the place where he dead bodies lay, and there he fell a singing in
mockery, the beginning of the decree which Demosthenes had propounded, whose
counsel they following, the ATHENIANS concluded to war against him, lifting
up his voice, and keeping measure with his foot, Demosthenes, the son of
Demosthenes PAEANIAN set out this. But afterward when he began a little to
come to himself again out of his drunkenness, and that he had thought a
little of the danger he had been in: then his hair began to stand upright on
his head, when he entered into the consideration of the force and vehemency of
such an Orator, that had brought him in a piece of a day, to put his whole
estate and his life to the hazard of a battle. And when the ATHENIANS sent
unto him to treat of peace, he presently set his countenance, rubbed his
eyebrows, and laying aside all madness and wantonness, made them a very
sober and advised answer. Others say, that he drank too much at the feast of
his sacrifice, and that after supper he daunced and made a mommery with his
minions: passed by the prisoners, and gave them sharp taunts in mockery,
touching the misfortune of their overthrow: and that Demades then being one of
the number, was so bold franckly to speak a word to him which was of such
efficacy, as it made him refrain from his insolency. O king, said he, being
now thy fortune to play Agamemnons part, thou art not ashamed to show the deeds
of Thersites. Philip finding himself touched to the quick with this word so
well set, he presently changed his apparel and countenance, cast down to the
ground his garland of flowers he wore on his head, caused all the other signs
of mockery which were carried after him to be broken, and from thencefoorth
began greatly to esteem of Demades, and would have him about him. Demades,
being passing eloquent above others of his time, did so well entertain Philip,
that he caused him to deliver all the other prisoners of the ATHENIANS, without
paying of any ransom. And further yet, humbling the conquerours fierceness,
he made peace with the ATHENIANS, but put a garrison within THEBES, and
moreover granted peace unto the BOEOTIANS.

But that which principally brought him to incline unto it, was the desire he
had to be chosen Captain general of GREECE. And to this end he caused them to
give out abroad, that he would undertake to make war for the GREEKS against
the PERSIANS, and to be revenged of them for the outrages and sacriledges which
they had committed against the temples of the gods in GREECE: and sought to
gain the good will and friendship of all the GREEKS by all kind of courtesies
he could possibly devise or think of, as well openly as secretly. So he made a
motive, that he desired to speak with the towns openly, and to communicate
somethings unto them which concerned the good of all their common wealth in
general. And for this purpose there was appointed a general assembly of the
states in GREECE in the city of CORINTH, in the which he propounded this, to
undertake the war against the PERSIANS, and putting them in great hope of
happy success, he persuaded the commissioners of every town, which were
present in this assembly of counsel, boldly to conclude this enterprise. He
solicited this matter in such sort, that the GREEKS with general consent
chose him their Captain general with sovereign authority. Then he began to
make great preparation for this war, and having made a description and sesse of
all the contributions, as also the number of men of war which every city
should furnish for this enterprise: he returned into MACEDON, and sent from
thence two of his chief Captains before into ASIA, Attalus and Parmenio, with
a part of his army, commanding them to deliver the GREEKS cities of ASIA out
of bondage. But his death brake the voyage, so that they went not very far.
Now hitherto we have seen Philips natural disposition in the midst of his
deeds, and what is commendable and reproachful in so great a Prince. But before
we go further in the rest of his life, it may peradventure not be much
impertinent, to insert in this place, some of his sentences and memorable
actions, whereby he may be the better discerned, to compare him afterward with
the others. For men's words and fashions amongst their familiars, be the very
lively tables of the affections and passions of the soul: being impossible for
any man always to counterfeit so, but that they may oftentimes see his heart
at his tongues end.

So then, news being brought him in one self day of three great prosperities:
the first, that he had won the prize at the courses of coaches with four
horse in the solemnity of the Olympian games: The second, that his Lieutenant
Parmenio had overcome the DARDANIANS in battle: The third, that his wife
Olympiade had brought him a goodly son: he lift up his hands to heaven, and
said: O fortune, I beseech thee send me in exchange of this, some reasonable
aduersitic, against such and so great happiness. Lasthenes an OLYNTHIAN, that
for a great sum of money had sold him the town of OLYNTH, complained to him
one day that some of his minions called him traitor. He answered him again,
that the MACEDONIANS were rude plain men, that called all things by their
name. He seemed to repute the ATHENIANS happy men, for that they found yearly
ten Captains in their town to be chosen: and that he to the contrary in many
years could find but one, and that was Parmenio. After he had overcome the
GREEKS, many advised him to put good and great garrisons in the towns, that
they might with more safety be kept under. But he answered them, I had rather
be called a long time courteous, then a short time Lord. And when his familiars
gave him counsel, to banish a malicious person, that did nothing but speak
evil: he answered them he would not, fearing least he should every where else
speak evil of him. There was an ACHAIAN called Arcadion, that made profession
to speak evil of him every where, and warned every man to fly so far from
Philip, as none could tell there what man he was. Arcadion being by chance met
in MACEDON, the courtiers would have had Philip to have punished him, and not
to let him escape out of his hands. Philip to the contrary spoke him fair, and
sent him presents to his lodging. Shortly after, he commanded they should make
inquiry what talk Arcadion had of him among the GREEKS. Every man brought him
word, that he did wonderfully commend and praise him wheresoever he came. Then
said Philip unto them, I am a better physician for evil speech then you are.
Another time in the assembly of the Olympian games, as the GREEKS spoke evil
of him, his friends said, that such ill speakers would be seuearely punished,
to speak so much evil of him that had done them so much good. Nay, but what
would they do then, answered he, if we did hurt them? Smicythus did often
accuse Nicanor unto him, telling him that he did nothing else but speak evil
of Philip: so that his best familiars thought it good he should be sent for,
and be punished according to his deserts. Yea but (replied he) Nicanor is one
of the honestest men of MACEDON: were it not better therefore to inquire
whether the fault be in us, or not? And forthwith having made diligent search
whence this coffeehouse of Nicanor came, he found that he was a man
oppressed with extreme poverty, and that no man would relieve him in his
necessity: whereupon he sent him immediately a good present. Afterward
Smicythus brought word, that Nicanor every where spoke great praises of Philip.
See then, said he, how it depends upon our selves to be well spoken of. He
was wont also to say, that he was much beholding unto the connsellors of
ATHENS, for that they speaking evil of him, were cause to make him an honest
man of word and deed. For, said he, I do daily enforce my self both in my
deeds and words to make them liars. He sent home (as has been spoken before)
all the ATHENIANS prisoners at the battle of CHAERONEA, without paying any
ransom, and yet moreover they asked for their beds, their apparel, and all
their baggage, and complained of the MACEDONIANS, because they did not deliver
it unto them. When Philip heard of this, he fell a laughing, and said to them
that were near about him: How say you, do not you think these ATHENIANS
suppose they were overcome by us at the play at bones? He said also that they
which gave him counsel to deal sharply with the ATHENIANS, were men of an ill
judgment, to counsel a Prince that did and suffered all things for glory, to
destroy the Theater of glory, which was the city of ATHENS, by reason of
learning. There was a great number of prisoners taken at a battle, and he was
present to see them sold by the drum, sitting in his chair, his gown being
turned up alitle higher then was decent. Then there was one of the prisoners
that was a selling, that cried out a loud unto him, I beseech thee, o king, to
pardon me that I be not sold: for I am thy friend from father to the son.
Philip asked him, how and from whence this friendship should come between us?
I will tell thee in thy ear, answered the prisoner. Philip commanded they
should bring him to him. Then the prisoner coming near to him, told him
softly: O king, let thy gown fall down before a little: for as thou sit,
thou show that that is unfit to be seen. Then spoke Philip aloud to his
men, Deliver him, and let him go: for he is indeed one of my friends and
wel-willers, but I had forgotten it. Such was his behavior to his enemies, and
those that spoke evil of him.

Let us now speak somewhat of his justice, and of diverse other affections
worthy to be noted in him: the which do appear something in his words, and by
the effects that followed. And they do show more and more that this prince had
learned very much with Epaminondas, but above all, to be nobly minded, patient,
and desirous of honor without shame: qualities that had been much more
excellent in him, if he had not made such merchandise with wicked men, as he
did that sold their country, besides that they saw in him an ardent ambition:
as also in that he coueted to be Captain general of all the GREEKS, and the
triumphs preceding his death, and all his life do show. And to this purpose, he
counseled his son Alexander to speak graciously unto the MACEDONIANS, to
win their good wills, whilst he had leisure now to be courteous unto them,
another reigning in the kingdom: as if he would have said, that when he came
to be king, he should carry the gravity of a master and of a Lord, and that
he should do justice. He gave him counsel also to seek to get the love of
those that bare credit and authority in good towns, as well of the wicked as
of the good, that he might afterward use the good, and abuse the evil. But
now to return to his justice again: Being a Judge between two bad men, he
ordained that the one should fly out of MACEDON, and the other should run
after him. It is reported of him, that he had gotten together a number of the
wickedest and most disorderedst men that were in his time, whom he lodged all
together in a town which he had caused to be built, and called it PONEROPOLIS,
the town of knaves. He had on a time bestowed the office of a Judge upon one
recommended unto him by Antipater: but understanding afterward that he used to
paint his hairs and beard, he took it from him, saying, that he that used
deceit in his hair, would hardly deal truly in a good cause. Machetas
pleaded a cause on a time before him whilst he slept, so that not conceiving
nor understanding well the matter, he wrongfully condemned him. Whereupon
Machetas began to cry out, that he did appeal. Philip being angered at that
word, asked him presently unto whom he did appeal from him? Before thy self,
o king answered he, when thou art awake, and wilt give good ear to conceive
of my fact. These words touched Philip to the quick, whereupon he rose up on
his feet, and calling himself better to mind, knew that he had wronged
Machetas in his sentence, and yet nevertheless he would not revoke his
judgment: howbeit he himself with his own money discharged the matter,
whereupon the suit was brought before him. Harpalus had a kinsman and friend of
his called Crates, attainted and convicted of great crimes. He besought Philip
that paying the fine, sentence should not be pronounced against this Crates,
that he might avoid the shame and disgrace. But Philip answered him again, It
is better he should bear his own blame and discredit, then I for him. A
soldier of his, a valiant man of his hands, having by false report obtained of
him the gift and forfeiture of the goods of a MACEDONIAN: it fortuned that the
MACEDONIAN ill willing to put up such an outrage, bewrayed unto Philip the
unthankfulness of the soldier whose life he had saved. Philip was so offended
with the villainy of this soldier, that after he had revoked his gift, he made
him quail in such sort, that his wickedness was known of every one, and the
MACEDONIAN restored again to all his goods. A poor old woman being in suit of
law, besought him to give judgment, and pressed him continually: but he
excused himself, and told her he was not at leisure to hear it. The old woman
cried out aloud: Leave then to be king. He being astonished and lively pricked
with this word, did hear her, and all others in order. As for his friends,
Philo a Gentleman of THEBES had done him many pleasures at the time when he
remained in hostage in the city of THEBES: for he was lodged in his house, and
after that he would never receive any gifts or presents of him. Whereupon
Philip said unto him: Take not from me the title and honor of invincible,
being overcome by thee of courtesy and liberality. Word being brought him of
the death of Hipparchus, borne in the I Will of EVBOEA, he was very sorry: and as
one that stood by told him, he was ripe, and ready to dye forage: Yea, said he
again, for himself, but not for me, to whom he is dead too soon: for he is
dead before he received any recompense of me, worthy the friendship he bare me.
As touching household matters, he fell out on a time with his wife Olympias, and
his son Alexander: in which time of his anger, Demaratus a Gentleman of
CORINTH went to visit him. Philip then asked him, how, and after what manner
the GREEKS lived one with another. Truly, answered Demaratus, thou carest
much for the peace and union of the GREEKS, since the persons that touch thee
so nearely, and those whom thou ought to make most account of, are so
separated from thee. This word made him consider so well of it, that afterward
he appeased his anger: the cause thereof is showed in the beginning of
Alexanders life, and so reconciled himself unto them. Being told him that his
son Alexander misliked it, and complained that he begot bastards of other
women: he told him, Since thou see now that thou shall have many
competitours with thee for the kingdom after my death: endeavor thy self to
be an honest man, that thou may come to the crown not so much through me,
being mine heir, as through thy self, for that thou art worthy. He persuaded
him much, diligently to study Philosophy under Aristotle, to the end, said
he, thou do not many things that I have done, whereof now I heartily repent me.
Being on a time fallen backward, lying all along the place where they
exercise wrestling: and wallowing up and down, as if he had seen the figure
and print of his body in the dust: O Hercules, said he, how little quantity of
ground will serve us by nature, and yet we covet to inhabit all the world. He
would on a time lodge his camp in a fair ground: but being told that there
was no forage for the beasts, he was constrained to dislodge from thence,
saying, What is our life, since we must take care even to place Asses? There
was an host of his that on a time bad him to supper with him. So, as he was
going, he met diverse by the way, whom he carried thither with him. Whereupon
perceiving his host was much troubled, because he had not meat enough to
feed so many mouths: Philip seeing it, sent secretly to tell every one in
their ears whom he brought with him, that they should keep a place in their
stomach for the tart. The other believing that he spoke in earnest, did
forbear to eat, whereby there was meat enough for them all. That which is
already said, is sufficient to make us know the natural disposition of this
great Prince: whose end we are now about to describe unto you. He undertaking
to pass into ASIA, to make war with the PERSIANS, in the state of Captain
general of the GREEKS: being desirous his voyage should be favored of the
gods he asked of the prophetess of DELPHES, whether he should overcome the
king of PERSIA? She answered him: The ox is crowned when his end is near at
hand,
To offer him in sacrifice, a man does ready stand.
This oracle being doubtful and obscure, Philip took it for his advantage: as
if Apollo had told him, that the king of PERSIA should be slain by him, as an
oblation of sacrifice. But clean contrary, the oracle threatened him with death
in a day of a solemn feast: and that he should be slain as a bull, whom they
crown with garlands and hats of flowers, when they go about to sacrifice him.
Notwithstanding supposing that the gods did favor his enterprise, he was very
pleasant, persuading himself that ASIA should shortly be tributarie to
MACEDON. So he prepared sumptuous and magnificent sacrifices in honor of the
gods, and made preparation for the marriage of his daughter Cleopatra. Now he
being desirous to draw to this feast as many GREEKS as he could possible, to
that end made proclamation every where, that there should be games of prize for
learning, and music, and sent to summon all his hosts and friends, in what
part of GREECE soever they were, to come to this marriage: and commanded the
Lords of his Court that they should do the like for their part. For he desired
to show the GREEKS all signs of friendship, and to make them the best cheer
that could be possible, in recompense of the honor they had done him, to
choose him their Captain general. There was a wonderful assembly of people
from all parts at this feast, and the marriage was solemnized betwixt Alexander
king of EPIRVS and Cleopatra, and the games also at AEGES acitie of MACEDON.
Where not only Philips private friends, and the most notable men of the
GREEKS, but also the principal and chiefest towns of GREECE (and among others
ATHENS) gave him presents of many rich crowns of gold. The decree of the
people presenting a crown of gold, and openly proclaimed by a herald, the
effect of it was: that if it happened any man having conspired or attempted ought
against the person of king Ppilip, should fly to ATHENS in hope of privilege
there: that he should be delivered into the hands of the king. In the midst
of this great feast at the marriage, there was an excellent player of tragedies,
called Neoptolemus, that rehearsed verses touching the enterprise of Philip:
and as if he had meant to have reproved the pride of the king of PERSIA, he
lively touched that of his master Philip, and before he was ware, foretold his
death in covert terms, and which might be applied (as also Philip did, blinded
and astonished with his prosperity) unto the estate, and unto the king of PERSIA.
Among other verses the beginning of it was very near to this effect:

Above the skies exalt thy pride,
Surmount all hautinesse that is
Within this earthly vale so wide:
Promise thy self a worldly bliss,
And prosperous life for ever sure,
Yet can thou now no longer dure.
For some already have begun
Thy ruin, which thou can not shun.
And death near to that breast of thine
Shall shortly break off thy dessigne.
The day after this royal marriage the games began to be played, and the people
ran from all parts to the Theater to see them, even until it was dark
night. And in the morning at the break of day there was a procession, in the
which among many other sumptuous and magnificent shows, they carried the images
of twelve principal gods of GREECE, wonderful cunningly wrought with great
art: and then after them was borne the image of Philip for the thirteenth, as
if he would have placed himself in rank with his gods. When the Theater was
full set with people, Philip himself came in the end, apparelled all in white,
having commanded all his guard to follow him a far off: desirous to show the
GREEKS, that because of the great confidence he had of their faithful
friendship, he thought he needed no guard for his body. But at that time he was
put to death after a strange sort: and that we may know by what occasion, we
will take the matter further off.

There was in his court a MADEDONIAN gentleman, called Pausanias, borne in the
country of ORESTIDE, one of the gentlemen pensioners of Philips guard, that
sometime was beloved for his beauty. He perceiving that the king loved another,
whose name was as himself, Pausanias: began to gall him with injurious words,
calling him Androgyne (as much to say, as womanish man) and reproved him that
he abandoned his body to any that would. This second Pausanias, very
impatiently bare these words in his heart, yet made no reply to them, but only
imparted unto his friend called Attalus what he meant to do, and within few
days after lost his life after a notable manner. Philip fought a battle with
the SLAVONS, in the which this young man behaved himself very valiantly, right
before the person of Philip, and received upon his body all the blows they
struck at him, so that he died in the field. This valiantness of his being
blown abroad through the army, Attalus, that then was in great favor with the
king, entreated the first Pausanias to come and suppe with him, and having made
him drunk, he left his body to all the horse-keepers and moyletters to be
carnally abused. His drunkenness having left him, he was so grieved at his
heart for the outrage Attalus had done him, that he went and complained to the
king himself. Philip was maruellously offended withal, because of the villainy
that was offered him. But because of the love he bare to Attalus, and also for
that he stood in need of his service, and for that he was uncle of Cleopatra,
the last and well beloved wife of Philip, and appointed his Lieutenant for the
war of ASIA, he made as though he knew it not. But to appease Pausanias, he
gave him great presents, and placed him amongst the number of them of the guard
about his person. Pausanias having made his complaint to Olympias, unto
Alexander, and to some other, had sundry aunswers, but no justice at that
time. Wherefore keeping this despite in his heart, he resolved not only to be
revenged of him which had done him this injury, but also of Philip that would
do him no justice. But to further him in this devilish purpose, amongst others
a Rhetoritian called Hermecrates did set him on, whom Pausanias frequented to
learn of him. Discoursing one day together, he asked him how a man might in a
short time make himself famous, to be spoken of of every body? Hermocrates
answered, in killing one that had done many great things. For, said he, it is
of necessity that remembering his facts, the name of him that killed him must
also be comprised. Pausanias applying that to the purpose of his anger, having
no patience to prolong time, his heart being so full of choler and grief:
determined with himself to execute his enterprise the same day the plays
should be: the which he did, as follows. He laid horses ready at the gate
of the Theater, and went about it, having a sword under his down after the
fashion of the GAVLES as they wear it. When the time was come that Philip
would himself go to the Theater, all the Noblemen and Gentlemen that attended
upon him, went into the Theater before him, who had commanded all the
Gentlemen of his guard to come a good way behind him. Then Pausanias seeing
Philip going all alone, ran to him, and gave him such a blow with his sword
overthwart his flanks, that he ran him through and through, so that he fell
down stark dead. The blow being given, he ran away straight unto his horse,
and some of the guard ran to Philip, others swiftly followed the murderer,
among which was Leonidas, Perdiccas, and Attalus. Howbeit Pausanias that had
gotten the start before, had easily mounted on horseback before the others
could have come near him to overtake him, had it not been that in the way as
he fled, he stumbled at the root of a vine, which overthrew him. Then
Perdiccas and the rest lighted on him as he rose, and thrusting at him, killed
him in the place. Behold how Philip, that was the greatest king in his time of
EVROPE, and for the greatness of his power, placed himself among the gods:
was brought low even to rank with the weakest of the world, and died being
but six and forty years old, having reigned 24 years. That therefore whereof
he gloried most, was in his skill of wars, and in the actions which he
managed bravely: preferring that far above all his exploits of war. For,
said he, in victory all that fight in the battle have their part: but in those
things that I have atchiued unto, having wisely directed them, none is partaker
of the honor but my self only. He had five wives, the first was Olympias the
daughter of Neoptolemus, king of the MOLOSSIANS, of the line of Aeacus, of whom
were borne, Alexander surnamed the Great, and Cleopatra. Alexander succeeded
his father: and for Cleopatra, she was married to her uncle Alexander, king of
EPIRVS, and brother of Olympias. The second wife of Philip was Audate, a Lady
of SLAVONIA, of whom he had a daughter called Cyne, married unto Amyntas his
consin german: who being slain, she was betrothed unto Lagarus, king of the
AGRIANIANS, who died before consummation of marriage. After the death of
Alexander the Great, she being of a manly courage, and opposing her self
against those that would deprive the children of Alexander of the crown of
MADEDON: was slain by Perdiccas commandment. The third was Phila: and the
fourth was called Mede, the daughter of the king of THRACIA. These two had
neither of them any children. And lastly being too old to marry, he married
Cleopatra, the daughter of Hippostratus and Attalus niece: at the marriage of
whom he would have killed his son Alexander, for throwing a cup at Attalus
head: after the which followed great trouble, and foul stir betwixt Philip,
Olympias, and Alexander: but Demaratus the CORINTHIAN salued all that again.
Of this last wife, he first had a daughter called Europe, and then a son
called Caranus, whom Olympias put to a cruel death. For his concubines, the
one called Arsinoe, being gotten with child by Philip, she fell into Lagus
hands, unto whom she gave Ptolomie afterward king of EGYPT. The second was a
girl of LARYSSENE, called Philinna, of whom he begat Aridaeus: who first of
all was poisoned, and in the end cruelly murdered by Olympias: being the last
king of the race of Temenides in MACEDON. For the issue of Alexander, they were
rejected by Cassander. The third was Nicasipolis, a woman of THESSALY, and
Iasons sister, tyrant of PHERES: of whom he had a daughter called Thessalonica,
whom Cassander married, and was afterward slain by Antipater. The end of
Alexander, of his mother, and of his children and successors, was lamentable
in diverse sorts. And thus we see in Philip and in his race, how many ways the
high Judge of the world has in his power and hand to overthrow the greatest,
when they are drunk with their prosperity.

The end of Philip of Macedons life.
THE LIFE OF Dionysius.
(...)



Base Tyranny is wrongs unhappy mother,
Witness this wretch, in show both grave and wise:
Yet he himself beguiling, and each other,
Showed that his heart was fierce, and full of vice.
IN the second year of the second Olympiad, Archias a CORINTHIAN, not daring to
return again into his city for a foul fact committed by him in the person
of an honest youth called Acteo^: he took the sea, and sailed into SICILIA
with certain CORINTHIANS and DORIANS, and there built the city of SYRACVSA,
the which by process of time became so great, that it had within it as it were
four towns, of the which the one was called the I Will, the second Acradine, the
third Tyche, and the last Neapolis: the one near unto the other, with a fort
called Hexapyle, which commanded all the other, and it was in the top of a high
place which they called Epipoles, as much to say, as over all the other towns.
It was governed at the first, by the command and power of Archias only: but
he being killed by Telephus, whom he had abused in his infancy, the SYRACVSANS
gathered together of diverse parts, brought their estate to Aristocratia, which
flourished for a time. But being come to pass that Tyndaris one of the Lords
of the town carried himself after such a manner, that he made many jealous
that his driftand policy was to make himself chief Lord: the other Lords
made a law called Petalisme, to meet with this practice: howbeit it was that
that increased his enterprise. Petalisme banishment for five years.
The effect of this law was, that the name of him that aspired to make himself
absolute Lord of the city, should be written in an olive leaf, the which being
put into the hand of this Lord, without further ceremony it was to tell him
that he was banished the city for five years, much after the fashion that is
reported of the Ostracisme of the ATHENIANS. By means of this Petalisme, the
Lords banished one another, so that in the end, the people became Lord. But
hereupon a dangerous sedition happening amongst them, Gelo, Lord of the city of
GELE, did so wisely look into the troubles of the SYRACVSANS: that they chose
him king in the second year of the three score and twelfth Olympiade. After
him succeeded Hieron, who at the beginning carried himself very evil: but
afterward falling into acquaintance with the Poets Simonides, Pindarus, and
Bacchylides, which taught him many good things, he reigned very prudently. So,
he having reigned about twelve years, left his brother Thrasybulus his
successor: who for his cruelties and insolences was driven out of SYRACVSA by
force, and went to LOCRES, and there ended the rest of his days. Then the
SYRACVSANS established the government of Lords, which continued sixty years:
in which time they make war with the AGRIGENTINES, and compelled them to sue
for peace: they destroy the TRINACRIANS and their town: they set upon the
LEONTINES, which are aided by the ATHENIANS under the conduct of Laches and
Carceadas, who behaved themselves so evil, that at their return home they
were banished. Shortly after the new troubles betwixt the SYRACVSANS and the
LEONTINES, the ATHENIANS sent Phaax into SICILIA to kindle the fire a little,
and to mutine the one against the other. Howbeit it had no good success, but
rather raised a cruel war betwixt the SYRACVSANS and ATHENIANS, in the which
at the last Nicias and Demosthenes were overcome by sea and land both, and
afterward put to death, and the soldiers of ATHENS that were prisoners most
cruelly used. The SYRACVSANS lift up with this victory, did put down their
Lordly government, and brought it to a popular state again. Then thinking to
be revenged of the CARTHAGINIANS that were come to the aid of the SEGESTANS
against the SELINONTINES, which were their friends: they sent Diocles with
four thousand good men against Hanniball the son of Gisco, who lay in camp
at that time before HIMERA, the which he wan after he had overcome Diocles, and
slain the most part of his troops. The SYRACVSANS casting their anger for
this loss upon Hermocrates one of their chiefest citizens, they banished him
with the Petalisme, and drove him out of the town. He helping himself with
the means he had in his hand, made up and armed five galleys, and afterward
with certain banished men of HIMERA, attempted to put in again into SVRACVSA.
But seeing he could not prevail, he landed and possessed the ruined town of
SELINONTE, he repaired it, called home again all the inhabitants dispersed
through SICILIA, fortified himself there, and in few days got together a
troop of six thousand men. With these forces he set upon them of PALERME, and
of MOTYE, in league with the CARTHAGINIANS, overcame them in a pitched field,
maintained his friends, and followed his victory. The SYRACVSANS hearing good
report of Hermocrates valor, began to repent them that they had so
dishonourably used him. He on the other side being advertised by his friends of
the good affection of the citizens unto him: to win their good favor again,
he was very careful to gather together the bones of those that were killed by
HYMERA under the leading of Diocles, and sent them to SYRACVSA, in carts very
richly set out. For all this they sent not for him home, the SYRACVSANS being
afraid of him, for that he was a man of such courage and wisdom, lest he
should make himself Lord of the town. He seeing himself thus refused, went
back to SELINONTE, and shortly after being solicited by his friends, he found
means by night to come into SYRACVSA, and possessed the Acradine. The
SYRACVSANS took arms immediately, fought with Hermocrates, killed him in the
great market place with part of his train, and banished those that favored
him. His friends saved some of them from the violence of the citizens, and
amongst others Dionysius the son of Hermocrates, a plain citizen of
SYSACVSA, whose life we presently write of.

Now it is reported, that his mother being with child of him, dreamed that she
was brought to bed of a Satyr, and that the Soothsayers being asked their
opinion, answered, she should have a son that should be famous above all the
GREEKS. Furthermore, a young gentlewoman of SYRACVSA called Himera, some time
before Dionysius made himself Lord of the city, dreamed that she was taken up
to heaven, by a guide that having carried her too and fro, in the end brought
her before Jupiter, at whose feet she saw a young man with a yelow hair, bound
with iron chains: and asking her guide what he was: It is, said the other, the
cruel scourge of SICILIA and ITALY, the which shall spoil a great country,
as soon as his bolts be off his feet. Within few years after, Dionysius having
already seized upon the estate, as he came to make his entry into SYRACVSA,
and that the citizens went out to meet him to do him honor: Himera being there
by chance, knew him, and straight cried out: This was the young man that she
sawin heaven. This being reported to Dionysius, he caused them to kill this
young damsel. Another time his horse falling in the mire that he could not
get out, Dionysius left him fast there: but the poor beast with struggling got
himself out, and ran after his master: bringing in his maine a swarm of
bees. This did hearten him, especially through the counsel of his soothsayers,
to follow his purpose to subdue his country: the which he obtained by this
means. The CARTHAGINIANS desirous to make themselves great in SICILIA, sent
thither their Captain Himilco with a great army: against whom the SYRACVSANS
made head, wanne a battle, and killed six thousand of his men.
Notwithstanding this, he went and besieged AGRIGENTE, and having upon surprise
overthrown the army of the SYRACVSANS by sea, he enforced them that were
besieged to save themselves as they could, entered into this great rich city
abandoned, and took the spoil of it. The AGRIGENTINES that escaped gave the
alarm through al SICILIA, and retiring themselves to SYRACVSA their friend
town, began in full assembly of the city to accuse the Captains of SYRACVSA,
saying, that by their treason the country was sold unto their enemies.
Dionysius, the son of Hermocrates, a young man of a stout heart, and that did
embrace great matters in his mind, being in this assembly, took hold of the
occasion offered: and seeing the people out of countenance, he stepped forth,
charged the Captains very much, and gave counsel that they should do justice:
whereupon the magistrates did set a fine on their heads. And having found
Philistus inclined that way, and gotten money of him (who was very rich) to pay
this fine, with promise to furnish others if they were condemned: he followed
his purpose in other assemblies, having speech at will, and a comely manner
withal, so that almost for little or nothing, he wan the hearts of the people,
who moved by his orations, did casseere the old Captains, and chose new, and
among others Dionysius, who was a good soldier, and had made proof of his
valiantness in diverse encounters against the CARTHAGINIANS. But after they
had chosen him Captain, he never came to counsel with his other companions,
nor would not be acquainted with them: but under hand, made a foul report run
abroad that they practiced with the enemies. This made men of good judgment to
presume that he himself went about to make some alteration: and they could not
forbear to blame him for it. Nevertheless the people not looking so inwardly
into it, they esteemed him very much. Herupon many assemblies were made to
think of their affairs in wars, in one of the which Dionysius perceiving the
SYRACVSANS astonished, gave advice that they should call home their banished men,
saying: that it was a great mockery to run into GREECE and ITALY for aid, since
they had hard at their doors such as had been citizens, who had rather die
like vagabonds, then serve the enemy. And that the favor they should show
them, would spur them forward to do their country good service. The wisest
men durst not gainsay this advice, perceiving that the people did incline unto
it: that if they hindered that, it was to get as many enemies as there were
banished: and that they being called home, should thank none but Dionysius, at
whose commandment they would ever be afterward. No man speaking a word, the
decree of repeal was authorized by the people, and the banished men returned
to SYRACVSA. In the midst of all this business, letters were brought from
GELE, which demanded aid. Dionysius offered himself straight, and was sent
thither with 2000 footmen, and 400 horse. Being arrived at GELE, and finding
the city in trouble, he took the peoples part, accused the principals, made
them be put to death, and their goods forfeited. With which forfeiture he paid
the ordinary garrison of GELE, and promised double pay to them that followed him
from SYRACVSA: unto the which he returned immediately, having the favor of his
soldiers. So all the people ran about him in multitudes, asking him where the
enemies were, and what they did? You do not consider, said he, thas your
enemies indeed are in your town. They that govern in your estate are more to
be feared, then the CARTHAGINIANS: for whilst you are busy about your plays
and feasts, they divide the common treasure among themselves, and pay not the
soldiers. In the mean space Himilco prepares himself to come and besiege
you, whereof your governors make no reckning, neither do they give any order
for it. I knew this well enough before, but now I am most assured of it: for
Himilco sent a trumpet unto me, under color of certain prisoners, and
secretly bad him tell me, that he would give me more then any other of my
companions, so that I would not search him too narowly: and if so be that I
would not help him, at the least yet that I would not hinder him. And
therefore think with your selves to find another captain in my place, for it
is no reason whilst others sell the town to the enemies, that I should go
hazard my self with my fellow citizens, and in danger in the end that they
should think of me I should be partaker with the wicked practices of others.
Those that heard what he spoke, being maruellously offended, carried these words
immediately all about the town. But for the present time every one went home to
their house, sad, and troubled in their minds. The morrow after, as those that
should speak before the people did draw by lot of letters, that they might
know in order how they should speak, and that the letter F. came to his lot:
some stander by told him, this F. signifies A Iester or s^^^^d Fool.
Fool, Dionysius, because thou will tell us great follies. No, replied he
quickly: that I shall be a Monarke. Presently the people being assembled, and
his turn being come to speak, he accused his other companions with great
vehemence, was heard very attentively, and with great praise of all the people,
whom the day before he had angered very much: so that in the end there was some
of the assembly cried out, that necessity required that Dionysius should be
chosen alone Captain general, with all authority and sovereign power, and
that it was no tarying till the enemies be under our walls, and that he was a
fit man to take care of this business: and as for the traitors, that they
should think of them at better leisure. Hereupon the people chose Dionysius
their Captain general, giving him full authority, and power of the affairs
of the commonwealth, and praying him to consider of all that should be
expedient to resist the enemies.

He seeing his enterprise so well grounded, propounds a decree to the people,
that the soldiers pay should be doubled over that it was before: for that
would make them more courageous and willing to do good service. And as for
money, that the SYRACVSANS should take no thought for that, for he knew a way
how to come by it well enough. This so sudden advancement, and his bold
promises joined with the disposition of this young man, made many suspect him
that had any understanding and judgment: in so much that some began to go and
come to houses to confer together to find means betimes to withstand the
tyranny, which had now (as they say) put the irons in the fire. But Dionysius
having an eye abroad, and a number of spies that slily fell into companies,
being afraid they would do him some hurt, determined to provide for it by a
far fetch to sight, but very fit to serve his turn: which was, to obtain
license to choose a guard for his person, unto the which he came, as follows. He
proclaimed in the town that those that were able to bear arms should follow
him, and to make their rende-vous with their arms at a day set down at the
town of the LEONTINES, and bring victuals with them for one month. There was
then in that town a garrison of the SYRACVSANS: the banished, and all sorts of
men withdrew themselves, whom Dionysius hoped would have taken his part, for
that they were men which desired nothing more then change and alteration, and
persuaded himself that few of the SYRACVSANS would follow him. Hereupon he
went himself into the field, and being encamped near the town, one caused
his friends to give the alarm, and to cry help, as if the enemies had
environed him to kill him in his tent: and making as though he had been
maruellously afraid, he fled, and saved himself by swiftness within the
castle of the town, where he passed all the rest of the night, made fires all
about, and sent for his soldiers in whom he put most trust, as a man that is
afraid, seeing his enemies lie in wait for him. The next morning some of the
people of SYRACVSA being gathered together in this town of the LEONTINES, in
open assembly he made a long discourse of that that had passed, to make them
believe that his evil willers would have surprised him, and could speak so
well, that the people appointed him six hundred soldiers to guard his person,
such as he himself would choose out. Immediately he chose young men to the
number of a thousand which had nothing to loose, hardy and desperate to put any
thing in execution that they were commanded. These he furnished with all
things necessary, and made them great promises: so that he wanne their hearts,
and got unto him the soldiers strangers that were in the SYRACVSANS pay.
Howbeit he changed the Captains from their companies, and put in their places
some other made to his hand. And afterward he sent Dexipus, a wise and valiant
Captain LACEDAEMONIAN, back again into his country, of whom he stood in
fear, and perceived he would be a bar in his way to hinder that he went
about. Over and above that he sent for the soldiers of the garrison of GELE,
and gathered together all them that were banished, all thieves and rogues that
would come and serve him, judging them to be fit men to serve the turn he
purposed. When he had gotten a great troop of such rakehels, he straight
returned to SYRACVSA, and lodged his forces in the Arsenall, and then showed
himself openly Lord, and tyrant, without any longer dissimulation. This
amazed and grieved the SYRACVSANS most extremely: nevertheless they were
enforced to bear this yoke which they could not help, because the town was
full of soldiers strangers, and for that also they were afraid of the
CARTHAGINIANS that were near unto them with a mighty army. All this
happened, Dionysius being but five and twenty years old, in the third year
of the ninety three Olympiade, and in the three hundredth seven and fortieth
year of the foundation of ROME. Thus you see how this young man of a base
condition, meanly borne, made himself Lord of one of the greatest
commonwealths in the world at that time, and continued this usurpation all the
days of his life, which was the space of 38 years.

This being done, he made them all rich and wealthy that aided him in this
enterprise, drove out all those he could find that withstood these his
attempts, put to death before all the people Daphneus, and Demarchus, two of
the chiefest men, and of greatest power that were at that time in SYRACVSA, and
that had most crossed him of all others in the device of his purpose.
Afterward, because he would yet strengthen himself the better, he married
Hermocrates daughter, a SYRACVSAN Captain, that overcame Nicias and the
ATHENIANS, and married his sister unto Polyxenus, brother in law unto
Hermocrates. Whilst things passed thus, the CARTHAGINIANS, being masters of
AGRIGENTE, after they had spoiled, burnt and razed it, they marched away with
their General Himilco, and went and besieged the city of GELE, friend to the
SYRACVSANS, in manner of a like distance from SYRACVSA and AGRIGENTE, very far
in land, where the other two were ports of the sea. The besieged did wonderful
valiantly defend themselves, their town being weak and kept by the citizens
only, accompanied with their wives and children that would not forsake them.
Dionysius hearing of their necessity, brought a strong aid unto them of
thirty thousand footmen, and a thousand horse, besides a great number of
galleys, that lay off and on upon the I Will, to cut off victuals from Himilco,
and to land also. But when they came to join, Dionysius having divided his
bands into three troops to trouble his enemy the more, he could not do so well
but the CARTHAGINIANS had the better, and slew many of his men. He very hardly
escaping with his troop entered into the town, and there called his friends
together to counsel what they were best to do. They seeing the place
dangerous, and of great disadvantage to hazard a battle in, gave him counsel
to retire again. He sent a trumpet ouer-night to Himilco, to pray him to
surcease arms till the morning, that he might gather the dead bodies together
to bury them. In the mean space, in the first watch of the night, he made all
the people come out of the town, and dislodged himself about midnight,
leaving there 2000 men lightly armed, commanding them to make great fires and
noise, that the enemies might think that he and his men were still in the
town: and that they at the break of day should come to their troops.
Dionysius having escaped thus, came unto CAMARINE, a town halfe-way betwixt
GELE and SYRACVSA, and commanded all the inhabitants to dislodge and come to
SYRACVSA, that they might avoid the cruelties of the CARTHAGINIANS who sacked
GELE. So, all the inhabitants of these two towns compelled to leave their
houses and country, all the fields and highways were full of women,
children, and of poor people of the country. This moved the soldiers against
Dionysius, who accused him that he had done this of purpose, that he might more
easily sease upon the other cities of SICILIA, which should be destroyed by the
barbarous CARTHAGINIANS: and thus they complained one to another of the little
aid he had given to the townsmen of GELE: how the soldiers of his guard had
dealt cowardly in their service, and ran away without the loss of a man of
theirs, and no body pursued after them. Upon this coffeehouse, the ITALIAN
soldiers that came out of ITALY, took their journey to return home. And the
men of arms of SICILIA at the first began to lie in wait to kill Dionysius on
the way: but seeing that the soldiers of his guard were never from him, nor he
from the^: they departed all together, and went with speed toward SYRACVSA,
and found them that were left there in garrison, lodged in the place of the
Arsenal, who knew nothing what had happened before GELE. By this means being
entered without resistance, they sacked the palace of Dionysius, where they met
with great riches, and did so villanously abuse his wife, that for grief she
killed her self. But about the time that they departed from the camp,
Dionysius imagining by the way what would follow after this, he chose out
certain footmen and horsemen which he thought he might best trust about his
person, and went with all speed possible with them to SYRACVSA, supposing he
should not overcome these me^ of arms, unless he did as they. And even as he
thought so it came to pass: for they persuading themselves that Dionysius
could not well tell what course to take, whether to follow them, or to keep
with is army: thought they had won all, and walked up and down the town
telling stories of the cowardlinesse of Dionysius: who having marched well
near nineteen leagues at one journey, came about midnight to the gates of
ACRADINE, with about a hundred horse, and six hundred footmen: and finding it
shut, caused store of fagots, reeds, and sedge of the fens to be laid against
the gate, wherewith the SYRACVSANS use to burn their lime, which they found
there ready at hand. Whilst this gate was a burning, his men that could not
follow him so fast arrived one after another. And so the gate being burnt he
entered, and found in the market place some of these men of arms, who in have
had set themselves in order of battle: but on the sudden they were engaged, and
killed with pikes and darts. Dionysius on the other side, he ran through the
town putting them all to the sword he met here and there in the streets, that
were running to aid their men. And not staying so, he entered into their houses
whom he knew to be his enemies, killed some of them, and drove others out of
the city. The rest of the men of arms fled, some here, some there, and the
next morning all his forces arrived at SYRACVSA. But they of GELE, and of
CAVARINE, being angry with him, went into the city of the LEONTINES.

In the midst of all these stirs and doings, the plague being hot in the
camp of the CARTHAGINIANS, enforced Himilco to send a herald unto SYRACVSA to
demand peace. Dionysius accepted it very willingly. So peace was concluded,
that the CARTHAGINIANS should have the SICANIANS, besides all the towns which
they had before the war in their power: That they of SELINONTE, of AGRIGENTE,
of HIMERA, of GELE, and of CAMARINE, might return home to their houses, dwell
in their country, and in their towns without walls, paying a certain yearly
tribute unto the CARTHAGINIANS: That the LEONTINES, those of MESSINA and all
other the SICILIANS should be free, and enjoy their liberties and privileges:
That the SYRACVSANS should remain under the government of Dionysius: That the
prisoners and galleys taken in this war should be restored again on either
side. By means of this peace Dionysius got the CARTHAGINIANS out of SICILIA,
established his principality surer then ever, and married again two other wives
together: the one a stranger of the city of LOCRES, called Doris: the other of
SYRACVSA called Aristomache, the daughter of Hipparinus the chief man of all
the citizens. He had asked a wife of them of RHEGE, but they refused him, and
scorned his tyranny: of whom he was cruelly revenged, as we will tell you
hereafter. It is reported that he married them both in one day, and it was never
known which of them he knew first: for the rest, that ever afterward he
showed them both a like favor. They did ordinarily eat together with him, and
both of them by turns lay with him. They of SYRACVSA were desirous that his
wife of SYRACVSA should be preferred before the stranger. But Doris had this
good hap, to bring forth Dionysius eldest son: which served his turn well
to defend himself that she was a forreiner. Aristomache to the contrary was
married a long time to Dionysius and had no children: though he was very
desirous to have one by her. Insomuch that he put Doris mother to death,
charging her that she had by charms and sorceries kept back Aristomache from
conceiving. But afterward she had children, to wit, two sons, Nisaeus, and
Hipparinus: and two daughters, Arete, and Sophrosyne. Dionysius the younger,
married his sister Sophrosyne: and Arete was married unto Thearides, brother to
Dionysius the elder: and her second husband was Dion, the brother of
Aristomache. Furthermore, considering that the SYRACVSANS being delivered from
the war of the CARTHAGINIANS should have leisure to think to recover their
liberty again: and perceiving that the quarter they called the I Will was
stronger of situation, and easier to keep then any other of the three: he
enclosed it in with a strong wall from the rest, and built there many great and
high towers, palaces to keep his courts, hals for his Counsel and public
assemblies, goodly galleries, and spacious gate-houses to contain a great
number of people. And to retire himself unto upon any sudden emotion of the
common people, he built a marvelous strong castle, within the compass
whereof he enclosed the Arsenall, where mightly in docke threescore galleys:
and there was a gate also to shut too, into the which could enter but one
galley at a time. Then choosing out the goodliest and best place of all the
territory of SYRACVSA, he divided it among his friends, and gave it unto them
that had charge of men of war under him. That which remained, he distributed
by equal portions unto other inhabitants of the town, as well natural borne
citizens, as strangers, come from other parts to dwell at SYRACVSA, concluding
under the name of citizens the bondmen enfranchised, who he called the new
burgesses: and distributed to the people also the houses of SYRACVSA, those
reserved of the quarter of the I Will, which he gave unto his friends and
soldiers.

So, having as he thought well assured his estate, he began to make war upon
the free cities of SICILIA, under color that they had favored the
CARTHAGINIANS. HERBESSE, a city in firm land near unto the mountains, in the
heart of the country, was the first he attempted, and went and besieged it. But
the SYRACVSANS that were a great number in this army, and well appointed, began
to have secret meetings, and to blame themselves, for that they joined not with
the men of arms to drive out this tyrant. He whom Dionysius had given them
for their captain called Doricus, was ware of their conferences, and threatened
one that spoke louder then the others: who replied so fiercely again, that the
captain came to him in choler to strike him. But his companions took the
quarrel, and did so contest against him, that they killed the captain in the
place. Then stirring up their fellow citizens to recover their liberty, they
sent for the men of arms of the SYRACVSANS, who were retired into the fort of
AETNE. Dionysius amazed with this change, presently raised his siege, and with
all expedition took his way toward SYRACVSA, that he might be there first.
After he was gone, those that had mutined chose them for their leaders that had
killed captain Doricus, went and encamped themselves with the men of arms
before SYRACVSA, in a place called Epipoles to make war with the tyrant,
having stopped all the passages that he could not come out into the field. And
forthwith they sent to them of RHEGE and MESSINA, to pray them to send them
aid: which they obtained, to wit, ninety galleys well appointed. Furthermore,
they promised by open proclamation, a great sum of money to him that would kill
the tyrant: and to the strangers that were in pay, to make them Burgesses as
themselves, if they would take their part against him. They provided engines of
battery to beat down the walls of the Isle, and every day gave new assaults
unto them, and made very much of all the soldiers strangers that took their
part. Whereupon Dionysius seeing himself shut out of the field, and that his
men forsook him every hour, assembled his friends to consult with them what
was to be done. Some counseled him to tarry, alleging that tyranny and
absolute power usurped by him, was a fair tomb. Polixemus his brother was of
the mind, that he should save himself on the swiftest horse he had in his
stable, in the lands which the CARTHAGINIANS held in SICILIA. But Philistus,
who afterward wrote the story of his gests, said then, that Dionysius should
neither fly away, nor yield up his tyranny, the which he should never forgo
but by force, and his feet forward. Dionysius took hold of this opinion, and
resolved with himself to abide all extremity, rather then to yield up his
place. Being in this case he fortuned to come to see a butcher slaughter an
ox, and having observed that at one stroke he fell down stark dead: Alas,
said he, were it not great shame that for fear of death which lasts so little
while, and is so soon gone, I should leave so goodly and great a Seigniorie?
But knowing what people he had to deal withal, he sent ambassadors unto them
that kept him in so straightly, to beseech them to permit him with safety to
come out of the town with his followers. Even at that instant he sent men to
the soldiers CAMPANIANS, to promise them all that they would have, so they
would come and besiege SYRACVSA. The townsmen having suffered him to go his
way with five ships, slept quietly in hope that he would be gone: and cassiered
a part of their soldiers, supposing they should need no longer to besiege it.
So that their soldiers dispersed themselves here and there in the fields, even
as if the tyranny had been put down. But the CAMPANIANS allured by Dionysius
promises, came into the field, and being come to AGYRIDE, they left their
carriage to be so much the sooner before SYRACVSA. They were twelve hundred
horsemen, and made such speed, that they surprised the SYRACVSANS, and in
despite of them rode through the town unto the castle of Dionysius, in whose
aid also at the very same time there arrived by sea, three hundred other
soldiers: so that now he became more courageous then ever he was. The
SYRACVSANS on the other side began to disarme themselves, some being of one
mind some of another: which Dionysins understanding, he made a fallie out upon
them that kept the quarter called NEAPOLIS, or new town, and put them all to
flight: howbeit many were not killed, for Dionysius riding every where about,
willed his men to kill none that fled. Thus were the SYRACVSANS driven and
dispersed in the field, where there gathered about the horsemen above seven
thousand. Now for Dionysius, he having caused them to be buried that were slain
in this conflict, he sent ambassadors unto AETNE to them that were retired
thither, to entreat them to be at peace, and to return home to their houses,
promising them by oath, that he would never be revenged for any thing they had
practiced or done against him. Those that had wives and children at SYSACVSA,
were compelled to trust to his words and promises. But when the ambassadors
alleged to the others, the humanity of their master in burying the dead:
they answered, that the tyrant deserved to have as much done to him, and that
they prayed the gods they might quickly requite him. For all this they would
not stir out of AETNE, expecting opportunity to set upon their enemy: who
being escaped from so great a danger, he courteously used them that returned,
to entice the others to follow. And for the rest, after he had well paid the
CAMPANIANS, he put them out of the city, suspecting their inconstancy and
treason. They departing from SYRACVSA, went unto the city of ATELLE, where
they prevailed so much, that they were received into the town to dwell there.
But their wickedness burst out into such extremity, that one night they set
upon the natural inhabitants, killed every man that was able to bear arms,
and afterward by force thrust out their wives: and by this means made
themselves masters of the town, and of all the territory thereabout. At the
same time Aristus, one of the chiefest men of LACEDAEMON was sent unto
SYRACVSA, upon a rumor given out amongst the people, that it was to drive out
the tyrant. But the effect showed that it was but to negociate with him, and to
bind him unto them, to serve their turns in their affairs. Aristus then
having immediately after his arrival had secret conference with Dionysius, he
began to mutine the SYRACVSANS, promising them all the aid he could, for the
recovery of their liberty. But afterward he himself killed Nicoteles the
CORINTHIAN, who had promised the SYRACVSANS to be the head of this enterprise:
and accusing them that gave credit to his words, he made the tyrant more bold
and stronger then ever. So did he also begin to show himself more then before:
for he found the means to send the SYRACVSANS into the fields to get in their
corn and harvest, and in the mean space whilst they were out of the city,
he went into the houses himself, and fetched out all their arms that had any.
Then he environed his castle round about with another second wall, built diverse
ships, and assembled a great number of soldiers strangers, whom he
afterward entertained. Now he thinking himself too little a Lord, undertook
to conquer some fronter towns near unto the territory of the SYRACVSANS, and
before he would assail them, he brought his army before AETNE, which he wan
presently. From thence he came to besiege the city of the LEONTINES, the which
having resisted him, after he had foraged and preyed the country about, he
turned unto the towns of the natural SICILIANS, making as though he meant to
set upon the^, to the end that those of CATANE, and of NAXE, seeing the war
in another place, should care the less for themselves. So being near unto the
town of ENNE, he put into Limnestus head, a citizen of the same, that he
should take upon him to make himself Lord of the town, promising to help him
in it: which the other executed. Howbeit he kept the town for himself, and
shut the gates against Dionysius: who being angry with this repulse, counseled
the ENNIANS to drive out this new tyrant. The people being set on by him, ran
one day in arms into the market place, and cried, Liberty. Dionysius
understanding that, followed with some of his faithful friends, took hold of
Limnestus, and delivered him to the ENNIANS, and went out of the town again
immediately, to make others to trust him. From thence he went unto CATANE, and
wan that town through the treason of Arcesilaus captain of the same: took all
the arms from the inhabitants, and left a good garrison there. Procles captain
of NOXE, shortly after played even the like part that Arcesilaus had done: and
was well recompensed for it, and all his kinsmen and friends were given him:
but the other inhabitants were sold by the drum, their town destoyed, and
their lands given unto the SICILIANS, neighbors to SYRACVSA. For those of
CATANE, they were also sold unto them that would give most within SYRACVSA, and
their town given to the soldiers CAMPANIANS. This made the LEONTINES hold up
their hands, leave the town, and go dwell at SYRACVSA. Now Dionysius fortified
SYRACVSA a new, and having determined to close in the quarter called Epipoles
with walls, he assembled threescore thousand laborers distributed by troops,
and serving skillful masters, accompanied with Masons that had their day
work. These men encouraged by his presence, by his promises and gifts,
finished the wall in three weeks of a reasonable height and thickness, being
little less then two leagues about. The banished men of SYRACVSA being fled to
RHEGE, did what they could possible to move the inhabitants to make war
against Dionysius. They labored it so well, that in the end the RHEGIANS went
into the field, and induced the Governors of MESSINA to keep them company.
But a MESSENIAN called Leomedon, having discouraged the troops, every one went
home again, and did nothing: and as for Dionysius, he looked no further into
them, but the RHEGIANS and MESSENIANS having sent unto him to treat of peace,
he judging that the friendship of these two cities would be very expedient for
him, made peace with them.

So having assured himself on that side, and considering that many GREEKS of
SICILIA fled into the towns which were subject to the CARTHAGINIANS, and that
there were towns, untouched, unto the which they carried their goods: he
thought that so long as he was at peace with them, diverse of his subjects would
be willing to do the like. Howbeit that in making war with them, those whom
the CARTHAGINIANS should overcome by arms, would come to his side.
Furthermore, word was brought him that CARTHAGE was wonderfully afflicted with
the plague, which did the more strengthen him in his resolution. But knowing
that he had to deal with mighty enemies of all the people of EVROPE, and that
this war would not so soon be ended: he gathered together into SYRACVSA out of
all the coasts of ITALY, of GREECE, and of SICILIA, the best workmen and
artificers, unto whom he gave great wages, and great gifts unto those that were
most skillful and diligent. Who laboring in envy the one of the other, they
built up in a short time two hundred galleys, repaired a hundred and ten that
had served a long time, forged an hundred and forty thousand bucklers or
targets, so many swords and daggers, as many helmets and sallets: fourteen
thousand corcelets, curates, and brigandines of all sorts: engines of battery
of all fashions, and of darts, an incredible and inestimable number. Touching
the galleys, to arm them with pylots, mariners, and galley-slaues, the city
of SYRACVSA furnished for the one half: and Dionysius for the other half
paid the soldiers strangers. The furniture of these ships, arms, and
harness being ready, he began to gather his army together, and would not for
saving of charges put himself in readiness before. He gathered together
within SVRACVSA all those that were able to bear arms: he drew out of the
towns subject unto him, all that were meet for war: he leauied men out of
LACONIA with consent of the Lords of SPARTA, and got a great number out of all
parts because he paid well, and gave them very gracious entertainment that
came to serve him. But above all the rest he showed himself a marvelous friend
to the RHEGIANS, and MESSENIANS, that had a reasonable strong army in readiness
to be employed: being afraid that so soon as they should see the CARTHAGINIANS
passed into SICILIA, they would join with them: for to which side soever these
two cities would incline, they would help to make a great weight in the
balance, and to bring the victory to fall on their side. It was at that time
that he gave a great country of extent unto the MESSENIANS, and prayed the
RHEGIANS to give him a wife of their town. But they would not hear of that in
any wise. Whereupon he went to the LOCRIANS, who gave him her of whom we have
spoken before: and for many days together did nothing else but make banquets
and feasts, as well to his soldiers, as unto the more part of the citizens of
SYRACVSA. For he had now changed his first soreness and cruelty of a tyrant
into gentleness: he did use his subjects in a more civil sort, put no more of
them to death, nor banished any mo of them, as he did at the first beginning.
Shortly after this marriage was past, he assembled the people of SYRACVSA, and
did persuade them to make war with the CARTHAGINIANS, telling them that they
were enemies of all the universal GREEKS, and of those especially that dwelt
in SICILIA, whom they practiced by all means they could to make subject unto
them. And that albeit they did not now make any alteration, it was because of
the plague that tormented them much: but so soon as they were free from that,
they should see the effects of their malice against all the inhabitants of
SICILIA, which they cast long before in their minds. And that it were better
for him, since it must needs be, soon or late, to begin to make war upon them
they being now weak, then to tarry till they were recovered again: and that it
was a great shame to the^ to suffer the towns of GREECE so near unto them, to
be made subject to barbarous people: that being desirous to recover their
liberty, so much more willing they would be to yield themselves unto the
SYRACVSANS, so soon as they should see that it were open war. These and other
reasons were received and allowed by the SYRACVSANS, who were no less desirous
then himself to make war with them. For they hated the CARTHAGINIANS, because
that for fear of them they were constrained to put themselves under the yoke.
And next, for that they hoped Dionysius would use them more gently, so long as
on the one side he should be afraid of the force of the enemies, and on the
other, of the rebellion of those who^ by force he kept under. And especially
above the rest, for that they hoped being armed, if occasion were offered, they
might one day stand for the recovery of their liberty.

War being concluded upon in this assembly, Dionysius suffered the SYRACVSANS
to spoil the PHENICIANS that trafiqued in their haven: which they executed out
of hand. The other SICILIANS did as much: so that the CARTHGAINIANS were driven
to run away, and those that they could catch were cruelly handled in every
place, for the hatred they bare them, because of the proud parts they committed
in the wars past. Dionysius having all his army in readiness, sent a Herald
unto CARTHAGE with letters, containing that the SYRACVSANS had decreed in their
Council to make war upon the CARTHAGINIANS, unless they departed from the
towns of GREECE which they held in SICILIA, and did leave them at liberty. The
Senate and people of CARTHAGE amazed at it, knew that they had to fight with
Dionysius, nevertheless they resolved to take arms, and sent to leauie men
out of all parts. Dionysius on the other side, he took the field with an army
of fourscore thousand fighting men of foot, and three thousand horse: and had
at the sea nere two hundred galleys and ships of ower, accompanied with five
hundred great ships of burden, full of all sorts of engines of battery, and of
necessary munitions for such an army. All the towns almost of SICILIA
yielded themselves unto him, saving MOTYE, ANCYRE, SOLES, EGESTE, PALERME, and
ENTELLE. Leptines his brother and Admiral, lay before MOTYE, and besieged it:
and himself spoiled all the country of the SOLENTINES, PALERMITANS, and
ANCIREIANS: and besieged EGESTE, and ENTELLE, and gave them diverse assaults.
News being brought unto him that Himilco was at hand, he went and encamped
before MOTYE, a town situated within a little Isle of SICILIA, half a league
from firm land, stately built, and very rich at that time. The which he
assaulted by sea and by land, drove Himilco and his forces back, and wan the
town by assault: but they sold their lives and town very dear, having killed
a great number of the enemies, before they were forced. The SICILIANS yet angry
in their hearts for the mischiefs they had endured through the insolency of
the CARTHAGINIANS in the former wars: were so brued in blood, that all those of
MOTYE were put to the sword. They that saved themselves in the temples, had
their lives granted them: but Dionysius made them all be sold by the drum.
Whilst he was occupied there, the EGESTANS made a sallie upon the camp which
he had left before the town, and set it on fire, which burnt the most part of
his soldiers, and the rest well warmed, saved themselves as they could. But
Dionysius not much regarding this loss, set upon all the towns of the
CARTHAGINIANS with his army. They for their part, gave all the authority and
power unto Himilco, to prepare for this war of SICILIA. He made an army of
three hundred thousand footmen, and of a great number of horsemen, and gave the
rende vous to the ships of burden at PALERME: where he arrived with his
fleet of galleys that followed him. The Admiral Leptines having descried his
coming, set forward with his ships, and fought with them in the maine sea: he
killed five thousand of his men, sunk fifty ships, and two hundred carts of
war: and the rest of them saved themselves by flying. But Himilco having
landed his army, went and assailed MOTYE, and wanne it again of the
SARACVSANS.

At that time Dionysius was before EGESTE, where word being brought him of the
arrival of the CARTHAGINIANS, and of the taking again of MOTYE: he began to
be afraid, and to take advice to return to SVRACVSA: he commanded the
SICILIANS to retire, and made their lands wast, to disadvantage their enemies
by so much the more. This sudden change of Dionysius, was cause that many of
his friends took part with Himilco, who seeing his affairs prosper so well,
made his army march to MESSINE: took in (passing by) the I Will and town of
LYPARE: and then besieged the MESSENIANS so straightly, that in the end he wan
the town by assault. And there having refreshed his troops, he razed the
town to the very ground, the which did so much amaze the SICILIANS, that all,
except the ASSARINS, turned unto the CARTHAGINIANS. Dionysius being at his wits
end for so many losses, did fortify the strong holds that were in the
territory of the LEONTINES, sent the CAMPANIANS to AETNE, that dwelt in the
town of CATANE: and taking order for his affairs the best he could possible,
he went into the field with four and thirty thousand footmen, and a thousand
horse, and lodged under the mount Taur, where the banished men of SYRACVSA were
placed, favored by the CARTHAGINIANS, and had fortified it, and made it in
form of a town: whilst he made his abode there, news came unto him that the
army of the CARTHAGINIANS was divided into two, and that the one part of them
went by land to CATANE with Himilco: and the other came toward him by sea, led
by Mago. He hoping to make this fleet as nothing, commanded his brother
Leptines to make out with his shipping against Mago. But Leptines was put to
flight, with the loss of twenty thousand men, and well near a hundred of his
ships. This loss drove Dionysius into such a fear, doubting besides lest Mago
following his victory should draw toward SYRACVSA, which was easy to be
won having no garrison in it: he retired into his city, and from thence sent
men into ITALY and into GREECE, to pray aid against the CARTHGAINIANS. Himilco
knowing his retraite, brought all his forces immediately unto SYRACVSA, besieged
it by land and by sea, wan the suburbs of ACRADINE, and set up his pauilion in
the temple of Jupiter Olympian, all the other temples of the suburbs having
been rifled by the soldiers. In the mean time Polyxemus brought to the aid
of the town, thirty ships of their friends under the conduct of Pharacidas,
a Captain of the LACEDAEMONIANS. With this aid, and all the ships of
burden, Dionysius put to the sea to go get victuals. But now whilst he was at
the sea in his voyage, the SYRACVSANS being careful to look to their city,
and spying out all occasions to mischief the besiegers: they descryed a boat
that brought corn to the camp of Himilco. Whereupon on the sudden they armed
all their galleys, and fought so valiantly with the CARTHAGINIANS, that they
took their Admiral with twenty others, and sunk four of them, and followed
the rest that fled, unto the very place where their ships lay at anchor within
the great haven, provoking the^ to battle. But the CARTHAGINIANS astonished with
this overthrow, stirred not.

Then the SYRACVSANS fastened the galleys prisoners unto the poopes of theirs,
and brought them into the city. Whereupon they being couragions again for
this little advantage they had of their enemies: they began to talk among
themselves, how the tyrant had been many times overcome, and that they to the
contrary without him had overcome the CARTHAGINIANS. And thereupon gathering
together by troops, they went speaking one to another, that they were weary
with serving a tyrant, and now specially having means to put him down for
ever: for before they were disarmed, but now by reason of the wars they had
their arms in their hands. Notwithstanding they daily held this talk,
Dionysius made the people to assemble, and praised them highly for the good
service they had done, persuading them furthermore to be of good courage, for
within few days he would make an end of this war. But as the assembly of the
people was ready to go their way, Theodorus SYRACVSAN, judged to be one of the
best men of arms within the town, stepped up, and made a long oration, in the
which after he had by peecemeale laid open all the tyrannies* cowardlinesse,
and wicked deeds of Dionysius, whom he called grammarian, clerk, a careless
man, ignorant of the affairs of war, oppressor of all SICILIA, and fauorer of
all thieves and ill men of the world: he persuaded them by diverse reasons to
endeavor themselves to recover their liberty. And since that their allies of
ITALY and GREECE were within the city, that they should bring back again the
power and authority to create such captains as they should think good, into
the hands of the citizens, according to the tenure of their ancient laws, or
else into the hands of their ancestors and first founders, which were the
CORINTHIANS: or at the least into the LACEDAEMONIANS hands, who had then the
seigniority of all GREECE. The SYRACVSANS being maruellously moved with such a
speech, behold the countenance of their confederates assistants in this
assembly: until such time as Pharacidas being gotten up into the pulpit for
orations, made every man hearken, supposing it should be he that should begin
first to stir up and encourage others to the recovery of their liberty. But to
the contrary, he being particularly friend to Dionysius, began to tell them,
that his Lords had sent him to aid the SYRACVSANS and Dionysius against the
CARTHAGINIANS: not to destroy them, nor to abolish his estate. This speech
being clean contrary to that the common people expected, the soldiers
strangers ran straight about him. Whereupon the SYRACVSANS stirred not, saving
that to themselves they cursed the LACEDAEMONIANS, because that heretofore they
had sent them Aristus, who pretending he came to aid them for to recover their
liberty, was a traitor and sold them: and now that this Pharacidas had broken
the hearts of their courages, being well disposed to root out this tyranny. For
Dionysius, he spoke smoothly for the time, being thoroughly afraid they would
have set upon him, and so dismissed the assembly, using the most gracious words
unto them he could possible. To others he gave presents, he sent for others to
come and eat with him at his table. In the mean time the plague straungely
possessed the camp of the CARTHAGINIANS, and in a short time killed wel-neare
150000. of them: whereupon the most part of them were forsaken alive and dead,
the contagion was so horrible. Some imputed it partly to the discommoditie of
the place, and excessive number of men living as it were on heaps together:
partly unto the vengeance of God punishing their pride, the insolences,
cruelties, and sacrileges of the CARTHAGINIANS. Dionysius understanding of this
misery, would not vainly let slip such a fit occasion, but armed fourscore
galleys, under the conduct of Pharacidas and Leptines, and his troops, with
whom he assailed Himilco by sea and by land, took his fortes, burnt and
drowned the most part of his ships, brake the rest, and gave his people of
SYRACVSA means to set upon the little barks, and to shut them within the city.
To be short, he brought them to such extremity, that they sent secretly unto
him to pray him to suffer that which was saved from the overthrow the day
before, to pass the sea, and to retire home to AFRIC with safety: promising
to make him a present of an hundred and fourscore thousand crowns. His answer
was, that it was not possible all should be saved, yet he was contented the
natural CARTHAGINIANS should pass. For he doubted much that the SYRACVSANS
and their friends would never suffer him to respite those other, if they once
understood it. But he did it of purpose, being unwilling that the army of
CARTHAGE should be utterly destroyed, for fear that when the SYRACVSANS should
see themselves free from this fear: they would remember the Oration of
Theodorus, and put too all their force to recover their liberty again. The
money promised him being delivered, Himilco embarked by night all the natural
CARTHAGINIANS that were left into forty galleys, and made sail immediately
toward AFRIC. Howbeit he was scant out of the haven, but certain
CORINTHIANS perceived his stealing away, and suddenly came to tell it to
Dionysius, who seeming to be very greatly busied, commanded to sound
thealarme, and that the Captains should prepare themselves to follow him. The
CORINTHIANS seeing he went but faintly to work, would tarry no longer, but
even at the present hour embarked themselves, drew up their ankers, and rowed
hard after their enemies: so that in a short space they ouertooke the rere of
their vessels, and so rudely hurt them, that they sunk some of them.
Immediately after, Dionysius drew his army into the field: but the SICILIANS,
friends unto the CARTHAGINIANS, had gotten the start before crossing the
country, insomuch that the more part of them got home to their houses. For
this cause Dionysius having left a guard to keep the passages by the high
ways, he brought his army back again to the enemies camp. The barbarous
people seeing themselves betrayed by their General, forsaken of the natural
CARTHAGINIANS and SICILIANS, their hearts were killed, and began to fly,
stealing away, some this way, some that way: but all of them in manner fell
into the hands of the soldiers that guarded the high ways. Those that were
left, came before Dionysius, and casting down their arms, besought him to
take pity of them, and to save their lives: the SPANIARDS only excepted, who
gathered themselves together with their arms, and sent unto him to offer their
service, if it would please him to accept them: the which he did, and received
them into pay among the soldiers strangers. For the rest, he took the other
prisoners, and gave their baggage in prey to his soldiers. For Himilco, after
he had lived ignominiously and poorly at CARTHAGE, he died distract of his
wits. Some hold opinion that immediately after he was arrived, not able to
endure the shame he got in this war, he killed himself.

Dionysius having driven the CARTHAGINIANS out of SICILIA, he built up MESSINA
again which they had ruined. Then he went to besiege TAVROMENION, fortified by
the SICILIANS: who lustily gave him the repulse, and made a sallie upon him,
and killed the most part of his men, having much ado to escape himself. On the
other side, Mago chief of the AFRICANS in SICILIA, did courteously entreat
his allies, and received into his protection all those whom Dionysius
oppressed. By which occasion having won the hearts of the most part of them, he
became so strong in a short time, that he got a great army again on foot,
marched with them to MESSINA, and ouerranne all the plain country, where
having gotten a great booty, he took upon him to besiege the ABACENIANS
confederates of Dionysius: who being bound to aid them, he went against the
CARTHAGINIANS, beat Mago in a conflict, and killed eight hundred of his men. So
having brought his troops to SYRACVSA and refreshed them, he armed a fleet of
an hundred vessels, to go and make war with those of RHEGE, and coming to
their haven by night, at that instant time he did fiercely assail them, set
fire on their gates, and set up scaling ladders in diverse parts: nevertheless
the RHEGIANS defended themselves so courageously, that he was forced to retire.
And thereupon receiving certain intelligence what great preparation they made
at CARTHAGE to begin the war again: he left RHEGE, and returned again to
SYRACVSA. So the CARTHAGINIANS had gotten together again fourscore thousand
men, whom they sent into SICILIA under the conduct of Mago. But before they
came to join with the enemies, they concluded peace with these conditions,
that every one should enjoy that they had gotten: That one of them should not
quarrel with the other for any thing: That Dionysius might without breach of
peace make war with the TAVROMENITANS. These being thus agreed upon between
them, Dionysius went and besieged TAVROMENION the second time, and did more
furiously assault it then before: so that in the end, after long resistance of
them that were besieged, he wanne the town, drove out the SICILIANS that dwelt
there, and did replenish it with strangers whom he kept in pay. Afterward
because his army should not be idle and mutinous, he chose twenty thousand
footmen, and three thousand horse, and went into ITALY with them next adjoining
unto SICILIA, to subdue those GREEKS which had dwelt there of long time. News
being brought unto them of Dionysius intention, they assembled all the estates
of the country of CROTONE, where they all resolved to join together to
repulse this common enemy: and making all the forces they could, establishing
Eloris, a banished man of SYRACVSA their Chieftaine, they made their army
march against Dionysius, who camped before the city of CAVLONE. He
understanding of their coming, raised his siege suddenly to go and meet with
them: and the next morning after his departure, by break of day he gave charge
upon the GREEKS with his troops well appointed, who marching disorderly, he
killed their Chieftaine, and the valiantest men of their army: and afterward
besieged the others that had saved themselves in a town, and compelled them to
yield for that they had no water. Yet contrary to all men's expectation, he used
them very courteously, and sent them home safe without ransom. After he had
won this goodly victory, he led his army into the territory of the RHEGIANS,
whom he hated to the death. They having no friends, and too weak of themselves
to resist such a mighty enemy: were constrained to make peace with him with
very hard conditions. For he made them give him threescore galleys, a hundred
and fourscore thousand crowns, and for hostage and observation of other
articles, a hundred of the chiefest of the town. From thence he returned to
besiege CAVLONE, and held them so straight, that he wan it by assault,
destroyed it, and gave the lands unto them of LOCRES.

But for as much as he could not forget the irreconcilable hatred he bare unto
the RHEGIANS, he having demanded on a time one of their daughters in marriage:
they report that the answer they made in an open assembly of the town unto his
Ambassadors, was that they would give him none of them, unless he would marry
the hangmans daughter of the town: this made him resolve that he would see the
end of it. And where before he had made peace with them, it was not for any
good will he bare them, nor that he desired their friendship, but because he
would take their galleys from them, hoping that after he had left them bare at
the sea, he should come closer to them, and have them at his discretion.
Therefore whilst he was in ITALY, he sought nothing else but to take an
occasion to make war with them, so that he might not be charged that contrary
to his faith he had broken the edict of pacification. Having therefore led his
army unto the strait, making as though he would pass into SICILIA: he sent
unto the RHEGIANS to demand victuals for his army, promising to send them so
much again upon his return to SYRACVSA. Which he did, to the end that if they
refused, he might excuse himself well if he did set upon them: and if they did
give him any, it should then turn to the hurt of the town, which if it came
to be besieged, should be constrained for famine to hold up their hands to him.
The RHEGIANS that least doubted his malice, furnished him with victuals for
certain days: but perceiving he tarried there too long, now counterfeiting he
was sick, then that he used other delays to prolong time, they began to see
his fetches, and refused to victual him any more. Thereupon he faining to be
much offended, sent them home their hostages, and came to besiege the town:
coming hard to their walls, he made daily and continual assaults, beating upon
the walls with great engines which he had made expressly of an incredible
greatness. They having chosen a valiant man for their Captain, called Phyton,
and furnished all those that were able to bear arms in the town, they
defended themselves courageously, and did many ways hurt their enemies: and
specially in a sally they made, Dionysius was sore hurt with a lance in the
flancke, that he was like to have died. But being recovered and well again, he
pursued his purpose more obstinately then ever: whereby he took all hope of
aid from them, and having continued siege there eleven months all together,
in the end the RHEGIANS found themselves in great want of victuals of all
sorts: for a bushel of wheat was at fifty crowns. After that all kind of
come failed them, first they did eat up their horses, and all kind of beasts
of burden. Then when they had no more to eat, they did sees all their hides
and leather they could find within the town, and so lived awhile. And last of
all, coming out of the town, they did eat and devour up such herbs and
roots as they could find by their walls, even as wild beasts. Dionysius
perceiving it, in stead of pitying of them (nay rather desiring they should
eat one another of them) he caused the grass to be cut down, and put his
beasts in the camp into it, to feed of all that was along the town walls
and ditches, to the end they should have nothing more to eat. So that in the
end the poor RHEGIANS overcome by necessity, were constrained to yield
themselves and their town to the discretion of the tyrant. Who being entered
into the town, found heaps of bodies dead of that plague of famine: and such
as were yet alive, seemed rather ghosts then living persons. So he gathered
together about six thousand prisoners, whom he sent all to SYRACVSA, suffering
notwithstanding all that could ransom themselves, (paying a talent) to be
redeemed: and the rest to be sold by the drum to him that would give most.
Amongst the prisoners there was Phyton and his son. Dionysius made his son
to be drowned first: and the next morning after, he made the father to be tied
to the highest engine of battery he had, and sent to tell him news of the death
of his son. He was happier by a day then his father, said Phyton: who was
drawn all the town over, and whipped most shamefully: having a sergeant at
his back that cried out aloud, that Dionysius made him be whipped thus, because
he had made the RHEGIANS take arms against him. But Phyton that had like a
valiant captain and worthy man showed himself in this siege, and had lived
honorably all his life time, did patiently endure the pain which the tyrant
made him suffer. For he remained constant, speaking out aloud that every body
heard him: That he was put to death, because he would not betray his country,
and deliver it into the tyrants hands, howbeit that within few days the gods
would be revenged of him for this outrage. His constancy was such, that it
moved Dionysius soldiers to compassion: who began already to murmr against
him. Wherefore fearing lest they should be so bold to take him out of the
tormentors hands: he made the^ leave whipping of him, and commanded that they
should drown him in the sea with all his kindred, which was done: for the rest,
the city of RHEGE was razed to the ground.

Thus have we made a large discourse of the practices and wars of Dionysius.
Now let us speak something of his private government. He had wit enough, but
troubled with many vices: and the more he grew in years, the more it was
corrupted. The flatterers made an end of his destruction: for they called his
cruelty, the hate of wicked men, and good justice, and made him believe that he
was a most worthy man in all things: insomuch that he thought himself the only
man of the world, and would be so reputed. Being thus carried, and seeing
himself at good leisure, he entered into a course which he had somewhat
disco^tinued during the wars, and wherewith he was strangely taken: which was,
to write verses, and to make tragedies. He fell to this study again with more
diligence then before, and sent for Poets out ofal parts, whom he honored, and
gave presents unto, because they should correct his works of Poetry. They
seeking to gratify him for their profit, said nothing, but that which they
thought should be most pleasing unto him: so that being puffed up with their
flatteries, he gloried more in his verses, then he did in his wars. Now
amongst other Poets that followed him, there was one they called Philoxenus, a
learned man, and excellent to write hymns in praise of the gods. Dionysius one
day gave him a tragedy of his to peruse and correct, he crossed it all over
from one end to the other: and one night being asked what he thought of
certain poesies which the tyrant made, he spoke openly, that they were worth
nothing. He answered so plainly, that Dionysius angrily said, it was of envy
that he censured his works so, and sent him forthwith to dig in the quarry pit.
The next morning his friends entreated Dionysius to pardon him, which he did:
and would have him again to supper with many others of his sort. In the midst
of this feast, Dionysius that desired nothing more then to have his verses
heard: he rehearsed some of them, and of those especially which he thought best
done. Then turning himself to Philoxenus, he asked his opinion. But he answered
him never a word, but looking about him, called one of Dionysius guard and said
unto him: Carry me again to the quarry pit. Dionysius smiling at it, bare this
nip well: and soon after taking Philoxenus apart, persuaded him not to be so
sharp. His friends also told him that he might easily forbear to speak so
freely to no purpose. Then Philoxenus made him an answer all new, saying, that
from thenceforth he would keep such a weight on his words, that he would speak
the truth, and keep himself in Dionysius favor, as he did. For Dionysius
having rehearsed certain verses full of great lamentations, to move the hearts
of the hearers to pity: he prayed Philoxenus to say his mind of the^: who
answered him, that those verses had filled him full of pity. It was a sharp
gird of mockery which Dionysius perceived not, no more then that which
Melanthius spoke of a tragedy after the like sort, that he could not see it, it
was so dark of speech. And so was Plato not much better used then Philoxenus.
Dion his disciple, and brother in law of Dionysius, had spoken so much good to
this tyrant, that being at leisure he was contented to see Plato, and to hear
him. So they being together, their talk generally was all of virtue: but
chiefly they disputed, what was true force and prowess? Where Plato proved
unto him, that tyrants were nothing less then valiant men. Out of that,
turning his talk to speak of justice: he showed him that the life of the just
was very happy: and that to the contrary, the life of unjust men was most
wicked. Insomuch that the tyrant seeing himself convinced, could no longer
endure talk with him: and was sorry to see those that were present so muchto
esteem of him, and to take such singular pleasure to hear him speak. So at
the last his choler being up, he asked him what business had brought him into
SICILIA? To seek an honest man, said Plato. And how? (replied Dionysius) by
the gods (to hear thee speak) it seems thou have yet found none. Dion
thought his choler should go no further, and so sent Plato away in a gallie,
whom Polis a captain of LACEDAEMON brought back again into GREECE. But
Dionysius prayed this captain secretly, that whatsoever he did he should kill
Plato by the way, or at leastwise sell him: adding too this jest withal, He
shall be never a whit the worse for that: for if he be a just man, he shall be
as happy being a servant as otherwise. And so Plato was sold in the I Will of
AEGINE for the price of 200. crowns, and afterward bought again by
Annicerius a Philosopher, and sent to ATHENS.

Dionysius gave himself all to Poesy, and sent for the best singers he could
recover in the games Olympials, to rehearse and sing his verses before the
people. The singers at the beginning were heard with admiration of every body,
for the goodness and finenesse of their voices: but when they came to examine
their songs, they were despised, mocked, and whistled at, which angered him
extremely when he heard of it. So this passioned desire did so much increase
in his head continually, that he became almost as a man beside himself: and
said that his faithful friends did envy him, and began to be at defiance with
them, as if they had been traitors unto him. To conclude, this fury of his did
so possess him, that he did put many to death upon false occasions, and
banished others, as Philistus, and Leptines his brother, both of them valiant
men, and that had done him great service in his wars. Howbeit afterward he
sent for them again, and they were his friends as before. But since we are now
to talk of his cruelties, let us say something as we pass by. One of his
greatest friends called Marsyas, dreamed one night that he cut his throat. The
tyrant understanding of it, put this poor dreamer to death: alleging that
this dream could not have come to him at night, but that he had it settled in
his mind to commit such an act in the day. Leptines being desirous one day to
describe SICILIA in his presence, took a halbard from one of the soldiers of
his guard, and with the but end of it drew on the ground that which he would:
wherewith Dionysius was so angry, that he bitterly took up Leptines, and put
the soldier to death that had given him his halbard. Dionysius one day being
disposed to disport himself some way, gave his Bardasse his sword and his
cloak to keep: which one of his familiars perceiving, said: And what, do you
trust this young boy with your life? The youth began to smile at it: but
Dionysius made him be killed, because by his smiling he seemed to allow of this
word: and he also dispatched the other, because he had showed him the mean to
kill him. He was determined to have put his brother in law Polyxemus to death:
but he having an inkling of it, fled out of SICILIA. Dionysius sent for Tescha
his sister, and chid with her because she had kept his flying away close from
him. But she answered him with a bold countenance: And how think thou,
Dionysius, that I am a woman so cowardly and faint hearted, if I had known
that my husband would have gone, that I would not have taken sea with him, and
have been companion of his fortune? I knew nothing before he was gone, for it
had been more honorable for me to have been called the wife of Polyxemus
banished, then sister to thee a tyrant. Dionysius was blanke at this speech,
and the SYRACVSANS wondered at the virtue of this woman: insomuch that after the
tyranny was destroyed, they did not leave to do her all the honor that they
could have done to a Queen. And when she was dead, all the citizens by common
consent went with her body to the sepulture. A question being moved one day, to
wit: Which was the best copper? Antiphon answering quickly that it was that
wherewith the ATHENIANS melted the statues of Armodius and Aristogiton,
Dionysius made him to be strangled and die in great torments. They report of
him that he spared not his own mother, but caused her to be strangled, though
she was very old. And as for his brother Leptines, he suffered him to be killed
by his enemies, albeit he might easily have saved and delivered him at that
time. Some talked of his tyranny in a Barbers shop, and said it was well
established, and also evil to be destroyed, as the Diamond to be broken. I
marvel, said the Barber, smiling, how you say that of him, upon whose throat I
pass my razour so often? These words being brought to Dionysius, he hanged the
Barber. He had put to death at diverse times ten thousand of his citizens, and
though he had written in one of his tragedies, that tyranny was the mother of
injustice: notwithstanding he had oftentimes this word in his mouth: That
children must be deceived with plays, and men with fair promises. And he
said, that the greatest pleasure and co^tentment he found in all his
government, was: that what he would have done, was suddenly executed.

One day he would have had money of the SYRACVSANS: they complained and
lamented, beseeching him to hold them excused, telling him they had no money. He
to the contrary, made them to be asked also by others: which he did twice or
thrice one after another. And as he continued still urging of them yet further:
it was told him they did nothing but laugh as they walked in the market place.
Then he commanded his receivers to press them no more: for it is a sign, said
he, that they have no more, since they make no account of us. His mother being
past age to marie, would needs mary a young man. He answered her, that indeed it
was in his power to break the laws of SYRACVSA, but of nature, not. He
severely punishing all other malefactors, pardoned thieves that took away men's
gowns and clokes whom they met by night in the streets. To the end that for
this cause the SYRACVSANS should leave to make feasts and assemblies, wherein
they could not keep themselves from speaking and complotting against him. On a
time a stranger promised him aloud to teach him secretly, how he should know
those that did practice any thing against him. Dionysius prayed him very
earnestly. So the other going to him, Give me said he, six hundred crowns,
that the SVRACVSANS may think thou have learned of me the signs to discover
the conspirators. He gave them him, and fained that he had learned these means
of him: greatly commending the subtle fashion to get money which this man had
invented. Having heard one day a man that played upon the citherne passing
well, he openly promised him the sum of six hundred crowns. The next morning
he came to demand this sum: and Dionysius told him: Thou gave me great
pleasure yesterday to hear thee play: and so did I thee in making thee this
promise: and so thou were paid in the field for the pleasure thou gave me, by
that that thou receiuedst. One asked him on a time, If he were not idle. God
forbid, said he, that that should ever happen to me. He being informed that two
young men of the city drinking together, had spoken many evil words of him and
his tyranny at the table: sent to inuit them both to supper to him: and seeing
that the one after he had drunk a little, said and did many od foolish things:
and that the other to the contrary was very sober, and drank but seldom: he
pardoned the one, as being a drunkard and insolent of nature, and that through
drunkenness had spoken evil of him: but he put the other to death, as one
that bare him evil will in his heart, and being enemy unto him even of set
purpose. Some of his familiars reproved him, because he had honored and
advanced a wicked man, and evil beloved of the SYRACVSANS. And he answered
them, I will that there shall be some one in SYRACVSA, that shall yet be more
hated then my self. Once he sent presents unto certain ambassadors of
CORINTH, which came unto him. They refused them, because they had a statute in
their commonwealth, that did forbid ambassadors to take or receive any gifts or
presents of Lord or Prince whatsoever. He was discontented withal, and told
them that they did evil to take away that only good which is in tyrannies,
that is, to have power to give: but they taught men also, that to receive any
good of tyrants, is a thing one should fear and shun. Being informed that a
townesman of SYRACVSA had hidden a treasure in the ground in his house, he
commanded him to bring it him: the which he did, but not all for all that, for
he reserved a part with the which he went and dwelt in another town, and bought
some land there: which when he understood, he sent for him to come to him, and
restored him all his gold and silver: Since thou know now, said he, how to
use riches, and not to make that unprofitable which is made for the use of man.

Now his cruelties and tyrannous behavior made him marvelous odious to the
world, by reason whereof he entered into such a mistrust of every body, that he
made a trench be dug about his lodging where he lay, and because he would
lie safely, he drew up a draw bridge, and shut himself in with great fear,
having a great guard without round about him. His wives durst not come into his
chamber before they had put off their gowns, he was so afraid lest they should
bring a dagger under their gowns. Yea his brother and his own son were feign
to put off their clothes, and the guard of his chamber should come naked
whatsoever he was that put his foot into it: then there was another garment
cast upon him. He was afraid of his own son as much as of any other, doubting
that when he felt his own courage, and frequented men of understanding, he
would make some complot against him, and in the end thrust him out of his seat
and signiorie. He locked him up in a chamber, and would suffer no man to come
and speak with him: where for lack of other occupations, this young man
occupied himself to make little coaches or charrets, candlestickes, saddles,
stools, and tables of wood. Nevertheless, after he had some more liberty,
and that his father began to let him come abroad: he straight grew to be
proud and dissolute as might be. And they say, that when he had ravished a
townesmans wife by force, his father being angry with him, asked him: whether
ever he had seen him do any such thing or not? the son answered him: No more
had you a father that was a tyrant. But Dionysius replied upon him again: So
shall thou never have a son at all, if thou leauest not to play these wicked
parts. Another time going to see his son in his lodging, and seeing there great
store of vessels of gold and silver, he told him: there is nothing in thee of a
Lord or Prince, since I have given thee such a deal of gold and silver plate,
and yet thou know not how to get a friend. It was an ordinary thing with
Dionysius to tell wonders, and do little, being so exceeding timorous, but
specially after the execution of his Barber, and that his daughters were now
waxen great, he would not abide that any should clip his hairs with sizers:
but he made an image-maker of images of earth to come to him, who with a
burning cole burnt his glib round about his head. Now he made himself to be
known by a memorable fact he did: which was this. A certain flatterer called
Damocles, praising the majesty and riches of Dionysius, and the magnificence of
his palace, maintained that the Sun never saw a more happy man. Dionysius to
make him partaker of this felicity, made him sit down upon a little bed very
sumptuous, and enriched with wonderful precious things. Then he caused them to
set up tables laden with vessels of gold and silver, and covered with
wonderful dainty meats, a number of fine Pages attending on his service,
perfumes passing rare and most excellent sweet for the chamber, and dainty
music both with voice and instruments. To be short, all the pleasures and
pastimes possible to be thought of, did compass this minion of court round
about. But in the midst of all this magnificent furniture, Dionysius caused a
naked sword, glistering, and sharp pointed, to be fastened to a small hair of
a horse, and to be hanged right over Damocles head: who forgetting this
felicity he had so much commended, besought Dionysius it might quickly be taken
away. And like as he was cruel unto men, so did he show himself a despiser of
his proper gods, whereof we will allege some examples. Having sacked the temple
of Proserpine in the city of LOCRES, he took the sea, and having a gale of
wind at pleasure: You see, said he, how the immortal gods do favor
sacrileges. He took off a cloak of fine gold from Jupiter Olympian, in the
town of SYRACVSA, which cloak weighed fourscore and five talents, which are
more worth then fifty thousand crowns, and gave him another of woollen,
saying: That the cloak of gold was too cold for winter, and too heavy for
summer* and that the woollen cloak would be more convenient in both seasons. He
rounded also the statue of Apollo, which had a glibbe of gold. And finding that
money went low with him, by reason of his great expenses in the wars he had
against the CARTHAGINIANS, he took the sea with a fleet of threescore
galleys, with pretense to set upon pirates, but indeed it was to spoil a
temple of great fame, full of goodly and rich jewels that had been offered up
there, the which was seated upon the edge of a quarter of a city of TVSCAN
called AGYLLE. Being arrived there in the night, and having landed his men: in
the morning by break of day he suddenly and without any danger executed his
enterprise. For the place being guarded with some few men, he easily forced it,
and afterward at his leisure sacked the temple, where he got to the sum of
600000. crowns. Which the townsmen understanding, came out upon him straight
to see if they could defend the temple: but he overcame them in battle, and
having taken a great number of prisoners, he spoiled all their country, and
then returned to SYRACVSA, where he sold his prisoners and his booty, for the
which he had also 300000. crowns more.

So being now well stored again, he began to set up an army: and because he
saw the towns subject unto the CARTHAGINIANS willing to revolt, he did entice
them, and used them very graciously that came and took his part. The
CARTHGINIANS hearing that, sent unto him to demand their towns, otherwise they
proclaimed war against him. So on both sides they came into the field. For
the CARTHAGINIANS, they dispatched Mago into SICILIA with a great army.
Dionysius being afraid of nothing, marched before with his troops, and being
camped near to a place called CABALES: both the armies fiercely gave charge
upon each other, and after a long fight Mago was slain in the place with
10000. of his men, and 5000. taken prisoners. The CARTHAGINIANS were not
discouraged for all this, but chose them again the son of Mago for their
chief Captain, a young Gentleman, wise, courageous, and valiant. So after
they had stayed Dionysius by a truce for a certain time, the term being
expired, they presented him battle, and fought it out so resolutely, that
after they had slain his brother Leptines (whom he forsook at his need) and
fourteen thousand of his men, with much ado he saved himself. But the
conquerers being never a whit prouder of such a victory, they sent ambassadors
unto him that concluded a peace for their advantage. For beside the towns that
remained unto them, Dionysius paid them 600000. crowns to defray their charges
in the wars. Also he kept not this peace long, but brake it shortly after: for
understanding that the plague was hot amongst the CARTHGAINIANS, and that they
were fallen out amongst themselves: he took occasion of this advantage, and to
give color to his pretense, gave it out that the soldiers AFRICANS had
foraged the lands of his friends, whereupon he leauied an army of 30000.
footmen, and 3000. horse: with this army he began to make war again, and in
the first employment of his forces he wan SELINONTE and ENTELLE: and after that
he marched to LILYBEE to besiege it: but seeing it well guarded, he returned
back again. Hereupon news was brought him that fire had taken some of the
arsenals of the CARTHAGINIANS: wherefore supposing al their ships of war had
been burnt, he began to scoff at al their forces. But they having armed upon a
sudden a fleet of 200. galleys, assailed unlooked for 130. of Dionysius
galleys, which wintered in the haven of ERIX, some of them he sunk and brought
away the others. After this loss Dionysius retired into SYRACVSA, and fell
very sick. The which Dion perceiving, entered into talk of his children, and
of his sister Aristomache. But the Physicians to currie favor with young
Dionysius, hindered him that he could have no fit time to say any thing to him.
Or as Timaeus writes, they gave him a drink (as he had commanded them) to
make him sleep, and by this means took from him his senses, joining death
with sleep. Some others say, that he was killed by his guard: others, that he
was poisoned. But Diodorus the SICILIAN sets down the cause after another
sort: which is this. He had caused, said he, a little before, a tragedy of his
entitled, The LENEIANS, to be played at ATHENS: and having gotten the victory,
one of the musicians brought him word of it by sea: which did so please him,
that after he had richly rewarded the messenger, he made a great sacrifice to
the gods to give them thanks for this prosperity, and sumptuous feasts, unto
the which he invited all his friends, and drank so largely, that he fell into
a great sickness whereof he died. Now he had in times past an oracle, that had
foretold him he should dye then, when he had overcome those that should be
worthier then himself. He applied this oracle to the CARTHAGINIANS, supposing
it was meant by them, because they were stronger then he. This was the cause
that oftentimes in the battles he had won against them, he being victour,
fled, or willingly suffered himself to be overcome because of this prediction.
Howbeit he could not shun his destiny: for being an ill Poet, he was judged by
the sentence of corrupt judges, to have excelled all the other Poets better
then ever he was: and then came he to end his days, as the oracle had foretold
him. Now though he had reigned the space of 38. years full out, and had
boasted many times that he would leave his son a Principality chained with
strong chains of a diamond: this young Dionysius ruled no long time, but being
shortly after driven out of SYRACVSA by the inhabitants themselves, secondly by
Dion, and at the last by Timoleon, who overthrew him altogether: he was sent to
CORINTH, where he ended the rest of his days in misery. Afterward the
SYRACVSANS maintaining their liberty for the space of 20. years: they fell
into Agathocles hands, who also committed terrible cruelties. After his death,
they being full of civil dissension, demanded aid of Pirrhus king of EPIRVS
against the CARTHAGINIANS. He having made a iourny into SICILIA, was
constrained to leave it, and had great war with the ROMANS. By reason whereof
the SYRACVSANS willingly yielded themselves unto Hieron the second of that
name, under whom (a great friend of the ROMANS) they prospered the space of
fifty years. But after his death, his little son Hieronymus, a young Lord and
unruly: took part with the CARTHAGINIANS: and having reigned only fifteen
months, he was killed by his guard. Now for that his death brought on great
confusions, and that the SYRACVSANS inclined to the CARTHAGINIANS part: the
Consul Marcellus went to besiege SYRACVSA, and took it in the second year of
the 142. Olympiade. So that afterward it was governed by Praetors, and
according to the ROMAN law, even to the declination of their Empire.

The end of Dionysius life.
THE LIFE OF Octauius Caesar Augustus.
DIVVS AUGUSTUS PATER.



Thy youth Augustus, and thy tongues good gift,
Thy valor, wisdom, and thy worthy feats,
Thy countries love, thy laws, and statutes, lift
Thy throne above all other princely seats.
ACcia, the daughter of Accius Balbus and of Iulia the sister of Julius Caesar,
was married unto the father of this man, whose life we write of now, and who was
descended of the ancient race of the Octauians, issued out of the country of
the VOLSCES, and known at ROME from the time of Tarquinius, and of Seruius
Tullus. Their son Octauius was borne in the year of the Consulship of Cicero
and of Caius Antonius, at that time when as the conspiracy of Catiline was
discovered, and suppressed. He was called Thurinus: but afterward, according
to the tenor of his uncles testament, who made him his heir, he was called
Caius Julius Caesar, and lastly Augustus, by the advice of Munatius Plancus,
and by the decree of the Senate. He was but four years old when his father
died, and at twelve years he made the funeral oration for his grandmother
Iulia: four years after that, he became a gowneman, though he were but young:
yet his uncle gave him a present at his return out of AFRICA, such as the
soldiers are accustomed to have of their Captains* Shortly after he followed
his uncle into SPAIN, whither he was gone against the children of Pompey, and
passed through many great dangers to overtake him. This war being ended,
because Caesar undertook other longer iourneys, Octauius was sent into the
city of APPOLONIA: and there plied his book very diligently. And it chanced
him, without having any mind to it, that being gone to see Theogenes a learned
Astronomer, he cast his nativity, and suddenly he leapt being amazed, and
honored him. The which made Octauius conceive great hope of himself, and in
memory of this good hap, he caused certain pieces of money to be coined, and
he himself told the opinion of Theogenes. Being returned from APPOLONIA to
ROME, after his uncle was slain by Cassius, Brutus, and their allies, he
declared himself to be his heir, though his mother and Marcius Philippus were
of another mind. And having put himself forward, he governed the commonwealth
of ROME, first with Antonius and Lepidus: afterward with Antonius the space of
twelve years: and lastly himself alone, the space of four and forty years.
But before we speak of his government of common affairs in time of peace and
war, let us say somewhat (after Swetonius) of his family and his manners. He
married being yet very young the daughter of Publius Seruilius Isauricus: but
having made peace with Antonius after the war of MVTINE, and at the request
of their armies who were desirous to see them friends, he married with Clodia,
the daughter of Publius Clodius and of Fuluia then wife of Antonius. But before
he knew her, he sent her to her mother, with whom he was somewhat discontented,
and because of the war also of PEROVSE. Immediately he married Scribonia, and
kept not her long because she was too troublesome: yet he had a daughter by her
called Iulia. But forsaking her, he took another which he loved unto the end:
and that was Liuia Drusilla the wife of Tiberius Nero, whom he carried with him
great with child as she was, and had no child: by her but one, and yet she went
not out her time, and it had no life. His daughter Iulia was married unto
Marcellus, the son of his sister Octauia: and after his death unto Marcus
Agrippa, by whom she had three sons, Caius, Lucius, and Agrippa: and two
daughters, Iulia, and Agrippine. After the death of Marcus Agrippa, he chose
for his son in law Tiberius the son of Tiberins Nero and of Liuia Drusilla,
at that time a knight of ROME, and compelled him to forsake his wife Vipsamia,
of whom he had a son called Drusus. But as he was fortunate in managing the
affairs of the common wealth, so was he unfortunate in his race: for his
daughter and his niece Iulia committed so foul faults in ROME, that he was
constrained to banish them. Agrippine was married unto Germanicus, the son of
his sisters daughter. Caius and Lucius died in less then a year and a half
one after the other: whereupon he adopted his nephew Agrippa, and his son in
law Tiberius. But because Agrippa was of a churlish nature and dishonest, he did
disinherite him, and confined him to SVRRENTVM. His niece Iulia had a child
after she was banished, but he would not know it, nor suffer it should be
brought up. He was very modest and continent in all the parts of his life,
saving that he was somewhat given to women and play: for the rest, he liked not
great palaces, but was contented with mean lodgings: and if there were any
ornament, it was in porches and parkes. His household stuff and apparel was
nothing sumptuous nor costly. It pleased him well to make feasts, he very
carefully made choice of his guests, and oftentimes he sat down at the table
a long time after every body, and would rise before others, which remained
after he was up. In his ordinary diet he banished superfluity of meats: he
delighted to be merry and pleasant among his friends, or to bring in pleasant
players of comedies to pass the time away. And he did not tie himself to any
certain hours to eat his meat, but when his stomach served him he took
something. So that sometimes he supped not at al, and then when every man was
gone, he made them bring him meat, neither dainty nor delicate. Also he drunk
very little wine, he slept in the day, and by times in the night, talking with
some, or reading: so that oftentimes he slept not till the break of day, and
for that he took no rest in the night, he might chance to sleep in his
litter as they carried him in the streets in the day time up and down ROME. He
was a goodly Prince, and that kept himself in good state from the beginning of
his life to the latter end: not curious to set himself out, as little caring to
be shaven, as to wear long hair: and in stead of a lookingglasse, reading in
his book, or writing, even whilst the Barber was trimming of him. Whether he
spoke or held his peace, he had so comely a face, that many of his enemies bent
to do him hurt, their hearts would not serve them so soon as ever they looked
on him. He had very clear and lively eyes, but with time he was subject to
many diseases and infirmities, the which he remedied with great care. As for
his exercises, he left arms and horses immediately after the civil wars: for
he was never any great soldier. He would play at tennis, at the ballone, he
would go abroad in his coach to walk and stir himself. Sometimes he would
go a fishing, or play at the bones, or at nuts with young children of the MOORS
and SYRIANS that had some pretty manner and behavior with them, and always
spoke words to move laughter. He was learned in the liberal sciences, very
eloquent, and desirous to learn: insomuch that during the war of MVTINE, in
the midst of all his infinite affairs, he did read, he wrote, and made
orations amongst his familiars. He never spoke unto the Senate nor people, nor
to his soldiers, but he had first written and premeditated that he would say
unto them, although he had speech at commandment, to propound or answer to
any thing in the field. And because he would not deceive his memory, or lose
time in superfluous speech: he determined ever to write all that he would say:
and he was the first inuenter of it. If he had to confer with any man, or
with his wife in any matters of importance: he would put that down in his
writing tables, because he would speak neither more nor less. And he took
pleasure to pronounce his words with a sweet voice and good grace, having
continually about him for this purpose a fine man to frame his voice. But one
day having a pain in his mouth, he made his oration to the people by an
Herald. He made many books and verses of diverse sorts: but all is dead with
time. His speech was as the rest of his life, eloquent, well couched together,
and sententious. He delighted to read good authors, but he gathered nothing
other then the sentences teaching good manners: and having witten them out word
by word, he gave out a copy of them to his familiars: and sent them about to
the governors of provinces, and to the magistrates of ROME and of other
cities. He was somewhat, and too much given unto deuinations: he was
maruellously afraid of thunder and lightning: he had a great confidence in
dreams, and in such like vanities. But peradventure we are too curious
searching out his private life: yet that may sometime discover great personages
more then their public actions, in the which they are more careful to frame
their countenances, and do counterfeit most.

Now, as we have lightly run over his private life before spoken of: so shall
the memorable deeds done by his authorite be briefly represented: being
impossible to comprehend in a few lines so many notable things, unless a man
would make a great book of them. This is to be noted in him, that so young a
man having so small beginnings, coming out of a mean house in comparison of
others, has excelled all other young and old men in wisdom and greatness of
courage: should rise so high, that before he had been Praetor the Senate gave
him the name of Augustus, created him master of the horse, when as yet he
never had charge of a company of men at arms: proclaimed him Emperor and
sovereign captain, before he had been placed in any public office by
authority of the Senate. Furthermore, for the first time he was chosen Consul
when he was but twenty years old: and he was thirteen times Consul, and
twenty times called Sovereign captain. Afterward, when he was not yet four
and thirty years old, the Senate and people of ROME gave him this goodly name
of father of his country, because he had maintained and preserved the
commonwealth. It is a wonderful thing that he could wind himself out of so
many great affairs and wars, that he could within four and twenty years
of age, restore again into so good estate the commonwealth of ROME, turmoiled
and troubled with so many proscriptions and civil wars as it was. And that
afterward so long as he commanded alone, he did so firmly establish this
Monarchy, that notwithstanding the infinite troubles received under other
Emperors, yet it stood upright and in so great prosperity for so many hundred
years. After the death of Julius Caesar, this man being but bare eighteen
years old, came to ROME, where he was welcomed and immediately did contest with
Antonius, hated of Cicero and of many others: from whence the advancement of
this young Caesar came, and the declaration of the war against Antonius,
judged an enemy of the commonwealth, and overcome by the Consuls Hirtius and
Pansa. Caesar who was their associate, was called Sovereign captain, though
he had not yet fought: both the Consuls being dead of their hurts. But the
Senate after this overthrow, beginning to change their mind, he perceiving that
they were slow to grant him the Consulship, resolved to possess it by force
of arms, and began to acquaint himself with Antonius and Lepidus which were
joined together: he made that the soldiers promised by oath the one to the
other, that they would fight against none of Caesar's troops, and sent 400 men
to ROME to ask for him, in the name of all the army, the office of Co^sull.
They having delivered their charge unto the Senate, Cornelius the Centiner
chief of this legation or ambassade, perceiving they would give him no present
answer, casting up his cassocke, and showing the Senate the pommell of his
sword, said unto them: This shall do it, if you will not do it. So they being
returned without obtaining their demand, Caesar made Antonius and Lepidus come
into ITALY, and he for his part having passed the river of Rubicon, marched
with 8 legions right to ROME. This put all ROME in such a fear, as they sent
to Caesar to present him the Consulship: and twice so much in gift, as they had
promised the legions. Now whilst the Ambassadors were on their way, the
Senators beginning again to take heart to them, encouraged by the arrival of
the legions of AFRICA, they determined to try all means before they would
betray the liberty of their country, being minded to call back that which they
had sent to Caesar, and so disposed themselves to make war. Caesar being
offended with this inconstancy, sent certain horsemen before to assure the
people that he would make no tumult at all: he drew his legions near, and made
himself Lord of ROME without one stroke stricken: and contrariwise, the people
and Senate received him with show of great joy. Then, in the assembly of all
the people he was chosen Consul, just at the full accomplishment of twenty
years of his age. So he demanded in the field that they should proceed
criminally against those that had killed his father Caesar. Q. Pedius his
fellow Consul published the decree. So were Brutus and Cassius, and all their
friends condemned, with interdiction of water and fire. But for as much as
Augustus had too small means to set upon Brutus and Cassius, he reconciled
Antonius and Lepidus with the Senate, and made alliance with them, followed
with great armies. They joined, and were in consultation of their affairs the
space of three days together, near unto BOLONIA, or unto MVTINE, and as if
the ROMAN Empire had been their own inheritance, they divided it between
them three. So that Caesar had the high and base LYBIA, with SICILIA, and
SARDINIA. SPAIN and GAVLE NARBONNESE fell unto Lepidus: and the rest of GAVLE
was for Antonius. They did decree also that they should be called Trium-viri,
appointed for the reestablishment of the commonwealth, with sovereign
authority for five years, to dispose and give the estates and offices to whom
they thought good, without asking advice of the Senate nor people. So they
established Lepidus Consul for the year following, in the place of Decimus
Brutus that was killed: and they gave him the guard of ROME and ITALY, so long
as they two that remained made their preparations to go against Brutus and
Cassius. Besides the presents they should make unto the soldiers after the
victory, they promised to give them leave to ease themselves, and eighteen
rich towns in ITALY for them to dwell in. Then they began to set up a roll
of all the citizens of ROME appointed by them to be slain. And they decreed to
every free man that should bring the Trium-viri a head of the proscripts, the
sum of two thousand five hundred crowns, and half so much unto the slaves
with enfranchisement: and the like sum also to whosoever could discover any
man that had hidden or favored the proscripts. Antonius and Lepidus were
thought to be the chief authors of this horrible tragedy: and Caesar seemed
willing to none but to the murderers of his father, and did a long time oppose
himself against the other two: but at the length he gave over, and they made
wonderful changes, abandoning their own parents and friends the one to the
other, to be revenged of their enemies. But when the sword was one drawn, he
was no less cruel then the other two. Cicero was not forgotten, as we may see
in his life: and it would be very hard to describe the wickedness of that
time, the which like a furious stream carried away so many citizens of ROME. In
whose history do appear most rare examples of all sorts of vices and virtues
in all manner of persons: of whom we will make mention, after those that have
written more at large: as amongst others, Appianus Alexandrinus: which will
serve to show, how much a man is a furious beast, being lift up in authority
in the commonwealth, and given to revenge. That there is nothing certain nor
sure in man's prosperity, which brings much envy to his servants: as to the
contrary adversity makes the afflicted contemptible: and every body ashamed
of them. But they are wise men, that in such tragical accidents do carry an
invincible heart, resolutely obeying necessity, and a more high providence
then that of man. We must not call that intolerable which may happen to great
or mean men: for all humane accidents are under the feet of virtue. It
chances often, that force and wisdom do defend a man, as always these two
virtues do preserve his honor. He is well advised that can finely pacify and
divert the fury of an enemy: as to the contrary shame and despair do gripe
cowards, slothful, and fearful. But in fine, necessity presses on the one
side, and danger on the other.

So they did set up the names of the proscripts fastened in diverse places of
ROME, to the number of an hundred and thirty Senators for the first time, a
hundred and fifty at the second time, and two thousand Knights. Then was the
gate open to all villainies and cruelties, fought withal by patience and
fidelity: but the examples will show that better then all the discourse a man
can make. Saluius Otho, Tribune of the people, was one of the first. Having
invited his friends to his last supper, a Centener came in, who in the presence
of all his guests, half dead for fear, struck off his head. Minutius the
Praetor was also killed, sitting in his seat of judgment. L. Villius Annalis,
a man that had been Consul, being escaped out of the hands of the murderers,
saved himself in the subburbes in a little house of one of his clients: but his
own son having no patience to stay for the inheritance of his father,
bewrayed him unto the soldiers who went to kill him there. Shortly after, this
parricide being drunk had a quarrel with the self same soldiers, who
stabbed him in with their daggers. C. Toranius was betrayed in like manner by
his own son, who having consumed in a few days the succession which he had
so execrably pursued, and being condemned for theft, was banished into a place
where he died for want and poverty. Now against these wicked, let us set some
virtuous children. Q. Cicero was hid by his son, whom they could never make
confess (though he was tormented) where his father was: who, not able any
longer to endure they should afflict so virtuous a son with so many evils for
his sake, came and presented himself to the murderers. The son began to
entreat them to kill him before his father: but they were both killed at one
time. The Egnaces, father and son, one embracing the other, were both run
through and slain at one blow. C. Hosidius Geta was buried for dead by his
son: who saved him, sustained and kept him till it was peace. Arruntius,
after he had comforted and strengthened his son, put himself to the swords
of the murderers. The son died immediately after for grief, and famine. Some
other children carefully saved and kept their fathers, and hid them. Certain
women also showed themselves marvelous faithful and loving to their husbands:
and so were there to the contratrary some unfaithful, that discovered their
wonderful wickedness. Tanusia made such earnest suit, that she obtained grace
of Caesar for T. Iunius her husband, who was hidden by Philopoemen his bondsman
enfranchised: whom Caesar knighted for his fidelity to his master. Q. Ligarius
having been kept by his wife was discovered by a slave, and killed: wherefore
his wife killed her self with famine. Lucretius Vespillo, having erred and
run in great danger here and there, not knowing whither to fly: came
secretly to his wife Thuria, and was hidden and kept close betwixt the seeling
and the top of the house, until she had obtain ed his grace of the Trium-viri.
Apuleius was saved by his wife, who fled with him. The wife of Antius wrapped
up her husband in couerlets, and made him be carried to the sea as a packet of
stuff, where he embarked, and sailed into SICILIA. Coponius was saved by his
wife, who put her honor aside in respect of her husbands life: for she lent
her body one night unto Antonius to preserve him (which she did by that means)
whom she loved better then her self. Now to the contrary, some women
unfaithful to their husbands, delivered them into the hands of the murderers,
because they might marry again. Amongst other, the wife of Septimius having
shamefully given her body unto one of Antonius familiars: she caused her
husband to be put in the number of the Proscripts, that she might more easily
continue her adultery: and so was Septimius put to death. Q. Vettius Salassus,
was hidden in a sure privy place: wherewith he acquainted his wife, but she
straight revealed him to the murderers. The which he perceiving from a high
place where he was, cast himself down headlong, choosing rather to die so,
then to make his cruel wife pastime. Fuluius was discovered by a slave of his,
and his concubine: ielous because he had married a wife, and had left her,
although notwithstanding he had made her free, and had given her goods to live
withal. Now let us presently speak of the faithfulness and unfaithfulness
of slaves enfranchised. P. Naso was betrayed by his slave freed, with whom he
had been too familiar. But he sold his death, for he killed the traitor with
his own hands, and afterward held out his neck to the hangmen. L. Lucceius
had put into the hands of two of his slaves manumissed, as much as was
necessary to have relieved him in his banishment: but they ran away with all,
and he came and put himself to the slaughter. Haterius, that was in a secret
place, was sold and discovered by a slave of his. Cassius Varus being bewrayed
by a free man that was his slave, escaped nevertheless, and hid himself among
reeds: where being found by those of MINTVRNES, they took him for a thief,
and would have racked him to have bewrayed his companions, he discovered
himself to be a Senator of ROME: but they would not believe him, because he
was in poor estate. But whilst they were reasoning of the matter, there
comes a Centener that struck off his head. C. Plotius was saved by his slaves:
but being a man given to parfume and rub himself with odoriferous ointments,
the sent and smell of them discovered him to the soldiers, that went ferriting
up and down in his house: yet could they not find him, but cruelly tormented
his servants, to make them confess where he was: which they would never do.
But Plotius having compassion of the evils of his faithful slaves, came out of
the place where he was hidden, and because he would prolong their life, he
shortened his own, and presented himself to the murderers. Appius Claudius,
as he was near to be had by the back, changed his gown with his slave, who
went in that sort to present himself to the murderers: but they took off his
head, and so he saved his masters head. Another slave of Menenius did the
like: for he went into his masters litter, and offered his neck to the sword
of the murderers: who dispatched him whilst his master got to the port of
the sea, from whence he escaped into SICILIA. But the slave of Vrbinus Panopio
is worthy of memory every where: for he hearing the murderers came to sack
his master, took his masters gown from him and his ring, gave him his own,
and put him out at the back gate. Then he goes up into his masters chamber,
and lay down upon his bed, where he boldly attended them that killed him for
Panopio. Another showed himself no less faithful in the behalf of Antius
Restio: for although his master had thoroughly thwacked him for his knauish
tricks played a few days before, and that then it seems he had opportunity
to be revenged: he to the contrary employed himself after a marvelous fashion
to save his master: for he meeting with an old man in his journey struck off
his head, and showing that with his whippings together to the murderers, he
made them easily believe that he had been well revenged of his master, with
whom immediately after he saved himself in SICILIA. The slaves of Martius
Censorinus kept him a long time, and so well that he had leisure to go to
Sextus Pompeius. Q. Oppius an honorable old man, and being almost at the pits
brincke, like to be killed, was rescued by his son, who having finely gotten
him out of ROME, took him up on his shoulders, and afterward led him into
SICILIA, where all the poor distressed ROMANS were gently received: for
Pompeius had sent certain ships to keep upon the coast of ITALY, and
pinasses every where, to the end to receive all them that fled on that side:
giving them double recompense that saved a Proscript, and honorable offices to
men that had been Consuls and escaped, comforting and entertaining the others
with a most singular courtesy: many went into MACEDON to Brutus and Cassius:
others into AFRIC to Cornificius. Some having escaped the tempest that was in
the time of Sylla, were even glutted with this cruelty: as amongst others, M.
Fidustius, and Lucius Philuscius. T. Labienus was one of the number of the
murderers in the proscription of Sylla. Afterward he did nothing else but go
up and down with a soul possessed with furies: so that being weary of his
life at this time, he went and sat in a chair at his gate, quietly attending
that they should put him in the number of them that should be killed. Statius
Samnis, an honorable Senator, being fourscore years old: because thieves
should have no part of his goods, he left them in pray whosoever would take
them: and afterward set his house on fire, and burnt himself within it.
Aponius being kept a good while by his slaves, was so weary to be shut up in a
troublesome place, and where he lived very poorly: that he came out to the
market place, and held out his throat to the murderers. Cestius being
possessed with the like grief, caused his slaves to make a great fire, and
then cast himself in it. Sulpitius Rufus, a man that had been Consul died,
because of an I Will of his the which he would not sell unto Fuluia: as also
Ampius Balbus, for that he refused to give this woman a pleasant place of his.
Balbus was betrayed by a servant of his, that shortly after was hanged upon a
gibbet by sentence of the people: and so had his reward for his villainous fact.
Antonius did put in the number of Proscripts a Senator called Nonius Struma,
and only to get out of his hands an Emerode esteemed at fifty thousand
crowns. But Nonius found the means to escape with this Emerode to the great
despite of him that greedily desired this pray. Some valiantly defended
themselves, as Atteius Capito, that killed many soldiers running rudely upon
him, thinking he would have suffered himself to be killed as others were.
Howbeit after he had sold his flesh dear, he was overcome by multitude of
assailants. Vetulinus aided with his son, having many times valiantly
repulsed the murderers, he would have saved himself in SICILIA: but in the
straight he met with such a number of enemies, that there he was killed.
Sicilius Coronas a Senator, was put in the number of Proscripts, because he
would not with others condemn Brutus and Cassius: devising how to escape, he
put himself in rank among those that carried a dead corpse to burial: but he
was discovered and put to death. The Triumviri appointed such men as they liked
of to take charge of them that had been killed. They sold the goods of the
Proscripts by the drum, at such price as the soldiers would: and yet the
most part of them were spoiled and given away. They promised the widows their
ioynter, and to the sons the tenth part of the patrimony of their fathers,
and to the daughters the twentieth part. Howbeit there were few, and in manner
none, that had any benefit by that: but to the contrary, they sacked many
that demanded such rights. On the other side, they did exact great sums of
money upon the city of ROME, and over all ITALY: the owners were constrained
to give the half of their yearly revenue: the tenants to furnish one years
rent of that they held of others: the masters of houses, the half of the rent
of their houses, according to the rent they went for. To encourage the
soldiers, the Triumuiri gave unmeasurable gifts, granted them daily new
pillage: the legions wintered in the richest towns, who were compelled to feed
the soldiers at their own charge. Furthermore, all the rich men were
constrained to pay in nature of a tribute at one time, the tenth part of all
that they were worth. To be short, so that they could find out new inventions,
it was enough to exact money. For the fear and custom to endure all, had
fashioned men to be more slaves, then the murderers and exactors would have
had them. And to close up all, the Triumuiri caused money to be coined: the
which on the one side had the image of Antonius with an inscription in Latin,
the effect whereof is this: M. Antonius Emperor, Augur, Triumuir, for the
establishment of the commonwealth. And on the other side there were three hands
joined together, with the marks of the Consulship, and had these words: Salus
generis humani, that is to say: The health of mankind.

Now during the cruelties of this Triumuirate, Brutus and his followers made
themselves strong in MACEDON, and did diverse exploits of war: and were
afterward overcome in the fields PHILIPPIANS, as has been said in the life of
Brutus, which we need not rehearse again, the principal being comprehended
there. After this victory, Antonius went into the East to dispose of his
affairs in ASIA, and to leauie money there to pay his soldiers, having
promised to every one of them five hundred crowns. Caesar returned into ITALY
to refresh himself, to assign Colonies to his soldiers, to pacify the
troubles Lepidus had procured, and to set a pike betwixt him and Pompey at a
need: if he were never so little in league with him. Caesar fell grievously
sick at BRVNDVSIVM: but being recovered again he entered into ROME, pacified
all things, and kept Lepidus in his wonted degree. But when he came to bring
his soldiers into Colonies, then the storm began to rise: for the owners
cried out that they were tyrannized, being driven out of their inheritances:
the old soldiers they complained that promise was not kept with them. Fuluia
and some others practiced to set them on, to the end to draw a war into
ITALY, and by this means to make Antonius come again besotted by Cleopatra.
These things proceeded so far that Fuluia took arms, for she was then in
the camp, her sword by her side, and commanded like a Captain. Caesar on the
other side being angry, sent her daughter home to her, unto whom he was
betrothed, and led his army against the NVRSINIANS and SENTINATES the allies
of Fuluia. In the mean space Lucius Antonius departed in the night with speed,
and entered into ROME by treason: used it as a city taken in war, and drove
out Lepidus. Caesar left Suluidienus to besiege the SENTINATES, returned to
ROME, and drove out Lucius, followed him and shortened his journey as he was
going into GAVLE, shut him up, and besieged him a great time in PEROVSE, and
compelled him through famine to yield himself, and to crave pardon, which he
granted him. PEROVSE was burnt by a strange accident: for one of the chiefest
of the city having set his house on fire, after he had wounded himself with
his dagger, a boisterous wind being risen upon it, so dispersed the flames
abroad, that it burnt all the houses besides. Caesar caused some of his
Captains to be killed that were against him. He condemned the NVRSINIANS in a
great sum of money, and because they could not pay it, he drove them out of
their city and territory. Afterward he suppressed some troubles raised in
NAPLES by Tiberius Claudius Nero, father of Tiberius Caesar, and favorer of
Fuluia: who seeing her self under foot, she fled unto ATHENS. But Caesar to
prevent a new conspiracy, sent Lucius Antonius far from ROME, to command the
legions that were in SPAIN: he gave him also commissioners to look into him,
and to observe his actions. He finely drove out Lepidus also into AFRICA with
six legions. On the other side Fuluia being dead, Caesar and Antonius agreed
being ready to fight: after that they made peace with Pompey that governed
SICILIA. Immediately after that he went into GAVLE, to appease some troubles
that happened there, and sent Agrippa before, who compelled the AQVITANS to
submit themselves, and pacified al GAVLE. On the other side Cneus Caluinus
subdued the CERETANIANS in SPAIN. And because the legions had committed
certain insolences, whereupon they fell together by the ears, and the
enemies had the better hand: after he had sharply reproved them, he took the
tenth man of the two first bands, and belabored Iubellius with a cudgel. In
the mean time Caesar sent at times troupsof men of arms into DALMATIA, and
ILLYRIA, to the end to breath them for other wars that were a hatching, as
that of SICILIA was the first. For Menas the pyrat, Sextus Pompeius Lieutenant,
having for despite brought his fleet unto Caesar, and taken his part, unto whom
also he delivered the Isles of SARDINIA and CORSICA, with three legions: Caesar
did him great honors, and refused to deliver him again unto Pompey, who asked
him of him. Besides that Pompey complained of Antonius, and pretending to have
just occasions, he took arms again. Wherefore Caesar sent for Antonius and
Lepidus out of GREECE and AFRIC to come and aid him. Antonius came to the
haven of BRVNDVSIVM: but upon the sudden, not known wherefore, he took sea
again, and returned from whence he came. Lepidus came too late, which made
Caesar (seeing all the weight fall on his arms) that he sent his Lieutenants
against Pompey: who fought with them by sea and by land, and had the better,
and put Caesar to great trouble, who had like to have bin killed by a slave
also, that would have reue^ged the death of his masters father, that was a
proscript. After that Antonius being come to TARENTVM, with intention to make
war against Caesar: Octauia sister of the one, and wife of the other, agreed
them, so that they did yet prolong with Lepidus their Triumuirate for five
years more. Antonius went against the PARTHIANS, and Caesar prepared to set
upon Pompey again. Hereupon Menas being angry for that he was not so well
accounted of as he thought he deserved: he returned again to join with Pompey
with 7. galleys. Caesar's fleet having sustained great hurt by tempest, was also
beaten by Menas. Lepidus wan LILYBEE, and took certain neighbor villages.
Caesar having repaired his ships and army by sea, and made it stronger then
before under the conduct of Agrippa, who sailed unto LIPARE, he gave battle by
sea unto Pompeys Lieutenants. But they being aided by Menas (that was returned
the second time) he overcame and wan thirty ships. But the other fleet that
Caesar himself brought, was wholly overthrown by Pompey, near unto
TAVROMENION, and Caesar brought to that extremity, that he was ready to kill
himself. But Cornificius ran to the shore who saved him, and brought him to
the camp: from whence he retired further off, and very quickly (but with great
danger) unto MESSALA. After certain encounters where Pompey ever had the
better, insomuch as Lepidus was suspected to lean on that side, Caesar
resolved to commit all to the hazard of a latter battle: and to draw Pompey
unto it, he cut him so short of victuals, that he was constrained to come to
blows, and the fight was very cruel: wherein Agrippa bestirred himself so
valiantly, that he wan the victory, sunk 28. ships, brake and spoiled the
most part of the rest, and took two of the chiefest Captains Pompey had: one
of the which called Demochares, killed himself with his own hands. Now for
Pompey, who but a little before had about three hundred and fifty sail, he
fled away with all speed only with seventeen, and went to MESSINA so
discouraged, that leaving all hope and his army he had by land, he went to the
I Will of CEPHALONIE, where being somewhat come to himself, he determined to
repair to Antonius. But Tisienus a Frenchman (his lieutena^t of the army by
land) led all his troops unto Lepidus: some GREEK historians report that it
was to Caesar. Plemminius was within MESSINA with eight legions, and did
capitulate with Lepidus to render up the town to him: whereupon Agrippa happened
to come thither: who maintained, that they ought to regard Caesar that was
absent then. But that stood him in no stead, for Lepidus entered the town, and
gave the spoil of it as well to Plemminius soldiers as to his. Thereupon Caesar
undertook a thing worthy of memory, which was: that being unarmed he went
into Lepidus camp, and turning by the blows of the darts that were thrown at
him by some, which hit his cloak and pierced it: he took hold of an ensign of
a legion. Then the soldiers all of them armed followed him, and left Lepidus:
who shortly after lost empire and army: he that with 20. legions promised
himself SICILIA and a great deal more, Caesar gave him his life, and the
office of sovereign Bishop of ROME, whither he sent him. Some say he was
banished. Upon these stirs there rose a sedition in Caesar's camp through the
insolency of the soldiers, that ran even to his judgment seat, using great
menaces. But he wisely appeased all, punished the authors of the tumult, and
did cassiere all the tenth legion with great shame and ignominy, because the
soldiers of the same did outbraue him in words. He dispersed and sent some
others to their houses, and gave unto them that had used themselves gently, two
thousand Sesterces for every soldier: which is thought to amount near to
fifty crowns. He made them to be mustred, and found that they were five and
forty legions, five and twenty thousand horsemen, and six and thirty
thousand lightly armed. Afterward he did great honors unto his Lieutenant
Agrippa for his notable service, and commanded Statilius Taurus to go into
AFRIC to take possession of the Provinces of Lepidus. Whilst Antonius made
war with the PARTHIANS, or rather infortunately they made war with him to
his great confusion: his Lieutenant Titius found the means to lay hands upon
Sextus Pompeius that was fled into the I Will of SAMOS, and then forty years
old: whom he put death by Antonius commandment: for which fact he was so hated
of the people of ROME, that though he had given them the pastime of certain
plays at his own costs and charges, they drove him out of the Theater.

Moreover, Caesar thinking to have sailed out of SICILIA into MAVRITANIA, the
sea being rough stayed him: which was the cause that he sent his army into
ILLYRIA, and set upon the IAPVDES, which did him much mischief, yet at the
last he overcame them. Then he ran upon the PANNONIANS, and the DALMATIANS,
whom he made tributaries, being hurt in his thighs, in his arms, and in one
of his knees, in this war against the ILLYRIANS. On the other side, Messala
his Lieutenant fought against the SALASSIANS, dwelling in a valley environed
with high mountains of the Alps: and after diverse overthrows, he made them
subject to the Empire. And shortly after Caesar was chosen Consul the second
time: but he resigned the office the same day unto Autronius Paetus, being
about to make himself friends against Antonius: who being stayed about
Cleopatra, gave his wife occasion to return from ATHENS to ROME. Now after the
fire of enmity betwixt these two competitours had been a hatching a certain
time: it stood either of them both upon to seek all the means to overthrow
his companion. The strange proceedings of Antonius in favor of Cleopatra
hastened the war, whereupon followed the battle of ACTIVM, the flying of
these wicked lovers, and the beginning of the Monarchy of Caesar, confirmed by
the conquest of EGYPT, and the tragical death of Antonius and Cleopatra. The
which we touch briefly, the whole being largely set down in the life of
Antonius. They did great honors unto Caesar after these exploits. The memory
of Antonius was condemned, and his statues maimed and thrown to the ground. A
little before, M. Lepidus, son of the Trium-vir and of Iunia sister of Brutus,
conspired against Caesar. But after they had discovered it, he was put to death
by the wisdom of C. Maecenas a knight, and governor of ROME: his wife
Seruilia killed her self, as Portio the wife of Brutus. After the utter
overthrow of Antonius, Caesar took order for the affairs of the East parts,
he made alliance with Herodes king of IVDAEA. He sent the king of the PARTHIANS
son in hostage to ROME, until they should send all the ensigns and
standards they had won of Crassus and Antonius. He governed the affairs of
ASIA, received into league and friendshid with him the kings of GALATIA,
CAPPADOCIA, and PAPHLAGONIA: and he punished some others by fines, that were
not his friends. He gave privileges to the cities of EPHESVS, of NICE,
PERGAME, and BITHYNIA, to build temples in the honor of Julius Caesar, of
ROME, and of himself. He set the SAMIANS at liberty, and after he had taken
order for all the rest, he went toward ITALY: where after he was arrived, it
cannot be expressed with what great joy he was received of high and low, from
BRVNDVSIVM unto ROME. There he triumphed three days together, for the
ILLYRIANS, for Antonius and for Cleopatra. He gave great presents unto
soldiers, and besides the money that was made of the booty, and distributed by
even portions, he gave every one fifty crowns a piece, the double to a
Centener, and the treble to a Knight: and to every person among the people ten
crowns, even to little children. He brought such store of gold and silver out of
EGYPT (by him reduced into a province, and condemned to pay twenty millions of
gold to the people of ROME for a fine) that he brought down usury from twelve
in the hundred, to four: and made that land and houses were sold dear, where
before the rich men had them almost for nothing. Furthermore, he brought in a
marvelous change in all traffic: he also abolished all taxes and subsidies
imposed by necessity of the civil wars. He cried down all strange coin,
which were at too high a price for their law, and all through the iniquity of
time. He lent out money for a time without interest, unto those that had means
to make double profit of it. He would not receive the gold which the cities of
ITALY sent him to make him crowns: but sent them it back again with his
thanks for their good will. He gave the pastime of all manner of games and
magnificent sights unto the people, such as they had never seen before. He
made goodly feasts unto the Senators and Magistrates, and by a world of
pleasures he appeased the sorrow of proscription, and of so many civil wars.
Being occupied in these matters, letters came from Crassus Caesar's Lieutenant,
aduertising that he had subdued the BASTARNES, diverse people of MAESIA, of
DACIA, and of THRACIA: that he had won seven or eight battles of them, that
with his own hands he had killed the king of the BASTARNES, and had brought
the king of GETES to such extremity, that he killed himself. These news did
increase the joy, and the triumph was granted to Crassus, and to Caesar also:
who by decree of the Senate caused the temple of Ianus to be shut the third
time, which had remained open the space of 200 years. At this time Caesar that
was in his fifth Consulship, numbered and mustred all the people of ROME,
reformed the Senate, the order of knights, the distribution of corn: and
because of the great dearth that was then, he made come to be distributed to
the people at a very mean price to some, and for gramercy to the poor. They
that had been bound to the common wealth of too long a time, he discharged
them, and burnt their obligations. He confirmed the propriety of houses in
strife betwixt them and the common wealth, if they had been in quiet possession
any convenient time. And to assure all those that had adhered unto Antonins,
and to keep them that they should no more give ear to any new rumors: he
swear unto them in good faith that having taken Antonins coffers, he had burnt
all the letters he found in them, and read not one of them. He set down an
order for Custom, eased the customers that had been too much oppressed: also
he restored the treasure again, and the augure of health. And by reason of
that above named, he was called father of the country in open Senate: and at
the same time he sent people to CARTHAGE, to set up the families of the
Patricians, greatly diminished by the proscriptions and civil wars.

The next year following, which was the 725 of the foundation of ROME, and the
sixth of his Consulship: seeing all the wars appeased, peace established, arms
laid down every where, the commonwealth in good strength, the laws honored,
justice in authority, the Senate in their ancient glory, and the people
restored by him to their rights of assembly to choose their yearly magistrates,
and to give out their commissions and charges according to their old custom:
he began to reason the matter with himself, which of the twain was most
profitable: either to keep (for the good of the state, and under the title of
a Prince) the Empire which he had in his hands: or whether he should render it
up unto the people. He found himself grieved for that Antonius had oftentimes
accused him of tyranny and unjust invasion: and on the other part also he
apprehended the fury of the people, and the factions of ambitious men, which
like the billows of the sea, would incontinently toss in horrible fashion
this unconstant sea. Being thus perplexed, one day he took aside Agrippa and
C. Maecenas, his two faithful friends, very wisemen and of great experience
above all others: and prayed them to tell him plainly without flattery, what
they thought of it, being resolved to follow that which should be most
expedient for the good of the commonwealth. Agrippa by an ample discourse did
counsel him to render up to the people his principality and signiority.
Maecenas was of the contrary opinion, and gave such counsel as Caesar
followed, tempering both opinions, and made himself master in such sort that
the people felt it not, but rather confessed that they needed such a Physician
to raise the^ up again from the incurable maladies they were fallen into. He
thanked both his friends, gave his niece Marcella to be the wife of Agrippa,
and did him new honors, proceeds to a new reuiew of the citizens of ROME:
and is chosen Prince of the Senate by Agrippa, who was then his companion in
the Consulship. Furthermore, assuring himself that so much good and honors as
had been communicated to the small and great, would make them they should not
much pass for their ancient dignity and liberty: and that the sweetness of
the ease and rest they did enjoy, would make them forget all the good and evil
past: he borrowed of his magnanimity the marvelous counsel that follows. He
resolved to discharge himself of the principality into the hands of all the
Senate, to render it unto the people: hoping that the Senate seeing his
affection so to submit himself to the accustomed order, and not to seek a
domination and government ill-willed, they would thank him the more: that all
the great persons would lay aside the envy which they might bear unto him, and
that the people would esteem and love him so much the more. Upon this thought,
and after he had acquainted some of the Senators withal that stood affected to
him, to the end to win others by their means, he made an oration in open
Senate, well studied, and fit for the time. Having made a long discourse of the
great extent of the Empire, and of his insufficiency: he added unto it, that
this common burden could not be carried but by the immortal gods: that he had
continued some years to manage a part of it, and that experience had made him
know that his shoulders were too weak to bear such a burden as the
principality, subject to infinite changes, and exposed to a thousand ambushes.
He therefore required, the city being furnished with so many noble persons,
that the affairs might be managed by many men, who joining themselves
together, might more easily satisfy the charges, then one alone: that in a
good hour, having set all things in good estate again, he did put the common
wealth into the hands of the Senate and people of ROME. This oration diversely
moved the Senators. Some of them thought there was more art then truth in it.
Others judged that it was not expedient to put the estate into the power of
many. The most of them enriched and made great by Caesar, and that were risen
up by the ruins of their country, said: that they should prefer that which
now they had in hand, before all the time past, beaten with so many tempests.
Many others inclined to that side, not that they were in good earnest of that
mind, but for fear to be looked upon with an evil eye, if they did speak
against their companions. So then all of them with one consent unadvisedly,
rather then of a common and ripe judgment, began to beseechand adjure Caesar,
that it would please him to be chief and preserver of the Empire, of the which
he had set down so many goodly and happy foundations. Immediately they ordain
that Caesar's guard should have twice as much pay as they had before. Agrippa
was of opinion that they should casseere the SPANISH guard, and Caesar in their
place should choose a guard of ALMAINES, knowing well that in those great bodies
there was little malice hidden, and less subtilty: and that they were a people
that took more pleasure to be commanded, then to command.

He being thus established in his Empire by the consent of the Senate and
people, to the end they should not think he would lift himself up above
measure, or to give sure footing to a perpetual Monarchy: he would not accept
the charge to provide for the affairs of estate, and the government of the
Provinces, but for the space of ten years: with condition to give up his
charge before this term, if things were sooner settled in their full estate.
First therefore, he left a part of the Provinces unto the Senate and people, to
take care for the government of the same: and for himself he kept those that
were not yet in order, and in the which he should be driven to make war. In
those that were quiet, he established Proconsuls: and for others, he governed
them by his Lieutenants, which had their lesson, according unto the which they
were bound to be directed. Among other laws they were forbidden to leauie any
money, or to gather men of war together, or to assail any Province, without
the commandment of the Senate, or of Caesar. That forthwith when they sent
any successor, they should leave their government, and repair to ROME within
three months. He appointed also unto the Proconsuls a certain sum of money
to bear their charges for their horse and carriage of the stuff. Furthermore
he established a law that the Proconsull or governor should not go to his
Province appointed him, till the end of five years after his commission
granted him: to the end that they which were convinced for taking of money
corruptly, should pay to the Provinces the fine they should be condemned: in and
he deprived them of all estates and honors, which through their evil
behauiours had been condemned in such fines. And further, he would not that the
officers that had to deal in his affairs should have any authority, but to
demand their stipends and money which the Provinces were bound to furnish. And
because he would beautify and adorn ROME, as the majesty of the Empire
required: he raised up many common buildings, and repaired many that had been
left unfinished or ruined, leaving the names of the founders. His buildings
among other were the temple of Apollo in the palace, with the porch, and a
library of GREEK and Latin books. Also the Monuments, and the park, for the
walks and pleasure of the people of ROME. In his seventh Consulship, certain
Senators propounded that they should call him Romulus, for that he having
preserved the city of ROME, it was as much bound unto him, as unto the first
founder. But he would not accept of that name. Wherefore Munatius Plancus
bethought himself of another, the which was given unto him by common consent
of all, and he held it to his death: as also we will call him from henceforth
in all that remains to be set down of his deeds: to wit Augustus. He not to
seem unworthy of this name, and to carry himself so that no man should repent
this change of government, began diligently to set his hand to these affairs.
He wisely reformed the ancient laws, and made new, that were very necessary.
To make sure work in these affairs, he chose from six months to six
months fifteen Senators that had been Consuls, and did privately acquaint
them with all that was requisite to be done for the preservation of the
quietness of the commonweath, giving order that nothing should pass but it
should be searched and examined to the bottom: saying that he would give the
people laws which they should all allow, and that he would not be his own
judge alone. Afterward he reformed the assemblies of the city, where all
things were carried by suits, presents, and violence. He then restored the
people their right by voices to choose the magistrates. And to cut off all
suits, he forbad them to make any roll of suitors names, but of those that had
laid down great sums of money, to the end that being convinced of their
suits, they should be put to their fines: adding also this ignominy, that such
should be deprived of all estates and honors for the space of five years. And
furthermore, he finely hindered the bad practices in elections, giving order
that none should be put in nomination, but such as were virtuous and of good
reputation. He left unto the Magistrates their charges whole, and did always
require in all his Consulships that they should give him two companions: howbeit
the Senate would never agree unto it. The year before, he had reduced the
number of Senators to six hundred, all honorable men. At that time also he
reestablished the ancient order and dignity: ordaining that the Senate should
have the superintendencie of the treasure, and of all the revenues that
belonged to the people of ROME. That all the expenses for the commonwealth
should be made by their ordinance. That the Senators should have the hearing of
all crimes of treason, conspiracy, ambushes, and offenses to his Majesty's
person: and that it should pertain to them to give entertainment and answer
that should be fit, to Ambassadors of nations. When in matters of importance he
asked the advice of the Senate, in stead of coming to the Prince of the Senate
according to the accustomed manner, or to him that was appointed Consul, or to
other Senators by order: he made choice of any one of them which he thought
good, to the end that every one should give attentive ear, and be ready to
deliver his opinion: and not to hold his head down in his rank, and content
himself to be of other men's minds. He ordained also, that the whole body of
the Senate should not assemble but from fifteen days to fifteenes days:
howbeit that in ordinary matters the magistrates should think of that that
were expedient. In the months of September and October, the Senators were not
bound to meet, but only four hundred drawn by lot: who might establish any
decree. And as for himself, to honor this company the more, the day of the
assembly he never saluted any of the Senators apart, but all of them together
in the counsel chamber when they were set, and all of them name by name, the
one after the other. If he would go out, and that he said he would detain the
company no longer: he bad them farewell in the same manner that he had saluted
them at his coming in. He ruled justice also civil and criminal, and willed
that amongst other things the criminals accused by certain enemies, should be
set at liberty: with condition notwithstanding that they should be brought to
prison again, if the accuser did submit himself to receive the like
punishment as the offender, if it were found he slaundered him. Moreover, he
made provision for common works, and reparations of bridges, causeyes, and
high ways. And because he was determined to make a voyage into GAVLE, he
established Messala governor of ITALY and of ROME, for fear least any
trouble should happen in his absence. But this place being troublesome unto
Messala, he besought Augustus he would discharge him: and therefore Agrippa was
substituted, who rid all ITALY of a great number of thieves and robbers on
high ways, and stayed the courses of many other troublers of the state.

The affairs of ROME and ITALY being in so quiet estate, understanding that
ENGLAND was full of sedition, SPAIN next unto the mountains PIRENEI in arms,
and GAVLE ready to rise: he opened the temple of Ianus, and took his journey
to give order for all. But the Ambassadors of ENGLAND prevented him, and
promised tribute. Then he went to GAVLE in NARBONE, to draw nearer to SPAIN.
And so holding on his journey to NARBONE, he pacified the GAVLES, he made an
exact numbering of all the GAVLES, of their goods, possessions, and slaves, and
caused the rolls to be brought unto him. He established laws and customs in
every place, and divided GAVLE into four parts: of the which the first part
was called NARBONENSE, which extends it self from the river of Var, unto the
mountains PIRENEI. AQVITAIN the second, unto the river of GARONNE. The third,
GAVLE LYONNOISE, unto the river of Seine. Then GAVLE BELGICA, bordered with the
river of Rhein: and rated all the GAVIS at ten milions of gold for a tax. Now
there remained no more for him to do, but to bring SPAIN to order: in the
which the ROMANS had made continual wars the space of 200 years together.
Nevertheless the CANTABRIANS and ASTVRIANS (which are the BASQVES) and other
people neighbors dwelling in the mountains, they neither cared for Augustus,
nor for the Empire: for they were ever in arms, and made incursions upon the
allies of the people of ROME, and did them great mischief: who complaining
unto Augustus of the great necessity they were brought unto, he being near
unto them, came to aid them: and found the CANTABRIANS besieging of a fort,
having taken the town by it called SAGESAME. He charged them home with such
fury, that he left them dead in the place, after they had valiantly defended
themselves. Afterward he divided his army into three parts, and environed the
country of the CANTABRIANS, who made head for the space of five years, and
did marvelous great hurt to the ROMANS: and if the streights whereby they
might easily enter into their country, had not been discovered unto Agustus,
they had sent him home again to ROME with shame. But having found the way to
surprise them on every side, he made a cruel war upon them, putting all to
fire and blood. They retired with speed to one of their highest mountains,
with all that they could carry with them. The ROMANS perceiving that it was
too hard a match for them, if they should go thither to set upon so warlike a
nation, and that could not be subdued by force: they made forts in the midst of
the mountain, and placed a strong guard there, to the end to famish the
CANTABRIANS, and by that means to bring them to reason. But they on the other
side, in stead of yielding themselves, did abide all the miseries that any man
can possibly think of: and it came to that pass, that even to sustain nature
the strong sons killed their old fathers, the mothers their infants, and the
young men did devour the old to eat up their flesh. Upon this evil, there
followed another, to wit, discord among them. Some would yield, others were of
another mind. The former alleging, that they must needs submit themselves to
the mercy of the ROMANS: the other, that they should make a desperate sallie
upon the enemies camp, and so sell their lives. Their contention waxed so hot
and violent, that the CANTABRIANS thrust out ten thousand of the ASTVRIANS with
their wives and children, and compelled them to descend along the forts made
by the ROMANS: whom they entreated with the tears in their eyes to make them
slaves, and to give them somewhat to eat. Tiberius then one of Caesar's
Lieutenants, would not suffer them to be received, to the end to famish the one
by the other, and to end this war without any bloodshed. This poor people
being deprived of sustenance and hope, and being afraid they should yet endure
greater evils, began to powne a venomous herb like unto Smallage, and
poisoned themselves. The young men killed themselves running one against
another with their swords in their hands. The others, to the number of three
and twenty thousand came down in a most miserable estate from the top of the
mountain, and yielded themselves to the discretion of the ROMANS: who set
aside ten thousand of the strongest of them, to serve them in the war which
they intended to make against the ASTVRIANS. The rest were sold by troops, with
condition that they should be carried far from their country, and that they
should not be made free, before they had served them as slaves the space of
thirty years. They disarmed ten thousand of them: which they bare so
impatiently, that many killed themselves with their own hands, esteeming their
life nothing without arms. They say, that a little child with a dagger killed
his father and brethren that were chained together, and that by the
commandment of the father: and that a woman did the like to some of her
kinsfolks. And that many of these mountainers accustomed to rob passengers,
being upon the gibbet, sang out songs aloud, even at their deaths, showing a
joy and marvelous courage. Augustus being then in those parts, gave leave to
the soldiers of his guard of SPANIARDS to depart into the territory of the
GASCONS with great presents, and privilege to enter in rank amongst the
ROMAN legions. He built SARAGOVSSE, and other towns which he replenished with
soldiers, to bridle the courses and tumults of the CELTIBERIANS: and
afterward made a stone bridge over the famous river of Eber. Then having
overthrown the CONISCES, friends of the ASTVRIANS, taken their head city, and
put all the inhabitants thereof to the sword: he set upon the ASTVRIANS, who
being environed of all parts, and choosing rather to die then to be made
slaves: burnt, killed, and poisoned themselves, and with them many other of
their neighbors. There were some of them yet left alive, with whom the
CANTABRIANS joined and other their neighbors, and that a long time. These
people had this custom, that all goods were common amongst friends, and when
one of them came to the other, he received and used him as himself: and so also
in adversity they ran one fortune, or else killed themselves immediately after
their friends were dead. Amongst them were certain loose people gathered
together out of diverse parts, who resolved all together to go charge the
ROMANS, and came to fight with such a fury, that nothing but the night could
separate them, having lost many of both sides. The next morning they began to
join again with more violence then before, and the fight continued even till
night that the ROMANS obtained the victory: but they confessed that they
never encountered with such cruel enemies. They that were left alive fled into
a town, in the defense whereof they made themselves all to be killed, rather
then to yield themselves. Augustus built certain places there in that
country, which afterward by time were much enlarged. In this self same year
of his ninth Consulship, Terentius Varro his Lieutenant subdued the SALASSIANS,
which are those of the vale of OSTE: he disarmed them, sold the young men by
the drum, gave part of the territory unto the soldiers Pretorians, and
built there a city called AUGUSTA PRETORIA. Vinicius also appeased some
troubles in GERMANY, and made war very fortunately in diverse places. By
means of which victories, Augustus was called the eighth time Imperator, as
much to say, as sovereign Captain: and they suffered him to wear from that
time forth the first day of the year, a hat of Laurel, and a robe of
triumph. At his return he shut the temple of Ianus the fourth time, married
Cleopatra, (the daughter of Antonius and Cleopatra) unto Iuba the
Storie-writer, overthrown by Julius Caesar in AFRIC, with a part of
MAVRITANIA and of GETVLIA to reign there. He reduced into a province
GALLOGRECIA and LYCAONIA, which made a portion of a kingdom: and by reason of
his sickness not able to be present at the marriage of his daughter Iulia, whom
Marcellus married, the son of Octauia his sister: he left all to the charge of
Agrippa, and went to ROME. There being chosen Consul the tenth time, the
Senate gave him absolute power over the estate and laws, to make and undo them
at his pleasure. They did him greater honors then before, and gave Marcellus
his nephew before his time great offices in the commonwealth: and to Tiberius
his wives son. He in token of thankfulness, gave to every one of the people
ten crowns apeece. Whilst these matters werein hand, the CANTABRIANS and
their neighbors revolted, by subtlety caught some of the ROMANS, and cut
their throats. Aelius Lamia, governor in those parts, to be revenged of this
outrage, put all the whole country to fire and blood, destroyed some towns,
and sold their young men by the drum. To be short, he followed them so hard,
that he brought them in subjection. Aelius Gallus governor of EGYPT, almost
about the same time, being sent by Augustus commandment with ten thousand
men, five hundred soldiers of Herod's guard, and fifteen hundred NABATEIANS:
under the conduct of a noble man of ARABIA called Syllaeus: he did nothing to
be accounted of, but discover the country. But having lost the most part of
his men within the deserts where this Sylleus brought them, and overcome the
SABEANS in a battle, he was enforced to retire. Afterward this Sylleus, for
that he killed his king Oboda by treason, he was taken prisoner, and beheaded
by decree of the Senate.

Augustus being Consul for the eleventh time, the plague was in ROME, and for
himself he was grievously sick: but restored again to health by Antonius
Musa his Physician. The people therefore caused a statue to be set up to this
Antonius, the Senate did him great honors, and in favor of his profession,
gave immunitie to all others that from that time forth did practice Physic.
Furthermore, by many ceremonies they did show the joy they had for the health
of Augustus: and specially fathers of household dying, expressly commanded their
children to bring their sacrifices to the Capitol with a title in great
letters, saying: THAT AT THE DAY OF THEIR DEATH THEY LEFT AUGUSTUS IN GOOD
HEALTH. It was also ordained that from that time forth they should never put
any man to death, as often as Augustus entered into the city. Shortly after he
did associate with himself Calpurnius Piso in the Consulship, who had followed
the party of Pompey and of Brutus. Afterward when he was gone from ROME into
the country, he made Lucius Cestius his deputy for him, an inward friend of
Brutus and of his memory. Whereof the Senate maruelling, by decree made him
perpetual Proconsull of the ROMAN Empire, Tribune of the people, and gave
him power to assemble the Senate as often, and when it pleased him. The people
would have compelled him to have been Dictator: but he bowing a knee, casting
down his long robe, and showing his breast, besought them to discharge him of
so odious an estate. In the mean time he accepted the decree of the Senate,
and the charge to cause corn to be brought in, because of the dearth that
chanced in ROME. In the which he served his turn by Tiberius created Quaestor
at the age of nineteen years. As for Marcellus his nephew, he was chosen
Aedilis Curulus, who aided him to set forth all the magnificent pomp of
plays, which he caused to be played before the people: every man judged that
he should be the successor of all his power. But this young man of great hope,
died shortly after, to the great grief of every man: and no man can tell
whether it was of natural sickness, or of poison given him by the practices
of Liuia. A little before his death, Agrippa impatient to bear the rising of
this Marcellus whom he despised, went into ASIA under color of another voyage.
They say that Augustus much troubled with sickness, returned to his first
consultation, to put the commonwealth again into the hands of the Senate and
people: and for this cause he called for the Senators and all the the other
magistrates: unto whom he gave an account of the Empire: and that was a little
book containing the numbering of all the riches, towns, and provinces allies,
legions, armies by sea and by land, of all the kingdoms and countries
tributarie, of all the customs of the Empire of ROME, that which was
necessarily to be leauied or released. But being somewhat amended again, he
changed his mind. And furthermore, having given audience to the ambassadors of
Phrahartes king of the PARTHIANS, which demanded a son of his brought by
Tyridates unto Augustus: he sent back the child, and suffered Tyridates to
remain at ROME, where he sumptuously entertained him. By this means he kept
himself in friendship with the one and the other, and held the PARTHIANS in
suspense, to the end they should alter nothing. At the beginning of the next
year following, under the Co^sulship of M. Claudius Marcellus, and of L.
Arruntius, the famine increasing at ROME, he wisely provided for it. And then
the people would constrain him by force to accept the Dictatorship, and
threatened to set the palace on fire and to burn all the Senators in it, if
they refused to allow this decree. He would none of the office of Dictatorship,
and did refuse also to be Censor, although that office had been void the space
of 28. years. But forasmuch as Munatius Plancus and Aemilius Lepidus, who were
chosen Censors, deserved themselves to be censured, because of their discords,
Augustus without the name took upon him to discharge it: and provided to
reform infinite disorders that were in ROME, in apparel, countenances,
companies, and in the fight of Fencers at the sharp. At the same time Fannius
Caepio, and L. Muraena having conspired against him, and being discovered by
Castricius, they were taken as they thought to have escaped, and put to death.
In the mean time the ASTVRIANS and CANTABRIANS ill entreated by Carisius, they
rebelled, but were overcome in a set battle, and the prisoners sold. The
CANTABRIANS preferring death before servitude, they killed, burnt, and poisoned
the one the other. The ASTVRIANS being overcome the fourth time, did submit
themselves: and their arms were taken from them. In the same time, Petronius
governor of EGYPT, followed with 10000. footmen, and with 800. horse, went to
make war with the ETHIOPIANS, which dwell under EGYPT, who had invaded and
ruined certain towns, overthrown and carried away the statues of Augustus.
Thereupon he pursued them, and made them fly before him: took certain places
upon them, and pierced far into their country: so that he enforced their
Queen to send her ambassadors unto Augustus (then wintering in the I Will of
SAMOS) to pray peace, which he granted them paying tribute.

At the beginning of the Spring, he prepared himself to give order for the
affairs in the East: but because they that bent themselves for the Consulship,
had almost put the city in alarm, and that in the end notwithstanding the
order he had set down, the people had chosen men whom Augustus feared: through
the advice of Maecenas, he made Agrippa come again to govern ROME in his
absence, and married his daughter Iulia unto him, Marcellus widow. Now whilst
Agrippa gave order for the affairs of the city, Augustus took sea, and
having provided for the affairs of SICILIA, he went into GREECE, did much good
for the LACEDAEMONIANS, and to the contrary, repressed the pride of the
ATHENIANS, from whom he took away the tribute they had leauied of the Isles of
AEGINA and ERETRIA. In the mean time, though he made little account of
strangers ceremonies, yet he made himself to be received into the fraternity
of mysteries: and the ambassadors of PERSIA having caused the temple of Jupiter
Olympian to be finished begun of long time in ATHENS: they ordained that it
should be dedicated to the spirit of Augustus. Being passed from thence into
ASIA, he gave order to his provinces and those of the people of ROME: punished
the CYZICENIANS, that had killed the ROMAN citizens in their town. He imposed
a tribute upon those of TIRE and SIDON, who had dealt badly, and brought them
into the form of a province. He did much good unto the towns that had been
faithful unto the commonwealth: to some of them he gave the right of
Burgesship of ROME, and to others the same rights and privileges which the
natural citizens of ROME had. He built up again the cities of LAODICEA, and
of THIATIRA: he set up them of the Isle of CHIO again, afflicted before by an
earthquake, he did exempt them from all subsidies for six years. He restored
certain Realms unto their kings whom he had subdued: or else he did stablish
others anew, who came to attend him at his Court as subjects, without any
signs or tokens of royal dignity. He sent Tiberius into ARMENIA, to install
Tigranes unto his royal throne again, having been driven out of it. Tiberius
returned thither, and having fought with the ARMENIANS, he gave them Artauasdes
for their king, who ruled not long. Phraates king of the PARTHIANS being afraid
they would set upon him: was very careful to get all the ROMANS together,
which were taken after the overthrow of Crassus and Antonius, whom he sent
every man of them unto Augustus, with all the standards and ensigns, and also
his son and nephews for pledges of his faithful friendship unto the people
of ROME. Augustus granted him peace, and then he came into the I Will of SAMOS,
comforted RHODES, replenished CORINTH and PATRAS with a great number of men
enfranchised, whom he made Burgesses of ROME. In this place also there came
unto him ambassadors from Porus and Pandion, two of the mightiest kings of the
INDIANS, who prayed alliance and friendship with him, and brought him very rare
presents. There came with them a philosopher of INDIA called Zarmanus: who
being brought to the city of ATHENS, he burnt himself alive, as one Calamus
did in the time of Alexander the Great.

In this mean space the city of ROME was full of great trouble by the
practices of Egnatius Rufus, who by force would needs be chosen Consul in
Augustus place being absent: who gave not him his voice, but named Lucretius
Vespillo, escaped from the proscription, as has been spoken of before. But
this put him in such a rage, that he conspired with M. Genucius, and Plautius
Rufus to kill Augustus. But they being discovered betimes, they were imprisoned
and executed by decree of the Senate: who made infinite numbers of honors unto
Augustus at his return: howbeit he would not accept them all, but carried
himself very modestly in every place where he was. The people chose him Censor
for five years, and perpetual Consul: and at his request they granted
triumph unto Cornelius Balbus, although he were no ROMAN borne (for he was a
SPANIARD) by reason of his notable victories he had obtained, as Lieutenant of
Augustus, upon the GARAMANTES. Agrippa on the other side was sent into GAVLE
troubled by the invasions of the GERMAINS, whom he ordered well enough. Then he
led his army into SPAIN, troubled with the rebellion of the CANTABRIANS: the
which came thus to pass. The prisoners CANTABRIANS whom they had sold by the
drum: by a complot they made together, cut their masters throats, and then
fled into their country, where they solicited others to take arms, got their
fortresses into their hands, and set upon the ROMAN garrisons. Agrippa could
by no means bring his soldiers thither, whether that they deserved to take
rest, or that the resolution of the CANTABRIANS did astonish them. But after
that he had brought them to his hand, he marched directly against the enemies:
who had the better at the first encounter, and the ROMANS were well beaten.
But they being rebuked and punished by Agrippa, who gave them barley for wheat,
he returned again to fight. But then the CANTABRIANS that bare arms were all
cut in pieces, the rest disarmed, and drawn from the mountain to dwell in the
plain. Augustus was saluted Emperor, or sovereign Captain, because of this
victory: but Agrippa modestly refused triumph, and within a while after he
overcame the PANNONIANS also. The year following, the GETES and DACES being at
civil wars, Lentulus that had subdued them before, counseled Augustus not
to lose this occasion: for he might easily subdue these barbarous people being
thus divided. But Augustus not being of the mind to make any wars at all with
any nation, without great and just cause, (although there were more hope of
gain, then appearance of loss,) he answered: There was no cause for him to do
so: adding also, that those that sought a little gain with great loss and
danger, were like unto those that would angle with a golden hook, the which
breaking and falling into the water, no fish is worth the value of it. And
therefore that the barbarous were to be left to their own miseries: and that
by their bloodshed, by their own companions, they were more then enough
punished for the illes they had done the ROMANS, who ought not to begin first
to do evil.

In the same year Augustus being very desirous to put his hand to the
reformation of abuses in ROME, and that effectually: he joined with him his
nephew Agrippa in the state of a Censor, and did establish him Tribune for five
years. First of all he began to correct some disorders that were in the
Senate, he reformed the knights, spectacles, and plays, and the manner of suits
for public offices. He set fines upon their heads that would not marie, and
bestowed much upon them that had wives and children. He gave unto Hortensius
Hortalus five and twenty thousand crowns, to procure him to take a wife, that
he might raise up issue to that noble house and family of the Hortenses. He
ordained also that maidens should be twelve years old at the least before they
married, and suffered them to kill adulterers taken with the fact, without
punishment: condemning the Sodomites without remission. And for military
discipline, he looked very carefully unto that. And because a knight of ROME
had cut off his own sons thombes, for that he should not go to the war: he
made him to be sold by the drum and all his goods. But because the Regrators
were greedy to seize upon them, he made them cease the sale, and put the
knight into the hands of one of his bondmen enfranchised, and was contented to
drive him out of ROME. Furthermore he procured that the Senate should not be
kept but with great reverence: that the Senators should come together as into a
temple of devotion, and that no decree should pass, but in the presence of
400. Senators if it might be: that no man should be made free of ROME, but upon
great consideration. For the rest: he and Agrippa gave the people the pleasure
of secular yearly games, which had not been seen a hundred years before. But
he took very great care that there should be no insolences committed. He
punished the players in diverse sorts, that behaved themselves more licentiously
then became them. And when one of them amongst them called him Lord, he showed
the people with his voice, his eyes, and his hand, that he was not well pleased
withal: and the next morning he published a sharp Edict, forbidding all
persons expressly to say so, and would never suffer that any of his should give
him this name. But these plays being ended, he adopted Caius and Lucius the
sons of Agrippa. In all this great business, the SICAMBRES, VSIPETES, and
TENCHTERES, people of GERMANY, surprised certain ROMANS in their territory,
hanged them up, passed over the Rhein, spoiled GAVLE, overthrew certain
horsemen, and following their purpose, overcame M. Lollius Proconsull of GAVLE,
and took away an ensign from him. Yet though he were a man of small action
and very covetous: nevertheless he was revenged of them, and coming upon the
inuadors, fought with them, and drove them beyond the Rhein. On the other side,
C. Lentulus made war with the DACES, and killed three of their chief leaders
with a great number of men: and afterward he established a garrison by the
river of Danuby, to stop the incursio^s of this wild nation. Augustus seeing
these troubles, disposed of the affairs of ITALY to go into GAVLE, to rid
himself of these griefs, and by his absence to make his presence more
honorable. At that same time, diverse people inhabiting upon the river of Danuby
rebelled: but Augustus Lieutenants bestirred them so well, that they were all
compelled to seek peace. At that time also all GAVLE was in commotion, and
that in diverse sorts. But the covetousness of Licinius Enceladus, made free,
and soliciter of the affairs of Augustus, was cause of all this mischief. For
he having commanded the people to furnish the tribute for every month, he had
put fourteen months in the year for twelve. So being accused to his master
for money ill gotten, although all the world cried out of him, yet he found the
means to escape well enough. For after he had gotten an infinite mass of gold
and silver togther, he brought it to Augustus, saying, he had never other
intention but to take from the GAVLES the means to rebel. For all this
Augustus withdrew him from thence, and sent Tiberius thither to settle all
things in good estate again. Almost during these commotions, and outrageous
dissentions, the RHETIANS, near unto the lake of Come, they brake into GAVLE,
CISALPINE, and took out of ITALY store of boot. They were a people separated
from all others, and so cruel, that having taken any place from the ROMANS,
they killed all the male children, and further, did ask their soothsayers of
women with child: and if they said she was great with a boy, they presently ran
her through, and killed her and the fruit of her womb. Augustus would not
endure these outrages, but sent Drusus the son of Liuia against them: who
drove them out of ITALY, having overcome them in a set battle, near unto
TRENT. They say that their women showed themselves so cruel in this fight,
that their darts failing them, they took their little children by their legs,
and did most barbarously force themselves to smite their enemies in the face.
Those that were driven out of ITALY would have entered into GAVLE, but they
were repulsed by Tiberius. In the end, these people and their allies were
constrained to submit themselves.

Augustus senta Colonie unto NISMES in LANGVEDOCKE: and made them free
Burgesses of ROME. It is thought that he sent another unto ARLES, of the
sixtlegion: and one of the second unto ORANGE. Some make report of these
Colonies in the time of Tiberius. M. Agrippa on the other side, he gave order
for the affairs of ASIA, and of all the Orient, where he behaved himself so
well, that all that were friends to the people of ROME, were of better courage
then before, and all their enemies so valiantly suppressed, that Augustus was
saluted the tenth time soueraign Captain. But Agrippa after his wonted manner,
he would have no triumph: which was the cause of the loss of this custom, and
following his example, were contented from thenceforth with the ornaments of
triumph. But of another side, the PANNONIANS, the GENOVESES, and those of
PIEMONT rebelling, they were subdued by the Lieutenants of Augustus: who
builded two cities in testimony of his victory against these two last people:
whereof TVRIN (called Augusta Pretoria) was one, and GENVA the other.

Augustus having pacified GAVLE, stayed the invasions of the GERMANS, and
quenched the rebellion of SPAIN: he left Drusus with authority and his army
upon the Rheine, and came to ROME as Agrippa did out of ASIA, and became
extremely sick of the gowt. Lepidus he died at the same time, to whom
Augustus succeeded in the estate of chief Bishop, and made sumptuous
spectacles and sights unto the people. He burnt all the books of deuination
and prophecy, except those of the Sibylles: and yet he kept them not all. He
reformed the Calendar, and ordained that there should be no leap years for
twelues years following. He suffered that the sixth month then called
Sextilis, should be called Augustus after his name. All that year was spent in
plays and pastimes, saving that Augustus (having been sick) caused all that
he had done in his government to be rehearsed before the Senate. He took a
reuiew of the Senators, and confirmed his nephew Agrippa in the estate of a
Tribune for five years more. But shortly after, this great person being
returned from a journey out of PANNONIA, whither he was gone to prevent
disorders that were likely to be renewed: he fell sick and died, before
Augustus could come in time. That was a marvelous grief unto him: and not
knowing now on whom he should bestow his daughter Iulia, in the end he chose
Tiberius his wives son, and married them together: but they continued not long
in good terms together. From thencefoorth Tiberius and Drusus dealt almost in
all the affairs of war, and Tiberius especially after the death of the
other: of whom we shall speak to best purpose in the life of Tiberius, yet we
will briefly note it here. So then Tiberius went and made war in PANNONIA,
risen by means of the death of Agrippa: yet he made an end of it, killed some
of them, sold and subjected the rest: and compelled all that people to submit
themselves unto the people of ROME. Drusus on the other side made war in high
and low Almaine, and brought the most part of these nations unto some reason:
and afterward he returned to ROME. Where Augustus held so straight a hand to
bring the Senate to order, that there were few men desired to be of the Senate:
and many to the contrary that gave up their offices. But Augustus compelled
those that were of age, of quality and sufficiency, and gave order also that
the dignity of the Tribunes of the people should remain entire: suffering
those notwithstanding which had this office, their time expired, to be amongst
the Senators, or with knights. As for the towns of ASIA afflicted with the
earthquake, he paid of his own to the commonwealth, the yearly tribute which
they ought. And for the regard of those which were of his Provinces, he freed
them from all impostes for six years, and gave them of PALESTINE a great
quantity of corn, which sustained great want and famine. In the mean time
Drusus passed over the Rhein, made war with the VSIPETES, SICAMBRIANS,
TENCHTERES, CATTIANS, CHERVSIANS, and SVAVBIANS, whom he overthrew in diverse
encounters: and especially in a great battle, where were killed a very great
number. For these people were gathered together with such a confidence of
victory, that they had already made agreement among themselves for division
of the booty. But specially at the last battle, the CHERVSIANS should have
the horse, the SVAVBIANS they should have the baggage, and the SICAMBRIANS the
prisoners. And yet to bind themselves more straightly together, they burnt
twenty Ce^teners of the ROMANS. And this was the cause that the battle was
so long and cruelly fought betwixt them: yet in the end the victory remained
to Drusus, who gave the prisoners and all the booty to the soldiers, making
the horse, baggage, and captives to be sold to them that would offer most. All
the field for a great league and a half of length was strawed with dead
bodies, and they found in the enemies camp great store of iron chains prepared
by them for the ROMANS: howbeit they served for the^. Drusus set up a toke^ of
triumph, and was called Imperator of his troops in the field where the battle
was pitched. Afterward he built above fifty castles upon the rivers of Meuse,
Visurge, and of the Rhein. Tiberius on the other side was in DALMATIA, where he
brought them under that rose in arms against them. The triumph of Ouatio was
decreed to them both, and Augustus was saluted by the Senate Imperator of
sovereign Captain, and this for the twelfth time. But in these businesses,
the war was hot in THRACIA, and more then ever before: all the Provinces
being in rebellion under the conduct of Bulogaeses, who had killed the king
Rhacuspolis, an allie of the people of ROME, driven out his Uncle and
Lieutenant Rhymetalces out of THRACIA into CHERSONESVS. L. Piso governor of
PAMPHILIA went against them, and at the first encounter had not the advantage,
but in the second he overcame them utterly. Drusus having made a voyage to
ROME, to celebrate the birth day of Augustus in great magnificence, whilst his
troops reposed themselves in their garrisons, about the Spring he returned
into GERMANY, overcame the SVAVBIANS, gave them a king: then he invaded the
country of the MARCOMANNES, fought with them diverse times, killed a great
number of them, and made all the rest subject to the ROMANS. Because of this
victory, and of that of Piso, Augustus was called Imperator the thirteenth
time. Almost in this time he put Proculus to death in prison, one that he loved
best of all his bondmen made free: being convinced of many adulteries. He made
the thighs of his Secretary Thallus to be broken, for the sum of an hundred
crowns which he took for showing a secret letter. In this mean time Tiberius
continued war in DALMATIA and PANNONIA, moved through the great imposts
whereof the people complained: but in the end he subdued them, and built many
castles upon the river of Danuby to stay the invasions of the enemies. Piso
also in THRACIA overcame the MAESIANS, and BASTARNES, and brought away a great
number of prisoners, who bit their iron chains for anger, and most impatiently
did bear their servitude. Drusus made the CATTIANS subject also, then he came
to LIONS to meet with Augustus: from whence they both returned together into
ITALY. They had a custom also that yearly on the first day of January,
(though Augustus were absent) all the Senators, officers of justice, and
others of mean estate, brought him New-yeares gifts to the Capitol: and also
every one cast a piece of gold or silver into the lake Curtius, for a vow that
they had made to his health. He did bestow all these New-yeares gifts to buy
many rich statues of the gods, which he set up in all the cross streets.

In the five and thirtieth year of his principality, under the Consulate of
Drusus Nero, and of Quintius Crispinus, Drusus having subdued a great part of
GERMANY, and preparing to go further: a vision having the shape of a great
woman, that spoke bigger and louder then a man's voice could do, said to him in
Latin: Go no further: which was a sign of his death. The which followed
incontinently after, this young Nobleman of an excellent hope, being but thirty
years old. Augustus had put him in the roll of his heirs, and made an
oration in his praise. Afterward all the charge of the wars of GERMANY was
committed unto Tiberius. And for Augustus, he being the same year called for a
witness in certain causes, did patiently suffer any man to ask him, or
refuse him, as he had oftentimes done before. One day as he spoke in full
Senate, one of the Senators told him: I understood nothing: another, I would
speak against it, if I might be heard. Another time being weary with the
contestations of certain pleaders, he went in choler out of his seat. But
some began to say unto him, that it was lawful for Senators to speak freely
to any matter that came before them: and that no man was ever offended for the
replies or contestations of any man.

Nonius Asprenaes, one of his greatest friends, was accused by Cassius Seuerus
to have poisoned a hundred and thirty bidden guests at a banquet. Augustus did
not recommend him, but let the Senators alone, who banished Cassius. An old
soldier upon complaint being brought before the Senators, and in danger of
his life, besought Augustus to help him. And when he had given him an Advocate
to defend him: the soldier opened his breast, and showing him the marks of
the wounds which he had received in the battle of ACTIVM, said unto him: But I
beseech thee Augustus, consider that I have received these wounds here upon my
body for to defend thee, and would put no other in my place. Augustus moved
with these words, appeared in justice, and pleaded this man's cause the which he
wanne. Soon after he was saluted sovereign Captain for the fourteenth time:
because of the victories which Tiberius and Sextus Apuleius had obtained in
GERMANY, and in ITALY. And the authority which had been given him for ten
years over the state of the Commonwealth being expired, was continued unto him
for ten years following. Then he did greatly enlarge the bounds of the
territory of ROME, and having advanced Salustius Crispus (the son of the
Historian) unto the place which Maecenas held, the ROMAN knight his faithful
friend and principal Counselor, deceased in those days: and by Tiberius
continued to bring the GERMANS under: for the victory of whom, and also for
that he had subdued all the people inhabiting along the Alps; the Senate had
set up a token of triumph, and granted triumph to Tiberius.

Under the second Consulate of Claudius Nero, and of Calphurnius Piso, Caius
and Lucius young sons of Augustus, were called young Princes, and appointed
Consuls, although they were but of tender years, and under fourteen years
old. This pleased Augustus greatly, though he fained to take no pleasure in it.
Furthermore, he then made an edict touching slanderous libels, declaring who
should have the hearing of those crimes, and how they should be punished:
although he himself cared not much, and patiently suffered they should gibe at
him, contented to answer by open defense, unto the reproaches and mockeries they
made of him. They scattered abroad one day in the palace many bills of paper of
cruel injuries against him. This moved him not at all, neither did he trouble
himself much to answer it: but in stead of searching it out, he did advise that
hereafter they should have an eye upon those, that by little books or Epigrams
published (under false names) scandale against any man. Tiberius wrote a round
letter to him one day, to the end he should carry a straighter hand upon that:
but he sent him these words: I pray thee, my friend, let not thy youth ouerrule
thee in this matter, nor be not so hot, though I be evil spoken of by some.
It is enough if we gain this point, that no man can hurt us. Afterward he
divided the city of ROME into fourteen regions, and two hundred and ten
streets, and in every of them he established Officers to see that all things
should be maintained as they ought to be, and to report unto the Prince any
memorable thing that should happen. He provided for the violence of fire, he
built up the temples that were burnt or ruined by time: and gave at one time
unto the temple of Jupiter Capitoline, for the renewing of the same, sixteen
thousand pounds of gold, and of rich and costly pearls, to the sum of twelve
hundred thousand Crowns.

Now Caius and Lucius his young sons growing apace, and Iulia his daughter
beginning to be too well known for her wantonness: Tiberius that could no
longer endure her, nor these two young Princes (and because he would have the
ROMANS a little long for him) he demanded and obtained leave with extremity,
threatening to kill himself with famine, if they did not grant him: and so
went to study at RHODES. In the mean time Augustus provided for the affairs
of ISTRIA, divided ITALY into eleven Provinces: and because he doubted they
did envy his greatness, he chose nine Pretorian cohorts for his guard, of the
which he kept three of them in ROME, lodged here and there in houses, so long
as they were in their quarter: and the six others were quartered in the next
villages unto it. He also erected new offices, to impart to so many men more
the honors and charges of the Commonwealth. At the same time when before the
Senate they did object many crimes unto Aimilius Aelianus, and amongst other
things, that he spoke ill of Augustus: he turning to the accuser, said unto him
as in choler: Prove me that, and I will make Aelianus know that I have a
tongue: for I will say more of him, then he has spoken of me. He made no
further inquiry afterward, and showed himself very gentle and courteous also
unto Cassius of PADVA, a man of a mean estate: who having spoken openly at a
table, that he lacked no good will nor courage to kill Augustus: he contented
himself to impose this only punishment upon him, as to drive him out of ROME.
From his eleventh Consulship unto the twelfth, there passed seventeen years:
in all which time he diverse times had refused this charge: but now he
demanded it, and obtained it. His intention was to advance Caius his little
son to great dignity, whom he caused to be proclaimed, young Prince, and sent
him to see the Provinces and armies, in the title of a Proconsull. Then he
commanded him to go into ASIA, having given him for governors Lollius, and
Sulpitius Quirinus. He himself in the mean time remained at ROME, where he
established extraordinary guards, under color to keep thieves and
maisterlesse men from offering violence, whilst the armies abroad were far
off. The year following, Caius having traveled in diverse parts of the
Orient, made peace with Phraates king of the PARTHIANS, and brought away
hostages for assurance thereof, the kings three brethren, and all the Princes
of the blood. The which was practiced by the means of the Queen Thermusa,
borne in ITALY, who being sent by Augustus for a gift unto Phraates, he fell
so in love with her, and held her in such high estimation, that after she had
brought him a son called Phraataces, he received her for his lawful wife.
She being desirous her son should possess the Crown, drove the right heirs
far off by means of this peace. And at the end of certain years,
Phraataces who entertained it killed his father, and possessed the kingdom.
But he was not long in quiet possession, for the great Lords conspired against
him, and took from him his life and Crown together. Furthermore, Caius
conquered ARMENIA, and shortly after Augustus demanded the thirteenth
Consulship, to the end to advance his little son Lucius as he had done Caius.
He sent him Proconsull into SPAIN, but he fell sick by the way, and stayed
almost a year at MARSEILLES. Though these two brethren were far enough off
Tiberius, who kept himself as a simple scholar at RHODES: yet they loved not
him greatly, nor he them: for which purpose, the process served not much
against their mother Iulia, banished because of her adulteries into the Isle of
PANDATARIE. Shortly after, her daughter also called Iulia, married unto Lucius
Paulus, was also convinced of the same crime that her mother was: and was
banished into another Isle of the sea Adriaticum, called TREMERA. This
affliction so near unto him, maruellously grieved Augustus, who could not
bear it but in mourning, and devouring himself with sorrow. Then all the
Provinces of the ROMAN Empire being in peace, Augustus shut up the third time
the temple of Ianus: and the King of kings, the Savior of the world, being
borne of a virgin in IVDAEA, appearing amongst men: he shut up the Oracles of
all the Painim gods, as the Oracle of DELPHES among others was constrained to
confess it, and never spoke afterward. Wherewith Augustus being astonished,
caused a great altar to be set up in the Capitol with an inscription,
signifying that it was The altar of the God first borne. The year following,
to stay the violent course of great vsuries, and to raise up again many
families decayed: he put into the Exchange two millions and a half of gold:
that is to say, five and twenty hundred thousand crowns: and suffered private
men to take of it for three years without interest, putting in pawn into the
Exchequer lands and possessions, being twice as much worth as the principal:
and condemned the usurers that had taken interest more then Julius Caesar had
ordained, to pay four times as much, and deducting out of the principal that
which had been paid over and above the tax of the law: he gave the debtors
three years space to pay it, at three equal times from year to year. He
made provision also for distributing of corn, and brought it to 200000. heads
of those that should come to have any of it: and did wisely remedy diverse
discontentments of the people. Shortly after, Lucius Caesar being 16. years of
age, died at MARSEILLES: the which was the cause that Tiberius being reconciled
for some other occasion with Caius, he obtained leave to return from RHODES to
ROME: with condition (for so was Caius will) that he should meddle with no
affairs of estate, and that he should remain yet the rest of the year at
RHODES. As touching Augustus, he labored to recreate himself with his
friends: and did willingly see learned men* and amongst others, T. Liuius that
renowned Historian: the Poets Virgil and Horace, but especially Virgil, who was
one of his most familiar friends. Which makes men think that Ovid committed
some great fault, since he was a banished man so long, and that they could not
obtain his grace, though the greatest men were suitors for him. And yet the
Historians say Augustus was not angry, as appears by the fact of Timagenes
the Historian: who having dispersed abroad some pleasant by-names against
Augustus, Liuia, and their familiars, whereat every one of them laughed, it was
so pleasant an encounter: Augustus was contented to advise him to moderate his
tongue from thenceforth, and did only forbid him his house and familiarity,
suffering him to wax old in the company of Asinius Pollio. He did greatly
support some also that were accused to have sealed a false Will, and mingled
with the marks of condemnation and absolution a third, pardoning all those that
it should seem had through ignorance sinned in this fact. One being evidently
convinced to have killed his father, was even at the point to be sewed up in a
leather sack, according to the custom, and thrown into the sea. Augustus
desirous this cursed wretch should not be thus handled, put the answer in his
mouth, in asking of him also: Surely I believe thou have not killed thy father.
The son of Tarius being charged to have conspired against the life of his
father, Augustus was sent for into Tarius house, to counsel him what were best
to be done: he gave the father counsel to banish him far off from all
knowledge. And when Tarius would have made Augustus his heir, he refused it,
and obtained that the son should be banished unto MARSEILLES: and that during
his fathers life he should have a pension to maintain him withal.

In the 44. year of the monarchy of Augustus, Tiberius having been absent the
space of eight years, he came again to ROME, where he lived, and meddled with
no matters. But that held not long: for in the same year Caius, upon whom
Augustus principally looked, died in LYCIA: and some say, that Liuia knew well
enough of what death. For she greatly desired the advancement of her son
Tiberius, knowing that Augustus did not greatly love the last son of Agrippa
and Iulia, by reason of the rudeness of his nature. Augustus took the death
of his son Caius very impatiently. He made his schoolemaister and domestical
servants to be drowned: and furthermore, he disposed all the forces of the
Empire and the legions amongst the Provinces, in commodious places as well by
sea as by land. Afterward he obtained the Tribuneship for Tiberius, more
through the procurement of Liuia then otherwise: although in the end he was
content to advance him, to make his memory to be so much the more desired,
when they had made proof of his successor, whom he knew better then any other,
and never spoke any thing well, but he spied always some cross thing in him
of a dangerous nature he had. And yet some judge, that Augustus did repute the
virtues in Tiberius to be greater then his imperfections: considering also that
in the Oration he made, his words tended to this end, that he adopted Tiberius
in favor of the commonwealth. But before he would declare this adoption: he
compelled Tiberius to adopt his nephew Germanicus the son of Drusus: and he
adopted with Tiberius Agrippa Posthumus, the son of M. Agrippa. Then to prevent
the complots of some of the chiefest of ROME, he made Tiberius to be chosen
Tribune for ten years following. That was the cause that in ROME they began to
speak well of Tiberius, whom they saw by that means somewhat stepped into
Augustus place, so soon as he should happen to die. Furthermore, at the
instance of the people of ROME and of Tiberius himself, Augustus did tolerate
the banishment of his daughter Iulia: howbeit for no entreaty he would ever
revoke her again. So after the decease of Augustus, she was destitute of all
help, and Tiberius made her die for want in an unknown place. The year
following, Valerius Messala, and C. Cinna little son of the great Pompey, were
elected Consuls. Cinna that took part with his cousins, was taken prisoner,
and brought to Augustus, who gave him life and advanced him. This
notwithstanding, he was afterward attainted and convinced to have conspired
against the life of Augustus: whom through the counsel of Liuia he sent for
into his chamber, and gently rebuked him for all the good deeds he had done to
him: pardoned him this last offense, and afterward raised him to the dignity
of a Consul, being sorry that he durst not demand it. After that Cinna became
his faithful friend and servant, and bequeathed all his goods by will unto
Augustus: against whom never any man co^spired more. His Lieutenants in AFRICA
obtained some victories, and Tiberius continued the war in GERMANY, from
whence he oftentimes returned to ROME, to keep himself in Augustus good favor.
Who having limited the pay, recompense, commodity, and time that the soldiers
should have, he procured for some time the good of the commonwealth: which had
continued longer in prosperity, if his successors had better entertained
military discipline. Afterward to resist the mutinies of the people by reason
of famine, he established corpse of guard in all the places of ROME, and drove
out a great number of unprofitable mouths. And when corn came again to bear
the ordinary price, he was about to abolish the distributio^ of corn which the
commonwealth made: because that the people trusting unto that, made no
reckening to plow their lands. At the same time many towns in diverse Provinces
were inclined to rebel, which caused the Senate to make a decree, that the
governors of Provinces should command two years one after another, and should
not depart thence til their successor were arrived. The ILLYRIANS also they
began to rise, but they were suppressed immediately by Valerius Messalinus. For
GERMANY, all were subject under the name of the ROMANS, except the
MARCOMANNES, and their king Maroboduus, a valiliant and wise man, that kept
himself and his people in good discipline, having always an army ready of
threescore and ten thousand footmen, and four thousand horse, all the which he
trained and put in readiness against his neighbors, to defend him the better
against the ROMANS, if they came to assail him. Tiberius prepared himself
with twelve legions to make war with him: but being constrained to go against
the ILLYRIANS, he made agreement with Mareboduus, that sought peace and
quietness: and so marched where necessity called him. For the ILLYRIANS, to
the number of eight hundred thousand men and upwards, rose in manner all at an
instant, and mustered up in short time, with such order in their affairs and
warlike exploits, that they possessed and brought in subjection almost all
MACEDON, and put Augustus into a marvelous perplexity, because they prepared
themselves to come into ITALY. Hereupon Tiberius is chosen to go against them,
the which he did with so good direction and warlike judgment, that he
dispersed their army. But now concerning the country of THRACIA: there the
army of the ROMANS was put to flight: yet taking heart again, they returned
to meet with their enemies, and obtained an honorable victory. For which
cause they called Augustus Imperator or sovereign Captain the sixteenth time.
The ILLYRIANS made head again better then before under the conduct of Bato
Desidiates: they made violent and strange invasions, and Tiberius never came
against them. Whereupon Augustus conceiving an evil opinion, dispatched
Germanicus the son of Drusus, to go into ILLYRIA with a complete army. On
the other side, Agrippa Posthumus showed himself so insolent, and committed so
many follies, that Augustus could no longer endure them, and therefore he
disauowed and disinherited him, confiscated his goods, and confined him to
SVRRENTVM: where being more audacious then before, he banished him into the I Will
of PLANASIA, near unto CORSICA: and caused the Senate to make an ordinance
that he should remain there till his death. By this means every man began to
regard Tiberius, who was also declared the son and colleague of Augustus by
decree of the Senate, who committed unto him all the armies and provinces of
the Empire. Liuia his mother did help him greatly in all these affairs.
Furthermore, he would not stir out of ILLYRIA until he had made an end of this
war, which continued three whole years.

Now at the arrival of Germanicus, the chieftaines of the ILLYRIANS came
suddenly to assail the camp of the ROMANS: who faining to be afraid, staid
till the enemy came to charge them in disorder. Then they came out with fury
against them, killed a great number of the^, and made the rest to fly.
Germanicus wan another battle against the DALMATIANS, and pursuing his
victory, he followed them so near at the heels, that they submitted
themselves, and demanded peace. By reason whereof they gave Augustus the name
of Imperator the eighteenth time. Bato Desidiates came to salute Tiberius set
in his tribunal chair, without holding down his head, or any way imbasing
himself: and being asked why after so many battles lost, he did yet rebel
again? he answered boldly again, that the ROMANS were the cause of it: who
in stead of shepherds had sent them wolves to keep their flock. Peace was
granted unto the DALMATIANS upon certain conditions. And as for the BREVCIANS
which continued their war, they were overthrown in many encounters, and at
the length brought to subjection by Plautius Siluanus, who triumphed. Their
king Bato Breucus had betrayed and delivered unto the ROMANS another great
Captain of the ILLYRIANS called Pinnetes: and afterward he was delivered
himself by his own men unto Bato Desidiates, who killed him with his own
hand: and then fortified himself in DALMATIA, where having made head almost a
year and a half against the armies of Tiberius and of Germanicus, he won and
lost many battles: at the last being able to hold out no longer, he sent his
son to demand peace of Tiberius, promising to yield himself and his into
the hands of Augustus. He obtained safe conduct, and came by night unto
Tiberius camp: who gave him very gracious entertainment, and many rich
presents. Afterward he made him be brought to RAVENNA, and was also gently
used: because that in an encounter where he was*inclosed, and in danger of his
life, he had given him means to escape and save himself. And because of the
diverse victories obtained by Germanicus and Tiberius, Augustus was saluted for
the nineteenth and twentieth time Imperator or sovereign Captain. And for the
PANNONIANS, their young men that had so many times threatened ITALY, were
constrained to bring all their arms together on a heap, as they were
commanded, and to fall on their knees before Tiberius to demand peace of him.
He received them into grace, and sent them home to their houses, disposing his
garrisons in strong places, under the charge of Mareus Lepidus. The glory of
Tiberius was yet more noble, and the anguishes of Augustus increased by the
overthrow of Quintilius Varus: who being gone to assail Arminius Prince of the
CHERVSSIANS, was enclosed in marshes, and utterly overthrown with three
ROMAN legions that were slain in the place: and for himself, fearing to
fall alive into the hands of the CHERVSSIANS, he killed himself with his own
hand. The victours did never so cruelly handle the ROMANS as those whom they
might know were common Counselors and pleaders. For at the beginning when
Varus came to command their country, where they knew not what process meant,
he persuaded himself he should tame them well enough, using the same form and
order of process there amongst them, as they did at ROME. So he had a
judgment seat, and all matters were pleaded before him. Some of them amongst
the rest being very subtle, seemed to esteem much this pleading: and to bring
him asleep, they of purpose moved occasion of process and suit one against
the other: and then they went before him, and by ROMANS themselves whose
tongues they borrowed, they demanded justice. Then they rejoiced not a little
when they could catch any of these Counselors: for they put out the eyes of
some of them, cut off the hands of others of them: and they say, that they cut
out the tongue of one, and afterward sowed up his mouth, and he that held the
tongue in his hand, said unto him: O viper, at the last yet thou will leave
whistling. Augustus was so astonished at this loss, that at times he would beat
his head against the wall, crying out, Varus, give me my legions. Certain
years after, Germanicus buried the bones of the ROMANS that were killed in
this overthrow. The year following Tiberius returned into GERMANY, and to
keep the passages of the Rhein, Augustus served his turn with the slaves
enfranchised, which caused afterward great confusions and seditions in the
ROMAN army. In all these stirs, two men of no worth, called Andasius and
Epicadus, complotted to take away Iulia the daughter of Augustus, and Agrippa
Posthumus from the places where they were, and to bring them to some legions to
alter the estate. But they were soon discovered, and punished for their
rashness. Some others also committed the like fond enterprises, but they
vanished away without any effect.

Furthermore, Augustus being now old and broken, began to leave all great
companies, cassiered his guards, and sent them to garrisons far off, to the
end they should not go about to make any change. He gave commandment that
the GAVLES and GERMANS should depart the city by a day prefixed. In the
mean time Tiberius having divided his army into four parts, entered into
GERMANY, about five and twenty leagues into the country beyond the Rhein, and
put al to fire and blood: then he retired fearing some encounter of Varus.
Touching Augustus, he qualified some strict laws against the unmarried, the
gifts of the husband to the wife, the banquets and suits: he did forbid the
Deuines to answer the vain question of those, that would know how long they
should live: and he suffered the knights (if they were challenged) to fight at
the sharp. Germanicus being returned to ROME obtained the Consulship, and
Tiberius triumphed of the ILLYRIANS, PANNONIANS, DALMATIANS, and GERMANS:
followed with his Lieutenants Germanicus, Vibius Posthumus, Plautius Siluanus,
and Marcus Lepidus, with triumphing robes. But before he went up to the
Capitol, he went out of his charret, and fell down on his knees before
Augustus. Then he made a dinner for all the people, and had a thousand tables
set up for them: and gave to every one of then seven crowns and a half. Under
the Consulship of C. Silius, and of Munatius Plancus, Augustus having obtained
ten years with Tiberius to provide for the affairs of the commonwealth: to
the end to quench many false rumors, about sixteen months before his death,
he made his will, and gave it to the Vestall virgins to keep. Because his
sickness kept him from coming to the Senate, he prayed the Senators to think
of some means to entertain the men of war. Which they having well
considered, found no better means then that which he himself had found out,
to wit: of the twentieth part of the inheritances: and they all agreed unto it.
The next year following, he went (as they say) to see Agrippa in his Isle of
PLANASIA, the which troubled Liuia much: for she knew what was past. At the
same time he and Tiberius took muster of the ROMAN citizens, and shortly
after he fell sick, whereof they recite many causes. But thereupon he went into
the country unto some places of pleasure, where he mended a little, and passed
the time away pretily merry, carrying Tiberius with him, whom he would have
brought on his way to BENEVENT, from whence he went into ILLYRIA. At his
return his sickness increased, that he was feign to stay at NOLA, and sent
for Tiberius, and talked with him a long time very privately, and after that
never did any thing of importance: although the Historians do not agree whether
Tiberius was come before his departure or not. For Liuia had set spials in the
house he lay sick in, and on the high ways, giving it out abroad that Augustus
was well: and on the other side sending messages upon messages unto Tiberius,
fame spreading it abroad that Augustus was dead, and that Tiberius held his
place. Augustus being at the point to give up the ghost, made himself to be
combed, and speaking to his friends, asked if no body made any noise without.
So he exhorted them to rejoice with him, for that he had so happily played the
Comedy of this humane life. Then having sent them all out of his chamber, he
asked if Liuilla Drusus daughter were in health: and so embracing his wife,
said these words unto her: Farewell Liuia, behave thy self well, and remember
our marriage: and suddenly went away, making a sweet end, which he always
desired as often as he heard talk of those that died quietly. He died in the
same town, and in the same chamber that his father Octauius died in, and lived
near unto the age of threescore and sixteen years. His corpse being brought
to ROME, the Vestall virgins brought out his will and testament, by the which
he appointed Tiberius his heir, and gave him three parts of his goods, and his
wife Liuia the fourth part. Furthermore he gave to the people of ROME twelve
hundred and fifty thousand crowns: to the five and thirty Tribes, thirteen
hundred, seven and thirty thousand, five hundred crowns: to every one of the
Pretorian soldiers 25 crowns, to those of the town 12 crowns and a half.
There were other legacies to be paid within a year: and he said, that all his
legacies performed, he left his heirs four millions of gold. Within 20 years
before his death, he did inherit of his friends goods which had made him their
heir, about 35 millions of gold: howbeit that he had spent all that with two
patrimonies of his own for maintenance of the common wealth. With his
testament there were three little libels or codicils, the one showing what he
would have done at his funerals. The second was a brief of all his actions,
which he commanded should be graven in copper tables before his tomb. The
third contained the estate of his reuenew, and of the principal affairs of
the Empire. He had added to them also the names of the infranchised bondmen and
of the slaves, whom they might bring to account, and therewith he advised them
to keep the limits of the Empire which they had at that time. They carried him
with great pomp into the field of Mars, where he was reduced into ashes, which
they closed up in his sepulcher built in his sixth Consulship. After all these
ceremonies the Senate appointed him a temple and divine honors, and was placed
in rank with the gods. To make this honor yet greater, one Numerius Atticus
that had been Praetor, a man of great authority in ROME, was entised by Liuia,
who gave him five and twenty thousand crowns, to swear before all the people,
that he saw Augustus carried up into heaven. After his death, many speeches were
diversely spoken of his life: some reproving him, as much as others commended
him. But his successor made him oftentimes to be lamented. And so he was wont
to say of Tiberius, that he should leave to the ROMANS in succession of the
Empire, a successor that never consulted twice of one thing. And as he was a
happy Prince in all his enterprises, and that by his Lieutenants had done an
infinite number of worthy exploits against the enemies of the Empire: so in
his life amongst his friends he showed himself very gracious, pleasant, and
well disposed in company: being learned, eloquent, and sententious in all his
talk. And to conclude, such as the Empire of ROME had never any Augustus
Caesar but him alone.

The end of Octauius Caesar Augustus life.
THE LIFE OF Plutarch.
PLVTARCHVS.



Thy precepts are a crown of purest gold
To Traian, deemed the glory of mankind.
In hands, and hearts, if great men would thee hold,
Virtue should rule, and vice should go behind.
Having undertaken to gather the lives of Plutarch and of Seneca, as they
themselves are amply showed in their works, the which in despite of the fury
of an infinity of strange accidents have yet remained whole and in reputation
until this present time: First, this thought has possessed me before, that
some man may marvel, how, and wherefore I do join Philosophers, quiet men,
and friends of solitariness: unto so many noble and worthy warriers. Wherein
it seems I wander too far off from the principal intention of Plutarch,
who was so willing to honor the Muses, joining into one body so many members
and parts of histories offered unto the posterity, that in the mean time he
has accompanied, and as it were environed them: With darts, and targets of
Mars redoubtable.
But I hope, that if those (which think strange of my doings) will but at
leisure with a reposed eye look upon the lives before: they shall find that I
have not gone so far from the right meaning, as at the first sight may be
judged. For, besides that the lives of some Orators, especially of Demosthenes
and of Cicero, are seen amongst the others: you shall find few noblemen
represented by our Author, but that they have as carefully handled books, as
their swords. And if some seem to be so much given to arms, that they have
left the study of learning behind them: yet we may see that they have loved
Philosophers, and that they themselves have earnestly and effectually reasoned
of Philosophy, in time of war and peace. And whereas Plutarch has mingled
some with virtuous men, some (I say) which have done infinite hurt to
themselves, and to all the world during their lives, and whose names are
detested at this day by those themselves which follow their execrable doings:
his intention was not to place them in the Theater of virtue, as if they had
deserved it: but as learned painters finely apply cloudy and dark colors in
their tables, to the end that the lively and fresh colors should appear more
beautiful and as it were imbossed; so in entermingling the strange excesses of
some GREEKS and ROMANS amongst so worthy acts of others, he has so fitly
mingled the sweet and profitable together, that it is not possible to be
better. But if my two Philosophers (since I have begun to qualify them thus)
were contented to shut up themselves in some school or study, and to do
nothing else but declaime and fashion some scholars: it may be indeed I should
have better left this enterprise unto some follower of Diogenes Laertius, that
would describe the sects of Philosophy, and the principal founders of the
same. Now there are here two personages, which (as the soul within the body)
have through their notable counsels given motions unto great and mean men in
their time, and by other men's eyes and hands have done infinite things in the
society of man's life, unto the which they serve at this day with their
precepts and goodly instructions, without the which the exploits of others
should be partly buried and abolished: as those have been of so many other men
that came before and after. They be the two schoole-maisters and counselors of
two Emperors. They be men that beside their study have borne great and
honorable offices, in the which they have so carried themselves, that by their
actions a man may gather, that knowledge is a great prop and stay to a virtuous
man. If they have not worn armor and commanded armies: if a man see them in a
long gown, and their books in their hands, they lose not therefore their
glory which so many ways recommendeth them at this present, having lift up
learning in honor, and furnished strong arms, by means whereof all Princes
may wisely and happily maintain their estates against the fury of wars, and
under the quiet government of peace. As to the contrary, when violence alone
would rule, and that men thought there was no need that our spirits should be
kept in and directed by the exhortations of Philosophy: confusions came on in
heaps, which ruined and overthrew that which they thought had been surest set
in the ground. Moreover, I did not bear my self in hand that I could attain
to that, as to represent Plutarch and Seneca in their beseeming comeliness.
They themselves could have done that, and in their writings there are draughts
very agreeable to their gravity. But as we do not willingly take the pensile to
paint our selves, but to please our selves, the discourse of our thought
suffices. In like manner also these goodly spirits here, being contented to be
known by the glass of their virtue which follows them: they leave every
body to think of their deeds and words that that is meet. Amongst all the
books that serve for the use of man's life, next unto that which concerns our
sovereign good we hope for in a better place then this world: I think there
are none more profitable nor necessary to all sorts of men, then histories. And
amongst histories, those of men which have been brought to honor and place of
government in the commonwealth: and among those men there, those that have
brought their deeds and sayings to some commendable end. Wherefore I will not
enter into disputation nor conference of stories, nor mingle the Scriptures
with the profane, or confound the discourse representing men destitute of the
knowledge of the true god, with the holy and admirable considerations of the
life of them, which have been lightened with the happy and supernatural light.
That requires a whole book, and separated from this present work, our
purpose being otherwise bent to the same. But as in the former lives I was
desirous to waken the good spirits of our nation, and by the interiection of
some of my conceits to induce them to do better: I do the like also in these
two, attending the commodity to set forth others, if the Author of life do
permit me.

Now before we proceed any further, for as much as Seneca was long time before
Plutarch, some might also require another order in my discourse.
Notwithstanding, as Plutarch does ordinarily place the GREEKS before the
ROMANS, and that for the matter of their lives there is no need otherwise for
a man to trouble himself much about the disposing of them, and that those
which be dead do not quarrel together to know who shall go before or behind: I
have thought with my self that I might begin this work where I thought good,
without binding my self too curiously, either to the order of time, or to such
other circumstances. For if any man be offended, I will allege that unto him
which was spoken unto one displeased, because his horse was painted standing on
his feet, which he would have had lying on his back, and his feet upward:
Turn the other side upward, and you shall be pleased. Even so is it in his
choice to read such a life first, as he thinks good, and to turn the table
at his pleasure, no man being constrained to come into the closet of the Muses,
but at his own will, and by the gate which pleases him best. I could have
been contented to have offered Plutarch only, or left him hidden in his
works, the true and durable treasures of his glory: but having been solicited
to show some patterns, I was unwilling to let him go alone. Now, I cannot cast
mine eye upon that personage, but Seneca does also present himself unto me,
for many reports and agreements that are between them. For, besides that
nature has brought them into the world, in the revolution of one age, both
came out of a strange country to ROME: both of them were rich and of great
power, masters and teachers of two Emperors, which did enrich and advance
them to honor, and great offices in the commonwealth. In regard of their
learning, although the one of them was of a sect impugned by the other in
diverse respects: yet they both tended to one end, although it was by diverse
ways: to wit, to drive away vice and vanity out of the hearts of their
disciples, and to plant in them the love of virtue, the contempt of death, and
of the world, with so sound reasons, and so well combined the one to the other:
that it is impossible to enter into a school of the heathen better ordered then
that of these two, to learn (as we ought) to be ashamed of dishonest things,
and to exercise those that be honest and virtuous. But as touching other
agreements and dissemblances which may be noted as well in their life and
behavior, as in their doctrine: peradventure it shall be better to reserve it
to fitter place, or to leave the discourse unto the studious reader: who
advisedly considering this little which we presently present unto them, and
joining thereto the writings of the one and the other: shall know what
authority and art these two wise men have to draw the most ignorant and foolish
to the love of virtue. Also that their style with their pertinent and plain
manner of discourse is accompanied with great gravity and forcible reasons, to
make men confident to believe them. If the one flow sweetly, and always almost
maintains himself in the same: the other in his wanderings and rollings about
can well reform his errors, and come to it again in time: and then go on
better then when he first began. Plutarch uses a world of approches and hooks
to pull down vice. Seneca seems to provoke him to the combat, and when he
sets upon him, it is in taking him by the collar and shaking him in all
parts. The one seems to be a company of light horsemen charging very swiftly,
and at diverse wheelings and returns: the other, to a battalion of footmen
well set in order, assailing resolutely, and not removing out of the place
before he have won the victory. The opinions of Plutarch are handled with
Platonicall inductions, enriched with examples, with similitudes, with quick
sentences, and gracious recitals, which force the reader to yield. Seneca
drawing that which is praiseworthy from the STOICKES, and from EPICVRVS also
goodly instructions: as the Be finely draws from the herb of bitter juice
that which makes sweet honey, differing somewhat from the common use, he makes
a very profitable and sure harbor wherein a heart ill settled may repose it
self. The one speaks as a friend, the other as a master: and both with such
a grace, that whether they give good counsel, or that they command: the ears
and hearts do bow at their voices. Insomuch that the wicked are constrained in
reading of these Philosophers to acknowledge and plainly to hear within this
grave school, a million of truths which condemns them: and I cannot tell
with what hidden force (as the Adamant draws iron) they feel themselves to
be carried that way, unto the which the learned instructions of these two
Philosophers do direct them, to delight in them even with mourning, and to
confess that those be the persons of whom men may learn to be less vicious,
and more virtuous: good men also they gather there a sweet fruit as possible
may me, for remedy against so many cruelties of this present life. And although
they find their true and perfect contentment in a far better school without
comparison: yet so it is, that in this school here they understand things
which afterward makes the other more agreeable, and more honorable. Now for
as much as afterward we have mixed the memories of their lives with diverse
particularities, which will make us see a part of their comparisons that may be
noted between them: let us begin with Plutarch, and consider his life
principally by the instructions which he himself has left us, and namely in
many places of his moral and mingled works.

Pausanias, in the ninth book of his description of GREECE, says, that there
ran a common rumor abroad among the THEBANS, that Cadmus the son of Agenor
coming from DELPHES into PHOCIDE, was guided by a cow marked in both her
flanks with white spots in form of a full Moon: and that the Oracle
commanded him to stay with his troops in that place where the cow should lie
down. Which came to pass in the territory afterward called BOEOTIA, because
of this cow. At the beginning of the same book he says that BOEOTIA took the
same name of Boeotus the son of Iton, and of the nymph Menalippe: which
should seem repugnant. But the one and the other opinion may well agree, if we
say that Cadmus being come into that part of the country, Boeotius that had a
charge in these troops, and remaining there after the others, left his name to
all the territory which is near neighbor to ATTICA, but in a thicker air,
because it stands betwixt two mountains, and that the country is more
Northwards. So that the ATHENIANS were ever thinner of body, and of liuelier
spirit: and the BOEOTIANS to the contrary, fuller of flesh, and duller of wit
also. From whence came many slents of laughter against the mass and weight of
their understandings, and they made proverbs dispersed in Greek and Latin
books. Yea the Poets themselves, and Ebulus among others, do floute the
BOEOTIANS, that they are great feeders, and love to speak much: which agrees
very well with the rest of their manners. Plutarch also himself in his first
treaty of eating of flesh, notes somewhat of that. Nevertheless, of such a
country came Pelopidas, and other excellent men, but namely him of whom we are
now presently to speak of, no simple nor sottish man: but as Midst bushes, and
the thickest of the thorn
The flowers of tendrest violets are borne.
Even so out of a country accustomed to bring forth fat men, as they say, and
fitter for war then learning: came Plutarch, borne in the city of CHAERONEA,
near unto LEBADIA. In old time (as Pausanias says) it was called ARNE,
because of Arne the daughter of Aeolus. But afterward because it stood evil,
and looked toward the West: Chaeron the son of Apollo and of Thero the
daughter of Phylas, caused it to be new built, and turned to the East, to make
it more wholesome and habitable. Upon which occasion, in token of thankfulness
for the good act of the founder, it was ever after called CHAERONEA. And
although for many memorable accidents this town is noted in histories, yet do
I not know any thing that has so much kept up the memory of it until this
present, as the name of Plutarch, whose ancestors, men of a noble race,
maintained themselves from father to the son in honorable office and place
of charge in their little common wealth, until the time of Nicarchus his great
grandfather, who lived in the time of Augustus Caesar, as Plutarch reports in
the life of Antonius: where he says also, that all the citizens of CHAERONEA,
not one excepted, were compelled themselves to carry upon their shoulders, a
certain measure of corn to the sea coast, which is before the I Will of
ANTICYRE: and yet they were driven forward whipped with many a sore lash.
Again, as they were preparing for a second journey, and that every man had his
burden ready: news came that Antonius had lost the battle before ACTIVM,
which saved CHAERONEA. For Antonius commissioners and soldiers fled
immediately, and the citizens divided the corn amongst them. Nicarchus, amongst
other children had Lamprias, a learned man amongst those of his time, and of
whom Plutarch makes often mention in his books, where he speaks of talk at
the table: how that he had been in company with other learned men at many
feasts, where there was no talk but of learning, and matters of Philosophy.
He speaks also of his father, the son of Lamprias, not expressing his name
although he represents him discoursing of many points of Philosophy, and
namely in the books above mentioned. Of this Philosopher then the son of
Lamprias, were borne many children, and amongst others Plutarch, Timon, and
Lamprias: all which three were very carefully brought up and instructed in the
liberal sciences, and in all the parts of Philosophy: unto the which they
shall ever see an humble reverence toward their grandfather and father joined
together, and amongst themselves a fast and pleasant friendship, as may be
gathered in many places out of their table talk. Whereupon in respect of the
grandfather and father, I remembered that Plutarch in those books speaking of
his grandfather, he makes always honorable mention of him. And as for his
father, in the instruction for those that deal in affairs of the estate, he
reports, that he being young was sent with another in embassage to the
Proconsull, and his companion remaining upon some occasion behind, he went
thither alone, and executed the commission. And at his return, as he would
have given the common wealth account openly, and have made report of his charge
and embassage: his father rising up alone, forbad him to say, I went, but we
went: and I spoke, but we spoke, and so commanded him to make his report,
always joining his companion with that he had done. We see in the treaty of
brotherly love, how heartily he loved his brother Timon, when he said in these
words: For my self, although fortune has showed me many favors, which
deserve that I should be thankful to her for them, yet there is none that
makes me so much bound unto her, as the love and good will my brother Timon
has borne, and does bear unto me in all things: the which no man can deny to
be true, that has but a little frequented our company. And in his talk at the
table, bringing in his father and brethren with many others, or together,
resolving diverse questions of Philosophy, he represents men that with a
grounded knowledge had joined a sweet behavior, and a wonderful good
understanding, and namely the young Lamprias, who was of a pleasant nature, and
loved to be merry. Plutarch then having a father that loved learning and
virtue, was in a good hour put out to learning, whereunto he was wholly
inclined. And amongst other good masters, he met with Ammonius, an EGYPTIAN
borne, says Eunapius, who having with great praise taught in ALEXANDRIA, he
did also visit the cities of GREECE wherein learning did yet flourish, and
tarried a great time in ATHENS, respected and well beloved of every man. In the
latter end of Theomistocles life, Plutarch shows that he was a boorder and
lying in Ammonius house, and in talk at the table he brought him in, either
disputing, or teaching his scholars. So the custom to teach the youth at that
time was very fine and easy, to give children a taste of learning and virtue:
for as the tutors employed part of their time to discourse in the presence of
their disciples, they occupied them in the same exercise afterward, and made
them declare, and say their opinion of diverse matters: so that in few weeks
by way of sport and recreation they had run through all the secrets of
Philosophy. Unto the which they joined also, besides their compositions and
particular exercises, their familiar talk and recreatiue disputations in their
walks, at their suppers and feasts, where nothing else could be heard but that
which made the young men wise and virtuous in a short space. That may be
gathered out of Plutarchs writings, and out of those especially where he
speaks how children should be taught, of the lecture of the Poets, how they
should hear, his talk at the table, and a good number of declamations
dispersed in the midst of his moral works. In this place I remember that
which he himself spoke in discourse, how a man should know a flatterer from a
friend, touching the direction of this his tutor. Our master Ammonius, says
he, perceiving in his lecture he made after dinner, that some of his disciples
and familiars had made a larger dinner then was fit for studens: he commanded
one of his servants a free man to beat his own son: he could not (says he)
dine without vinegar. When he had spoken that, he cast his eye upon us: so that
they which were indeed culpable, found that he meant it by them. We may see
also in the first and second question of his third book of talk at the the
table, how ready this Philosopher was to sharpen the spirits of young men that
frequented him. Thus therefore Plutarch having so good a help, in few years
he profited greatly in the knowledge of all the parts of Philosophy, and never
went out of his country, nor traveled to understand strange languages,
although the Latin tongue was common in ROME, and in diverse places of the
ROMAN Empire: which extended it self into GREECE, and beyond, as Plutarch
notes it in the end of his Platonicall questions. Without notwithstanding that
he ever profited much in the knowledge of any other tongue, saving in the
knowledge of the GREEK: the which also has a taste of his Philosophy of
BOEOTIA. He does also confess in the beginning of the life of Demosthenes,
that whilst he was in ITALY and in ROME, he had no leisure to study, nor to
exercise the Latin tongue, as well for the business he had then in hand, as
to satisfy those that frequented him to learn Philosophy of him. So that
very late, being well stepped on in years, he began to take Latin books in
his hand, wherein there happened a strange thing unto him, but yet true
notwithstanding: that is, that he did not learn nor understand things so much
by the words, as by a certain use and knowledge he had of things he attained
to the understanding of the words. But furthermore (they are his own words) to
know how to judge well, wherein consists the beauty of the Latin tongue, or
to speak it readily, or to understand the figures, translations, and the fine
knitting of simple sayings one with the other, which do adorn and beautify
the tongue, I think well (said he) that it is a very goodly thing and
pleasant* but withal it requires a long and laboursome exercise, fit for
those that be at better leisure then I am, and that be yet able for age to
attend such finenesse. That which is above above spoken of, shows that in
that time they learned sciences in their mother tongue, so that even from their
cradle children began to enter into the school of the Muses, and pierced into
the goodliest secrets of the same, having in their own tongue the arts and
goodly disciplines discovered even to the bottom: whereas presently the best
of our age steals away in learning of words, and when we should enter into
the knowledge of things, our memory is ouer-whelmed and judgment altered with
an infinity of objects, which (like diverse sawces) have most times altered
our right taste. Insomuch that almost commonly we see that we delight for the
most part to heap together letters upon letters, and after a great provision
of strange words, we find our selves children, and void of the true knowledge
of things. But now to come again to Plutarch, as touching his sufficiency and
his advancement in sciences, we need not speak of them in particular,
considering that his writings do sufficiently prove them, and that we have also
spoken something in the preface of his moral works.

Now, as his good fortune made him meet with excellent masters, and men very
careful to manure so noble a spirit: so he for his part answered their hope
very sufficiently, showing himself even from his infancy to the end of his
life wholly given to study, with an earnest desire (but well governed) to keep
his body in health, to content his mind, and to make himself profitable a long
time to himself, and to others also. Which was no hard matter for him, having
been carefully brought up even from his cradle, and so well governed, as was
requisite to maintain himself long in strength: his fathers house and table
being a school of temperance and of frugalitie. Considering furthermore that
talk with learned men was very necessary for him to attain to that which he
pretended: and having a mind desirous to excel in all things, he traveled into
EGYPT, and talked there of all the ancient doctrine with the wisest men,
whereof afterward he made a collection and entitled it, of Isis, and Osiris:
which is yet left unto us, where he shows himself to be well studied in the
Divinity and Philosophy of the EGYPTIANS. From thence he returned again into
GREECE, and visited the towns and universities where there were any
Philosophers, and frequented them all, to gather together the goodly
instructions which he has left us. Moreover he began to make collections, and
culled out remembrances not only out of the books already published, but also
of the notable talk and discourse which he understood of the one and the
other. Also of registers and autenticall instruments kept in towns where he
came, whereof afterward he did most artificially frame the most part of his
works. And pretending such a laudable end, the better to establish his
conceits, and to speak with a more commendable authority and good manner: he
made a journey unto the city of SPARTA, of purpose to see the papers and
memories of all the government of this goodly commonwealth, and of their
lawmakers, Kings, and Ephores, and gathered together all their notable deeds
and sayings so carefully as could be possible, even to the least words of the
simple soldiers and women of SPARTA, together with all their customs,
ordinances, ceremonies, and fashions to live in common, and particularly, in
war and in peace. He did the like in diverse other commonwealths, as his
lives, and the demands of things pertaining to the GREEKS and ROMANS does
amply prove it: without which collections also it was impossible for him to
have left in writing such particularities, and he could not but of necessity
have had communication with a great number of men lovers of antiquities. Unto
that he joined a curious search of statues, metals, inscriptions, paintings,
tables: also of Proverbs, Epigrams, Epitaphes, Apophthegms, and other
ornaments of history, to leave nothing behind him. And being continually almost
in the company of learned men in all professions: it seems his memory was
always bent to gather, and his judgment occupied to discern that which was
to be rejected or retained. By which means he saw himself in a short time
advanced to the knowledge of all things: moreover he had in his hands goodly
briefes and collections, with the which he finely help himself, and
afterward made a good part unto his friends and posterity. He himself at the
beginning of his book treating of the contentment and quietness of the mind,
makes mention of the memories which he had of long time made for his own use.
So that out of this rich closet he has drawn the excellent pieces which have
remained unto us, and which show how much we have lost being deprived of them
that are no more to be found, and the which time has dispersed, or utterly
consumed.

Now though that in general it may be said, that this man was ignorant in no
learning, nor of the goodly secrets of nature: yet this word we must add to
it, that whosoever shall duly consider the entrance, continuance, composition,
binding and enclosing of his discourse, be it that he write an history, or
that he by any treaty apart will put back vice, and make virtue to be
beloved: be it that he sport himself in clearing the difficulties of natural
Philosophy, or of the Mathematickes, be it that he beginnneth to commence some
disputation against those whose opinions he disproueth: we shall find in his
writings an exact and easy method both together, his proofs sound, and his
inductions pleasant and agreeable to all sorts of wits, and of such pithie
discourses, so that of force we must confess that this person had been most
excellently directed in his studies, considering that in speaking after such an
easy manner, he presents so profound instructions, and I cannot tell what,
where there is always somewhat to be learned. Furthermore, seeing diverse
sects in credit in his time, it seems he had a good will to sound into the
depth of the value and error of them. Then reaching higher yet, he has
searched out the opinions of the first Sages. So that the Pythagorians,
Platonians, Epicurians, Stoickes, and Peripateticians, with their precepts have
been very familiar with him. But not being content with turning over the leaves
of their writings, and seeing to the end all that which the natural
Philosophers have thought of the secrets of the world: yet would he familiarly
frequent those whom he understood to be practiced in sciences, and confer
with them, understand their reasons, and be thoroughly resolved of them: and at
the length obtained his desire, as his books make mention. That was
accompanied with a continual reading of all sorts of good Authors, as well to
amplify his collections, as still more and more to enrich his memory, and to
polish his judgment: as may be noted in his works three several excellences
of his spirit. For some of them are certain declamations made in the school,
and by way of exercise, as we have showed them placed at the beginning of the
same: so that if he would have taken the pains to have reuiewed and smoothed
those pieces there, they would have seemed to be others then they were. But we
perceive that he left some imperfect, not thinking that that (which served not
but for a proof of some thing better labored) deserved to come to light.
There are also some other discourses better polished, yet in such sort
notwithstanding, that it plainly appears, he might have amplified them and
made them better. And there be other pieces, unto the which it may be said, he
has put his last hand: as are his Lives, and the most part of his Moral
works, written at leisure, very advisedly, considered in all understanding,
and to diverse reiterations. He could have done the like in all, and with the
like style have raised his writings to their perfection: but having as it were
more expressly stayed himself upon some, he has showed therein the
disposition of his studies, and with what discretion he spent his time.

Now, though he had tasted of all the sects of the Philosophers, yet you may
perceive that inclining to the Platonians (for he greatly reverenced Socrates
and Plato, whose birth days he did yearly celebrate) he nevertheless shut
himself within the bounds of modesty of certain ACADEMICKES, being content
simply to propound the things, but to leave them to the judgment of the
readers, forcing no man. Furthermore, we see with what diligence he had turned
over the leaves of the writings of the Epicurians, and of the Stoickes, against
whom he stoutly opposed himself. But moral Philosophy was his chiefest end:
for the rational, the natural, and the Mathematickes (the which he had
greatly studied) they were but simple pastimes in comparison of the other.
Whereupon may be discerned, that having received in himself a singular
pleasure of such study, he always sought to print the same desire and
contentment in the thought of all men, leaving the speculations and pricking
questions: only tending to this good, to bring wisdom into the houses, to
establish it in the thrones of kings, to make it go in the streets, to lodge
it in the eyes, in the ears, upon the tongues, and in the bottom of the
hearts of all men. See here what his thoughts have been, which he could well
digest afterward: so that it seems he was altogether given to that. Now
though he was occupied in meditations and so excellent works, he forgot not
therefore any thing that was requisite for the exercises of his body, such as
men used at that time, to keep their spirits in strength, as also more
joyfully to pass over so many other crosses as our life is assailed withal.
And we may see also in the precepts he has written of health, that albeit
Physic was not his profession, nevertheless he learned that which was the
principal for his own private good. For in that book of his, he speaks
reasonably of the use of meats, and shows from what meats we should
abstain. Afterward having declared in what sort one should use his appetite
and the pleasures of the body, he condemns the excess of drinking and
eating, he teaches how to prevent sickness, sets down remedies, treats
of diet, and of signs of sickness, and of the true ways how to keep health.
And thereupon he comes to reason of the exercises and diet of students,
laying that open which we should most carefully observe therein: which makes
me believe that he having known so well what was fit for the preservation of
the body, he did wisely help himself: as also even to very old age he has
borne office in the commonwealth, and always carried a body and mind lusty and
ready to take pains, having had this wisdom to consider well his nature and
disposition: also to take such meats and drinks as were good for his
stomach, and to use them soberly, and keeping his body in good state by
commendable exercises and nouriture, to make himself profitable a long time
for humane society. It is true that he being a grave man, raised to honor, and
a Philosopher by profession, his chiefest exercises of body were to walk with
other learned men, where without contention of words, he always decided some
points of Philosophy. Furthermore he loved to talk at the table, and to
mingle pleasant and grave matters with some new device: so wittily and sweetly
to enterlace and divide the course of his life: being no crabbed nor sullen
person, but pleasant, and whose company was troublesome to none: and otherwise
as sober and discreet in his talk, as he was in drinking and eating.

So then his manners, as well alone, as with his friends and openly, do show,
that truly he had a good soul within a body well tempered. Now I do not enter
here into the examination of the ridiculous opinions of Plutarch in matter of
religion: being sorry that so rare a spirit has been so miserably environed
with the darkness which was at that time in the most part of the towns and
men of GREECE, and specially among so many wise men, straungely ignorant and
dull in respect of the knowldge of the true God. If we had not bin warned
betimes by the true and only wise men taught in the school of eternal
wisdom, of such a judgment of God upon the wise men of the world, who have
been confounded in their discourse, when there has been question of the honor
due to our sovereign Lord: then we might have been astonished, and remained as
men cast away. And whereas so many great wise men have erred in their ways,
that will not excuse them before their judge, as if he had kept the light from
them. For, since that which may be known of his eternity and omnipotent
power, has been revealed unto them in nature and in philosophy: staying a man
upon himself, or upon other creatures, and forsaking the only Creator, they
condemn themselves by their own words and writings. Now to come again to
Plutarch. He having been Apolloes Priest, as himself confesses, and from his
youth suckled with the foolish dotings of the GREEKS: I do not find it
strange, that many absurd opinions and without good ground (yea wicked and
pernicious) are scattered in his disputations, touching the default of Oracles,
of the religion of the JEWS, of the inscription of the letter E'i' in the
temple of DELPHES: why the prophetess Pythia does no more give her oracles in
verse, and in many places of the lives and works, in the which he openly
inclines to the superstitions and Atheismes of the PAGANS. There he shows a
conscience evil informed, and a man running very swiftly out of the right way.
By the same means a man may plainly note, that in matter of supernatural and
divine philosophy, another manner of light then that of our corrupt
understanding is wholly required, not being possible that a man left to his
own wit can comprehend the things which are of God: because they are discerned
after a fashion merely unknown unto him, and of the which he cannot be
partaker but by a special grace, and which nature does not bestow upon him,
but he which has made and reformed nature. It is no marvel then if Plutarch
should be misled, that has had so many instructions and masters strayed from
the way of the eternal truth, and whose predecessors were drowned in the
bottomless pit of ignorance. Yet notwithstanding, in the midst of that
darkness he has had so much light, that he seems at times to note and
condemn the laberinth of error, as a man that has lost his way in an
horrible dark night should from one time to another be directed rightly by the
light of the flashings of lightning. For some do gather by his discourse, of
the cessation of the Oracles, and by other places, that he did acknowledge one
God, and very liberally condemned many old and new superstitions, unto the
which both himself, and others his like, did cleave unto rather by custom for
fashions sake, and to please the people, then for any opinion they had that
they were worth ought. But as I have said, my intention is not to judge this
person nor his deeds: considering that besides the matter I touch (every where
where he goes out of the way) he confuteth himself sufficiently: witness his
discourse of superstition, and the seventh chapter of his first book touching
the opinions of the Philosophers, where he will dispute of the eternal
providence: and the third question of the second book of talk of the table,
making mention of the egg: and the last question of the fourth book, where he
medleth with speaking of God, and of the ceremonies of the JEWS. In the mean
time, and in the midst of this great blindness, they see in Plutarch a heart
that is enemy unto vice, and a friend of good manners. Let a man see him in
his family, in the school, in bankets, with his friends, and openly: behold,
there is a grave man, modest in behavior, sharp, learned, and pleasant in his
discourses, offending nor hurting no man. If he speak of vice, he lets out
the filthiness, and scantly makes the patient cry. If he speak for virtue,
it is with such efficacy, that every man may know he spoke of the abundance
of his heart. He is a good father of a house, a wise schoole-maister, a grave
historian, a brave politician, an excellent Philosopher, a good writer to
imitate: and furthermore, a faithful, profitable, true, and a joyful
counselor and friend. His plainness, simplicity, and grave modesty
shines in all his writings: his virtue, accompanied almost ordinarily with all
others which we need not speak of particularly, neither to unfold the life of
our Philosopher from one part to another to see his uprightness, integrity,
gravity, sweetness, constancy, force, prudence, temperancie, and liberality:
that may be truly spoken of him, which had been long time before applied in the
Theaters unto Amphiaraus, and to Aristides:

He little cares to seem upright, but strives so to be,
In deepest thoughts preferring virtue still:
Whence day by day, proceeding we do see
Wise counsels, that without respect, true honors laws fulfill.
In testimony of his sweet gravity, and of part of his thoughts: I will
allege some words couched in his own discourse against choler. As for me,
said he, If I have done well or evil I know not, but by that means I have rid
my self of choler. As the LACEDAEMONIANS did in old time, who to learn their
children not to be drunk at all, showed them their slaves being drunk: so do
I consider the effects of choler in others. And afterward he adds more, that
a man should accustom himself to bear many of his wives words, and of his
familiars and friends, which do reprove us for that we are too gentle and soft.
And this was the chiefest cause (said he) why I was so often angry with my
servants, fearing they would wax worse for want of reproof and correction.
But I observed my self at the last, though late, that first I were better by
patience and pardoning them, make my servants worse: then to hurt my self by
sharpness and choler, seeking to reform others. I considered also with my
self, and remembered (said he) that as he which teaches us to shoot in a bow,
does not forbid us to draw, but to fail in drawing: so he that teaches us to
punish in time and place, moderately, profitably, and as we should: does not
let us but that we may punish. I do labor all I can to withdraw, and utterly
to banish all choler: principally because I would not take from them that are
punished, the mean to justify themselves, and to hear them. For time
brings in the interim to the passionate mind, a delay and forgetfulness
which dissolueth it: in which space the judgment of reason finds both the
mean and the measure to give reasonable correction. And besides that they give
the party punished no place to resist the punishment, if he be not corrected
in anger and choler, but convinced for that he had well deserved it. And (which
were yet more unseemly) they shall not find that the servant punished speaks
more justly then his master that punishes him. Touching this purpose, I will
remember the pleasant report which the Philosopher Taurus made of Plutarch, as
Gellius recites it in the six and twentieth chapter of the first book of his
nights Attiques, as some man has heretofore expressed it in our language. A
slave, a vile and vicious man (but yet that had his ears somewhat instructed
with books and disputations of Philosophy) having been stripped naked for
some fault he had done, by the commandment of his master Plutarch, whilst
they were whipping of him, he grombled at the first that it was without reason,
and that he had done nothing: but in the end crying out amain, and iniuring
his master, he told him that he was no Philosopher as he bragged himself to
be: and that he often heard him say it was a foul thing to be angry, yea that
he made a book of it: and that now (overcome with choler) in making him be
beaten so cruelly, he utterly belied all his writings: Thereunto Plutarch
coldly and quietly answered: Why, how now roister, said he? whereby do thou
think that I am angry at this present? my countenance, my voice, my color,
my words, do they give thee any sign that I am angry? I do not think I have
cruel eyes, nor a troubled face, nor any fearful cry. Do I blush? do I
foam? does any thing escape me that I should repent me? do I stamp? do I rage?
For to tell thee truly, these be the shows of choler. Afterward he turned to
him that whipped him: saying: Forward with your business, whiles he and I do
reason the matter. Furthermore, we may easily gather what Plutarch was amongst
his friends, from the nine books, containing the questions decided at the
table. And for his disputations against the EPICVRIANS and STOICKES, they show
that this person for the regard of his actions concerning the commonwealth,
having respect unto those whom at that time he made his judges, and to the
posterity into whose hands his writings might come hereafter: he always carried
himself in such a modest gravity, that they could require no more of him. And
if sometime he did feelingly touch some, as Colotes, and Herodotus, it was not
in vain. Also he always used terms which witnessed that he had an upright
soul. To be short, it appears every where that his passions were marvelous
well stayed. And if any of them were furious or violent, he could tell in time
and place how to reform them by the precepts of Philosophy, leading (as is
said) a life without blame of men. But above all the rest, when any discourse
or disputation drew him unto it, to speak of shameful or dishonest things, he
did convey it with such discretion as it cannot be amended: whereof we need not
to bring forth examples dispersed in his writings, and especially in the
dialogue of love, seeing that being concealed it does no hurt, as also
remembered or too expressly revealed, it cannot but hurt the eyes, and an
honest thought.

Furthermore, Plutarchs study of Philosophy took not away the care he had to
live with some profit amongst men, nor made him to disdain the means which
his predecessors had left him. But as he came of a noble house, and with time
being advanced unto office and charge in the commonwealth, greatly esteemed of
Traian the Emperor, and of the noble men of ROME, he saw he had goods enough to
live at ease: whereof notwithstanding he never made such account as that he
would forget his study, and entangle himself in the snares of the love of
riches, within the which so many miserable souls have bin engaged unto death.
His means served his turn to maintain himself among his friends, and to
bring up his children: for he had many of an honorable Lady which he married,
and loved most dearly. Amongst his other sons, himself makes mention of
Autobulus, of Plutarchus, and of Charon, who died a young infant, and some
others whom he names not at all. Also of daughters, two of the which were
married to Firmus, and unto Craton, learned philosophers: and Timoxene, who died
very young. As for Autobulus, he married in his fathers life time, and it is not
well known, whether Sextus of CHAERONEA, a Philosopher of the Scepts, who
lived in great honor in the Empire of Antonius, was his son, or the son of
Plutarchus. That which I am now about to speak of, may be gathered out of
diverse places in the works of Plutarch, and specially of the discourse at the
table. And in the consolation which he wrote to his wife upon the death of
their daughter, they may note that she was an honorable Lady, modest, and
virtuous, well attended on with women and servants: and otherwise charitable to
her children, and bearing great reverence unto her husband. That the house of
Plutarch was very well governed: that he had a great number of kinsfolks and
friends. And in other places of his book entitled Sympositum, and other
treaties, we may know that his sons and nephews were studious and learned,
and specially in the sixth question of his eight book of talk at the table,
speaking of his youngest children: who because they tarried somewhat longer at
the Theater then they should have done, to see and hear the pastimes they made
there, came by that means late to supper: it showed sufficiently that they now
began to follow the fathers steps. And there appeared in no partany evil touch
amongst these persons: but as Plutarch did converse in a singular reverence,
friendship, and gentleness, with his grandfather, his father, and his
brethren: we are to judge the like conversation with his wife, his children,
and his nephews: as also they being in so good a school could not fail but
every day to go forward in the knowledge and practice of virtue.

But as a fountain hidden serves to no use, so it had little prevailed
Plutarch to have seen, read, and gathered so much together, unless he had
made little streams run from such a lively and goodly fountain, unto such
places where his virtue might shine more then in any other parts of the world.
That was ITALY, and the city of ROME, the seat of the Empire, and where
(notwithstanding the disorders brought in by former wars, and by the
dissolutions and tyrannies of some Emperors) notwithstanding there were many
learned men, and in the Emperors courts also some counselors, and other
persons of authority which loved virtue. Now Plutarch having begun to advance
himself in GREECE, about the time of Vespasian and Titus, it seems he came to
ROME immediately after the death of Titus, under Domitian, as well to make
profession there of Philosophy, as also that he might more nearly know the
ancient government of the commonwealth, and to increase his collections, from
the which proceeded afterward infinite particularities enclosed in his works:
but especially the lives of the noble ROMANS compared with the GREEKS. For
my part, I think Plutarch was drawn to ROME by means of some friends he had
there, especially by Sossius Senecio, that had been a Consul, who was of great
estimation at that time, and namely under the Empire of TRAIAN. And that which
makes me think so, is because of Plutarchs own words, who says in the
beginning of his first book of his discourse at the table, that he gathered
together all his reasons and discourses made here and there, as well in ROME
with Senecio, as in GREECE with Plutarch and others. Not being likely that he
would have taken the pains to have made so long a voyage, and to have come to
such a city where he understood not their vulgar tongue, if he had not been
drawn thither by Senecio, and such other men: as also in acknowledgement of
the good turns and honor he had received by such men, he dedicated diverse of
his books unto them, and among others, the lives unto Senecio, and the nine
volumes of his discourse at the table: with the treaty, How a man may know
that he profits in virtue. Now for the time, considering what he says in the
end of his book against curiosity, I suppose that he taught in ROME in the
time of Titus and of Domitian: for touching that point, he makes mention of a
noble man called Rusticus, who being one day at his lecture, he would not open
a letter which was brought him from the Emperor, nor interrupt Plutarch, but
attended the end of his declamation, and until all the hearers were gone away:
and adds also, that Rusticus was afterward put to death by the commandment
of Domitian. Furthermore, about the beginning of the life of Demosthenes,
Plutarch says, that whilst he remained in ITALY and at ROME, he had no
leisure to study the Latin tongue: as well for that he was busied at that
time with matters he had in hand, as also to satisfy those that were his
followers to learn Philosophy of him. He does not tell what matters he had in
hand besides his profession: but following that which Suidas and others speak
of him, that he was near to the person of Traian, and had the honor and place
to be his schoolmasters and teacher, or at the leastwise one of so many
learned men as this prince made much of, as some story writers do testify, he
was honored and advanced to some charge or government: which I think is that
he speaks of in this place. Now furthermore, his chiefest labor was
publicly to teach all the parts of Philosophy, mingling in his declamations
and lectures a diligent and curious search of all that the ancient
Philosophers, reasonable, natural, or moral, of what sect soever they were
had treated of: as appears by his writings, which are as summaries of his
lessons and orations he made with his own voice. His speech does not flow so
as that of many other Philosophers, Orators, and Greek Historians: but being
come later, and in a more rude and harsh world, his style also is more hard,
brief, enforced, and Philosopher like: aiming at this mark to instruct the
mind first, not tarying to tickle the ears much, though he did fill and
content them learnedly. But the flowing sweetness we taste in Plato, in
Xenophon, in Herodotus, and in some other, wanting indeed in Plutarch, is
supplied and recompensed in him by infinite stories, sentences, similitudes,
and notable particulars which he boroweth of others, and whereof he composed a
work so well divided, so rich, and so pleasant, by reason of his variety,
that it is not possible to read books of a more gentle and profitable
reading, amongst all the historians, and Philosophers, GREEKS or ROMANS. If
Plutarch then does at this present content all sorts of men, what may we think
he did with his lively voice? but after the example of this Hercules of GAVLE,
which held his auditors ears fast chained to his tongue: so has he by his
goodly documents moved an infinite number of men, to leave vice, and to cloth
them with the love of virtue.

So he having continued these exercises for some years, being heard and
visited of all sorts of men, grew to be of such reputation, that the greatest
persons began to seek him and to make much of him, yea to think themselves
honored by his friendship: as his books dedicated unto some of them do
sufficiently testify it. And touching the access he had about the person of
Traian himself, it may be gathered from the beginning of this goodly collection
of Apothegmes, which he dedicated unto this great Emperor, what was his
intention: that is to wit, to serve for the good of all the ROMAN Empire,
giving wholesome instructions unto the head thereof. For he wisely judged, that
in ruling the thought of that man, it was to give physic at once unto all the
subjects of that great Monarchy. The same being a common thing, that Subjects
and kingdoms commonly do choose
The manners that their Princes daily use.
It is true that such instructions in respect of Traian, do only concern his
person and politic affairs. For as touching the only true religion, it was
merely unknown of Plutarch, and rudely persecuted under the Empire of Traian:
who notwithstanding in the end being softened by the precepts of moral
Philosophy, and through the aduertisements his deputy governors gave him, and
namely Plinius secundus governor of BITHYNIA, of the innocence of the
Christians: or rather restrained by the secret providence of our sovereign
Lord, (who excellently strengthened his, put the Oracles of the lying spirit to
silence, and overthrew Idolatry in most places) he carried himself more
gently, and did forbid to vex and trouble them any more, whom before they had
pursued with all sorts of cruelties. Furthermore, I think that it was in
favor of Traian chiefly, that Plutarch made certain particular Treatises,
(besides the lives of Noblemen) and amongst others that, where he maintains,
that it is requisite a Prince should be wise. The instruction for those that
deal in the affairs of estate. The notable sayings of GREEKS and ROMANS,
and others concerning the duty of Princes and great Lords. Now considering
that wherein he reasons, and briefly defends, (but gravely, and with
assured proofs) that a Philosopher ought to converse with Princes: some may
say that it is an Apology of Plutarch, against the common and light objections
of some Courtiers, which think that Princes cannot be well counseled, but by
men that blow (as they say) fire with their mouths, and that carry the rapier
and dagger in their hands: and would that men of learning (whom in scorn they
call schoolemaisters and Philosophers) should be turned to their study, or
into a school, to cry out there as much and as loud as they think good.
Therefore he was willing as well to encourage himself first in that discourse,
as also to remedy what in him lay, certain evils infinitely abounding and
ouerflowing in others. In all times and ages every man has granted and
confessed, that amongst those that want good company, are Princes, Lords, and
great personages. For their affairs being so important and weighty, as every
man knows, their bodies being weak, and their spirits not able to dispatch
all things: they must needs see by others eyes, and work with others hands.
Whereupon there are three sorts of men which are to be reproved. For the first,
they are the Princes themselves, who in stead of calling and drawing near unto
them, men of honor that might help them in any matter, they give access unto
ill-minded men, that corrupt them, and overthrow their estate. The second (but
a small number at all times) are the Philosophers, that is to say, men of
authority, wise, learned, lovers of virtue, and of the good of Princes and of
their subjects: who being able to do much, yet they draw back: or being
advanced, have not always that consideration nor courage that is fit, being
oftentimes carried away with the greatest opinion, and mingling somewhat too
much their humane wisdom with the apprehension of their true duty: whereof
their conscience being cleared diverse ways, does sufficiently inform them.
For the last, they are ignorant tutours, or Atheists, minions, shifters,
iesters, flatterers, brokers of filthy pleasures, and such practisers, which
by wicked means creep into Princes Courts, houses and closets. And in
recompense of the charges they boldly accept, and of the treasures which they
heap together with a wicked conscience, and do afterward spend of the same,
they do deceive, dishonor, and finally they undo their unwise masters: as a
million of examples in histories do testify. Plutarch therefore considering
these things, does attempt in this Treatise to give courage unto those, that
have a desire to see all things well ordered: and such manner of men does he
exhort to be about Princes. But because gravity and wisdom makes men modest
and slow: as to the contrary, ignorance and malice makes them have brazen
faces: he shows that it is no ambition of a Philosopher to be about great
Lords, but rather that his duty does bear it, sithence that such receive
honor, pleasure and profit: and this he proves by reasons, and notable
examples. But above all, he forgets not to set upon the^ that come to
Princes courts to make themselves great, showing that Philosophers should shoot
at another mark. And last of all he treats of the contentment those receive,
which serving one alone, do by the same means help an infinite number of others
that are bound unto them for so great a good turn. I have written at large the
argument of this treaty of Plutarch, because it contains the brief of all the conceits of this Philosopher coming to the Emperor: and it is a pattern
also to al learned me^ that enter into service of great lords, the which if
they will painfully follow, the chiefest may recover some part of their ancient
glory. Now I make no doubt of it, but that Plutarch has assayed by all
possible means to practice that which he teaches in this book, to gain to
himself a great contentment in his soul, and to leave a good sent of him unto
all posterity.

The cause that makes me speak this, is the consideration of the estate in
the which the Empire of ROME stood in at that time, the which if any man will
at leisure confer with that which he may gather out of many parts of Plutarchs
works, he shall find the words of Plato very true: that happy are those
commonwealths which are governed by Philosophers, or by Princes that have
Philosophers about them. For like as an expert pylote by his skill and
knowledge resists the winds and billows of the sea, and in despite of their
force bears sail to the desired haven: even so when the ship of the
commonwealth has a master that guides it by the precepts of Philosophy, the
government is peaceable and happy every way. And if any storm happen, and
necessity requires it, he finely plucketh down the sails, and yields
himself in such sort to the waves, that he escapes and ouercometh it with
honor. Dion writes, that one of the first acts Traian did, after he was
chosen Emperor in the place of Nerua, was: that he wrote letters with his own
hand to the Senate of ROME, promising by them he would never put any man to
death, or make him infamous, that was an honest man: and this he afterward
confirmed by solemn oath. He put Aelianus and the soldiers Praetorians to
death, because they mutined against Nerua. And after he had made his entry
into ROME, he gave good order for the affairs of the estate, and specially
favored virtuous men many ways, granted them great privileges, and gave
means to the cities of ITALY to bring up their youth. He reigned Emperor
ninteene years and a half, being two and forty years old when he was
chosen. His behavior was such that he obtained the name of a just, valiant,
moderate, and a good Prince: so that in the flower of his youth, they noted in
him a stayed judgment, and in his age a great courage. He envied no man, he
hurt no man, he raised good men to honorable place and charge in the
commonwealth: whereby it came to pass that he was never afraid, nor had no
enemy in the world. Accusers had no access unto him: he was as gentle a Prince
as was possible, and as much an enemy of covetousness, as he was of murders
and robberies. In time of peace and war he was at great charge in stately
buildings, witness the wonderful bridge over Danuby. But with magnificence
such enterprises and reparations ordinarily were necessary, without oppressing
or wronging any man: for he was a noble Prince, that desired rather to be
beloved of his subjects, then feared and much made of, as some of his
predecessors. To mean men he showed himself courteous and easy to have
access unto: grave and honorable among the Senators. The ROMANS loved him
as much as they could possible, and his enemies infinitely were afraid of him.
His pas-times were hunting, feasting, and the Theater to see common plays and
sports. Oftentimes he would be private with his friends, and came without his
guard into their houses, yea sometimes he would lie there, and pass away the
night. He was not of the wisest, although by his behavior they could not judge
otherwise of him, but that he was a wise and learned Prince. There was nothing
in him but it was excellent, and in manner blameless. For although he loved to
drink wine, and delighted to see fair boys: yet for all this he never
committed any foul act, being very wary in his passions, and above all,
keeping himself from abusing his authority. He desired nothing but war, but it
was principally to overcome his enemies, and to enrich his friends.
Furthermore, he was so fortunate and brave a chieftaine of an army, so beloved
of his Captains and soldiers, that there was never any mutiny or disorder in
his camp. That made him dreadful to those that troubled him near or far
off, of which the chiefest was Decebalus king of the DACIANS: whom he pursued
so hard, that being impossible for him to escape, he killed himself.
Furthermore he made war with the PARTHIANS, with the ARABIANS, and with the
JEWS, with diverse events, but almost always to his advantage. Furthermore,
to come to his manners, he loved so faithfully, that it was a hard thing to
make him think evil of those whom he loved, which we will prove by some
example. Certain ill-willers brought him word that Sura Licinius, one of his
private friends did practice somewhat against him. In stead of taking it ill to
conceive a hard opinion of him, he went (unbidden) into Sura his house, he
would sup there, and sending back his guard, first he made Sura his Physician
come to him, and showed him his eyes to help some grief that troubled him:
not being so contented, he sends for his Barber to shave his beard: then
being trimmed, and having washed, he sat down at the table and supped* The
next morning some reporting unto him the ill will that Sura did bear him: If
he would have killed me, said he, yesterday he might have done it, for he had
means to do it. This Sura was he unto whom Traian had given the office of the
great Marshall of the Empire: and coming to him to tie his girdle baudricke
wise about his neck, having the sword drawn in his hand, he used this speech
unto him: Receive this sword of me, and if I command as I ought, employ it in
my defense: if I do otherwise, draw it against me, and take my life from me. He
caused statues to be set up of Sossius Senecio, of Palma, and of Celsus, who
were all three Senators whom above all others he loved and honored. He set up
Libraries, and did many notable acts, in testimony of his great courage. But
that which most of all other does commend him, is, that having done wonderful
much good to the Empire, by decree of the Senate, he was surnamed Optimus
Imperator: that is to say, most good Emperor. And so was he wonderfully
beloved of the Senators, and Officers of the Empire, of all the people, and
specially of the soldiers, amongst whom he would be so familiar as if they had
been his companions. Furthermore, nothing pleased him so much as this title of
Optimus: wherein he gloried amongst his friends, and did more and more endeavor
to show himself so. As also after him (as Eutropius reports) when any new
Emperor was chosen by the Senate, after the showtings of happy presage, and
well wishings of the Senators, they cried out unto him: What, can thou be
more fortunate then Augustus, and better then Traian! Now if we bring to the
writings of Plutarch the life of this Prince, we will say that the Prince did
always think of the wise precepts of the Philosopher: and on the other side
that the Philosopher has framed the deeds of the Prince to the rule of good
life, which he has so fitly propounded to great and mean men. And therefore
it is not to be marvelled at, if Plutarch declare (to the high praise of Traian
and the Senate) in his treaty, where he instructs those that deal in
public affairs: that in his time for peace sake, people had no need of wise
governors to defend them: for (said he) all the wars against the GREEKS and
barbarous people are fled from us. Thus stands the estate of the Empire, the
which if any man will particularly confer with that which Plutarch sets
down in his writings: he shall find it was happy to have met with so well
disposed hearts, to receive, and carefully to practice his goodly lessons. And
that as it was a singular honor to Traian by his virtue to have obtained a
surname that made him greater then the most part of the ROMAN Emperors: so is
Plutarch every way to be commended, that was the excellent instrument to
advance and maintain so great a good. Whereupon I desire his Morals should be
specially remembered, to apply that which he speaks of vice and virtue, unto
that which has been touched in the life of Traian. For I think the one can
hardly be spoken of, but that the other by the same means must be remembered.
And it seems that one self soul has put forward these two hearts, both to
give and receive one commendable instruction. Only for proof a man may with
his eye run over two or three discourses. As for example, that of the
difference betwixt the flatterer and the friend: Against choler: How a man may
know if he profit in the exercise of virtue: That it is requisite a Prince
should be wise: The instruction for those which deal in the affairs of the
estate: The apothegmes: and there shall a man find the rules which the Emperor
Traian could wisely apply to himself, and practice in all his actions.

So could he well acknowledge the good he had received of Plutarch, being a
noble and bountiful Prince, as has been said here-before. For, besides the
great honor he had done him at ROME, having made him a Consul: he commanded
(as says Suidas) that all the magistrates and officers which were in the
Province of SLAVONY, should do nothing but under his authority. If we had the
books of Marius Maximus, of Fabius Marcellinus, of Aurelius Verus, and of
Statius Valens, which have written the life of Traian: we might easily draw on
this matter further, the which Suidas (according to his style) is contented to
touch in one word. And Dion who was a GREEK, a man very forgetful for an
Historian, and that in some places showed he had no great judgment: he seems
to have suppressed the name of Plutarch, as though he had been offended with
the fame obtained by this man. Or else, if one will take things in good part,
as I incline unto it: it may be he thought he needed make no mention of one
whose writings made him to be known sufficiently. Yet furthermore, I do not
find that Plutarch was in SLAVONIE at all, and if so be that he made any
journey thither, I think he tarried not long there: because it appears in
diverse places of his works, that his abode was most in ITALY and in GREECE.
And for his honorable charges committed unto him, that should not be thought
very strange, if we consider the merits of Plutarch, the names of Traian, and
the goodwill that Sossius Senecio, (one of the principal men of ROME, and of
the chiefest favorites of Traian) bare unto Plutarch. For he that was in so
great credit with his master, would not forget him whom he loved above all
other men: wherein he lost not his time, forasmuch as the statue that was set
up for him, and that which Dion and some others do briefly pass over, do not
commend Sossius, as do the prefaces of honor, and the books which Plutarch
dedicated unto him. The which we need no more rehearse, then to write over
again the Epistle of Plutarch unto Traian, the which is written in Latin, as
Amyot shows in his preface of the lives: where he has inserted the Epistle
at length, because he thought it wisely and gravely written, a brief worthy
of such a Philosopher as Plutarch. That which Cuspinianus says in the latter
end of the life of Traian, seems to touch that: speaking also, as if it had
been expressed out of Greek into Latin. But time has deprived us of that,
and of many other goodly pieces of the self same, as we have somewhat spoken
of it before in the beginning of the Moral works. Now he has written nothing
touching his behavior in his public charge, but contenteth himself to speak
a word sometime passing by, because he made no account of any thing but of
Philosophy, through the help whereof he assayed to make him self and others
wiser, and more virtuous every day then other. Being a thing very likely that
such a man as had so painefully considered of the estate of the world, and of
all sorts of public governments, and had joined his studies with so great
experience: that he has happily managed the charges that were committed unto
him. To conclude, to live as we should amongst men, the speculation and
knowledge of things being joined with the practice of the same, do bring forth
excellent effects: whereas those that do content themselves with the simple
theoricke, and others that follow exercise, contemning the true understanding
of the causes and grounds of affairs, as Philosophy does show them: they
oftentimes fall into wonderful difficulties.

For Plutarch, though he tarried a long time in ITALY and in ROME, yet that
took not away the remembrance of the sweet air of GREECE, and of the little
town where he was borne: but being touched from time to time with a sentence
of an ancient Poet, who said, that

In whatsoever country men are bred,
(I know not by what sweetness of it led,)
They nourish in their minds a glad desire
Unto their native homes for to retire:
He resolved to go back into GREECE again, there to end the rest of his days
in rest and honor amongst his citizens, of whom he was honorably welcomed home.
Some judge that he left ROME after the death of Traian, being then of great
years, to lead a more quiet life. So being then at rest he earnestly took in
hand that which he had long thought of before, to wit, the Lives: and took
great pains in it until he had brought his work to perfection, as we have
done at this present: although that some lives, as those of Scipio African, of
Metellus Numidicus, and some others are not to be found. Now himself
confesses in some place, that when he began this work, at the first it was
but to profit others: but that afterward it was to profit himself, looking
upon those histories, as if he had looked in a glass, and seeking to reform
his life in some sort, and to form it in the mould of the virtues of these
great men: taking this fashion of searching their manners, and writing the lives
of these noble men, to be a familiar haunting and frequenting of them. Also he
thought (said he himself) that he lodged these men one after the other in his
house, entering into consideration of their qualities, and that which was great
in either of them, choosing and principally taking that which was to be noted,
and most worthy to be known in their sayings and deeds. In sum, he declared
that by continuance of reading ancient histories, and in drawing out the lives
which he has written, and receiving daily in his understanding the memorable
things of the most honest and virtuous men of times past: he instructed
himself, and prepared him to lay aside all evil, foolish, dishonest, or
spiteful condition: if by chance by often frequenting their company he must
of necessity keep, he learned any evil touch. The which he did reform,
turning his quiet thought not stirred with any passion at all, to the
consideration of so many goodly examples. Now because that some might object
unto him, that for the finishing of so great a piece of work, he could not
have made choice of a fitter place then ROME: or rather that being a man given
to his book as he was, he should have left that work unto some other that had
seen more. This objection being of some weight, he answers it at the
beginning of the life of Demosthenes, and says: That to attain to true
felicity, whereof the greatest part consists in the manners, qualities and
conditions of the soul: it makes no matter whether a man be borne in an
obscure town and of small name, no more then if he were borne of a foul or
little mother. For it were a mockery to think that some small towns or little
Islands could notwithstanding bring forth good Poets and excellent players of
Comedies: and that they could not in like sort bring out an honest, just,
constant, wise, and noble or worthy man. And although we have reason to think
that arts and sciences invented to make things necessary for the use of men, or
else to win a name and reputation, are made and counterfeited in poor little
towns: so we must also think that virtue, none otherwise then a strange plant
can take foot and root in any place, where it meets with a good nature,
gentle and patient to endure pains. Wherefore if we come to commit any error,
or that we live otherwise then becomes us, we must not accuse or blame the
meannesse of our country, but justly attribute the fault to our selves. It is
true (says he) that he that has undertaken to frame a piece of work, or to
write any history, in the which many things should be put, not familiar in his
country, and that they find not always at their hand every where, but strange
for the most part, dispersed here and there, and that must be gathered from
many places and diverse authors: in truth he must first and before all other
things dwell in a great and noble city, full of people, and a great number of
men loving goodly and honest things, to the end there may be store of books,
and that in searching up and down, and hearing them tell with lively voice
many things, which other story-writers peradventure have left unwritten, and
that shall bear so much more credit, because they are fresh in memory of the
living: he may make his work complete and perfect in all things, and not
wanting many things that should be necessary for it. Having made this preface,
he excuses himself, that he could not profit so much in knowledge of the
Latin tongue, as he desired, and shows how he did help himself. But
forasmuch as it is in this work of his Lives that Plutarch has most showed
his sufficiency, whether you consider the length of the work, or try with
what judgment he has proceeded: peradventure it will not be hurtful to
speak somewhat of it, beside that which has been spoken by his Translator in
the Preface. I do not enter here into commendation of History in general, nor
we need not apply that unto Plutarch, which Cicero and many others have spoken.
For if ever there were book, next to that we call the holy Scriptures, it may
be said, that that which contains the lives of the noble GREEKS and
ROMANS, is an assured testimony of many hundreds of years, a Sun of
verity, a life of memory, a true mistress of life, and an excellent
messenger of antiquity. And as the stone called the Opall, shows many Orient
colors above all other precious stones: so does the lives of Plutarch make an
abridgement of all the best things contained in the Greek and Latin
histories. For there are seen worthy examples of vices and virtues, an
infinite number of Maxims and notable precepts touching the duties of every
one, their virtues and vices. Now although Plutarch in the ignorance and
blindness of the true God, could not (no more then other profane Historians)
touch the true end of history: yet we may note some admirable thing in him in
that respect. Since history (which contains in it an infinite number of
particular deeds and honorable actions, as the collection of the lives of
Plutarch) is a goodly or glistering glass or table, within the which may be
discerned the wonders and admirable working of the divine Providence: for to
comprehend that well which God and men do, there are three things to be
considered in every history: to wit, the men whereof there is question, the
things worthy of memory, and the circumstances, keeping this ground against
the Epicurians and enemies of man's life: That there is a Godhead and
supernatural power which governs and maintains the world, wherein nothing
happens by chance, but all is guided by a most wise disposition of the same,
for the preservation of families, of civil policy, and of a company and
happy congregation that shall be taken out of this world into a better. A wise
and learned Historian must have an eye upon these three things, for to apply
them unto three other virtues that ought to shine in him: verity, moderation,
and eloquence. For So Much as if he set out fables, or if he talk to no purpose,
and make discourses at pleasure, or if he be troublesome in a speech not
coherent and hanging well together: then he deserves no more the name of an
Historian. As for these virtues, I do assure my self that every man of
judgment will agree, that they are readily to be found in Plutarch,
accompanied with a sweet gravity that always pleases the reader, and gives
him at a hundred times reading as good a savor and taste of him as at the first.
Let a man look upon stories that have nothing in them but the name, and upon so
many books ill composed, of the which Europe is full: they shall find that the
parts necessary to be observed in the persons is nothing at all regarded: that
those which think to represent others, they do sample them after a strange
fashion. Thereupon the affections and passions, the hatred, the envy, evil
speaking, false reports, flatteries and lies, present themselves so untowardly
that they mar all. To the contrary, we see Plutarch very exact in that
respect. It suffices me to touch the things passing by: whether he show the
vices or virtues of great and mean persons, he does it in good terms, without
aggravating or making it less. He takes no manner of pleasure to speak evil
of any, but wisely hides that whereof we ought not to speak but with shame
and compassion of man's infirmity. And he is more inclined to commend the good
in vicious persons, then too much to set open the shops of their wickedness.
But if necessity enforce him unto it, it is with such manifest proofs, that
others which are wicked seeing him wash the head of their companions, they are
compelled to hang down their heads, and to condemn their wicked thoughts. Now
touching matters that ought to be remembered in histories, therein are to be
considered, the counsels, executions, and accidents. For counsels, who notes
better then he the wickedness of those which ask counsel of the world, of
the unconstant multitude, of men of as little judgment as themselves, or of
themselves? With what grace does he lay open the errors committed by Xerxes,
Pyrrhus, Marius, and infinite others? And though evil counsel prosper for a
time, yet the eternal wisdom, has a secret intention to bring things to
pass, which the wisdom of man cannot see till it be done: as Plutarch does
finely discover them in the life of Cato Vtican, and of others. The executions
are of diverse sorts, according to the workmen and their means. In this point,
Plutarch is admirable, showing particularly infinite thoughts in actions which
he represents: so that for one self deed he gives always entrance and
direction unto the studious reader, to make half a dousin of sundry rules for
the direction of man's life: he was ever so fortunate to comprehend all things
well, and to draw that which was to be offered unto the view of posterity. If
accidents come in question, he can excellently refer them to the counsels,
and draw out goodly instructions for all sorts of men. Now there remains the
circumstances of times, of places, of people, and others so diligently searched
out in Plutarch, that in this matter he seems to have surmounted himself. To
prove all that has been presently spoken in few words, behold here the book
lies open, and under the indifferent examination of the learned and virtuous
men.

I am not ignorant thatsome men well thought of among the learned men of our
time, have veryboldly censured Plutarch, accusing him of ignorance: also that
he had written things incredible, fabulous, and that he had made unapt
comparisons. For his ignorance, that has been sufficiently handled heretofore
speaking of Plutarchs tongue. And if we must speak of the sufficiency of an
Historian, I think it is most excellent in him: howbeit I shall not need to
defend him, seeing that he defends himself sufficiently well. If he be
mistaken in some circumstances, and that they discover some fault in his
memory, or of discordance condemned by many other Historians: that deserves
not so sharp a reprehension. And for all the rest, I will add too the answer
of a noble person well studied in Plutarchs lecture, for that it suffices and
fully agrees with that which we now speak of. And these be his words: If one
had spoken simply that Plutarch recites things otherwise then they be, it was
no great reproach: for those things which we have not seen, we take them at
other men's hands of credit: and I see that to his knowledge he reports at
times one self history diversely. As the judgment of three of the best
Captains that ever were, given by Hanniball, is otherwise set down in the
life of Flaminius: and contrary again in the life of Pyrrhus. But to charge
him to have taken for ready money things incredible, and also impossible: it is
even to accuse for want of judgment, the author of the best judgment in the
world. And here is the example which they allege, to wit, that Plutarch said
that a child of LACEDAEMON suffered his belly to be torn out by a fox he had
stolen, and hid under his gown, even to suffer death rather then to bewray his
theft. First of all I find this example very evil chosen to bound the
endeavors of the faculties of the soul, whereas for corporal forces we have
more law to limite and know them. For this cause, if I had had to do withal, I
would rather have chosen an example of this second sort, and they are less
credible. As amongst others, that which he recites of Pyrrhus: that being hurt
as he was, he gave his enemy armed at all pieces such a blow with his sword,
that he claue his head down to the lowest parts, so that the body fell asunder
in two parts. In the other example I find no great wonder, neither do I like
the excuse they make for Plutarch, for that he added too this word, (as they
say) to advise us, and to be wary in our carriage and behavior. For unless it
be in things received by authority, or in reverence of antiquity or of
religion, he would not himself have received, nor have made us believe things
of themselves incredible. And that this word (as they say) is not used in that
place to that purpose, is easy to be judged: for that he himself reports in
another place upon the subject of the patience of the children of LACEDAEMON,
of examples that fell out in his time vnlikelier, to persuade us. As that which
Cicero also has testified before him: for that he was (as he said) even in the
very places: that even till their time there were children, for proof of
patience, that were tried before the altar of Diana, who suffered themselves to
be whipped until the blood ran down their legs, not only without crying, but
also without weeping, yea and some of them even to death. And that which
Plutarch tells with an hundred witnesses: that at a sacrifice a burning cole
being fallen into a boys sleeue of the LACEDAEMONIANS, as he was censing: he
suffered all his arm to be burnt, until the very savor of the burnt flesh
came to them that were present. There was nothing according to their custom
that did more disgrace them, and for the which they should suffer more reproach
and shame, then to be taken stealing. I am so instructed with the greatness of
these men there, that it seems to me, that this report which Plutarch made
should not be incredible, or not so much as rare or strange. Marcellus also
reports, touching this matter of theft: that in his time there could be found
no manner of torture or torment how cruel soever, that could force the
EGYPTIANS taken with theft, (whereunto they were accustomed and hardened) once
to tell their names. I know that there were certain poor countri-men, in the
miserable civil wars, that did endure the frying of the soles of their feet
against the fire, and the nipping of their fingers ends, to thrust their
bloody eyes out of their heads, their foreheads being fast bound with a great
cord, before they would be ransomed. I have seen one left stark naked in a
ditch for dead, having his neck swollen with a halter tied about it, with the
which they had dragged him at a horse tail all night long, his body thrust in
with a dagger in an hundred places, not to kill him, but to make him full of
pain: who had endured all that, having lost his speech and senses, resolved
(as he told me) to die a thousand deaths, rather then to promise any thing, and
he was one of the richest laborers in all the country. We must not judge that
which is possible and that which is not, as it is credible and incredible to
our capacity. It is also a great fault, (into the which notwithstanding the
most part of men do fall) to make it nice to believe that thing of another man,
which we our selves cannot do. This is that which this person answers unto
the objection made, touching the fact of the boy of LACEDAEMON set out to
accuse our Plutarch ouerthwartly with a lie. The other example which they
allege of incredible things, and altogether fabulous, spoken by Plutarch, is:
that Agesilaus was condemned in a fine by the Ephores, because he alone had won
the hearts and goodwils of al his citizens. I know not what note of falsehood
they find in that: but so it is, that Plutarch speaks of things which he
should better know then we. It was no new thing in GREECE to see men punished
and banished only for that they were too great with their Citizens: witness
the Ostracisme and Petalisme. And where they accuse Plutarch, that he did not
well sort the GREEKS with the ROMANS: witnesses, Demosthenes and Cicero,
Aristides and Cato, Lysander and Sylla, Pelopidas and Marcellus, Agesilaus and
Pompey; judging that he favored the GREEKS, for that he gave them companions
so little resembling them: which is justly to blame Plutarch for that wherein he
was most excellent and praise*worthie. For in his comparisons (which is the
most admirable part of his works, and in the which (in my opinion) he took
more delight then in any other of his writings) the fidelity and sincerity of
his judgments, equalleth their profoundnesse and their weight. He is a
Philosopher that teaches us virtue. Let us see if we can defend him from this
reproach of malice and falsehood. I think that which has been the cause of this
censure, is the great shining color of the names of the ROMANS which we have
in hand. It appears not to us that Demosthenes can equal the glory of a
Consul, Proconsull, or Quaestor of this great commonwealth. But he that shall
consider the truth of the thing, and the men in themselves, whereat Plutarch
ever most aimed: and to weigh their manners, their dispositions, their
sufficiency and their fortune: I think to the contrary, that Cicero and old
Cato are indebted to their companions. For the purpose of this censure, I would
rather have chosen the example of the younger Cato compared unto Phocion: for
in this comparison there might be found a more likely disparitie to the
advantage of the ROMAN. For Marcellus, Sylla, and Pompey, I see well that
their exploits of war are more puffed up, glorious and sumptuous, then those of
the GREEKS which Plutarch compares with them. But the most fair and virtuous
actions are not always (no more then in wars) the most famous: I oftentimes
see the names of Captains drowned by the glory of other men's names of less
merit: witness, Labienus, Ventidius, Telesinus, and diverse others. And to take
it from thence, if I were to complain me for the GREEKS, might I say that
much less is Camillus comparable unto Themistocles, the Gracchi unto Agis and
Cleomenes, Numa unto Lycurgus, and Scipio unto Epaminondas, which were also of
his roll. But it is a folly to judge things on a sudden of so many men. When
Plutarch compares them, he does therefore equal them. Who could more
eloquently or conscionably note the disparities and differences? Does he come
to compare the victories, the exploits of arms, the power of armies led by
Pompey, and his triumphs, with those of Agesilaus? I do not believe, said he,
that Xenophon himself if he were alive, although that they suffered him to
write what he would to the advantage of Agesilaus: durst put him in comparison.
Does he speak to compare Sylla with Lysander? There is no comparison, said he,
neither in number of victories, nor in hazard of battles: for Lysander wan only
but two battles by sea, etc. That takes away nothing from the ROMANS. To
have simply presented them to the GREEKS, he could have done them no injury,
what disparitie soever there might be: neither does he weigh them also all
together: in the great there is no preferencie. He has compared the pieces and
circumstances one after another, and judges them severally. Wherefore if they
would convince him of favor, they must unfold some particular judgment, or to
say in general that he had failed to match such a GREEK with such a ROMAIN:
because there were others fitter to be compared, and of better report. So much
for this point. There are other that have blamed the length of Plutarchs
discourses, also that he has mingled many light things, and that he delights
to thrust in many verses of Poets, without any necessity, say they: judging
that he did that to lose no part of his memories, and so has confusedly put
all pieces together in his work. But that which has been spoken of before,
answers that objection. And to accuse Plutarch to have wanted judgment, (he
that has always been very discreet in his writings, as he protests at the
beginning of his book of fatal destiny) is to show himself mad, and out of
his wits. Those things that men judge to be small are not so always, if they
be better considered of: neither is his length so far out of square and
troublesome, neither is that out of the matter, which he intermingleth of the
Poets, but is spoken to good purpose, and oftentimes upon good ground of advice
in matters of great weight: whereof his works shall make proof whosoever will
examine them without passion.

But now let us leave these censors to think more advisedly hereafter what
they speak, and come again to Plutarch: who after his return to GREECE, gave
himself more to his book then he did before: and notwithstanding he was very
old, he made an end of his Lives. And furthermore, continuing still the love he
bare unto his country: he employed himself in diverse Offices of the
commonwealth, whereof he makes mention also in sundry places of his Morals,
and especialy in the book where he instructs those that deal in the
affairs of estate. For he says there these words: I answer them that reprove
me when they find me present in our town, to see them measure, and tell
brick, and tile, stones, sand, and lime which they bring: that it is not for
my self that I build, but for the Commonwealth. And in his Treatise, Whether
an old man should yet deal in the affairs of estate. Thou know (said he,
writing unto Euphanes) that there are many Pythiades, that is to say, many
terms of five years that I do exercise the Priesthood of Apollo PYTHIAN: yet
I think thou would not say to me, Plutarch, thou have sacrificed enough,
thou have made processions enough, thou have led many dances: and now that thou
art old and ancient, it is time thou leave thy crown off thy head, and abandon
the oracle, because of thy age. At the beginning of the eight question of the
sixth book of his discourse at the table, he mentions his Office of being
Mayor of the town of CHAERONEA. To conclude, even to the end of his life he
showed in his deeds, that which he excellently handled in his writings: which
is, that there is nothing lets old men to serve and profit their
commonwealth in diverse sorts of government, whether it be with good words, with
good counsel, with liberty and authority to speak boldly, and with grave
respect, as the Poets say. For they are not the feet, nor the hands, nor all the
strength of the body only, which are the parts and good of the commonwealth:
but they are first of all and principally the soul, and the beauties thereof:
as justice, temperance, and wisdom, the which coming late to their perfection,
it were to no purpose they should enjoy a house, land, and all other
inheritances of his citizens, and that it could receive no more any profit by
the^ for the good of the Commonwealth, because of their long time, the which
does not so much deprive them of strength and ability to do service, as it
does increase them with sufficiency and knowledge of faculties requisite to
command and govern. Furthermore Plutarch having lived always honorably even
to old age, he died quietly among his children and friends in the city of
CHAERONEA, leaving in his writings an immortal savor of his name unto
posterity. Besides the honor his citizens did him, there was a statue set up
for him by ordinance of the people of ROME, in memory of his virtue. Now
furthermore, though time has devoured some part of the writings of this great
man, and minished some other: nevertheless those which remain being a great
number, have excellent use to this day among us. Howbeit, having met with some
fragments in Stobeus, of some Treaties which are not to be found any more, I
thought it would not mislike the reader to cull out some pieces to present them
unto him, to shut up all this discourse. Wisdom, says he, (in the book Of
the profit which knowledge brings of the time to come) consists not in
show, but in affairs, before a man sets too his hand: and shows how he
should come before them, and receive them when they be offered him: for it
considers the things to come. The body has no eyes but before, the back
sees nothing at all: but wisdom by help of memory, sees even the things
that are past and gone. It is the Secretary which always remains and
abides within, as Plato says. It is the part or instrument of the soul which
takes hold of things past, keeps them, and lays them up safe, making a
circle, within the which that that is past joins with the thing present, and
will not suffer it to extend it self beyond compass, and to pass the bounds
of nature and knowledge. Of the Book against pleasure. Pleasure undoes the
body, and daily makes it tender by deliciousness, the common use whereof
cutteth down the lustiness and consumes the strength, so that weakness and
sickness do abound, and in youth they begin to wax old. Voluptuousnes is a
beast that makes men slaves, but yet no savage beast: for if she did openly
assail any body, there would soon be an end: but she is so much more
dangerous, because she hides her ill courage, and takes upon her the habit
of goodwill. We must shun her therefore for two causes, the one, that she
should not hurt us, the other, that she should not seduce us. Let us no more
call voluptuousness honest pleasures, but rather acknowledge that they be
troubles, services and duties: and esteem the rest as shameful and violent
things, which by their diversity flatter us, and in the mean time finely hurt
us. Now our selves and affairs ought to be subject to the same law that the
brute beasts are: to the end that when we have satisfied our desire, we have
no new mind to covet further, but that our moderate pleasures be contented when
they have things necessary. Is there any man that will commend traitors? Now
pleasure is even such a one: for she betrayeth all that depends upon virtue.
Does any body esteem hangmen much? See notwithstanding what it is to follow
sensuality, which tormenteth and rendeth asunder all moderate things. Will any
man commend avarice? Voluptuousness is as insatiable as the love of money.
What pleasure can we take of a beast that destroys us by flattery? I ask,
why do thou not play the fool and knave in the presence of all men? To the
contrary thou flyest, and bear reverence to thy self, abusing thy self in
the night and darkness which cannot depose against thee. No man seeks to
hide him that does well, nor is afraid of the light that is round about him:
but rather to the contrary, he would all the world were become a bright Sun,
to give light to all the parts of the good works he does. But if he happen to
commit any fault, he does all his possible endeavor to hide it, and blames his
passion. Now let us take away the veil, and openly muse upon these pleasures.
They make us drunk, even to lose our senses: they continually make knaves and
drowsy lubbers to follow harlots when they should labor: enemies of man's
life, neither caring for father nor mother, void of all reverence unto the
laws. In the Book that treats, how women should be taught and learned. It
is no easy thing to hide his ignorance, says Heraclitus: and much less then
when he has drunk more then ordinary. Plato says also, that the thought is
discovered by wine: as much to say, after a man has drunk too much. Sophocles
blamed Aeschylus, because he wrote his tragedies when he had drunk out of
measure: for, says he, though Aeschilus does well, yet he knows not what he
does. Pythagoras being asked how it could be brought to pass, that a drunkard
should abstain from being drunk? If he remembered said he, oftentimes what he
did when he was drunk. It is a common saying in every man's mouth, Let not the
child have a knife. And I say, keep riches from a child, and ignorance from a
man. Of the Book of accusation. Hippias said, there was nothing so
intolerable as accusation: because there was no punishment ordained by law
for accusers, as there was for thieves: although they stole friendship from
men, which is the goodliest riches a man can have. So that an outrage of fact
though it be great, is less then accusation, which does much more hurt because
it is hidden. Of the discourse or Epistle of friendship. He is a true witness
of the truth, that is not bound by benefit unto him that brings him forth,
and that speaks before the Judges without exception of person. We must win
love by gentleness and bounty, rather then by menaces: and for the
commonwealth, wisdom and gentleness should be joined together. Agrippinus in
his government, attempted to persuade them whom he condemned to lose goods and
life: that it was expedient for them they should be condemned. For, said he, I
do not pronounce sentence against you, as a thief passing by should say,
Deliver thy purse, or thou art dead: but I do that as your tutor, and one that
has a care of you: like unto the Physician that comfort his patient from
whom he would cut some member, and persuades him to be ruled. Cotis king of
THRACIA was very cruel unto his subjects: and when one of his familiars told
him, That is called fury not kingly government. But so it is, answered the
king, that this fury of mine makes my subjects wise and quiet. Of the book
against the strength of the body. Do thou think the strength of the body
to be so great a happiness, that thou will conclude that nature which has
given more strength to beasts then to men, should be mother to them, and
stepmother to the other? Do thou think it is by reason of the massiuenes or
weight, or by the swiftness or strength of the eyes? The true strength of men
consists in discourse of the soul, by means whereof he hunteth in the
forests, and takes the Elephants in a snare: he rides horse and breaks
them, he brings oxen subject to the yoke, he beats down birds with bolts,
and catches with angles fish that lie hidden in the bottom of waters. There
is his strength, which is seen much better, when he considers at his ease,
the roundnesse of the earth, the breadth of the Element, and the reuolutions of
the stars. Such were the worthy exercises of Hercules. And who had not rather
be Ulysses, then Polyphemus the CYCLOPIAN? Also when one spoke much in
commendation of a venturous and hardy man, as if he had been some brave
soldier: There is great difference, said Aratus the SICYONIAN, betwixt
esteeming virtue, and regarding life nothing. Of the book of Deuination. It is
most apparent that from the beginning Necessity invented and polished certain
arts, which she does keep even till this present. It is she that has taught
all things. For, is there any thing that necessity has not thought of? she
has brought forth the occupation of weauing, of building, the art of
Physic, tilling of the ground, and all that belongs unto it. There be other
crafts also found out, I cannot tell by what pleasure: as Perfumers,
Apothecaries, Cooks, and others that serve for ornaments of the body: also
Painters. Again, there are sciences which men seek, learn, and teach,
because of the probable and apparent reason which they discover, and for the
beauty of them: as Arithmeticke, Geometry, and all others consisting in
measures and proportions, then Astrology. And yet though we contemn them,
nevertheless because of their excellency, we are constrained in some sort to
know them, says Plato. Of the Treaty, That love and judgment are diverse
things. Some say, that love is the faculty of the soul, which we call
understanding: others, that it is a concupiscence or voluptuousness: others,
that it is a madness: and there are that think it is, I cannot tell what
divine agitation of the soul: and others that make it a God. This disputation
has made that some have judged, and rightly, that from the beginning, love is
a simple desire or lust: but if it exceed, it is fury. Also that friendship
does resemble it. If love be despised, it begets melancholy: if it increase
as wished, he that is possessed withal has a thousand conceits and
fantastical imaginations, and does imagine all the greatness and favors of
heaven and earth. And this is the reason why the Poets say, that love is a
Torch: and the Painters, Potters, and Statuaries do represent it in that
estate. For that part of the fire which does give light, is very pleasing,
profitable and commodious: but that which burns, brings nothing but trouble
and sorrow. Like as it is a good thing to reprove and admonish our friends, and
such as belong unto us, whilst they be in their right wits, and capable of
judgment and understanding: so to the contrary, if they be light headed and
distraught of their wits, we do not use then to reason and contest with them,
but we rather do yield to that they say. So must we freely and lively reprove
them, that commit a fault through choler or covetousness: but as for lovers,
they must be excused because they be sick. And therefore from the beginning,
it were the best way not to suffer love to take root in them: if it do, repair
then to the altars of the gods that give remedy, as Plato says, that is to
say, keep company with wise men. Drive this beast far from thee, before his
teeth and nails do grow: if not, thou must fight with the evil when it is
great and full grown, the which thou did embrace in thine infancy and
youth. But which are these teeth and nails of love? Suspicion and Jealousy.
Now some will say to me that there is also I know not what, a thing that
draws, and is pleasant. So had this famous Sphinx wings of diverse colors,
very pleasant to behold: for when he turned them to the beams of the Sun,
they shined like gold: and when he was against the clouds, one would have said
it had been azure mingled with yellow and red, like the rainbow in the Element.
Love after the same sort has in it (I know not how) a gracious, gentle, and
fair show. But it destroys men, overthrows houses, dissolueth marriages,
and confounds great Captains, without propounding of hard Enigmaes or
questions to be resolved: but himself being so taken that he cannot be freed.
For example. If one asked: What is that which at one instant loves and hates,
flies and pursues, threatens and prays, angreth and flattereth, takes and
leaves, laugheth and weepeth with a breath? it is a knot which one cannot
easily undo. Furthermore, the Sphinx had many things devised for pleasure,
mingled in the midst of his Enigma. For though an old man go with a staff, yet
he has not three feet: and the little child is not a beast with four feet,
although he creep of all four, helping his weak legs with his two hands. But
there be no such Enigmaes in the passions of lovers. They love and hate, desire
the thing absent, and fear the thing present: they flatter and do injury,
they die and kill themselves for the thing they love: they desire not to love,
and yet will not leave to love: they repent them and wax blind: they become
wise, and yet cast themselves away: they will command, and yet yield themselves
slaves. And therefore it is that such a passion is holden for a pure rage: as
also Eurypides does confess it. Now love is not begotten upon a sudden, nor
does not invade all the person, as choler does: but it kindles by little and
little, as a little fire. It slippeth in softly, and when it has possessed the
soul, it dislodgeth not easily: but we see it sometimes lusty and fresh even in
old men that have white hairs. If it cease, and begin to cool by succession
of time, or that it be dead by some accident: it does not altogether leave the
soul, or the substance of his fire consumed, where the marks of his heat
passed are to be seen, as if lightning had passed through there. As for the
sorrow past and the choler after it is quenched, there is no spark left in the
soul, but they perceive that the inflammation of the passion which made a
great noise is quiet: but the bitings of love, albeit the beast be gone, do not
therefore lose their venime, but the inward wounds do renew and refresh
themselves again. To be short, no man knows what such a passion means, nor
how it comes, nor from whence it slipped into the heart. In the books where he
disputes for beauty. Are not men compounded of body and soul? Is the one
enough for us without the other? how could that be? for if the body were not
governed by the soul, it would not live, and the soul had need of a place to
be kept and lodged in. Since then both the one and the other are adorned with
gifts proper unto them: the soul with justice, temperance, and wisdom: and
the body with force, beauty and health: were it not to be wondered at, if one
despised that which concerns the body, and that he made no reckening but of
the goods of the soul? Corporal beauty is a work of the soul, which makes
a present of this gift to the body. For when the soul is gone, there
remains nothing good in the body. The strength, the color, the sight, and
the voice do vanish. To conclude, the body being abandoned of his ancient
inhabitants, there is nothing left that is amiable. Thou therefore that
accusest beauty, unawares thou speak outrage to the soul, which is cause of
this beauty. Aristotle to one that asked him, why a man did love fair things?
answered: It is for a blind man to ask such a question. Diogenes called fair
Curtisans, Queens, because many do execute that which they command. Of the
Book against Nobility. What do we think that Nobility is, but riches
gathered together by ancestors, or some honor attained unto long time
before? whereof the one nor the other proceeds not of our will: but the one
comes by unconstant fortune, the other proceeds from the disorders of the
world. So then this proud name of Nobility flows from two strange springs.
Now riches makes not those that are born like unto them: but virtue proceeding
from the sincere habitude of the spirit, is planted in the race of the
virtuous, and does make them truly noble. In this is true Nobility, to wit:
the conformity unto virtuous manners. But I pray you, king Midas riches, were
they more rich then the poverty of Aristides? although he left not
wherewithal to defray his charges of funeral. To the contrary, king Midas
tomb passed for magnificence all the riches of the world: but Nobility is not
enclosed in gold nor silver. Vice is rightly compared unto fire: for when
neither the one nor the other wants nouriture, it goes out. But the
baseness of the race of Socrates the Philosopher, the son of an Imagegrauer,
and of a midwife: is it not more noble then the glory of Sardanapalus? Thou
should not think Xerxes more noble then Cynegyrus, who had one of his hands
cut off fighting for his country: since the other fled to save his life, being
a king environed with cowardlines. Of the Treaty against riches. Hunger never
gave any man cause to be an adulterer: nor want of money has made any man
dissolute. Poverty is a kind of temperance, and need may be called a summarie
observation of the laws. Arcesilaus said, poverty was rude, no less then the
Isle of ITHACA: but furthermore, a good nurse for children: because it did use
them to frugalitie and abstinence: and at one word, it is the healthful
school of virtue. Thus have you some fragments of our Philosopher, of the
which as of the rest of his works, we desire that all may learn to be
virtuous.

The end of Plutarchs life.
THE LIFE OF Seneca.
L. A. SENECA.



A knowledge that does many errors fly:
A life resisting vices poisoned breath:
A death, in death, that conquered death by death,
O Seneca, are fruits of thy Philosophy.
SPAIN is divided by the Geographers into three principal parts, of the
which, one of them abutting upon the straights of GIBRALTAR and the Mediterrane
sea, called by Strabo TVRDITANIA, was in old time the best inhabited. And
albeit he does confine it into two thousand furlongs in compass, yet he says
that in his time they made account of two hundred towns within that circuit,
which at this day is called ANDALVZIA, having taken the name of the VANDALES,
which have dwelt there since the ruin of the ROMAN Empire. In this part of
SPAIN was (and yet is) situated upon the river called of the ancients Baetis,
and at this day Guadalquibir, (that is to say, the great river, by reason of
his long course) the city of CORDVBE, or CORDOVE: which was in old time one of
the most famous cities of SPAIN, built by Marcellus, and inhabited with noble
ROMANS, as Pliny and Strabo The family and (...) of Seneca.
do witness. This place amongst others was a seed-plot or garden of good
spirits, and men given to study. Among other honorable families of that time
was that of the Annaeans, which besides their nobility loved learning,
specially about the father of Seneca, whose life now we Senecaes father.
write. He was a simple gentleman bearing no charge in the commonwealth, for
that he had no spirit in him to embrace such burdens, and gave himself most
to learning, although otherwise he left not his sword, being a knight as many
other PATRICIANS in the province where he was. With his arms he joined the
profession of learning, but specially of eloquence, in the which he excelled
the most in his time. He married a Lady called Elbia, of whom he had three His
brethren.
sons, the eldest bearing the name of the father, to wit, Lucius Annaeus
Seneca. The second, Annaeus Nouatus, afterward called Julius Gallio. The
third, Annaeus Mella, father of Lucan the Poet. The father was very careful to
have his children well taught and brought up, but the eldest especially, who
with time gave himself wholly unto Philosophy. For Gallio, besides his
learning, he was raised up to some public dignities at ROME. Mella on the
other side, he cared not for advancement, and therein he followed his father,
as we will show hereafter more at large. Seneca, of whom we have presently to
speak, was borne as it should seem a little before In what time Seneca was
borne.
the death of Augustus Caesar. For himself writes in the hundredth and ninth
Epistle unto Lucillius, that he was a young man when by the commandment of
Tiberius the ceremonies of the strangers religions were driven out of ROME:
the which Cornelius Tacitus in the second book of his Annals said to have
happened in the fifth year of Tiberius. But of this we will speak more
hereafter, treating of the writings of Seneca. Furthermore, the occasion why
himself and his brethren came out of SPAIN to ROME, was this. About the tenth
year of the reign of Tiberius Empire, matters began to be troublesome in
diverse parts of the dominion of ROME, by reason of the cruelties and
insolences of this Prince: who having about him Seianus, and some other
dangerous counselors, he showed his disposition more then before. The
sickness of the head flows into all the principal members: so that the
provinces were left without governors, or else were tyrannized by Praetors:
whereupon followed great alterations. SPAIN amongst others, in many places
lived as they listed: it was managed at that time by exactors, which caused
people to rebel and enter into factions. It chanced amongst others, that L.
Piso Praetor, was killed by a TERMESTAN, because he carried himself tyrannously
amongst the people. This TERMESTAN being caught by the back, and cruelly
tortured, he showed himself The great constancy of a Spaniard.
so stout notwithstanding, that they could not possibly make him confess any of
his associates. But being quickly dispatched by the hands of the hangmen, who
would have put him to a new torture, he knocked his head against a stone with
such force, that he died presently in the field. Shortly after the cities began
to be weary of their yoke, and CORDOVE specially among others, which being of
the principallest and of great importance, an army was sent thither under the
conduct of Cneus Domitius Aenobarbus, who having subdued CORDOVE, took amongst
others Seneca, his two brethren, and Lucan his nephew, their father being dead
some years before. Domitius knowing what men they were, he set them at
liberty, and did so much that he persuaded them to leave SPAIN, and go to
ROME, as well to continue and to advance their studies well begun, as to be
known and honored with public office. Now the state of SPAIN was such at
that time, that Seneca and his were easily persuaded and won by him that had
authority over them, and at the last they went into ITALY. Some think that
Annaeus Mella remained still in SPAIN, being a man that loved to live
privately, and that made no account of the honor and vanity of the world. For
his son Lucan, he was brought very young after his two uncles, who did hear
at ROME Pomponius Marullus, Julius Hyginus, Cestius and Asinius His masters at
Rome.
Gallus in Rhetoric: and in Philosophy, Socio Alexandrinus, and Photinus a
STOICKE, very famous. Under which they all profited, and Seneca specially, who
joining to the gravity of the doctrine of the STOICKES, a compendious and
sententious speech, in short time made himself to be known.

Now having remained a space shut up in schools, or hidden in the company of
some learned men whom he harkened unto, and familiarly frequented: he was put
forward at the beginning of the Empire of Caligula, by Cneus Domitius (who had
married Agrippina the daughter of Germanicus, and little daughter of Tiberius, of
whom Nero was borne, nine months before the death of Tiberius) and began to
show himself openly, pleading before the Senate with great grace: for from
that time forth he was esteemed for one of the wisest and most eloquent men of
ROME. By means whereof his credit increased from day to day. But as pricks
be hidden under roses, and where men think to win honor, oftentimes they
get repulse and contempt: the revolution of men's affairs flourishing, yet
marvelous brittle and subject to fall: So Seneca proved that his eloquence
profited others more then himself: and that as sometimes it is a wiser part to
keep the sword in the scaberd, then in the hand: even so The hire of silence
does no danger threate.
The Emperor Caligula was a Prince that cared little for liberal sciences,
yet he was very curious to speak well, having words at commandment, and
esteemed eloquent among others: specially if sometime he disposed himself to
speak against any man, the words and whole sentences did increase in his
mouth, with such an accent and gesture, that they heard him and knew him a
far off, and sometimes he threatened men with the force of his tongue. This
quickness and vain eloquence of his, made him (besides that he had an ill
shaped head) wonderful presumptuous. For there was never a learned man and
eloquent in all the ROMAN Empire, but he would prefer himself before him.
And those which directly or indirectly went about to cross him, they did put
themselves in manifest danger: witness that which happened to the Orator
Domitius Afer, and unto Seneca. Caligula bearing ill will a long time unto
Domitius for some light spite he had unto him, Domitius was accused before the
Senate: where Caligula made a long oration written, and therein laid open all
his sufficiency, to show himself better able then Domitius, esteemed one of
the best spoken men at that time. Now his purpose was to put Domitius to death,
if he had studied to answer eloquently. But Domitius easily discovering this
dangerous resolution, made no reply, nor excused himself, but said he was
astonished at the oration of the Emperor: and faining that the babbling of
Caligula had ravished him, he made a brief repetition, as if he had come
thither to hearken. Then having magnified his discourses, and being commanded
to defend himself: he began to lament, and to crave grace, and kneeling down
besought Caligula, being more afraid of his word then of his hand. Caligula
wonderful joyful of this honor, and thinking to be Eloquence it self,
received Domitius into grace. Seneca taking no heed otherwise to that matter,
and having at that time the free spirit of the STOICKES: within few days after
he fell almost into the like peril or greater danger then Domitius: he knew
that Caligula did bear him ill will, and did also speak evil of him amongst
his friends: and did compare him in his talk to gravel or sand without lime,
as if he would have said, that there was neither good band or consequence in
Senecaes discourse. And to conclude, that he was but a iangler. But Seneca
being carried away with the glory he had won, which pleased him well,
continued notwithstanding to be in the Senate. Insomuch that one day having a
cause to plead before Caligula, he behaved himself with such a grace and
vehemency, that all that heard him esteemed him more then they did before,
Caligula only excepted: who being vexed, and as it were pierced through with
the eloquent words of Seneca, (he having in the mean time let fall no word to
offend Caligula, but went on roundly with his matter) he was even at the point
to put him to death, and then had executed his thought, had it not been for a
woman he kept, who persuaded him not to do it, assuring him that Seneca had a
disease that would soon dispatch him out of the world. But after that, Seneca
forbear, knowing with whom he had to deal. And soon after Caligula being
slain by Charea: and Julius Sabinus his uncle (the son of Drusus and of
Liuia) called Claudius, was chosen Emperor: at the beginning Seneca came
again into his former credit and fame, and continued it for some years: but
at the last he was banished ROME for this cause. Claudius was a Prince of small
judgment, and carried by certain minions and parasites of the court, and by
his wife Messalina, one of the most shameless women that ever was. This woman
wholly possessing Claudius, caused men and women of all qualities to be put to
death, and banished as she thought good: and those above all others that went
about to hinder the course of her strange ways. Among others she did bear
Iulia the daughter of Germanicus ill will, (as Dion reports) because Iulia
did not regard nor flatter her. Furthermore Iulia was a very fair Lady, which
made Messalina jealous, who by little and little, found the means to accuse this
Lady of many crimes, and specially of adultery: and made her be banished, then
put to death immediately after. Seneca was carried away with this tempest, as
culpable of the faults pretended against Iulia. Some think that Iulia is this
Agrippina mother of Nero, whom Claudius married after the death of Messalina,
and that she was banished from the court but for a time only. The which is
very likely, as also Cornelius Tacitus seems to incline to that opinion. But
for Seneca, it is not only in one place, but in many, that Dion and others do
accuse him, that he had been somewhat bold with Agrippina, as if the credit he
had in the house of the late deceased Cneus Domitius, had given him the
boldness to defile the bed of his benefactor, dead a little before Tiberius.
Furthermore, he was banished into the I Will of CORSE, where he remained about two
years: during which time he earnestly disposed himself to the study of
Philosophy, with a singular contentment and quietness of mind, as may be
gathered out of the goodly discourse he wrote, and sent unto his mother Helbia,
who did hardly bear this banishment of his. But he did comfort her, and by
lively reasons showed her that this entertainment was not grievous unto him,
but that Philosophy had strengthened him after an excellent fashion, against
all the assaults of fortune. Whilst he was in this profitable solitariness,
Messalina continued in her wantonness with such an impudent and hot fury,
that without the testimony of so many worthy historians, it were impossible
to believe that the wife of an Emperor durst once have thought to have
committed the thousandth part of the villainies unto the which she had given her
self over to the sight and knowledge of all the world. In so much as in the
end in the day time, within ROME, in presence of many persons of quality, and
in the sight of all the people, Claudius being no further off then at HOSTIA:
she married with great pomp an adulterer called Sillius, a gentleman of ROME,
with all accustomed ceremonies and solemnities. Se made a feast, and held
Sillius for her husband. Tacitus in his Annals reports these things at
large. Now though Claudius was so foolish before, and then too, that he
perceived not that which all others saw so openly: in the end being wakened by
Narcissus, one of his minions, he put Sillius to death, and some others
culpable of this strange excess. And for Messalina, she had almost come
again into grace: but in the end she was killed by the commandment of
Narcissus. After Messalina was executed, the three minions of Claudius, to wit,
Narcissus, Calistus, and Pallas, they laid their heads together to give their
master a wife. But in the end Pallas, that pleaded for Agrippina the widow of
Cneus Domitius, little daughter of Tiberius, daughter of Germanicus, and niece
of Claudius: he carried it from them, the reasons he propounded had so much more
force, being accompanied with dainty sugared words: who under the color of a
kinswoman, came often to visit her uncle, and she flattered him so bravely,
that she being preferred before others, and not yet married, she did already use
the authority and power of a wife. And out of hand, immediately after the
marriage was solemnized with her uncle Claudius, she advanced Domitius Nero her
son, and the son of Cneus Domitius. Furthermore by her practices, Octauia the
daughter of Claudius, and of Messalina, betrothed unto Sillanus, was promised
and afterward given unto Nero for his wife. Who being yet very young when his
mother married Claudius (and but eleven years old only) it was in question to
get him a good master and tutor to teach him his book betimes, and to train
him up in affairs of estate. Agrippina, a woman of a marvelous spirit, and
that plotted great things, as the effect showed afterward, as Tacitus has
wisely noted: she resolved to have Seneca called back again, and immediately
obtained his grace of the Emperor. She did this to diverse ends, the one was
to have a man of great authority and bringing up about her son, to the end to
maintain Nero under the shadow of so great an appearance, until the time of
his advancement were come. The other, to make the remembrance of Messalina the
more odious, who had been the cause of the banishment of Seneca: to put back
Britannicus, the son of her, and brother of Octauia, and by that means to have
men at her commandment, little affected unto Claudius. So then Agrippina
ouer-ruling Claudius at her pleasure, she did not only obtain the repeal, but
also the Praetorship for Seneca, whom they sent for quickly, and he returned to
ROME with great honor, to the contentment of high and low.

Immediately after he was arrived, Claudius received him graciously, made him a
Senator, and installed him in his charge. Afterward being called into the
palace of the Emperor, Domitius Nero is given him in charge, with great
promises of Agrippina, who had two vices common to such persons. The one was,
that she was set on fire with extreme covetousness to get money, under color
that she laid a foundation in store to help to maintain her estate. The
other, that she gave largely unto those whom she knew meet* for the
advancement of her son, whom she would raise up to be Emperor what soever it
cost her, yea were it her own life: as appeared by her answer to a wise man
whom she had asked what should become of the future greatness of her son
Nero. For he having answered her, that he might be Emperor, but it should be
to her undoing: Let me dye then, said she, so he may reign. Tacitus writes
that Agrippina thought the people would rejoice at the return of Seneca,
because of the great fame of his knowledge: and also procured this good, to the
end that the infancy of Domitius might grow until his adolescency under such
a master, and she to use his counsel, to attain to the greatness of
command which she hoped for: Seneca, in stead of continuing in his
solitariness, and not remembering that Who enters tyrants houses, does become
A slave: though he a free man thither come.
He to the contrary, thinking he had found the means to show the effects of a
Philosopher (the wit of man, yea of the wisest, is so snared in darkness upon
darkness, when there is question of the troubles of this life) went and
engaged himself in the service of Agrippina. And although for a time he bridled
the youth of Nero, and did withstand certain disorders: yet in the end he was
constrained to leave all, and suffer the fierce stream to run, having
desired (but too late) solitariness: and with less goods and honors of the
world, more liberty, and quietness of mind. Now, as he himself knew very
well, and did excellently teach it unto others, that so as migrims and pains
in the head are not healed by a crown or royal band, neither to the contrary
is good health, nor the good state of a man lost, though he be not a great
Lord: so this greatness in the which he saw himself highly lift up in a short
time, did nothing else but increase his cares, wherewith he found himself
bound, as with strong chains to the end of his life. And though he did shake
them, and at times had proved to break them, yet he could not possibly unloose
them: and in the end there was no way but he must perish under the weight Of
massy chains, that of no iron were,
But such as shamefastness, did make him bear.
It is true that at the first this charge and government seemed light unto
him. For Nero was a young Prince of great hope, and in youth he showed himself
gentle, tractable, obeying his schoolemaisters instructions, who delighted to
manure this plant, hoping all the world should have joy of him. But as the
Emperors that were before, even in their young age, had made some show of that
which might be expected of them in time to come: Seneca also perceived through
the goodly appearance of his scholar, some part of his wild, naughty, and
untoward nature, which he showed within few years after. Also Cneus Domitius
his father, as some came to gratify him for that Agrippina his wife had
brought him a son: he holding down his head, answered, that that they should
not think that of him and of such a woman should be borne an infant, but to
the ruin and confusion of the Empire. This prediction was not noted. But when
Agrippina her self felt by the loss of her life, what a child she had brought
into the world, and advanced by so many strange practices, and by the degrees
of incest, of blood, and filthiness unto the Imperial dignity. Now whilst
Seneca employed himself to polish this spirit of Nero, and sought to princ in
his heart the love of virtue: Agrippina, careful of the worldly greatness of
her son, she followed her purpose, cunningly helping her self (as much as
she thought fit to serve her turn) with the counsel of Seneca, whom she
acquainted not but with the least part of the corruption of her intentions: for
she being a cruel woman, and that never received those into favor whom she
hated: she caused Lolia Paulina to be put to death, that had reasoned against
her for the marriage of Claudius. She caused Calpurnia to be banished out of
ITALY. And having through Pallas credit, who privately governed her, and also
kept her, made her son Nero to be adopted, who was preferred before
Germanicus the right successor unto the Empire: to the end she would have her
power and authority to be known to the friends and allies of the Empire, she
caused a number of soldiers of the old bands and people to be carried to the
place where she was borne, a town of the VBIANS, at this day called CVLLEN,
upon the Rhein. So that this city was afterward, and is at this present
called COLONIA AGRIPPINA. Afterward, Caractacus a king of England and his
Queen submitted themselves to Claudius the Emperor of Rome.
for a new testimony of this authority, Caractacus king of ENGLAND, was led
prisoner unto ROME, and presented with his wife and his brethren unto Claudius:
who in presence of the people and of his gards pardoned them: this king and his
train went the same time before Agrippina (who was set upon a scaffold joining
unto that of her husbands:) they did her reverence, and thanked her with the
same praises they gave the Emperor. Which was found very strange and new,
against the custom and fashion of doing of the ancients: to see a woman set
amongst the standards and ensigns of the ROMANS. But she maintained that she
was a companion of the Empire obtained by her predecessors. Now these were but
slight approches in comparison of this that follows. For having caused her
son to be declared to be of sufficient age, in testimony whereof he took
the robe due unto those that were come to man's estate, and obtained that he
might receive the Consulship at twenty years of age: she made him have the
power of Proconsull out of the city, and the name of Prince of the youth.
Besides all this, there was great largess made unto the people in his name,
and a sum of money given to every soldier. Also Nero himself passing on to
go to the plays of Circes, went apparelled with an Imperial robe, and
Britannicus as he was wont: who remembering so many outrages as they had done
unto him, could not contain but must show some coffeehouse. But this served
Agrippina her intention: for she prevailed so much with Claudius, that she
procured him to banish or put to death all the governors of his son
Britannicus. And worse yet: he committed him unto men suborned by Agrippina;
who passing further yet, discharged Lucius Geta of his Captaineship of the
guard, and Ruffus Crispinus, servants of the house of Messalina, and placed in
their rooms, Burrus Afranius, a man greatly esteemed for a warrior, but who
knew well enough by whose favor he was advanced. Such was the boldness of this
Agrippina, a great Lady in truth (for she was the daughter, sister, wife, and
mother of an Emperor) but of a spirit compounded of all sorts of mischiefs.
We have touched these things passing by, upon the occasion of Seneca: who being
occupied about his pupil, was constrained to be partaker of many counsels, of
the which he understood not the depth always. But so it is, that Agrippina
served her turn much by his authority, to advance her business: the which
Seneca perceived well, but he could not remedy it, for he thought of it too
late. Now touching Nero: although the free admonitions of his master were
bars to keep him in order, yet the corruptions of that time, and the working
of his mother also, began by little and little to appear in him: so that by time
he made it manifest, that the good instructions had beaten his cares a little,
and troubled his brain somewhat: but that evil had taken too deep root in
his heart. Furthermore, whilst Nero remained so as under the rod, openly there
could be noted in Agrippina nothing but severity and gravity, no insolences
in her house, otherwise then she thought might serve for the advancement of her
affairs: for then, her self, as also all her train, gave themselves over to
all dissolution. Now after she had advanced a part of her intentions, Nero
being sixteen years old married Octauia the daughter of Claudius: and to show
that he had learned under Seneca, he pleaded many causes of importance unto the
Senate, with the praise of all men. Immediately after, a matter happened, that
compelled Agrippina to look advisedly unto her affairs. Claudius having
drunk well at a feast, let these words escape him, that his destiny was first
to endure all the mischiefs of his wives, and afterward to punish them. She
being afraid to be prevented, determined to make have, after she had first
destroyed Lepida her cousin german, who wanne the heart of Nero by her
kindness and liberality. These troubles of Agrippina gave Narcissus the
alarm, and made him join with Britannicus. But in these stirs Claudius was
poisoned by a woman, an Eunuke of his, and his physician, practiced of long
time by Agrippina, who having disdained Britannicus and his sisters a long
time, suddenly the gates of the palace were opened, and Nero accompanied with
Burrus presented himself to the soldiers PRETORIANS, of whom being saluted
Emperor, he was confirmed by decree of the Senate, and afterward allowed by
the Provinces. Then Nero made diverse orations penned by Seneca, who besides
the contentment he had of the high dignity of his pupil, wrote a pleasant
discourse upon the death of Claudius, and did intitule it, Apocolokynthosis,
that is to say, immortality gotten by mushrommes: because the meat was
sprinkled all over with mushrommes, whereof Claudius was poisoned. The which
Nero afterward called the meat of the gods, seeing that by that means his
father in law was scraped out of the world, and made one of the gods after the
fashion of the ROMANS. Also Gallio Senecaes brother gave Claudius a mock,
saying that he was drawn up to heaven with a hook, slenting at the custom in
practice at that time: to draw the bodies of malefactors put to death in
prison, with an iron hook into the river. Such was the end of Claudius,
rewarded for his incest, and for the injury he did unto his son Britannicus,
to advance a son in law, for to please an ambitious woman, to wit, Agrippina.
Nero being thus raised up, his mother set upon Julius Sillanus Proconsull in
ASIA, who was poisoned because she feared him, for that being the last son of
Augustus, the people did greatly honor him, and said he should be preferred
before Nero. On the other side Narcissus was hastily compelled to die, although
Nero was very angry withal. To be short, the knives were drawn, and this
woman had shed much blood, if Burrus and Seneca had not beaten down the
blows. They being Neroes governors, and agreeing well together in this equal
and common greatness, they had both alike power and authority, but by diverse
means. Burrus, he disposed of all matters military, and was a grave man, but
had sower manners. Seneca with a pleasant and comely fashion taught this young
Prince eloquence. They did carefully help one another, and often conferred
together what means they should use to make Nero love virtue, whereof he
seemed to have great beginnings. To hold him in more easily, they let him have
his own will in exercises and honest pleasures, and left him to his
disposition to do as he thought good. This young man from his infancy used his
wit, which was quick to diverse things, peradventure better for a man of some
other quality, to wit: to grave, to paint, to sing, to play on the citherne,
to ride horses, and to make verses. That a Prince have all these parts in him,
and be furnished with others: is not a thing in it self to be blamed, so that
the principal do always go before, and that nothing be forgotten requisite
for discharge of his government received of God. Otherwise, as he was justly
reproved, that of a wise Physician was become an evil Poet: and sometime a
great Lord was blamed for that he was too good a Musician. Also it was said to
a king, that would contest against a player on the flute: that it was not his
craft. So they may answer him that would describe the praises of a Prince: He
was a good player at tennis, a cunning workman, a brave fencer, a fine
dauncer, a great talker: My fair friend, thou do as if one being about to
speak of a man and his contentment, came to tell us that he handles his feet
and his hands finely, and that he has fine shoes on, and wears his hat
gallantly: and thou forgest bodies without a soul, and men without vocation,
and vocations ridiculous. Agesilaus hearing one call the king of PERSIA, a
great king: Why, said he, is he greater then my self, unless it be that he is
iuster then I am? Nothing surely makes Kings and Princes truly great but
justice. Other things how exact soever they are found, they shall oftentimes
meet with more excellent in a poor crafts man's hand, hidden amongst the
refuse of the people. The Prince therefore is not desirous of true honor, nor
a man that deserves praise, that is careful to cloth his body sumptuously,
and that glories to be a painter, a grauer, a cunning workman, a singer, a
player at tennis, a hunter, a dauncer, and that his house be richly furnished
with household stuff, and himself daintily served: and all this while he
gives no order for his speech, his company, and conversation, that therein he
be grauer and wiser then a base and common person, making no account to have
the palace of his soul royally apparelled and set forth, as appertains to
a royal magnificence. But how can a Prince be great, what power or authority
soever he have, if he be given to vile things, unworthy of his true greatness:
and worse then that, if he join vice unto these ridiculous things in him? Away
with this trash, and take virtue from a great man in the world, you shall see
him little in all other things. Little in his gifts and presents: because he
will not, or knows not how to dispose them. Little in pains, because of his
delicateness: little toward God, because of his superstition: little unto the
good, because of his envy: little unto men, because of his cowardlinesse: little
among women, because he is subject unto voluptuousness. For like as evil
workmen, which set up little statues upon great and large bases, do by measure
show the smalnesse of their statues: even so when fortune lifts up to high
estate a man of a weak and little heart, where he is to be seen of all the
world, and in the place of the robe and staff of justice, he is seen
apparelled like a crafts man, or an interlude player: she does discover,
descrie, and dishonor him, making it to appear how he reeleth and stumbleth
for his lightness. Let this be spoken to the purpose of Neroes pastimes: who
shortly after left all such comedies, to play terrible tragedies. And for his
small pleasures, although at the first Burrus and Seneca were wary that this
young Prince lived modestly enough: yet we must confess that sometime they
gave him liberty to entertain women: which the estate of his court and of
ROME did offer him at pleasure. But that which most troubled them, was the
boldness of Agrippina: who being set on fire with all the passions that may be
found in a wicked government: had near about her palace an arrogant man, and
that having forgotten with what condition he came to mount so high, braued all
the world, and Nero himself: who, notwithstanding his youth, did very
impatiently bear the insolency of this minion. And yet he bare it, because he
would not anger his mother, to whom he spared no reverence, honor, and
kindness amongst his Lords: also he called her his good mother, even to give
this name otherwhile for a watchword unto the Captain. In these beginnings
Nero made many goodly and well penned orations, after the manner of Seneca, who
had a gentle spirit, and meet for the ears of this time. These exercises
fashioned Nero, kept under his wild nature, and framed it to the affairs of
estate: in such sort, that the first five years of his Empire, he was so
finely handled by Seneca, seconded with Burrus, that the affairs of peace and
war prospered, every man having great hope of Nero, who showed himself
lowly, and given to virtue. Seneca reports wonders in his books he did
dedicate unto him, where he treats of clemency, singularly of this
gentleness of his. For at the beginning of the second book he says, that
Burrus desirous to hang two thieves, sued to the Emperor ot set too his hand,
against whom, and for what causes this execution should be done. This being put
off diverse times, Burrus solicited the dispatch, and being angry, presented
the paper unto Nero: who with a discontented countenance, and doing it as
against his will, he cried out: By my will, I would I could neither write nor
read. See to what end the instructions of Seneca served: where I will tell you
another story, although it chanced a long time after the first, to show the
credit of the master toward his scholar. Nero having made a pauilion with
eight panes wonderful sumptuous, Seneca told him: Thou have showed thy self
in this pauilion that thou art poor: for if thou loose it, thou shall never
have the like again. As it came to pass: for the ship wherein this pauilion
was, was cast away. And Nero remembering Senecaes words, did bear the loss of
it more patiently. Furthermore, Seneca accompanied Nero in the assemblies of
counsel, and oftentimes told him in the field what he should do, according to
the occurrences: and in diverse orations he procured that Nero made
protestation of his gentleness before the Senate. The which turned to the
praise of Seneca, in such sort notwithstanding that the people perceived it,
and rejoiced at it. So they report that the Emperor Traian was wont to say,
that all the other Princes were far from the first five years of the Empire
of Nero: as Tacitus and others do testify. In the mean time Nero showed
himself very liberal unto Seneca, and did esteem him as much, or more, then
any man in ROME at that time: for he made him a present of great sums of
money, unto three thousand Sestertium, which some think do amount unto seven
millions and 50000 crowns, of the which part of it yielded him great profit
at usury: the other part was bestowed upon sumptuous gardens, houses of
pleasure, lands and possessions far off and near ROME: and furthermore, a
palace in the city, full of all sorts of precious moueables. For all this
Seneca waxed nothing the prowder, but fearing fortune, and remembering his old
state and condition, sought to keep himself upright in the midst of the
great combats which were like to come, having upon his arms the unconstant
youth of Nero, the which in sight began to run to his destruction: on the
other side, the ambition of Agrippina to fight withal and beat down: this
woman being of such a spirit, that she could tarry in no place, but set her
self and others on work. But this credit of Burrus and of Seneca, and their
great riches also, especially of Seneca, made them to be envied of many, that
did blame and accuse them openly. Whereunto Seneca opposed the gravity of his
manners, and sought by diverse writings to strengthen himself more and more: as
some of his works, specially the discourse of a happy life, seems to be done
by him during these alarmes.

Now the beginning of these griefs of Seneca, came partly for that he
perceived Neroes mind so corrupted, that he began to be very dissolute: and
partly also for that he discovered that Agrippina and her minions would set
upon him and Burrus also, which with time would bring them into many dangers.
And though for his own part he was resolute against all accidents:
nevertheless the charge and care he had of the affairs of the Empire, and the
love which he bare unto Nero his scholar, troubled him exceedingly.
Nevertheless as hope entertaineth us in all dangers, attending better: he
determined to keep himself upright as long as he could possible, and to
expect some other issue in the affairs. Nero was enamoured with a bond woman
called Act, which his familiars did endure, alleging they must suffer one
evil, for fear a worse should happen: and that so long as he should satisfy
himself with her, he should not run after the Ladies of ROME. But Agrippina
that could not bear with this insolency, began to take up her son roundly,
thinking she could by her magistralitie remedy this well enough. To the
contrary, this was to kindle the fire, and to embrace it altogether in this
girl. Nero being waxen great, and counseled by Otho and Claudius Senecio, who
made the messages of Love: he snuffed at these reprehensions, and began to
despise his mother: who on the sudden came to change her subtilties. And she
had not been so sharp before in rebuking, but she was now as gentle in
yielding, and offered her closet to her son for the accomplishing of his
desires. This sudden change, made Nero and his minions think much of it, in
so much as they prayed him to beware of the deceipts of this woman, that
practiced in her heart some villainy. Nero countermining her, presented his
mother with many rich jewels and apparel of great price. But she being
suspicious as could be possible, gave them injurious words that brought them.
Wherewith Nero being offended, and knowing that Pallas was the chief
counselor of Agrippina, took his offices from him which were committed to
him by the Emperor Claudius. Agrippina began then to diminish in reputation,
and to fly off the hooks: and coming to Nero himself, threatened him to take
his Empire from him, and to establish Britannicus, the lawful successor of
Claudius: and hereupon detested in express terms the wickedness she had
committed to bring up a son that was so unthankful unto her: adding moreover
that she would go find out the armies with Britannicus: so long as they should
see on the other side, this baggage fellow Burrus, and this banished
pedanticall companion Seneca (so did she qualify him) barking after he
government of the world. These threatenings were accompanied with such strange
countenances and imprecations, that they troubled Nero, besides that
Britannicus came now to be fourteen years old: and that one day playing, he
could say aloud before Nero himself, that they had taken his Empire from him.
Shortly after Britannicus was poisoned, and died suddenly, to the great
astonishment of Agrippina and of Octauia also. Afterward, Nero desisted to
converse so privately with his mother as he did at other times: and began to
give ear unto them that would set them further at odds: so that a certain
fool called Paris, having told Nero one night that Agrippina conspired against
him: he was resolved to make his mother be put to death, and to take from
Burrus the charge of Captain of the gards. But Seneca kept him from that, and
after some reasons passed between them, Burrus being sent for, to put Nero by
his choler, he besought him to let him have the charge of this business,
assuring him that he would put Agrippina to death, if she were convinced of any
villainy. Notwithstanding that every body should be heard speak in their
defense, and above all, a mother: adding also that the accusers were not
present, and that there was but one accuser suspected. And that he could not
justify, that such an important deliberation should be made by night, and at
the table: and that all that would show his rashness and folly more then any
other thing. Nero being somewhat pacified, they tarried till day, that they
might go to the mother, to know how these accusations fell out. Burrus was
there by express commission with Seneca, and some others, to mark what should
be said. But Agrippina could so well justify her self, that her accusers were
punished: for one of them was put to death, and the rest banished. From that
time forward Nero began to run riot as is described by Suetonius, Tacitus,
and Dion. But the beginning of new and horrible miseries, (the other that went
before being but light in respect of them) was the falling in love with Sabina
Popea, the wife of Otho, who had taken her away from her first husband Ruffus
Crispinus, a knight of ROME. Nero did the like unto this Otho, and took from
him this minxe that knew the tricks of the occupation. She having gained Nero
in a little space, prevailed so much with him, that he determined to put his
mother Agrippina to death. Who hearing of the ill will her son did bear her,
sought by all means to get into his favor again: even to present her self
so shamefully unto him, that I shame to be the reporter of that which the
historians speak of her. This notwithstanding he perseuered in his
determination, and commanded Anicetus General of the galleys of MISENE, to see
her drowned: the which was executed in some sort, yet Agrippina for that time
escaped being hurt, and got to a house of pleasure of hers. Nero hearing these
news, more dead then alive, thinking he was undone: sent presently for Burrus
and Seneca, to have their advice: and we cannot tell (says Tacitus) whether
they were of counsel and privy to this fact, or not. Both of them therefore
were a great while and spoke not a word: being afraid they should loose time,
if they should go about to dissuade Nero from that which he was purposed to
redouble upon her: and they knew well that the day was come, that Nero must
needs dye, if Agrippina were not prevented. Seneca, who until this present
time was ever ready to speak, looked upon Burrus, as to know of him if he
thought good to command the men of war to do this murder. Burrus answered,
that the PRETORIAN soldiers were so affectioned to the house of the Caesar's,
and did so much reverence the memory of Germanicus, that they would never
enterprise any thing against the life of his children: and that Anicetus was to
perform his promise. Who without any further thought, demanded and accepted
the commission, which was forthwith executed, and Agrippina put to death in
her house, where she thrusting out her body to the Centener, who took his
sword in his hand to kill her, she cried out: Ventrem fert, desiring that the
womb which had borne such a fruit as Nero, should be first stricken, and run
through. Nero defiled with this execrable murder, added thereto other infinite
abominations, specially the putting away and doing his wife Octauia to death,
a virtuous Princess, and that deserved better. Now this is enough that we have
touched these things by they way, because they specially concern the life of
Nero, who paid his master with an evil reward, entangling him in such wicked
counsels. On the other side also it cannot be denied, that Burrus and Seneca
yielded too much to the cruel will of this Parricide. And as for the
extremity they feared, there were means enough to have helped it: and we must
never do evil, that good may come of it. And what good could come of such an
execrable abomination? For though Agrippina deserved such a cruel punishment,
for so many wicked deeds as she had done: yet should not her son have had his
hand in it, and his counselors should not have consented unto it, nor Anicetus
have executed it. As all were much to be blamed for this deed, yet some more
then other, so they had all their turn, as Tacitus and Suetonius do show
particularly.

Burrus dislodged the first, and as least to be blamed for so many disorders,
he was spared, in that he saw not the other incredible confusions that fell out
afterward. His throat swelling within, by little and little, he died, his
pipes being stopped that he could fetch no wind. Many affirmed, says Tacitus,
that by the commandment of Nero, making as though they would help him, the
palate of his mouth was rubbed with poison, and that Burrus perceived that
wickedness, and when Nero came to see him, he would not vouchsafe to look on
him, but turned on the other side. And Nero asking him how he did, he answered
only, I am well. This man was wonderfully lamented of the ROMANS, because of
his virtue, and of the foolishness of one of his successors, and of the
notable villainies of the other called Tigellinus, who was the utter ruin of
Nero. The death of Burrus much impaired the power and authority of Seneca: for
that the means to do good were weak, as having lost the half part of their
life: and because that Nero inclined unto those which held him up in his
wickedness, against the which Seneca opposed himself as time and occasion
would suffer him. But his enemies having the Princes ear, they failed not to
set upon this honorable person, because of his age and the services he had
done to Nero. They did falsely accuse him, says Tacitus, for that he having
great riches, and more then was fit for a private man, he did still increase
them, and grew greater: and besides did gain and draw the good will of the
peoole too much unto him. That he had goodlier gardens and more sumptuous
houses of pleasure, then the Emperor himself. Furthermore, that he imputed all
the honor to himself for knowing how to speak excellently well: and that he
made verses oftener then he was wont, after that he perceived Nero took
pleasure to make them himself. That flatly condemning Nero his exercises, he
mocked him, seeing him ride and manage horses, and laughed at him hearing him
sing. And all this was but to make men believe, that nothing was well done in
the affairs of the estate, that proceeded not from his invention. Now that
Nero was come out of his infancy, and in the flower of his youth, that he
should leave his master, considering that his ancestors should serve him
well enough for great and good tutors: Seneca understanding by the report of
those that yet somewhat regarded virtue and honor, how these lewd incensers
did accuse him: perceiving also that Nero withdrew himself more and more from
his familiarity, which he had showed in times past: he besought him to hear
him, the which having obtained, he said thus unto him: My Lord, it is now
fourteen Senecaes Oration unto Nero.
years since I was first called to accompany the great hope that was had of your
infancy, and eight years since you have been Emperor: during which time you
have heaped so much goods and honor upon me, that nothing wants to my
felicity, but to know how to use them well. To this purpose I will lay before
you notable examples practiced by men of your quality, not of mine. Augustus
great father of your grandfathers father, licensed M. Agrippa to withdraw
himself unto MYTILENE, to lead a private life: and to C. Mecaenas to live at
his ease within ROME it self, as in some pleasant remote place farther off.
The one of them had accompanied him in his wars, and the other having been
beaten and tormented with great tempests in ROME, had bone both, to speak the
truth, amply recompensed, as also the great service they had done well deserved
it. As for my self, I brought nothing that deserved you should be so noble and
liberal unto me, but only my studies nourished (if I may be so bold to speak
it) in the shadow, and covertly, from whence notwithstanding all my reputation
is proceeded, for as much as it seems I have been in your apprentiships:
which truly is to me a great reward and rich recompense. But besides all this,
you have infinitely favored me, and presented me with innumerable goods. In so
much that I often reason thus with my self: Is it possible, that I that am but
of a simple house of Knights (also dwelling without ROME) should hold the place
of one of the chiefest Lords of ROME? and amongst the most noble, and those
that are noted to be of so great antiquity, that a new come man as my self,
has dared to show himself in place? Where is that spirit that contented it
self with mediocritie? what means he to have so fine and goodly gardens?
What? he walks by such and such houses of pleasure, near unto the city. His
lands and possessions are of so great an extent, and his money brings him in
such a commodity many ways, that he is full to the throat. For the which
there is nothing to be offered, but a defense for my self: that I could not
refuse your presents. Now we have, both the one and the other, performed our
duty: you, in giving so much as a Prince could give to him that he loves: and
I, in receiving that which a man in great favor might have and take of his
Prince. As for my honors and estates, Envy looks awry upon me: howbeit (as
all other things of the world) she is under the feet of your greatness. Yet
in the mean time she lights upon me, and therefore I have need of help. And
as in war, or otherwise in traveling abroad, if I were weary I would
require rest: so finding my self in the travel of this life now old and very
unmeet for the least office, since I can no longer support the burden of my
riches, I do desire to be discharged. Command therefore that your receivers
henceforth do take them and put them into your treasure. I shall not therefore
become poor, but when I shall be rid of those things which blindfold me with
their brightness, I shall bestow my time in study, which I was wont to employ
in my gardens and possessions. You are young and lusty, and time has
established you in the greatness of your estate: but we that are your ancient
servants have leave as it were to repose our selves. It shall be also a great
honor for you to have raised those to Neroes answer to Senecaes oration.
great offices, to whom mean things had sufficed. Unto this Nero made answer,
in manner as follows: For that on the sudden I do answer your premeditate
Oration, it is because I have learned it of you, that have taught me how I
should deal, not only in things seen far off, but also in those which are
presented upon the sudden unto me. Augustus my grandfather suffered Agrippa and
Mecaenas to repose themselves after their travels: but it was in such an age,
that his authority might maintain that, and any thing else by him granted:
and yet he did not take from the one nor the other any goods that he had given
unto them. They got it in the wars, and with danger of their lives: for
Augustus spent his youth in wars. I do assure my self that your arms nor
hands would have failed me, if I had gone to the wars: but as the estate of
my affairs did bear, you have by reason, by counsel, and by instructions
raised up my infancy and youth. So will I remember all the days of my life
the good service I have received at your hands. That which you hold of me, your
gardens, money in bank, houses in the country abroad: all that is subject
unto diverse accidents. And though all together seem much, yet is it so, that
many far short of your deserts have possessed more. I am ashamed to name
bondmen made free, whom men see richer then you: and the cause that makes me
ashamed is, that you whom I should cherish above all others, do not pass them
in riches and humane greatness. Furthermore, you are yet in good age, to
govern your lands and revenues, and we do but now enter into managing the
affairs of the Empire: but it may be that you esteem your self less then
Vitellius, three times Consul: and commend Claudius above me, as if I could
not by my liberality give you as much goods as Volusius by long sparing has
gotten. Moreover, if our slippery and unconstant youth sway on one side more
then it ought, you reform it, guiding by your aid and vigilancie that small
direction we have. If you bring your money into my coffers, If you forsake the
Prince, they will not say it is because you are content with little, and seek
your ease: but their talk shall be none other, but of my covetousness, and my
cruelty. And although they should much praise your moderation in this action,
yet it becomes not an old man to seek honor by doing any thing that should
dishonor his friend. Nero added to this fine speech, many embracements and
kisses, being made by nature, and brought by custom to cover his malice with
false and counterfeit kindness. Seneca (as it is the conclusion of a speech
holden with him that commands) thanked him: yet he immediately changed his
accustomed manner he was wont to use during his former greatness: gave them
leave to depart that came every morning in troops to salute him: turned away
from others that offered to follow and accompany him: very seldom times he
went into the city, and stirred not out of his house, as if he had been sick,
or troubled after his study of Philosophy. This was the talk betwixt Nero
and Seneca, who having leisure to bethink himself better of the answer of
Nero, knew very well that his fortune was changed, and that the disciple was
become the master: yea and that so much more dangerous, for that his cruel
courage was wrapped up in so gracious words and countenances, the which a man
was constrained to trust, or at the least to make show of it.

Nero being as it were overcome by Seneca, was as cruel and more then before,
counseled by Tigellinus and Popea. First of all then he began to cut off the
heads of Plautus and Sylla, honorable men banished before into ASIA and to
MARSEILLES. He refused, confined, and finally put to death his wife, the
Princess Octauia, using an infamous and strange manner in his proceedings
against her. He married the adulteress Popea, who brought him a daughter that
died soon after. He counterfeited the player, always intermixing some new
cruelty with his pastimes. Afterward he being present at a banquet made by
Tigellinus, in the which were committed all sorts of villainies, and he himself
being defiled with natural and unnatural whoredoms and abominations, within
few days after (a matter incredible, if so many grave historians, amongst
others Tacitus did not assure us of it) he married one Pythagoras as his
husband, which was of the company of these villans, and was solemnly married
according to the custom of other marriages. The yellow veil of the married
couple covered Neroes head. Soothsayers were sent for, the ioynter was
assigned, the bed of the spouse prepared, the wedding torches were lighted: and
to be short, they saw that openly which the night hides, when the question of
marriage is in hand with a woman. Thirdly, he set fire on a great number of
houses in ROME, so as the most part were burnt. And to clear himself of this
wickedness, he falsely laid it upon the Christians, (being a great number at
that time in ROME) that they were the authors of this disorder: in so much that
they were set upon with a strange cruelty. And yet as they put them to death,
they did a thousand mockeries unto them, putting beasts skins upon them to be
torn in pieces with dogs, or else they were hanged upon the cross, or burnt
with a little fire: their wood-houses, or stackes of wood served to give light
in the night. Now though the people of ROME were bloudily bent against these
innocents, yet there were many that had pity of them, seeing honest men
tormented, to satisfy the cruel insolency of Nero: who apparelled like a
coachman, and driving the horse himself in the midst of these confusions,
made the people pastime. Besides all this, he forraged and ransacked all ITALY
with impositions and excessive lones, ruining the towns, and not sparing also
the temples of ROME, of ASIA, nor of GREECE. It was given out abroad, says
Tacitus, that Seneca (whom Nero went oftentimes to visit, to keep him in
breath, and gently to lull him asleep) to avoid the suspicion that he had
been of counsel with this sacrilege: had asked leave to go to some house of
his far into the country. Which being denied him, he kept his chamber,
faining to be sick of the gout. Some have written that a bondsman of his
enfranchised called Cleonicus, did prepare to poison him by the commandment of
Nero: the which he avoided upon warning given him by him, or for that he feared
such a thing, living meanly, eating such fruits as were brought him out of the
country, and being contented to drink clear running water if he were athirst.
Such detestable wickedness of Nero having of long time offended many honorable
persons, which could no longer endure such a master: they resolved to set
themselves at liberty, and conspired to kill him one day when they saw
opportunity. The day being come, one called Millicus, an enfranchised bondsman
of one of the principal conspirators, went to discover to Nero what they had
complotted against him. This gave a strange alarm to the Emperor, who caused
them to lay hands of one and other, amongst which number there was Lucan the
nephew of Seneca, that was a party in this conspiracy, for anger against Nero:
who was the cause that his verses were not had in that estimation they
deserved, and commanded him not to publish them, thinking (but in vain) that
he could make as good. From that time forth they could see nothing in ROME but
imprisoning of men of quality, and preparation for execution which followed.

Seneca, that stirred not out of the country, was not forgotten of Popea, nor
of Tigellinus, which were the secret counselors of Nero in his cruelties. And
Nero also failed not to take hold of this occasion to make away his
schoole-maister, whose shadow did torment him. It was not for that Seneca was
partaker of the counsel with the conspirators, but Nero was glad to find the
mean to dispatch him with a sword, since he could not do it by poison. For one
of the conspirators called Natalis (whom Nero had pardoned) said nothing else
of him, but that he was sent to visit Seneca being sick, and to complain
because he thought not good that Piso (being the head of this enterprise, and
should be created Emperor after the murder of Nero) should come to see him,
and that he would confirm their friendship, frequenting familiarly together:
but that Seneca had answered, that their talk and meeting would neither be
profitable for the one, nor for the other: and moreover, that his life depended
upon that of Piso. Grauius Siluanus Captain of a band of gards, was commanded
to go to Seneca, to know if he would take any knowledge to have spoken the
words confessed by Natalis, and the answer that he made at that time. By
chance, or wittingly, Seneca was come home that very day, and remained in a
house of his two small miles from ROME. The Captain came thither about night,
and placed his soldiers round about the house: and afterward came in, and
found Seneca at supper with his wife Pompeia Paulina the wise of Seneca.
Pompeia Paulina, and two of his friends. So having delivered his message unto
him, Seneca answered straight being nothing moved, that Natalis was indeed sent
unto him to complain in the name of Piso, for that Seneca would not suffer him
to come and see him: and that for himself, he did excuse himself as well by
reason of his sickness, as for the desire he had to take his ease. And for
those words: that his life depended upon that of Piso, he said he had no
occasion to prefer the preservation of another private man's life, before his
own. And that furthermore, he gave not his mind to flatteries, whereof he
would have no better testimony then Nero himself, who had oftener known that
Seneca was a free man, then a slave or a bondsman. Siluanus returned unto Nero,
and made report in the presence of Popea and Tigellinus, who were very desirous
to hear his answer: which being heard, Nero asked him, if Seneca made any
show to be willing to dye. The Captain assured him that he perceived no sign
of fear nor of sorrow, in the words, nor countenance of Seneca. Thereupon Nero
commanded this Captain to return to Seneca again, and to command him to
dye. Some think that this executioner returned not again that way he was
come, but went another way, to find out Fenius Captain of the gards, whom
after he had acquainted with Neroes commandment, he asked him if he would
execute this commission. Fenius, that was of the number of the conspirators,
nevertheless advised him to obey the Emperors commandment, by a fatal
cowardlinesse of as many as were of them. For Siluanus that had this commission
to go to Seneca, was also one of the conspiracy, and yet his hand was ready
to increase the wickedness of Nero, of the which before he was desirous and
procured to see the punishment. To hide his offense in some sort, he would not,
or durst not return into the presence of Seneca, nor speak to him: but made
one of his Centeners go into the house to declare the Emperors commandment,
which was, that Seneca must dye. At that time it was half a favor unto those
that were condemned to loose their lives, to suffer them to be put to death,
either by themselves, or by any of their acquaintance: which was done in
diverse sorts. Some pricked their veins and let themselves blood, and then
went into a hot-house where they ended. Others swallowed down poison: others
stabbed themselves in with their daggers, or their swords. It is judged this
was done, that they should not fall into the hands of the hangmen: for when it
happened so, the bodies of the condemned were not buried, and their goods were
forfeited: whereas if they put themselves to death (of the which the most part
following the doctrine of the STOICKES were nothing afraid) their bodies should
be buried, and their wills and testaments good. Sometimes this choice did cut
off the griefs of a more ignominious and cruel punishment.

Now to return to Seneca. Having heard the message of the Centener, without
changing countenance, and wholly resolved: he called for his book of tables,
in the which was written his will: which being denied him by the Centener,
turning to his friends, he protested, that since he was let to acknowledge
their merits, that he would leave one only thing (and notwithstanding the
best) yet his, to wit, the image of the example of his life, the which if they
remembered, they would carry a commendable reputation of honest and virtuous
men, for a worthy reward of so constant a friendship. And seeing them weep, he
sought to appease them, or to stay their tears, now with sweet words, by and
by with vehemence, as if he would have reproved them. To conlude, he did
encourage them to remain firm and constant, asking them where was the
resolution they had learned so many years in the schools and studies of
Philosophy, against all the chances of the world. He added further, that every
one knew well what Nero was, what cruelties he had committed: and after that he
had so wickedly behaved himself to his father in law, to his mother, to his
brother, and to his wife: there was nothing left behind for the accomplishment
of his cruelties, but to add too the murder of his schoolemaister. After he
had discoursed such or the like words before them all, and as in general, he
embraced his wife, and having a little emboldened her against this blow, he
instantly prayed her to moderate her grief, and exhorted her also to remember
how virtuously he had passed his life, and gently to bear (and with a heart
worthy her self) the sorrow of the death of her husband. She for her part
assured him that she was resolved to die, and bad one of them give her the
blow. Then Seneca, not to deprive himself of that honor, and being touched with
the love he did bear her, was contented not to leave to the mercy of the
dissolution that then reigned, her whom he had most dearly loved. I did set
before you (said he) the sweetness of life: but since your self has chosen
rather an honorable death, for my part, I shall not be sorry if you show me the
way. Let the constancy therefore of so coragious a death as ours, be alike to
us both: although the endof your life shall be more famous. Immediately
thereupon, they caused the veins of their arms to be opened: but because that
Seneca had an old body, and thin by eating little, there would no blood come
out but drop by drop: he made the veins of his legs and hams to be cut. Then
weary of such a cruel butcherie, being afraid that his pains would make his
wives heart sail her, or that he himself should grow impatient for so many
torments as he endured: he persuaded her to withdraw her self into another
chamber: and for himself, having to his last gasp his words at commandment,
he caused his Secretaries that were wont to write under him, to come unto him,
and told them there many notable things in fine terms, the which were
published after his death: but time has taken them from us for want of
storie-writers: although some think that that might be kept as well as other
writings of Seneca. Others carrying some envy to the virtue of this man, have
kept it back, being loath that the posterity should enjoy a table, where the
visage of Seneca might be better known, then in other places of his works.
Nero, that had men coming and going every minute of an hour from Senecaes
house to ROME, understanding how every thing passed, and bearing no particular
hatred to Paulina, fearing also he should increase the blame of his cruelty:
he commanded they should keep Paulina from dying. Wherefore his slaves and
freed bondmen, warned by the soldiers themselves, bound up her arms, and
staunched the blood, not knowing whether she felt any thing or not. For as
there are always among the people that take things at the worst, there wanted
not men which thought that so long as Paulina stood in fear of Neroes anger,
she desired to have the report that she was a companion of the death of her
husband. But afterward when there was a better hope offered her, she was
contented to be won with the flatteries of life, unto the which she added some
few years with commendable memory, and sorrow for her husband: being otherwise
so pale of countenance, that she showed to have lost a great deal of blood and
her strength. On the other side Seneca seeing his death prolonged, he prayed
Statius Annaeus (whom he esteemed much for his faithful friendship he had
borne him a long time, and for his skill in Physic) to bring him of the like
poison to that which they keep by public ordinance in ATHENS to put offenders
to death, whereof he had of long time made provision. So when it was brought
him, he swallowed it down without regard, his members bieng cold, and his
body constant against the force of the poison. In the end, he entered into a
bathing tub of hot water, with the which sprinkling his slaves that were about
him, he added to it, that he offered this liquor unto Jupiter the deliverer.
After that being carried into a stoue, and having through the heat thereof
yielded up the ghost, his body was burned without any solemnity of obsequies.
He had so appointed it by his will made at that time when he was very rich, and
of great credit. It was reported that Subrius Flauius, one of the chiefest
conspirators, had secretly determined with the Centeners (yet not without the
priuity of Seneca) that after they had killed Nero by the means of Piso, they
should also dispatch Piso himself, to the end to make Seneca Emperor, as an
honest man, only elect and chosen to that greatness for the fame of his
virtues. Such was the end of Seneca, that had lived in honorable and public
charges, of Praetor, Quaestor and Consul under two Emperors, and was long in
credit with the last: who seeing himself covertly despised of his master,
that could no longer endure such wickedness: sought the occasion before
mentioned, but with extreme injustice, to rid him out of the way. Furthermore,
Dion thinks that Senecaes two brethren were likewise put to death. But
because he is contented to touch it but in a line, and that that which Tacitus
says is to be marked, set down in particular, and with most likely
circumstances: we will speak one word more. Shortly after the death of Seneca,
he commanded they should put Annaeus Lucanus to death, the son of Mela: who
feeling his feet and his hands cold whilst the blood ran down, and that by
little and little his spirit parted from the extremities of his body, his heart
being yet lively and his understanding good, calling certain verses of Poetry
to mind, in the which here presented a soldier hurt: dying of the same death,
he recited the same verses, which were the last words he spoke. Altitia, Lucans
mother was left alive, neither being pardoned nor punished. For Iunius Callio,
who was a Senator, he was so astonished at the death of his brother, that before
all the Senate he fell down at Neroes feet, beseeching him to give him his life.
Whereupon another Senator called Alienus Clemens, set upon him with injurious
words, calling him traitor and parricide. But the other Senators with one
consent made Clement hold his peace, telling him that he should not seek
common adversities for to revenge his private quarrel, or to draw on the
Prince to a new cruelty, who had now by his clemency quieted and forgotten
all. Within a few months after Annaeus Mela was dispatched: he was a knight of
ROME, but of the dignity of a Senator. And although Seneca and Gallio his
brethren were advanced to greater honor, yet he would never purchase it by
extremity of ambition: but being come out of SPAIN to ROME, more for the love
of his brethren and of his son then for himself, he was contented to have
this honor, that a knight was ever equal in power and credit with a Consul.
The name of his son Lucanus greatly esteemed of every body, and specially of
learned men: had gotten him great reputation. Immediately after his sons death,
he seeking somewhat too eagerly after his sons goods, he raised against him an
accuser called Fabius Romanus, one of Lucanus chiefest friends. This man showed
counterfeit letters as done by Lucanus, which charged Mela that he was partaker
with his son of the complot against Nero. death of Annaeus Mela.
Though this accusation was utterly false and fained, yet Nero that thirsted
after the riches of Mela, commanded those letters should be carried to Mela:
that was as much to say, he must die. The which Mela knowing well enough, made
his veins to be opened, and followed the way of others. Seneca in his writings
yields great testimony of the constancy and virtue of his brethren: and I
think he was a man that was not given to speak lightly. Notwithstanding, I
have simply recited that which Tacitus says, who sufficiently shows in the
example of diverse others, that it is not to be marvelled at if the cruelties of
Nero, who least spared the great then the small: made the boldest hearts of
them all quake sometimes.

Now there remains to tell you something of the Philosophy and writings of
Seneca: for it is in those tables that we must look to see him lively, and
speaking with that self vehemency of spirit that followed him even to the
last gasp of his life. It is true that the insolences of Nero had oftentimes
as it were stopped his mouth, and hindered that good soul to give free passage
to his discourses, yea and in some places they made him stumble. Yet he called
himself back again to his first thoughts, and remained constant in the midst
of the cruel raging storms of his time. Now as it is easy for men that be on
the land, where they do idly behold some master Pylot striving with the force
and fury of the wind and billows, to say: That man there should guide his
ship after another fashion: who if they were in his place, should without all
comparison find themselves more troubled, or at the least would make a
sorrowful wrack. Even so it happens, that Senecaes Philosophy is despised
of many, that think he could speak Philosophy but by his book, and that when
he should come to show it indeed, men would say he does like the masters of
fence, who being in a school of fence with young youths, they do wonders, and
give mortal vennies at pleasure: but if they come to any private fight at the
sharp, where it stands them upon for their lives: as soon as they see the
glistering of the naked sword, you may perceive all their flourishes and
tricks are gone, or changed into a flat running away. I will say at one word,
that I think Seneca as much and more a Philosopher in deed then in name. His
life and his death can say it, and in the last Chapter hereafter we must speak
more at large. For this present let us a little consider his tongue. Life is a
sweet thing, and all desire to live, yea the beasts themselves seem to have a
singular contentment, for that they have a being and life. If life be a
pleasant thing, yet is it much more pleasing and acceptable when it is well
governed, and tends to a good end. So then a quiet and contented life is much
better, sweeter, and more excellent, then a life full of troubles and passions.
This quietness is none other but felicity and good fortune. Furthermore all
men do not aspire to this end, but only wise men, and the true friends of
wisdom. For the most part of men whom the earth sustaineth, do run a strange
course when they should set a foot forward to betake them to some course of
life: and all in manner err, when they should judge what happy life is. Those
that delight in money and to gain, seek felicity in riches. The idle and
slothful think, that to make great cheer, to live (as they say) in the
shadow of tables, of pots, of curtains, and at the ease of their bodies, is
the only soueragine good. There are another sort of men greedy of worldly
honor, which establish an unspeakable happiness to command many, (in what
manner, or how dear soever it be) taking themselves to be half gods, if they
may see many men, or two or three go under their feet. But wise men establish
sovereign good in virtue. And if they be asked, What is a happy life? they
answer, That it consists in living virtuously, and serving God. This was the
Philosophy of Seneca in general. But because there are certain clouds of
opinions which darken humane felicity, it is good we look to examine them
briefly. Nature has dispersed in us some seeds of virtue, and has given us
some grains of knowledge and wisdom, which are borne with us and take root
(if we may say so) in our hearts. This notwithstanding, we must manure it, and
virtue has his precepts which opens the way to attain to the sovereign
good, whereunto the Philosophy of the Stoickes does summon us. Four things
are enemies to that good, yea they obscure it, they corrupt and abolish it in
an evil disposed heart. The first cause is death, that is to say, the fear
and imagination to lose this earthly and corruptible life. For where there is
fear, it cannot be said there is contentment and felicity, but misery: it is
not a pleasant life, but a sorrowful life, and a torment of the mind. The
second, is the bodily grief, lingering diseases, cruel and sharp in a
thousand kinds, the torments and tortures: and briefly a thousand evils which
hurt the contentment of the soul. For no man will say, that to be troubled in
his mind with a burning fever, to cry out night and day because of the gowte,
or for pain of his teeth and the reins, or to be brought to any
extraordinary torment, and to be dismembered by the hangman: is a thing where
there is no apprehension that moves the spirit. Besides all this, there are
the griefs of the soul: mourning, loss of children, of kinsfolks and dear
friends: for that afflicts and eats our thoughts without ceassing, and
gives tragical Poets ample arguments to write upon. If the grief of the
body affects the rest and contentment of the mind: much more does the inward
grief and anguish. And finally there are passions, as joy and pleasure, which
hinder and abolish the feeling of a happy life. Those that are possessed with
an extraordinary joy, oftentimes both do and say many fond things and
iestures, in words and works. As if a man be told that land is fallen to him,
or that he is raised to wished dignity not looked for: ye shall see him play
the fool and wanton like a child. There are some whose manners honor changes
in such sort, that from the day till the next morning you shall not know them
by their face, by their countenances, by their words, nor by their apparel:
they will straight disdain them that they called before servants or loving
friends. Now this vain pride and foolishness are in manner one self thing:
and it may be said that all ambitious men are altogether besotted, or
doubtless they will be so. If thou will make me see a proud man, one that
presumes to know much, and that looks upon his feathers, as they say, I will
presently show thee a fool furnished at all pieces. There is no surer sign of
foolishness then pride: and who will say then Pride shows foolishness.
that the life of such a one is happy? And as for pleasures, we see how a man
is carried away, who then is no more himself: but to the contrary, thinks
that the destruction of body and soul is his sovereign good. Now amongst all
the Philosophers which have tried to remedy these troubles of the mind, and to
maintain a man in this contentment which they call sovereign: it may be said
the Stoickes were the chief, and among the Stoics Seneca. I will not here
enter into examination of the doctrine of this sect, nor declare that which
Zeno and Chrysippus have written, as may be gathered of Laertius and of
Plutarch: but simply to stay my self upon my principal purpose, which is is
of Seneca. And in this place to follow that which many learned men have
gathered of his works, to show what was his Philosophy: unto the which we
will add some Summarie of reasons with the which he helps himself, to fight
with those passions, and to make the soul at peace, as much as he himself
could apprehend it. This is out of all question, that Seneca was one of the
first and principal Philosophers of the Stoickes among the Latins, as he
himself does boast in his own writings. Furthermore, he exalts this sect
above all others, and says, That the Stoickes do make profession of a
Philosophy worthy of men: forasmuch as there is difference betwixt them and
others, as betwixt males and females. That the other kinds of Philosophies are
made, to hear and to obey: but that the Stoicke is borne to teach and
command. He being desirous to present some perfect Idea of a wise man,
brings forth Cato: and in the Treaty where he will show that the wise man
cannot be offended nor outraged, he lifts up this man out of the rank of
all other men, and specially comme^deth him in his death. If he speak of the
Stoickes, he calls them his, and does make open profession of their
instructions. Now in many places he distinguishes Philosophy into three
parts, which he calls Rational, Morrall, and Natural. But after the fashion
of the Stoics, he rested more upon the moral, albeit that all his discourses
show that he had a marvelous vein in the rational. And the books of
natural questions show that he had a deep insight in the secrets of nature.
So then his principal end was to frame good manners, and to bring men to the
knowledge of the contentment of the mind, to desire and apprehend it. They saw
him oftentimes exhort Lucilius to the study of moral Philosophy, as in the
end of his 89. Epistle: So set down these things, says he, to others, that
thou thy self may take pleasure to comprehend them. Write, to read
afterward thy writing, referring all things to the reformation of life, and to
the means of appeasing the fury of passions. Study, not to be wiser then
others, but to be better. On the other side, he turned the same Lucilius from
the study of Logic, and from his subtle disputations, in the which they
please themselves that do but linger after sillables and words. Leave (said he
to him in the 71. Epistle) this occupation and sifting of letters, to those
masters that shut up a thing so magnificent as Philosophy is in syllables: and
do imbase, yea bring to nothing, and utterly destroy the mind, in teaching
things that are not worth the labor and study. I am content that thou resemble
wise men that have invented letters, but not those that teach them. In some
other places he laugheth at the subtilties of these school disputers, namely,
where he sets down one of their fashions of speech, to wit, in the 48. which
is the 49. in the editions not well corrected, upon these words: Mus (that is
to say a mouse) is a syllable: a mouse eats cheese, therefore it follows
that a syllable eats cheese. But it is not only that he sets upon Logic,
or rational Philosophy, but also on the sciences commonly called the liberal
sciences, and especially when there is question of the Philosophy of manners.
Witness that which he writes in the fourscore and eighth Epistle worthy to
be diligently read of all, but specially of them whom such sciences do puff
up, and who for the rest do little care to rule their life within the compass
of virtue. In sum, he declares in a great number of places, that Philosophy
consists not in the knowledge of these things, but that the end thereof is,
to give counsel against all the accidents of this life: and that men were wont
to repair unto Philosophers, who do show them in the midst of darkness
(wherewith humane society is snared) the way they must follow not to err,
showing what things are necessary and unprofitable: how easy the laws of
nature are: how joyfully we live and at our ease, following of the same. And to
the contrary, that there can be nothing but misery in the condition of those,
which suffer themselves to wander rather by opinion, then by nature and reason.
I think therefore that all the Philosophy of Seneca looks unto that, to
establish the mind all that may be: to attain to the which it speaks of the
sovereign good, to the end to draw us to aspire unto it. And because the
accidents of this life, namely the causes before mentioned, do obscure this
happiness: he strives with infinite discourses and reasons against them. Now it
were to make a great volume, if all were put together that he speaks, and it
were better to leave it to their liberty that shall read the works of this
Philosopher, of the which I will note here some heads or rules, on the which he
reasons very amply to remedy the griefs before named. The intention
therefore of Seneca above all in matters most important, is to beat down first
all corporal and spiritual passions: to wit, opinion and apprehension. He
discovers the vanity, shows the wrong which men of understanding do, and
the error of their judgment: who see things as in the water, and with a
corrupt eye. Which done, he goes further, and seeks to show, that when that
which is called evil is arrived, the wise man feels it not: as also it is as
little trouble to him when one thinks to touch him, as it is then when one
threatened him a far off. For proof of this, he shows that they cannot hurt
a wise man any manner of way: and that no man is iniuried or hurt but by
himself. That the wise man bending al his thoughts unto virtue, cannot be
offended, but rather ouercometh all humane accidents, as well for respect of
himself, as for all others. Hereupon he comes to this point, to maintain,
that that which they call evil, is good to the wise man: who like a good
husband makes his profit of all in such sort, that there is nothing in the
world but serves his turn, and whereof he is not master with a singular
contentment. Of these rules and Maxims, there rise many Paradoxes dispersed in
his books, the which if a man consider apart, are very strange and ridiculous
withal: but being brought to their originals, they may receive some
exposition. Furthermore, to frame a perfect wise man, he will have nothing
pleasant unto him but virtue, which consists in contemning all that the world
admireth: and a love of beautiful things which give contentment to the soul.
That all that which is earthly and corruptible, should be esteemed as much as
nothing: that the wise man enfolding himself in his virtue, sees all the
greatness of this world very low under him, and as it were trodden under the
feet of his heart. And that in the midst of all dangers, yea even in the most
fiercest death of all, and when heaven should fall upon him: he remains merry
and pleased with the felicity which his virtue brings unto him. Afterward
he reasons particularly against the apprehensions of death: and shows that
it is as inevitable, as it is also good and necessary. That the greatest
contentment of a wise man is, that he can break in sunder the iron chain that
holds him, as often and when he thinks good: and upon this occasion
treats in some places of the immortality of the soul, as in the end of the
seven and fiftith Epistle, in the threescore and fifth, threescore and
sixteenth, and the hundred and seventeenth, in his comfortable discourse unto
Martia, and elsewhere. Touching these corporal pains, he shows that they
cannot turn a man out of the pathway of virtue, nor from the profession of
constancy and truth, nor from the resolution to maintain a just cause. That
there is no pain nor grief so sharp, that can let a wise man to think of
his duty, and to acquit himself so far as his hands may reach. That these
corporal griefs cannot eclipse the least of the beams of virtue, and the
hope of the immortality of our souls, for the which we exchange in the day
that our pains comes as it were to have greatest strength, all the
discommodities we apprehend in this transitory life. Furthermore, that the
troubles which the estate of this world does spread as a veil before our
minds, cannot blindfold them to see the perfect beauty of virtue, and to hear
the excellent comforts which she proposes. Also that the wise man is
sufficiently defended not to be overcome by passions, which have no power on
him that is in the ordinary safeguard and protection of virtue, in possession
whereof he is already so entered, that he still goes forward every day more then
other, shortly to enjoy her with perfection. To conclude, that there is no
hinderance at all for him whom virtue pleases, and whom she brings to
immortality. And this is a little touch (me thinks) which may be particularly
noted in Seneca: in the beauty whereof, as in faces better formed, there are
some spots discovered as in other Philosophers, namely the Stoics. Above all,
in his portraiture of this wise man, he imagines in this life a thing that is
not to be found in a corrupt man given over to sensuality, which is, virtue
and perfection. But let us refer that to the ignorance of true religion, and
consider this Philosopher in the limits of his sect. For other Paradoxes, as of
the world, of the spirit, of passions and affections of virtue, and some others
borrowed of the school of his masters, that Plutarch has examined in his
book Of common conceptions, and in that which he entituleth, The contradiction
of the Stoickes: that which is evil does condemn it self, or excuses it
self under the questions and disputations, which permit a man to say somewhat.
And for the other, forasmuch as Seneca made profession to form manners, he
seems therein to have given way and free passage to some of his conceptions,
and after the example of Painters, to give some shadows unto his tables, the
better to retain the judgment of the reader. That which I least allow in him,
or rather which I cannot approve, is the excessive praise he gives to his wise
man, lifting him up, yea above the gods. And afterward in diverse places he
would have this wise man put himself to death, and of his authority and power
dissolve the bands of this life, without leave of the sovereign Captain, and
with a testimony of a strange cowardlinesse and distrust of the doctrine of
the eternal Providence: the which would have us keep a steadfast hope and
confidence, yea even when things seem to be most desperate. And that which he
often applies unto the death of Cato, whom he infinitely commends, has been
by us examined in the comparison of Cato and of Phocion. Furthermore, Seneca
stayed not upon one or two in his discourses he has left unto us, but has
culled out of all the Philosophers Greeks and Latins which were before him,
all that he thought good to set down for the rule and government of our life,
according to the end he looked unto. And as for his writings, all that we have
left concerning moral and natural Philosophy, with the pleasant discourse
upon the death of Claudius, is out of all disputation until this present: as
the style that is hard, short, sententious, and in apt terms for that time,
and aster the manner of teaching of the Stoickes, does show it. But for the
books entitled, Controuersiae and Suasoriae, that is to say, pleadings and
orations, or declamations, I am of the same opinion that diverse learned men of
our time are, to wit: that these books are not of Seneca, but of the father of
Seneca. And because many other learned men ancient and modern have thought the
contrary, we must needs say somewhat for proof of the opinion which we
follow. The author of these collections says, that he heard Ovid and Cicero
declame, and that he was familiar with Portius Latro, Valerius Messala, and
with others that were in the time of Augustus. When he heard Cicero, he could
be no less then fifteen years old: how can that be attributed unto Seneca,
dead in the end of the Empire of Nero, wel-neare six score years after that
time? Now, that which Tacitus speaks in diverse places of the age of Seneca,
reaches not so far: and Nero speaking to Seneca a little before his death,
said that he had yet strength enough to use his goods, and govern his
possessions. That could not be spoken of an old man of a hundred and twelve
years old. Also Seneca speaks otherwise of his age in one of his Epistles
noted here before, where he tells that about the fifth year of the Empire of
Tiberius, he came out of his infancy, of the age of eighteen years.
Furthermore, Seneca was Praetor, Quaestor, and Consul, as in his discourse to
his mother Elbia, the Chronicles, and the Lawyers books do make mention. And
to the contrary, his father dedicating his books above named unto Seneca,
Iunius, and Mela, his three sons: and speaking to Mela in the Preface of his
second book of pleadings, he exhorts him to follow the inclination of his
mind, and contenting himself with the state of a private gentleman, and a
ROMAN knight as his father, the better to warrant his life in the hazards and
accidents of this world. That which made Seneca to be esteemed the author of
those books there, is, for that his father did bear that name: and that these
three, Seneca, Nouatus, (surnamed Iunius Gallo) and Mela be brethren, and the
sons of one self father and mother, it appears by the history of Tacitus,
in the fifteenth book of his Annals, and by the writings of Seneca himself,
specially by the discourse to Elbia, where he says amongst other things:
Consider my brethren, that being safe, you have no cause to accuse fortune: you
have in the^ cause to rejoice in a diverse kind. For the one, through his good
wit has attained to honor, and the other has wisely despised it. Tacitus
plainly shows that, as we have seen here before. And whereas commonly they
allege the age of Seneca to be six score years and above, to give the more
authority to the pleadings and Orations of his father, that is to say, to the
fragments which he seems to have set forth in the favor of his children, to
frame them betimes one day to practice that whereof he made profession, to wit,
eloquence: there cannot be showed any sufficient or authenticke testimony of
that which is alleged, that Seneca had three sons called, Nouatus, Seneca,
and Mela. Touching the true books of Seneca, the dilgent reading and
consideration of them will incontinently show the profit that may be gathered
by them. For a man to stand resolved against the diverse and troublesome events
of this life, to repose himself sweetly upon the divine Providence, to
contemn death, and to desire the blessed immortality, for to repress the
insolency of strange passions which do often carry us too high and too far,
and for to enjoy a great rest amongst so many tempests and wrackes as happen
daily, I know not an Historian among the Painims, Philosopher, Orator, or
author whatsoever, that I would prefer before Seneca: yea, there are few to
be compared to him, and the most part do follow him far off.

This brings us to the consideration of some censures made of Seneca by
diverse learned men, as well ancient, as those of this latter age, to the end
to induce them that behold Seneca, to look nearely into him: for if there be
any thing wherein humane wit does give scope and license, let another judge
that. But that specially is as an ordinary thing unto them that make
profession studiously to thrust their noses into books, to mark presently,
and sometime too suddenly, that which is before them: to bear others in hand
afterward that things are such as they did imagine them to be. And although I
do not acknowledge my self to be one of the number of them that read and know
passably something: yet for all that ere I beware, I am too often attainted
with this disease, which possesses those that make many books, reproving and
judging others. But as I do not commend them in any wise unto whom the books
of sound erudition are not pleasing, (like to weak stomachs unto whom meats
evil dressed and also hurtful, seem to be the most sauorie) but feeds
themselves with their follies, vain fancies and abominations, wherewith this
latter age is miserably defiled: so would I wish that the excellent wits which
are yet in EVROPE were on the one side better advised in many respects, and in
the others more careful to discern that which is commendable and blameable,
certain or uncertain in good authors: to note them particularly unto
posterity, with two conditions: the one, that it should be done by the
sufficientest men, and as it were of purpose appointed to that end, by consent
of fame and truth: the other, that all scoffs, spiteful and sinister
passions, should be far from such censurers. To come again to Seneca: I see
that some have too much axalted him, as I think: and others have imbased him
more then needed. Which being particularly considered, peradventure it will not
mislike: and if it profit not, I hope it will move the Reader to some thought
higher then mine, both to search matters more exactly, as also to settle his
opinion upon mine with the compass of truth, of mildness, and of virtue.
Because Seneca speaks amply in some places of the providence and majesty of
God, before whom he exhorts us to walk, and sometimes prays Lucilius to
live with men as if God saw him: and to speak with God, as if men heard him.
Also that he died in the end of the Empire of Nero, at which time S. Paul the
Apostle was prisoner at ROME. Some have thought that Seneca of long time had
leaned unto Christian religion, by reason whereof his writings were read as
proceeding from a man advanced in the knowledge of the true God. And otherwise
he was contented to speak in general, and as under a veil of the ignorance of
his time, and because he would have them no more envied whom the world did
altready hate. Briefly, that he was a secret disciple of Christ, in the school
of his Apostle. In confirmation whereof, they show certain letters of Seneca
unto Paul, with mutual answers: and they do add also the testimony of a
great christian Doctor, who has placed Seneca in the Catalogue of Saints,
whose souls we believe are in glory with their Savior. Howbeit certain
learned men of our time have spoken their opinion touching all that, to whom I
do agree, to wit: that whether Seneca saw the Apostle and spoke with him,
whether he disdained to see him, or that he cared not, nor did inquire after
him, as I think that he thought then of any thing else rather then of the
doctrine taught by S. Paul: there is nothing in his life, in his writings, nor
in his death, that comes near to the Christian belief and profession. But if
we should call all those Christians, in whose writings we do read goodly and
true sentences of wisdom, justice, and the providence of God: it would make a
strange mingling of Scripture with profane books: and further, they would
dispute if the one should be put in the place of the other. As we see that in
the bodies of the books which for excellency we call the Bible, there are
two, in the which the name of God is never expressed: which notwithstanding are
holy, and do contain infinite instructions and singular consolations. Seneca
having written in some place, The Godhead is I know not what great thing, yea
so great, that it passes al man's understanding. Our life is dedicated to his
service. Let us take order to be approved of the same: for a hidden conscience
is good for nothing: God sees us. An ancient Doctor said thereupon, Any man
that should know God, could he set forth any more certain verity, then that
which is spoken here by the mouth of a man, that knew not what true religion
meant? For he represents the majesty of God, saying that it is so great,
that man's understanding cannot measure it: and plainly, the fountain of
verity: showing that the life of men is not unprofitable, (as some Epicurians
think) since it is referred to the glory of the Creator, when they follow
justice and piety. Other discourses of Seneca might be alleged touching the
providence of God, against idolatry, superstition, and impiety: but the
consequence is not stable. That he has therefore known any thing of the
doctrine of the Gospel, you shall not find one discourse in all his writings,
and the doctrine of the Stoickes does in nothing agree with that, which neither
flesh nor blood can reveal: and whereof it is not our purpose to speak in this
place, which requires not that we should discover the holy things, and much
less that we should mingle them with the profane. As for the letters
published under the name of Seneca and of Paul: both the style and the matter
show at the first sight, that it is the work of some idle man that thought
himself very wise, if he dissembled with those which did not sift it so
narrowly. And we shall not need here to make a recapitulation of the just and
learned censures that have been made: where you shall see the madness,
repugnancies, and falsehoods hidden in those letters, if they be conferred with
the life and doctrine of them unto whom they were attributed. We do not meet
with any thing so much in the writings of Seneca, as the constancy and
contempt of death: how comes it then that you shall not find one word that
shows him to be a Christian? That Nero has not discovered or perceived any
thing to charge Seneca with, when he commanded him to die? For that had been an
ample discharge before the people that extremely hated the Christians.
Suetonius and Tacitus, little favoring our religion, would not have forgotten
it. But how chances it that in his death he remembered Jupiter, and not
Christ? Now, in regard of the Catalogue which is alleged for a buckler: I
desire that learned men do consider, if they have not wronged the person to
whom it is attributed, mingling amongst his works this scoff, and others
which are no better, forged upon the like anuile and with the self same
hammer, which the letters were before mentioned. Now I think, (these are the
words of a learned man that had well read Seneca) that it is best for the
reader to take Senecaes books, as proceeding from a man ignorant of true
religion. For if you read them as a Pagane, he has written like a Christian:
but if you take him for a Christian, know that it is a Pagane that speaks.
There are many things that may inflame us with the love of virtue: they will
prick us more nearely, if we remember from whom they come. If we meet with any
sentences that seem to be drawn out of our fountains, they will be so much the
sweeter unto us: and as for uncertain and false opinions, they will offend us
less, when we shall say that it is a Pagan that has set them out. Let us come
to the other point, and consider those that have too much imbased him, either
in respect of his life, or because of his writings. For his life, some (and
Dion amongst others) have accused him of avarice, of ambition, of dissolution,
of adultery, and of other such like vices: unto the which I will not vouchsafe
to make answer, since so many learned men ancient, and modern, and the life
and death of Seneca do say the contrary. And it were an easy thing for one
that would cut Dion a gown of his own cloth, to discover in him many things
impertinent and evil beseeming the name whereof he makes profession. But it is
better to confute evident slanders by silence, then with long discourse. Some
other speak not so plainly, but say that Seneca lived not after his own
precepts. On the contrary, the honor which he makes often to Epicurus,
seems to show that he has mingled the wickedness of the Epicurians with the
austeritie of the Stoickes. I grant that Seneca has not in all the parts of
his life showed this constancy which he requires of a wise man, and I
perceive well that he has dissembled too many things in the government of
Nero: the which the wise Thrasca would never have allowed of the presence, nor
of the word, nor of the deed. But man's infirmity is such, that that which the
mind sees plainly enough, it cannot or dare not effect it, because of the
resistance of reason and passions: or if it dare, it is staid with the least
object through this natural faintness that keeps us back, when we should
resolutely follow virtue. Now of this censure there follows no more, but that
the Eternal wisdom does give us knowledge of many notable things uttered by
the mouth and testimony of this stranger: and in the mean time does admonish
us in no wise to stay our selves upon him that speaks: which she does well in
her proper house, where she understands that we lend our ears unto those
which go with other feet then they should, so that they keep within the bounds
of their commission. And as a Sergeant or Herald that had but one eye, or were
lame, could notwithstanding deliver a message of importance in the name of the
Prince, and must be heard: even so whatsoever he be that comes to us with the
notes of chaste and fair Verity, he ought to have audience, to be believed and
followed, so long as he contains himself near to her, and rejects all
that is contrary, be it in words or in fact. For Epicurus, Seneca alleges
some notable matters of him, wherefore it follows not that he does allow of
his faults, nor of his sect, as is also to be acknowledged in many places. And
there can be nothing observed in the life of Seneca, that shows him to be an
Epicurian or a Libertine. For even in the midst of the abundance and of the
great riches he possessed by the liberality of Nero, they saw a great
moderation witnessed, also in his death: not being forbidden to Noblemen to
possess gold, silver, earthly goods, and moueables of great value, so that
such prosperity do not make them drunk, to cause them despise God and men. As
for the last, be they ancient or modern whose names I am not content to
express, which very boldly do censure the writings of Seneca: and in agreeing
to him in some excellent thing, they afterward take license to think him rude
in his style, too rigorous a Judge of other men's labors, a foolish ieaster,
affected in his discourses, troublesome by reason of his repetitions, without
art, of small judgment, forgetful, trusting to his own wit, curious of light
things, and seeking I know not how to be particular, because he would not seem
to have borrowed any thing of any man. These be accusers in the most part of
such articles, and no competent Judges, saving the honor due to their
erudition. For proof whereof we do exhort the reader to take one whole book
of Seneca which he likes of best, and then to examine it all, if I speak
evil, saying, that he had wrong to be so tossed and played upon. I think that
there is nothing in his works, be it in his style, in the method, or in matter
that could be better performed. Also if they consider what words he uses, how
he joins them together, what is the end of his discourses, and what the
matters are that he treats of: they will be less rigorous unto him. For
conclusion, I desire that Senecaes life, referred to his writings, do teach
four things to my self, and to all others. The one, that being in mean or
base condition, we never care to clime up any higher. The other, that if we
change a mean estate with another greater, we do remember the former, to
converse modestly with great and small. The third, that we never pass for any
worldly prosperity, but that we be always afraid of it, until we be loosed
by the means of a happy death. And the last, that in our public and private
conversation, in our thoughts, words, writings, and actions, there shine in us
the love and reverence of true piety and justice.

The end of Senecaes life.
THE LIVES OF NINE EXCELLENT CHIEFTAINES OF WAR, TRANSLATED OVT OF LATIN FROM
AEMYLIVS PROBVS.
THE LIFE OF Miltiades.
MILTIADES an ATHENLAN, the son of Cimon, being one of the chiefest of his
city, as well because of the ancientry of his race, as for his modesty joined
to the glory of his predecessors, after he had attained to that age, which his
citizens had occasion not only to hope well of him, but also to assure
themselves that he would be such a one as they judged him after they knew him:
it chanced that the ATHENIANS resolved to send a Colonie into CHERRONESVS. And
because many men prepared themselves to go thither, and that there was great
suit who should lead them: they chose some to go to DELPHES, to inquire of the
Oracle who should be their Captain: forasmuch as the THRACIANS at that time
did occupy all those parts thereabouts, and they must be driven out by force
of arms. The Prophetess enjoined the Commissioners expressly to choose
Miltiades for chief of this people or Colonie, the which should prosper in
this enterprise under his conduct. With this answer Miltiades accompanied with
a chosen company of men, sailed unto CHERRONESVS, and when he came near to
LEMNOS to subdue the inhabitants of that Island, he summoned them without any
compulsion. They mocking him, answered, That they would then yield themselves
when Miltiades should come from ATHENS to LEMNOS with a Northrene wind, which
was full in the faces of them that should come from ATHENS to LEMNOS. Miltiades
having no leisure to tarry there, hoissed sail, and arrived in CHERRONESVS.
And there having in a short time broken all the troops of the barbarous
people, he made himself Lord of the whole country, built up some fortresses,
placed his people in the country which he had brought with him, and made them
rich, by diverse attempts against the self same countrymen. Wherein he
prevailed as much by his wisdom, as through his good fortune. For after he
had through the valiantness of his soldiers overcome the armies of his
enemies, he established his affairs with great equity, and resolved to
remain in CHERRONESVS. So he was there as king, although he had not the name,
and attained to this degree of honor as much through his upright
administration of justice, as for his sufficiency in wars. This kept him not
from doing his duty unto the ATHENIANS, from whom he was parted: the which was
the occasion indeed, that as well those which had sent him thither, as those
with whom he was embarked, were content he should continue there always
Governor. CHERRONESVS being brought to this order, he came again to LEMNOS,
and according to the promise of the inhabitants, he demanded that they would
yield up their city unto him: for they promised to give him their hands when
he should come unto them from his country by the North wind. Now (said he)
that his country was in CHERRONESVS. The CARIANS, who held LEMNOS at that
time, seeing things go otherwise then they looked for, and taken not so much by
their words as by the good fortune of their adversaries, durst not make head,
but went straight from thence. So all things prospering according to his
desire, he brought all the other Isles called the CYCLADES, to be subject to
the ATHENIANS.

At the same time Darius king of PERSIA having passed all his army out of ASIA
into EVROPE, determined to make war with the SCYTHIANS, and made a bridge over
Danuby to pass over his troops: the guard of the which in his absence, was
committed unto the Lords which he had brought with him out of IONIA and AEOLIA,
and unto every one of the which he had given perpetual power and government
over their towns. Supposing by this policy, easily to bring into subjection
all the GREEKS that dwelt in ASIA, if he gave the guard of the towns unto
their friends and confederates, that could not escape by any means if he were
oppressed. Miltiades was of the number of the guards of this bridge. News
being brought by diverse messages that Darius had but ill success, and that
the SCYTHIANS held him hard to it: he persuaded the other guards not to lose
the occasion that was offered to set GREECE at liberty, considering that if
Darius and his forces he brought with him were ouerthrown, all EVROPE should be
in peace, and the natural GREEKS remaining in ASIA should see themselves out
of danger, and freed from the domination of the PERSIANS. And this might
easily be done, since that by cutting of the bridge, Darius should in few days
be cut in pieces by the enemies, or should die for penury with all his army.
Many agreed unto it: but Istiaeus MILESIAN brake the neck of it, saying, that
the kingdom of Darius upon whom their authority depended, made difference
betwixt the good of the affairs of them that commanded, and the people that
was under subjection and government. That if Darius should happen to die, they
should be driven out and punished by their citizens: and therefore that he was
of a contrary mind to all the rest, thinking nothing more profitable, then to
see the kingdom of the PERSIANS established. The greater part of them being of
his mind, Miltiades was afraid, for that there were so many witnesses, that
the king should soon be advertised of that which was propounded: wherefore he
left CHERRONESVS, and returned again to ATHENS. Now though his counsel took
no place, yet he was highly commended, having showed more regard to the good
and liberty of all, then to his own particular advancement.

For Darius, he being returned out of EVROPE into ASIA, his friends counseled
him to set upon GREECE. Whereupon he armed a fleet of five hundred galleys under
the charge of Datis and Artaphernes, giving them two hundred thousand footmen,
and ten thousand horse, saying that he would be even with the ATHENIANS,
because that the IONIANS had in favor of the ATHENIANS forced the city of
SARDIS, and killed his garrisons. These two Lieutenants of Darius being arrived
in EVBOEA with their galleys, they presently wanne ERETRIA, took all the
inhabitants of the country prisoners, and sent them to the king in ASIA. From
thence they went into ATTICA, and camped in the plain of MARATHON, which is
within five leagues or thereabouts from ATHENS. The ATHENIANS astonished at so
great a number of enemies, and so near unto them, knew not of whom to demand
aid, but of the LACEDAEMONIANS, unto whom they dispatched a very swift
footman, a foot Post, called Philippides, to advertise them that they had need
to send them aid, and that presently. In the mean time they chose ten
Captains to command and govern their troops: Miltiades was one of them. So
there was great disputation among them, to wit, whether they should keep the
walls of their city, or they should go meet with their enemies to bid them
battle. There was none but Miltiades that reasoned, that there was no delaying
or protracting of time, but they must make a camp: and that that would lift up
the hearts of the ATHENIANS, when they should see and behold, that they had a
good opinion of their virtue and valiantness: and that the enemies hearts
would fail them, when they should understand that so few men came resolutely
to fight with them. At that time the ATHENIANS had no aid from any city but
from PLATAEA, which sent them a thousand men: who being come, the army of the
GREEKS was compounded but of ten thousand men in all, who desired nothing
but to fight: That was the cause that Miltiades counsel was preferred above
all the other Captains. For the ATHENIANS respecting his valor, caused their
troops to march into the field, and they camped in a place of advantage. Then
the next morning having disposed their footmen at the foot of the mountain,
which they had in flancke, they gave charge upon their enemies courageously,
with a new and sure fashion of fight. For there were trees growing here and
there, by means whereof they were under covert of the rocks, and the trees
kept them from being enclosed by the multitude of the enemies horsemen. Now
although Datis saw that the place did not favor and affect him, yet because he
had so many men, all his desire was to fight, thinking he should win and
obtain much, if he could join before the aid of the LACEDAEMONIANS came to
them. And therefore he made an hundred thousand footmen and ten thousand horse
to march against them. Then he went to charge the ATHENIANS, who made excellent
proof of their valiantnes, considering that they having to fight one against
ten, they made the PERSIANS fly for life, and so astonished the^, that in
stead of returning back to their camp, they saved themselves in their ships.
See, here was one of the brauest battles that a man can speak of: for never
such a handful of men overcame so great forces. Peradventure it will not be
impertinent to show what reward Miltiades had for obtaining of so noble a
victory: to the end that all men may know the better, that all commonweales
have one disposition. As the honors of the people of ROME were in times past
rare and simple, and by consequent more glorious and to be desired: and now to
the contrary more disordered and less esteemed: the very same we find to have
been practiced among the ATHENIANS. For all the honor they did unto this
Miltiades, the savior of ATHENS and of all GREECE, was, that the battle of
MARATHON having been painted over the porch called Poecile, his image was set
up the first in rank of all the Captains, with the countenance of a man
speaking to his soldiers, and going first to fight. The same people of ATHENS
being come to be of greater power, and corrupted by the gifts of those which
sued for charge and office in the commonwealth, caused three hundred statues to
be set up for Demetrius the PHALERIAN.

After this battle, the ATHENIANS gave a fleet of threescore and ten galleys
unto Miltiades, to make war upon the Isles which had aided the PERSIANS. He
compelled some by simple commandments, others by force of arms to yield
themselves. And not being able by any perswasio^s to bring the I Will men of PAROS
to reason (proud because of their riches) he landed his forces, enclosed the
town with trenches, and took from the besieged all means either to come by
victuals or munition of war: then having set up his Gabions and Mantelets, he
came near the walls. He was at the point to win the town, when one night (not
known by what mischaunce) there was a great fire seen upon firm land in a
wood which they saw from the Isle. This flame made those that were besieged,
and them that lay at the siege think that it was a sign of the fleet of the
PERSIANS, to encourage the PABIANS, and to keep them from yielding up their
town. Herupon Miltiades fearing that Darius army by sea was at hand, he set
fire of his Mantelets and Gabions and hoissed sail toward ATHENS, where he
arrived with all the galleys he carried out: wherewith the people were
maruellously offended. They accused him of treason, that when he might have won
PAROS by assault, he had taken money of the king, and was returned without
fighting, or doing any memorable act. At that time he was sick of the wounds
he had received at the siege of PAROS: wherefore not being able to defend
himself in person, his brother Stesagoras pleaded his cause, the which having
been debated, he was quit for death, yet condemned to pay a fine of thirty
thousand crowns, to the which they valued the charge of the army in that
iourny. And being unable to pay so great a sum, he was committed to the
common prison, and there died. Now this matter of PAROS was but a cloak: and
they speak of it thus for another reason. For the tyranny of Pisistratus, who
had altered the estate some years before, was the cause that the ATHENIANS
were afraid of their citizens that were in any credit. Miltiades, that had had
many great and honorable charges, seemed that he could no more be brought to
live as a private person, considering also that he was given to this desire to
command always. For all the time of his abode in CHERRONESVS there was no
other Lord but he, and also they called him tyrant: but just, because he had
not gotten this authority by force of arms, but with the consent of his
citizens, and carried himself very modestly. Now they take and call them
tyrants, which have a perpetual power in a commonwealth that was free before.
Furthermore, Miltiades was a very gentle person, wonderful affable, and there
was not so mean a man, but might easily come and speak with him. All the
towns respected him, he was very famous, and they reputed him for one of the
brauest Captains of GREECE. The people of ATHENS considering these things, had
rather condemn this innocent man in a fine, then to be longer in pain to take
heed of him.

The end of Miltiades life.
THE LIFE OF Pausanias.
PAusanias LACEDAEDONIAN was a great man, but unconstant in all the parts of
his life, furnished with virtues, but overwhelmed with vices. It was he that
wanne that so famous victory of PLATAEES. For he being General of the GREEK
army, this great Lord Mardonius, a MEDE by nation, and son in law of the
king of PERSIA, the most wise and valiant captain among all the PERSIANS,
followed with two hundredth thousand chosen footmen, and twenty thousand horse:
he was overcome, the rest of all his troops driven out of GREECE, and himself
slain in the field. This victory raised up Pausanias heart to such a height,
that he began to confound the affairs, and to devise great change in his
brain. The first shame he received was, that he having offered a trivet of
gold unto the temple of DELPHES, of the booty he had gotten upon the enemies,
with an Epigram containing in substance, that under his conduct the barbarous
people had been overthrown before PLATAEES, and that acknowledging this
victory he made this present to Apollo: the LACEDAEMONIANS razed out these
verses, and wrote no other thing but the names of the towns, through whose
aid the PERSIANS had been overcome. After this battle they sent him again
with an army by sea of the allies into CYPRVS and HELLESPONT, to expulse the
garrisons of the barbarous people thence. The which he having fortunately
executed, he then grew to be more insolent and ambitious then ever.

For, having taken the city of BYZANCE by force, and made a great number of
gentlemen of PERSIA prisoners, among which were many kinsmen of Xerxes, he
secretly sent them to him, and gave it out that they escaped out of prison.
Gongylus ERETRIAN did accompany them carrying letters to the king, the effect
whereof was this, as Thucydides says: Pausanias, Captain of SPARTA, knowing
that the prisoners of BYZANCE are thy kinsmen, he sends them unto thee for a
present, and desires to be of alliance with thee, and prays thee to give him
thy daughter in marriage. If thou do it, he promises that by his means SPARTA
and all GREECE shall be brought under thy power. Therefore if it please thee to
give ear unto it, send him a man expressly with whom he may confer. The
king very joyful and glad for the delivery of so many friends of his, sent
Artabazus presently to Pausanias with letters, in the which he commends him,
and prays him to spare for nothing to bring his promise to pass. If he do,
that all shall be granted which he demands. Pausanias understanding Xerxes
mind, resolved resolutely to put his hand to this work: which the
LACEDAEMONIANS mistrusting, having sent for him home, they accused him of
treason: whereof he was quit, and yet condemned to pay a fine. This was the
cause that they sent him not again to the army: but shortly after he returned
of his own mind, and by a rash and evil grounded Oration, he easily
discovered the thought of his heart. Furthermore, he did not only change his
fashion of living after the LACONIAN manner, but also of his diet and apparel.
For he had a royal pomp, trayning a long gown after the fashion of the
MEDES, followed with a troop of the MEDES and EGYPTIANS for archers of his
gaurd. His table did so abound in all kinds of dainties after the manner of the
PERSIANS, that no man could away withal. He gave no access unto him but very
seldom: to them that would speak with him, he answered very proudly: and
commanded with all cruelty, refusing to return any more to SPARTA.

He went to COLONES, which is a place in the country of TROAS, and there
plotted all his dangerous practices against his country and himself. When the
LACEDAEMONIANS had understanding of it, they sent Ambassadors unto him with the
Scytala, in the which was written, after their accustomed manner, that if he
came not into the city, they would condemn him to death. This letter astonished
him. Yet hoping to escape this imminent danger by force of presents, and by
reason of his credit: he went home into his country, where being, the Ephores
made him to be apprehended, and cast into prison: for it is lawful for one of
the Ephores to take the king, and use him so. Nevertheless Pausanias loosed
himself, being notwithstanding suspected of every man: for they had always
this opinion of him, that he had intelligence with Xerxes. There are certain
people there called ILOTES, and they are a great number of them, and they plow
the lands of the LACEDAEMONIANS, whom they serve as slaves. It was supposed he
did practice with them, under promise to make them free men. But because they
had no pregnant witness to convince him, they thought they must not condemn
so noble a person as he by bare conjectures, but rather to tarry till time did
reveal it of it self. In these businesses, a young man called Argilius, who
in his infancy had served Pausanius for a Page, having received letters of him
to carry to Artabazus, he doubting least there were somewhat therein that might
hurt him, for of all those that went into PERSIA about these affairs, not one
of them came back again: he brake open the seal, and knew by the contents
thereof that if he had carried them, he had died for it: also the letter
mentioned matters whereof Pausanias and Xerxes were agreed. Agilius carried
these letters, and put them into the hands of the Ephores. Here is to be noted
the moderation and gravity of the LACEDAEMONIANS, that would not yet take
vantage of this detection, to lay hold upon Pausanias: and resolved not to
proceed with rigor, till he first discovered it himself. And therefore they
taught Argilius what they would have him to do.

At TAENARE, there is a temple of Neptune, the privilege whereof the GREEKS
hold for sacred and inviolable. Argilius fled thither, and sat him down upon
the Altar: near unto the which the Ephores made a cave under the ground, from
whence one might understand all that any body would say unto Argilius. Some of
the Ephores hid themselves within it. Pausanias understanding that his man was
in the privilege of the temple, went thither maruellously troubled, and began
to ask him how this change happened. Argilius confessed he had opened the
letters, and seen the contents of them. Wherewith Pausanias more troubled then
before, began to pray him to say never a word, and not to betray him who had
done him so much good: that if he would do him that favor to help him out of
this trouble, he would make him a great man. The Ephores having heard all this
talk, they judged that the surest way was to take him in the city. Whither
they being gone, Pausanias thinking he had appeased Argilius, and thereby
assured his affairs, he returned home to his house: and as they were ready to
catch him by the collar, he perceived by the countenance ofone of the Ephores
that called him as if he would have spoken with him, that they went about to
entrap him. Wherefore doubling his pace somewhat faster then those that
followed him, he saved himself within the temple of Minerua, called
Chalciacos. But because he should not come out, the Ephores caused the Church
doors presently to be mured up, and the roof of the temple to be pulled
down, that he might dye the sooner with air. It is reported that Pausanias
mother, being a very old woman, lived yet at that time: and that she
understanding of the wickedness of her son, her self brought the first
stone to mure him in there. Behold, how Pausanias stained with a shameful
death the great glory he had obtained in the wars. Being brought half dead
out of the temple, he died immediately. Some would have had his body carried to
the gibbet: others liked not that opinion, and buried him far from the place
where he died: from whence he was dug up again, by commandment of an
Oracle of DELPHES, and put in the same place where he died.

The end of Pausanias life.
THE LIFE OF Thrasybulus.
FOr Thrasybulus, he was an ATHENIAN, the son of one called Lycus. If we
should consider his virtue a part, and leave his fortune behind, it may be we
should place him first of all others. And to confess a troth, I know no man
more faithful, more constant, more nobly minded, and more loving to his
country, then he. For whereas many have desired (and few executed) to free
their country from the hands of one only tyrant: it was his fortune to
deliver his country from the violence of thirty tyrants. But it chanced, I
know not how, that he which went before all others in virtue, was put down by
many others in chargeand dignity. In the wars of PELOPONNESVS, Alcibiades
did nothing without him, but he on the contrary did many things without
Alcibiades, and wanne honor through the goodness and excellency of his
nature. This notwithstanding, all the exploits of war ought to be divided
amongst the Chieftaines, soldiers, and fortune: for when armies meet, that
which has been demtermined in counsel, is executed by the force and
valiantness of the soldiers that fight. Wherefore the soldier may pretend
right to that which his General has done: Fortune challenges the better part,
and may say that she has in such a case stood them in better stead then all
the wisdom of the General. Even so then, this worthy act of Thrasybulus is
proper to himself. For as the thirty tyrants established by the SPARTANS, that
kept the city of ATHENS in subjection, had banished part of the citizens
escaped from the war, put some to death, and forfeited the goods of others:
Thrasybulus was the first and only man that began to make war with them. He
was gotten into a strong hold, called PHYLE, in the territory of ATTICA,
having but thirty men with him in all.

This was the beginning of the health of the ATHENIANS, and the foundation of
the liberty unto the goodliest commonwealth of GREECE. And for as much as the
tyrants scorned him and his company, it was the cause of their destruction, and
of the preservation of Thrasybulus: and their not caring to set upon him and
his, made them stronger by the leisure they had given them. The which should
teach all to remember this rule: that we must never despise our enemy. And so
it is not spoken in vain, that the mother of a coward does never weep. For
all his fame that went of him, many did not join with him: for then those that
were best affected, made war with the tyrants more with their toungs then
with their hands. From PHYLE Thrasibulus went to the port of PYRAEA, and did
fortify the fortress called MVNYCHIA: the which the tyrants did assault, but
they were repulsed with such shame, that they suddenly retired to the town with
loss of arms and baggage. In this action, Thrasybulus showed himself no
less wise then valiant: for he commanded his men to touch none that made no
resistance, thinking it reasonable that the citizens should pardon one the
other: and there was not a man of them hurt, but those that assaulted them. He
would strippe none of the dead, nor suffer any thing to be taken from them, but
their arms and victuals which he needed. Critias, the chief of all the
tyrants, having fought very valiantly against Thrasybulus, was slain at the
second assault. After he was dispatched, Pausanias king of SPARTA came to the
aid of the ATHENIANS, and made peace betwixt Thrasybulus and those which kept
the city: with these conditions, that the thirty tyrants, and the ten new
governors, which had committed as many cruelties as the tyrants themselves,
should be banished, and their goods forfeited, without touching any other
citizens: and that the sovereignty and government of the estate should be
resto red again unto the people.

It was another fine device of Thrasybulus, that after he had pacified all
matters, and obtained great credit in the city, he made a law that no man
should be called in question nor troubled for things that were past, and that
was called Amnistia, or law of oblivion. But he was more careful to keep it,
then to publish it. For some of his followers in his exile, complotted to kill
some that were pardoned: but he stopped it by open proclamation, and kept his
promise. To recompense these so many good deeds of his, the people gave him a
Crown of two branches of Bays, the which got him no envy, but great glory:
because he had obtained it through the good will of his citizens, and not by
force. It was wisely spoken of Pittacus, one of the seven Sages: when the
MITYLENIANS gave him many thousand of days work of lands, I pray you, said
he, give me not that thing which is envied of many men, and desired of all the
world: of all those I will only take but a hundred days work, which shall
make proof of my moderation, and of your good affection: for small presents do
continue long, but we are no long time owners of great riches. So then
Thrasybulus contenting himself with this Crown, he sought for no more, and
did think that no man was more honored then he. Shortly after he being arrived
in SICILIA with a fleet the which he commanded, his soldiers were not
careful to keep good watch in his camp: upon which occasion, the barbarous
people that were besieged, having by night made a sally out of the town upon
him, they surprised him, and killed him in his tent.

The end of Thrasybulus life.
THE LIFE OF Conon.
DVring the wars of PELOPONNESVS, Conon ATHENIAN began to deal in the
affairs of the common wealth, and did great service: for he was chosen
Colonel of the infanterie, then Admiral, in which charge he did many goodly
exploits. By means whereof he grew to be of singular reputation amongst all
men, and had the government of all the Isles: during which time he wanne PHARES
a Colony of the LACEDAEMONIANS. Toward the end of the war of PELOPONNESVS,
at what time Lysander overcame the army of the ATHENIANS upon the sea coast
which they call the river of the Goat, he had then charge of certain galleys:
howbeit he was not at the battle, which was cause that all came to naught, for
he was a wise and valiant Captain: in so much that it was in every man's mouth,
that if he had been there, the ATHENIANS had not sustained such a loss. He
seeing things brought to so poor an estate, and understanding that his city
was besieged: he sought not to hide himself to live I safety, but thought how
he might help his citizens. For this purpose he went to Pharnabazus, a kinsman
and son in law of the king of PERSIA, and governor of IONIA and of LYDIA,
into whose favor he insinuated himself, but with great trouble and much
danger. Now when the LACEDAEMONIANS, after they had subdued the ATHENIANS, in
stead of maintaining the alliance made with Artaxerxes, had sent Agesilaus to
make war in ASIA, through the persuasion of Tissaphernes, which had forsaken
the king (of whom heretofore he was greatly beloved) and joined with the
LACEDAEMONIANS: Pharnabazus was appointed Lieutenant general of the army of
the PERSIANS to make head against Agesilaus. But in truth Conon commanded all,
and nothing was done without his advice and counsel. It was he that brake the
most part of all the intentions and attempts of this great Captain Agesilaus,
being a thing certain enough, that if Conon had not opposed himself, the
LACEDAEMONIANS had taken all ASIA from the king, unto the mountain Taurus.
Hereupon Agesilaus being sent for home by the Ephores, because the BOEOTIANS
and ATHENIANS had proclaimed war against SPARTA: Conon left not to be ever
near to the Lieutenants of the king of PERSIA, and did them great service.

Tissaphernes withdrew himself from the court of PERSIA, the which all men
perceived well enough but the king, with whom he was in great credit and
estimation, though he was no more his servant. And it is not to be marvelled at
if Artaxerxes could believe nothing, remembering himself that by Tissaphernes
means he overcame his brother Cyrus. Conon being sent by Pharnabazus unto the
king to accuse this Tissaphernes: he being come to the court, came first to the
Captain of the guard, called Tithraustes, according to the custom of the
PERSIANS. He is chiefest of all the officers of the kingdom, and no man can be
suffered to come near the king to speak with him, without his leave and
license. He being entreated by Conon to let him go unto the Prince: I am
contented, says he, but consider first if thou be determined to speak with
him thy self, or to deliver thy mind by writing that thou would say unto
him. For if thou come to his presence, thou must kneel to the king: and if
thou think that grievous unto thee, thou may execute thy commission by my
means, as well as by thine own mouth. As for me, answered Conon, it shall be
not troublesome thing to me, to do the king that honor that shall please thee:
but I am afraid to do my city dishonor, if I do a thing proper to the barbarous
people, and unfit for that city which was wont to command other nations. So
then he delivered his message in writing: which when the king had seen, he was
so moved with the report of so great a person, that he judged Tissaphernes his
enemy, decreed war against the LACEDAEMONIANS, and suffered Conon to make
choice of such a man as he would, to distribute the money necessary to defray
the charge of this war. Conon made this answer, that this election pertained
nothing to him, but to the king, that knew his servants best: yet in his
opinion, this charge should be best bestowed upon Pharnabazus. He was sent
back with great presents to the maritime towns, to command the CYPRIOTS,
PHENICIANS, and others dwelling upon this coast to put galleys in readiness,
and to arm a fleet that might keep the seas the next Summer, under the
conduct of Pharnabazus and of Conon, who had so required it.

The LACEDAEMONIANS being advertised thereof, were amazed, perceiving well that
they were to make another manner of war then with the barbarous people. For
they saw that they must needs come to fight against a valiant and wise
Captain, having the kings treasure in his hands, and that had as much and
better direction and forces then they. With this thought they gathered together
great store of shipping, and embarked themselves under the conduct of Pisander.
Conon met with them near unto CNIDOS, gave them battle, made them fly, took
store of galleys, and sunk a great number of them. By means of this victory,
ATHENS and all GREECE subject to the dominion of the LACEDAEMONIANS, were set at
liberty. Conon returned again to his country with part of these galleys,
built up again the walls of ATHENS and of the haven of PIRAEA, which had been
overthrown by Lysander, and presented his citizens with 30000 crowns which
Pharnabazus had given him. But that which happens oftentimes unto other men,
chanced also unto Conon, that is, to have less courage in prosperity, then in
adversity. For now that he had overcome the fleet of the PELOPONNESIANS,
thinking he had taken sufficient revenge of the wrongs received by his country:
he began to embrace in his mind imaginations too high for his carriage: although
this was good and commendable in his enterprise, that he had rather make his
own country great and rich, then the king of PERSIA. Therefore he being now
grown into wonderful credit, not only amongst the barbarous people, but
also amongst all the cities of GREECE, after this battle of CNIDOS, he began
underhand to practice the means to restore IONIA and AEOLIA to be subject
again to the common wealth of the ATHENIANS. His practices being discovered,
Tiribazus governor of SARDIS, sent to pray him to come to him, to be sent in
Embassage to the king. Conon straight obeying his commandment, he was no
sooner arrived, but he was straight clapped up in prison, where he remained some
time. Some write that he was carried to the king, and died in PERSIA. But Dinon
the historian, to whom we give great credit in that he treats of the
affairs of PERSIA, reports that Conon saved himself, leaving it in doubt
whether Tiribazus was privy to it, or that he knew not of it.

The end of Conons life.
THE LIFE OF Iphicrates.
IPhicrates the ATHENIAN was famous, not so much for his diverse exploits or
for the greatness of them, as for his military discipline: for he was such a
Chieftaine of war, that they compared him unto the brauest men of his time,
and they did not set him behind any of those that had gone before him. He had
been in many wars, had commanded armies oftentimes, he never had misfortune
by his own fault, he ever overcame by wisdom: his understanding reaching so
far, that he brought in many good things never seen before in the art
military: and made some of them better that were in use. He altered the arms
of footmen: and where before him the Captains did use great targets, short
partisans, and little swords: he to the contrary brought in light bucklers, to
the end his men should be lighter to remove and to run to give charge. He
made the partisans greater by half, and the swords longer. He changed also the
corslets, and in stead of iron and copper, he made them of canuasse well
wrought together, which made the soldiers much lighter: for being eased of
that weight, they had means to defend themselves nimbly against blows, and
were ready besides to give charge upon the enemy. He made war with the
THRACIANS, and reestablished Seuthes again in his kingdom, an allie of the
ATHENIANS. Being at CORINTH, he observed so good discipline in his army, that
they never saw any soldiers in GREECE better disposed, nor more obedient to
their Colonel then they were. To be short, he did use them to rank themselves
so well in battle, without help of the Captain, so soon as ever the
General had given them the sign to fight: that it seemed expressly as if the
most expert Chieftaine of war had imbattelled them.

With such an army he assailed the LACEDAEMONIANS, which was a most famous act
through all GREECE: and in this war he put all their forces to flight, which
wanne him great honor. And as Artaxerxes was ready to set upon the king of
EGYPT, he demanded of the ATHENIANS Captain Iphicrates, to be the chief
leader of all the strangers troops, to the number of twelve thousand men. Whom
he so well trained and disciplined, that as the FABIAN soldiers had been
famous among the ROMANS, so in GREECE they spoke of none but of Iphicratian
soldiers. Afterward being gone to aid the SPARTANS, he stayed Epaminondas
roundly: and had not he come, the THEBANS would never have returned back
before he had taken and burnt the city of SPARTA. He was a man of a stout
heart, and of a high stature, having the port and countenance of a Sovereign
captain, so that he made all men wonder at him that saw him: but he was
slothful and impatient, as Theopompus says, but otherwise a good and
faithful citizen, whereof he made proof among others, especially in keeping
Perdiccas and Philip the son of Amyntas MACEDONIAN safe. For Euridice their
mother coming with them for refuge unto Iphicrates, after the death of
Amyntas: he spared no means of his own to defend them. He lived a long time,
being in good credit with his citizens: saving that on a time during the
wars of the allies he was criminally accused with Timotheus, howbeit he
cleared himself, and was quit by judgment. His wife was Thressa, daughter of
king Cotys: and of her he had a son called Menestheus: who being asked which
he loved best, either his father, or his mother? My mother, said he. Whereat
every man musing: Marvel not, answered he, I have reason to say so. For my
father, as much as was in him, begat me a THRACIAN: and my mother to the
contrary, she made me an ATHENIAN.

The end of Iphicrates life.
THE LIFE OF Chabrias.
CHabrias was an ATHENIAN, and was placed in rank of excellent Captains. So
has he done many things worthy of memory. Amongst others, his stratageme he
showed at the battle of THEBES is famous, where he was to aid the BOEOTIANS.
For, that great Captain Agesilaus rejoicing because of his victory, and that
he had made all the troops at the THEBANS pay run away: Chabrias stood still
with them that were left of his battalion, teaching the soldiers to resist the
charge of the enemies, casting down their pikes, and covering themselves with
their bucklers upon one knee. Agesilaus moved with this novelty, durst not
run in to them, and made them found the retreat, to keep his men they should
pass no further. This act was so renowned through GREECE, that Chabrias caused
a statue to be made of him in the state above mentioned, the which the
ATHENIANS set up for him in the great market place. Afterward the wrestlers,
and other such kind of people followed this fashion of erection of statues,
which they deserved for their victories. To come again to Chabrias, he made
many wars in EVROPE, in the quality of General of the ATHENIANS, and went
also of his voluntary will to make war in EGYPT, in the service of
Nectanebos whom he did set again into his kingdom. He did the like in CYPRVS,
whither the ATHENIANS sent him of purpose to help Euagoras, and would not
depart thence, before he had first subdued all the Isle: for the which the
ATHENIANS wan great honor. In these businesses, war fell out betwixt the
PERSIANS and EGYPTIANS. They of ATHENS were allies of Artaxerxes, and the
SPARTANS took part with EGYPT. King Agesilaus did greatly invade the
PERSIANS, and carried great booties away. Chabrias considering that, and giving
no place to Agesilaus, went of his own head to aid the EGYPTIANS: who made
him their Admiral, and gave the charge of the army by land unto Agesilaus.
Then the Lieutenants of the king of PERSIA sent unto ATHENS, to complain that
Chabrias made war with the EGYPTIANS against their king. The ATHENIANS sent
for Chabrias immediately to appear in person, threatening him to condemn him to
death, if he were not there by the day appointed. This message made him to come
again to ATHENS, where he tarried no longer then needs he must. For the
Citizens bare him no great goodwill, because he carried himself so stately, and
would be so merry, that the people envied him. This vice reigns commonly in
those great and free towns, that glory is ever accompanied with envy: and
they willingly speak ill of them whom they see to be great. And to be short,
the poor cannot abide wealthy and rich men. Therefore Chabrias did absent
himself out of the city as much as he could possible, and he was not alone in
that, for almost all the chiefest of the city did the like: thinking
themselves safe from the teeth of the envious, so long as they were far off
from the sight of their citizens. Therefore Conon lived for the most part of
his time in the Isle of CYPRVS, Iphicrates in THRACIA, Timotheus in LESBOS,
Cares in SYGEEA. As for Cares, he was not to be likened in any respect unto the
others, in exploits, nor in manner of life: and yet he was honored in the city
of ATHENS, and had great means.

As for Chabrias, he died in the war of the allies in this manner. The ATHENIANS
made war with the Islanders of CHIO, at what time Chabrias had no charge in the
army by sea. Notwithstanding he had more authority then all the Captains: and
the soldiers did esteem him more then any other of the commanders. That was
cause of his death. For striving to enter the first into the haven, and
commanding the Pylote to row right thither, it was his destruction: for being
moored there within, the other ships followed him not. Whereupon the enemies
compassed him in: but as he fought valiantly, his galley being beaten with the
spur of another vessel began to leake, and to sink to the bottom. He
seeing there was no way for him to escape, because the fleet of the ATHENIANS
was too far off to receive him in, if he should have attempted to have
swomme: he had rather die then leave his arms, and forsake the galley which
carried him. The others, they took another course, and saved themselves by
strength of their arms. But he esteeming an honest death to be more excellent
then a shameful life: fighting very near, was killed by the enemies with
darts.

The end of Chabrias life.
THE LIFE OF Timotheus.
TImotheus the son of Conon, a Captain of ATHENS, did by many virtues
amplify the glory received of his father. For he was an eloquent man,
diligent, painful, expert in military discipline, and a great Politician. He
has executed great things, whereof the most notable are these, to wit: he
subdued the OLYNTHIANS and BYZANTINES: he wanne the city of SAMOS, the siege
whereof in the former wars had stood the ATHENIANS in the sum of twelve
hundred talents. He delivered it unto the people freely without any charge to
them. He made war with king Cotys, and brought of the booty he had gotten
there unto the Treasury, the like sum of twelve hundred talents. He also
raised the siege that was before CYZICA, and went with Agesilaus to the aid of
Ariobarzanes, of whom having received money, he had rather his citizens should
buy towns and lands, then to carry it home to his lodging. Therefore he joined
ERICTHONE and SESTOS to the signiorie of ATHENS. Afterward having charge of
the army by sea, he invaded PELOPONNESVS, spoiled all the territory of
SPARTA, and had all their ships in chase. He brought the CORCYREANS under the
subjection of the ATHENIANS: and drew into their alliance the EPIROTS,
ATHAMANES, and CHAONIANS, and all the people upon that sea coast. The which
made the LACEDAEMONIANS leave their so long old quarrel, and of their own
goodwils let the ATHENIANS have the principality of the sea: treating peace
with these conditions, that the ATHENIANS should be Generals upon the sea.

This victory did so please the ATHENIANS, that there was then first of all an
altar built to the common peace, and they did ordain a pillow should be made
for that goddess. Furthermore, that such a glorious act should remain for
perpetuity, they raised up a statue unto Timotheus in the market place, by
ordinance of the people, which was an honor that never man received before, to
wit, that the people having granted a statue for the father, they should also
give one to the son. By this means the statue of the son so freshly set
up, renewed the memory of the father. Now Timotheus being very old, dealing no
more in affairs of the commonwealth, they began afresh to torment the
ATHENIANS of all sides. SAMOS and HELLESPONT shrunk back and revolted. Philip
king of MACEDON, who began to wax great, plotted wonderful things in his
head. Chares was sent against him to make head. But they thinking him not
sufficient to repulse Philip, they therefore sent Menestheus the son of
Iphicrates, son in law to Timotheus, and made him Colonel, gave him the
charge of the affairs of the wars, having for his counselors, his father,
and father in law, brave Captains, wise and expert men to direct him with
their counsel: their authority being so great, that every man hoped that all
that was lost, should be recovered again by their means. They pointing for
SAMOS, Chares that had heard news of it, sailed up and down that coast, to
the end nothing should be done in his absence. Drawing near to the Isle a
storm rose, and to defend themselves against it, the two old Captains struck
sail, and hulled, going no further into the sea. Chares to the contrary upon
a head, not respecting them that had seen more then he, held on his course,
thinking to have found an occasion as he wished, and sent as well to Timotheus
as to Iphicrates, that they should follow him. But having had evil success,
and lost many of his ships, he fell back again to that very place from
whence he came, and sent letters to the people of ATHENS of this effect, that
he had easily taken SAMOS, if Timotheus and Iphicrates had not forsaken him at
his need. Upon this accusation they were summoned to appear in person by this
bold people, suspicious, unconstant, enemy and envious of another man's
greatness, and are charged to be traitors unto the commonwealth. Timotheus was
condemned, and a fine set upon his head of sixty thousand crowns. Iphicrates
constrained by the importunity of his unthankful citizens, went for a time to
CHALCIS. After Timotheus death, the people repenting their sentence, abated
nine parts of the sum above named, and commanded Conon, the son of the
deceased, to furnish six thousand crowns for the reparation of a pane of the
wall. Here is to be noted a wonderful revolution of the affairs of this
world: for the young son was constrained at his own charges (to the great
dishonor of his house) to repair the walls, the which his grandfather Conon
had made up with the booty gotten of the enemies. We could allege many
examples of the modesty and wisdom of Timotheus: but we will add for the
end a matter whereby may be easily coniectured, how much he was esteemed of the
GREEKS. Being young he was accused, and brought before the Judge: whereupon
his friends and familiars came out of all parts into ATHENS to defend him: and
amongst others the tyrant Jason, who was at that time the mightiest Lord of all
GREECE. This tyrant was never assured in his own country without his guard:
and yet he came without any train to ATHENS, esteeming so much his host
Timotheus, that he had rather hazard his life, then fail his friend in time of
necessity. Notwithstanding this, shortly after Timotheus made war with
Jason, by the commandment of the people: thinking that to obey his country,
and to maintain the right of the same, is a more devout thing, then to favor
a private friend. After this last age, which took away Iphicrates, Chabrias,
and Timotheus, Captains of ATHENS: they could never find in the Commonwealth
after their death, any Chieftaine of war, that deserves any memory of them.

The end of Timotheus life.
THE LIFE OF Datames.
I Presently enter into the life of a most valiant and wise Captain, among all
the barbarous: Hamilcar and Hannibal of CARTHAGE excepted. We will speak
somewhat more amply of this man, for that the most part of his exploits are
little known, and because also that he had obtained his victories not so much by
force of arms, as by his wisdom: a virtue in the which he did surpass all
the men of his time. But this cannot be judged, unless we make him known in
all particulars. Datames the son of Camissares a CARIAN and of a SCHYTIAN,
was at the beginning a soldier of the guard of the palace of Artaxerxes. His
father Camissares, because of his valiantnes and direction in the wars, and
for that he had done many good services unto the king, was made Governor of
CILICIA, near unto CAPPADOCIA, where the LEVCOSYRIANS dwell. As for Datames,
following the wars, he made proof of his valor in the war which
Artaxerxes had against the CADVSIANS: where many men being slain on both
sides, he fought so valiantly, that his father being killed, he had his
authorie and place of Governor of CILICIA. He showed himself no less valiant
in war, then Antophradates did by the kings commandment unto those that had
rebelled. For, by the direction of Datames, the enemies that were now entered
into the PERSIANS camp, were repulsed, and all the army of the kings in
saftie: the which was the cause of his calling and advancement unto higher
charges. There was at that time in PAPHLAGONIA a Governor called Thyus,
descended of an ancient race of one Pylaemenes, whom Homer says, was killed
by Patroclus in the war of TROIA. He not regarding the kings will and
commandments, who therefore resolved to make war with him, and gave the
charge of it unto Datames, cousin german to Thyus. By reason of kindred,
Datames would prove by all means he could to draw his kinsinan to some
conformity before he took arms: he went unto him without any train, little
thinking that his friend would have laid any ambush for him: but he had almost
been taken tardie, for Thyus sought to surprise him, and to cut his throat.
Datames mother, Aunt unto Thyus, being told what was practiced against her
son, she did advertise him in so good time, that he escaped with speed, and
proclaimed war against his adversary. And although that in the pursuit of
this war, he was forsaken of Ariobarzanes, Governor of LYDIA, of IONIA, and
of all PHRYGIA, yet he let not to go further: he took Thyus prisoner with his
wife and children, and then very carefully took order that no man but himself
should carry news of it to the king. So following that purpose, without any
man's priuitie he arrived at the Court, and the next morning apparelled Thyus (a
tall man and of a terrible grimme look, being black haired, and wearing his
hair long) with a rich robe, such as great Lords use to wear. He apparelled
himself like a country man, in a Lion tawnie coat, with a cloak of diverse
colors, and a hunters hat, having in his right hand a club, and in his left
hand a leace, unto the which Thyus was tied, who went before, as if he had led
some savage beast he had taken in the chase a hunting. They all ran to see this
new monster thus disguised: and those which knew Thyus went presently and told
the king of it: who at the first would believe nothing, but sent Pharnabazus to
see what it was. So when he had told him all what had happened, he made this
pomp come in presently: and the king took great pleasure to see it, but
specially to see so mighty a Prince beyond all hope so subdued.

Therefore after he had given sumptuous presents unto Datames, he sent him unto
the army that was leauied under the conduct of Pharnabazus and Tithraustes, to
make war in EGYPT, and ordained that he should have as much authority as
they. Now after that the king had sent for Pharnabazus, all the charge of the
wars was committed to Datames. Who being greatly occupied about leauies of
men to go into EGYPT, he received letters from the king, commanding him to
invade a Lord called Aspis, who held CATAONIA, a province joining near to
CAPPADOCIA, beyond CILICIA, a mountain country well furnished with
fortresses, that despised the king, and made invasions upon the Provinces
thereabouts, spoiling victuals and all things else that were carried to the
king. Though Datames was far from that place, and had other affairs of
greater importance in hand: yet he determined to obey the king, and suddenly
embarked himself with a small number of resolute men, thinking (that which
came to pass) that with a few men he should sooner surprise a man not dreaming
of any such matter, then with a great army to go and assail him. He being
arrived in CILICIA, landed, then marched day and night over mount Taurus, and
came to the place where he would be: he inquireth for Aspis, and understands
that he was not far off but a hunting. But as he stayed for his coming,
Aspis knew that he was come, and immediately disposed of his PISIDIANS and
others of his train to make head. Datames knowing this resolution, takes his
arms, made his men march, and galloped to the place where Aspis was: who
seeing him come with such a fury, he lost his courage to defend himself, and
presently yielded. Datames made him to be bound, and sent him by Mithridates to
the king. Hereupon Artaxerxes considering better what he had done, drawing his
Lieutenant far from his army, to send him in commission about a matter of
less consequence, being angry with himself, sent a messenger to the camp,
thinking Datames was not yet gone from thence, to tell him that he should not
go. But before this messenger came to the army, he met them by the way that
brought Aspis. This so sudden execution wanne Datames the kings good favor,
but made him very much hated of the Courtiers, seeing one only man more made
of then all the rest: which was the cause that they all joined together to
destroy him.

Pandates Treasurer of the spare, and Datames friend, did advertise him by
express letters, that he stood in great danger, if any sinister fortune
happened, whilst he should command the army in EGYPT: that it is the
custom of kings to impute all misfortunes to their servants that chance in
their affairs, and to attribute the good success unto themselves. And this
makes them very easily incline to the extermination of them, of whom report is
made; that they have not done that which was committed to their charge. And as
for him, that he should so much more stand in fear, because that those which
could do most with the king, were his greatest enemies. Datames having received
these letters in his camp, and knowing that they carried truth with them: he
resolved to forsake the king: which doing notwithstanding he committed no
breach of his fidelity. For he left Androcles MAGNESIAN General of the army.
And for himself he went with his men into CAPPADOCIA, afterward he wan
PAPHLAGONIA which was hard by it, without showing himself either friend or
enemy of the king. He secretly contracted friendship with Ariobarzanes,
assembled forces, and gave the guard of the towns of war unto those he
trusted best: but the winter did let him that his affairs went not forward. He
understands that the PISIDIANS did leauie some troops to set upon him: which
caused him to send his son Aridaeus before with an army. The young man being
killed at an encounter, the father marched right thither with his men, hiding
his grief as much as he could possible, because he desired to meet with his
enemies, before those that followed him should hear of his loss, being
afraid lest the news of the death of this young Lord should kill their hearts.
So being come to the place where he pretended, he camped in such sort that the
multitude of his enemies could not enclose him, nor keep him from coming to
fight when he thought good. He brought with him Mithrobarzanes his father in
law, who was Colonel of the horsemen. He perceiving the affairs of A fine
stratageme.
his son in law in so poor an estate, forsook him to go yield himself to the
enemies. Datames being told of it, judged that his soldiers if they once
perceived that his father in law had forsaken him, they would also follow his
example: wherefore to prevent all, he gave it out that Mithrobarzanes was gone
by his commandment, pretending to yield themselves to the enemies: to the end
with more ease and advantage to cut them in pieces. And therefore that there
was no reason to leave such a man so far from them, but they must needs follow
him with speed. So that they standing to it lustily, the enemies could not
resist, considering they should be charged within and without their camp. So
having thought that the best way in the world, he marches into the field with
his troops, and follows Mithrobarzanes: who did but newly yield themselves
to the enemies, when Datames appeared, who put out the signal of battle. The
PISIDIANS troubled with this strange sight, did suspect that Mithrobarzanes
and his would betray them, and that they were come of purpose to do them some
mischief. Thereupon they vehemently gave charge upon these traitors, who not
knowing what to think of such a charge, were constrained to fight against them,
unto whom they had yielded themselves: and to return unto them whom they had
forsaken. But the one and the other not knowing them any whit, in a short time
these wicked men were cut in pieces. So withal Datames sets upon the
PISIDIANS who made head against him, passed through them, and brake them at the
first charge: pursued them that fled, killed a great number of them, and was
master of their camp. Note here how wisely (and all done at one time) he
punished the traitors, and put his enemies to flight: turning that to good,
which was devised for the overthrow of him and his. This is the most brauest
and most speediest executed stratageme of a Chief in wars, that can be found
in histories.

The son betrayeth the father.
Notwithstanding that, this great person was forsaken of his eldest son
Scismas, who went to the king to advertise him that his father was revolted.
This troubled Artaxerxes greatly, knowing that he had to deal with a valiant
and a wise Captain, who boldly did set upon any enterprise with discretion.
Thereupon he sent Autophrodates into CAPPADOCIA, whom Datames took pains to
go and meet, to prevent him that he should not win the straight of CILICIA.
But being long assembling his forces, and that hope being frustrate, he chose
with those few men that followed him such a place, that his enemies could not
enclose him, nor pass, but that he should shut them up in very unwholesome
places, nor hurt him when he liked to join in fight. Now though Autophradates
understood somewhat of that, yet he made account that it was more expedient for
him to join then to flee from the list, having so great forces. He had 20000
horse, and 100000 footmen, which they call GARDATES, with 3000 slings of the
same name. Furthermore, he had 8000 CAPPADOCIANS, 10000 ARMENIANS, 5000
PAPHLAGONIANS, 10000 PHRYGIANS, 5000 LYDIANS, and about 3000 ASPENDIANS and
PISIDIANS, 2000 CILICIANS, as many CAPTANIANS, and 3000 GREEKS in pay: besides
a great number of men light armed. Against this world of forces, Datames could
hope no more but in his direction, and in the commodity of the place where he
camped: for he had not the twentieth part so many men. Yet trusting to himself,
to the place, and to the valor of his men, he came to fight, and put to the
sword many thousands of his enemies, having lost of his side but one thousand
of his men. For this cause he set up the next day in the field a sign of
triumph where the battle was fought. So being removed from thence, as he was
the weaker in number of men, he to the contrary remained victor in all
skirmishes and fights, and never came to hands, but he put his enemies to the
worse: in the which he had oftentimes very good success, because he knew all
the ways, and did wisely consider his affairs. Antophradates seeing the king
lost more in these wars then he got, he persuaded Datames to fall to
agreement, and to make his peace with the king. Though Datames had no great
trust in that, yet he accepted the condition, and said he would send
ambassadors unto Artaxerxes. And thus the war of the king ended against
Datames. And for Antophradates, he retired into PHRYGIA.

But the king being vexed ^o the heart against Datames, considering that he
could not prevail against him by arms, sought to make him away by treason.
Datames looked warily to his ways, and avoided many ambushes. As on a time,
having understanding that some pretending to be his friends, had laid a plot
for him: although his enemies had given him intelligence of it, yet he thought
that as it was not a thing lightly to be believed, so was it not altogether to
be discredited: whereupon he resolved to try whether it was a true or false
report brought him. Therefore he set forward to the place where it was told him
this ambush was laid: but he chose amongst his men one that was of his height,
he gave him his furniture, and made him march in the rank which he was wont to
hold. He on the other side apparelled like a soldier, went with the archers of
the guard. Those which lay in ambush deceived by the order and furniture,
as soon as they saw their time, they began to set upon the supposed Datames.
But the right Datames had warned them before with whom he marched, to be ready
to do all as he did. He seeing then these traitors running, he threw darts at
them, and so did all those that were in his company, so that the other fell to
the ground, before they could come near him whom they would surprise. Now
notwithstanding all this, this so wary and subtle Captain was in the end
betrayed by the deceit of Mithridates Mithridates stratageme against Datames.
the son of Ariobarzanes, who promised the king to do the deed, so that he
would afterward suffer him to do what he thought good, without being called in
question any manner of way. The king consented unto it, and gave his hand upon
it after the custom of the PERSIANS, to make him more assured. Mithridates
having the kings word, made show to be sworn enemy The manner of Mithridates
(...).
unto Artaxerxes, he gathers troops together, and by means treats
friendship with Datames, he enters with a maine army into the kings country,
besieges and takes fortresses, carries away great booty, he gives part of
it to his soldiers, he sends the rest unto Datames, and delivers many
fortresses and holds into his hands. So having continued his course a
reasonable time, Datames began wholly to believe that Mithridates had
undertaken a war which he would never leave, and this traitor gave him great
occasions to think so. For fearing lest Datames would mistrust some ambush, he
sought not to speak with him, nor went about to meet together: but without
enterview he entertained his alliance so finely, that these two men seemed both
one, not so much for mutual benefit, as for a common hatred conceived against
the king. When he saw his snare well laid, he wrote to Datames that time
required they should assemble greater forces to make war against the king:
and if he thought good, he would appoint a place where they might one see
another, and confer together. Datames found this advice good, and Tim and
place appointed for enterview the other.
so they appointed a day to meet together, and place where they might speak
personally one with the other. Some days before Mithridates came to the place,
seconded with another in whom he put great trust: he hid poigniards separated
in diverse places, and did carefully mark the places where they were laid. The
day being come of their talking together, both of them sent men to discover the
place, and to search one the other, because they should be without weapons.
That being done, they enter into talk, and after they had spoken some time
together, they departed: so that Datames was gone a good way off. And as for
Mithridates, before he went to his men (to give no occasion of ill thought) he
comes to the same place again where they had spoken together, and sat him
down in a place where there was a poigniard hidden, faining to be weary, and
to refresh himself a little. Then he sent for Datames under color that he had
forgotten to tell him some thing. In the mean time he took the poigniard out
of the place where it was hidden, drew it, and put it naked under his robe. And
seeing Datames, told him they must go a little aside, and that he had discovered
a place directly over against them very fit to camp in. Datames traitorously
murdered by Mithridates.
He began to show him the place with his finger: and as Datames turned to see
what it was, this traitor stabbed him with his poigniard, and made an end of
killing of him before any of his men could come to help him. See here how
through pretense of friendship he was surprised, who had entrapped so many
others by his valiant direction, but none by treason.

The end of the life of Datames.
THE LIFE OF Hamilcar.
HAmilcar the son of Hanniball, surnamed Barcas, a CARTHAGINIAN Captain.
being very young began to command an army that was in SICILIA, in the end of
the first war of AFRIC. Before his coming thither the CARTHAGINIANS had
very ill success both by sea and land: but so soon as he led the army, he
never gave place to the enemy, and gave him no advantage to hurt him. But to
the contrary he found many an occasion to draw them to fight, wherein he had
the vantage. Which being done, although the CARTHAGINIANS had well-neare lost
all that they held in SICILIA, yet he kept the city of ERIX so well, as it
seemed that there had never been war made in that quarter. In the mean time
the CARTHAGINIANS having lost a battle at the sea near unto the Isles AEGATES,
against Catulus Luctatius a ROMAN Consul: they determined to leave arms,
and gave all the charge unto Hamilcar to treat of peace. For his part he
desired nothing but war: yet seeing his town in want of money and means,
and in danger to sink under their burden, he concluded that they must make
peace. Yet so notwithstanding he resolved with himself, that as soon as all
matters were pacified, he would make war again, and set upon the ROMANS,
either to make them Lords of all, or else to compel them to be subject. With
this mind he entered into parley of peace, where he showed himself so stout:
that as Catulus declared he would agree to nothing, before Hamilcar and his
soldiers which had kept ERIX had laid down their arms, and were gone out of
SICILIA, he made answer that he would rather dye in the ruins of his country,
then to return home with such shame: and that honor would not suffer him to
yield up his arms to his enemies, which his country had put into his hands to
be employed against them. Catulus let him go with this obstinate resolution.

But when Hamilcar was arrived at CARTHAGE, he saw matters go far otherwise
then he hoped for. For during the long wars against the enemies abroad, there
was mischief sprung up among them within: which went on so fiercely, that
GARTHAGE was never in so great danger but when it was altogether destroyed.
First of all, the mercenarie soldiers that had been in the wars against the
ROMAIMES, to the number of 20000 they rebelled, they made all AFRIC rise, and
they besieged CARTHAGE. The CARTHAGINIANS being greatly afraid of so many
evils, they demanded aid of the ROMANS, which they granted. But in the end,
when all was thought to be in a desperate case, they chose Hamilcar their
Captain general: who did not only drive the enemies far from the town,
which were in number above a 100000 fighting men: but he did also shut them up
in such straights, that the most part of them died of famine, and the rest were
slain. Furthermore, he brought the cities which had revolted, under the
obedience again of CARTHAGE, and amongst others VTICA, and HIPPONA, two of the
strongest cities of AFRIC. But not staying there, he extended the limits of
the signiory of CARTHAGE, and pacified all AFRIC in such sort, that it seemed
there had been no war of long time.

Now having done all things according to his mind, he bearing ill will to the
ROMANS, and hoping to be revenged: to find a more easy way to daw them to
war, he practiced so well that he was chosen General, and they sent him with
an army into SPAIN, whither he carried with him his son Hanniball nine years
old, and another fair young gentleman called Hasdruball, whom many judged to
be loved of Hamilcar otherwise then was fit for honest men. For there were many
always that could not contain themselves from speaking evil of this great
Captain. Which was the cause that the governor of Hasdruball did forbid him
to come no more to Hamilcar, who afterward gave him his daughter in marriage,
so that they began again to meet together. For by the custom of the country
they could not forbid a son in law, to frequent with his father in law. We
have made mention of Hasdruball, because that after Hamilcar was slain, he was
made chief of the army, which did great exploits under his conduct. But so he
was the first, that by presents and gifts corrupted the ancient manners of the
CARTHAGINIANS. After his death, Hanniball had the charge of the army, with the
consent of all the men of war. As for Hamilcar, he having passed the sea,
entered into SPAIN, and did great things there with good success. He subdued
many warlike nations, enriched all AFRIC with horses, with arms, with men,
and with money. As he had thought to have transported the war from thence
into ITALY, nine years after his coming into SPAIN: he was slain in a
battle against the VECTONS. The deadly hate he bare unto the ROMANS, seems
to have kindled the second war with AFRIC. For his son Hanniball was
brought to this pass, by the continual adiurations of his father: that he had
rather destroy himself, then to fail his help against the ROMANS.

The end of Hamilcars life.

