MADRIGALES AND AIRS.

Of two, three, four and five Voices, with the continued Base, with TOCCATOS,
SINFONIAS and RITTORNELLOS to them. After the manner of Consort Music.

To be performed with the Harpesechord, Lutes, Theorbos, Base Violl, two
VIOLINS, or two VIOLS.

PUBLISHED By WALTER PORTER, one of the Gentlemen of his MAJESTY'S ROYAL
Chapel.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby. 1632.

Cum Priuilegio.

TENOR

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN LORD DIGBY of Sherburne, Earl of BRISTOW.
My singular good Lord:
REtreats from the World are settings forward for Heaven, And since it is now
so rare a fashion, to have many Associates: in such extrauagancies; me thinks
their divine Solitudes (or Desolations) should be pleased with presentment of
divine Consorts. God himself is entitled to Music, it being even his own
spirits most sweet inspiration. For which cause I have employed my best
endeavors to serve your Honor in your sweet Solitariness (as Sir Philip Sydney
calls the fruition of his own) with my best ability; As well to express my
true gratitude, for all your rare goodness in my attendance in Spain; here
and every where, wherein your right Noble Family has bound me with most strong
deseruings; As any hope in my unworthiness to please you worthily. In regard
your good Lordship has heretofore been feasted with the Choice Musiques of
Christendom; whose Accents still sounding in your ears, must with all power
of desert keep out the desertlesse assaults, or Assayes of Entry made by mine
own deficiencies. But because men many times (in curious fear to seem
partial in sentence of their own labors) are as many times scarce
indifferent and equal; If any worth all in these my solicitous watches could
obtain lest pass to your Honors delight. I should be more glad to be now so
deceived; then ever I was sure of good speed in my most happy and successful
Ambitions.

And so rest ever your good Lordships, Walter Porter*



To the Practitioner.
GEntle Practitioner, I have boldly aduentred to publish these Madrigals and
Airs; thou may blame my presumption, yet thou can not, if there be any
goodness in thee, blame my intention and end, which is no other, but by this
means to be free from burying that poor talent which God has given me; and
by this little, to acknowledge his great goodness, and my will, if I had
greater ability: and to express in some mean manner my thankfulness unto my
Noble and worthy Friends, which, if they like any of them, I shall acknowledge
my self well satisfied for all my labor and charge; if they come to any of
your hands, before you censure (which I know you will, and they that understand
least most sharply) let me entreat you to play and sing them true, according
to my meaning, or hear them done so; not in steed of singing, to howl or
bawle them, and scrape in steed o playing, and perform them falsely and say
they are naught; In so doing if they were nere so good, you would spoil them; for
I must tell you, a Composer, when he has set a Song with all the art he can,
has done but half the work, the other half is the well performing or
expressing that in singing or playing which he has done in composing,
howsoever I now must be content, yet thus I could wish it; I have expressed in
the part of the Harpsechord, the mayor and minor sixses, by Flats and Sharpes,
the figures I have put over the head of every Note as near as I could, I have
made the singing Base also a through Base, in which you are not to sing but
where there are words or this sign * of Repetition; in the Songs which are set
forth with Division, where you find many Notes in a place after this manner ^
in rule or space, they are set to express the Trillo: I have made use of these
Italian words, because they shall not mistake, and sing them, if they were
expressed in English, being mixed amongst the other words, Tace which is, that
the Voices or Instruments, are to be silent, or hold their peace, till such or
such things be performed, also the word forte, which is strong or loud, I have
set before most of the Songs, Toccatos, Sinfonias, and Rittornellos, which
besides the delight and variety they beget, they are good for the respiration
of the Voice, for which end they are used; Thus much I thought good to certify
thee; what shall be wanting as through Bases, for the other Instruments, which
is to be used to make up the body of Music, according as I have set down,
thou must take a little pains to write out, as I have taken a great deal to
make them, and to have them printed, and when thou have done, let a little
Charity be in a part of thy censure, And I shall strive, if this have but
indifferent acceptance, to do something for thee more useful, till which
time and ever,

I rest thine in all love, Walter Porter.

I.
Of 5. Voices.
Cho:

^ O Let your Songs be of him and praise him, And praise him, and let your
talking be of all * his wondrous Verse. works, of all his wondrous works, be
of all * works. Remember the marvelous works that he has done, his wonders
and Judgments of his mouth, And forget not all his benefits, And * which
forgiueth all thy sins, Cho: And heals all thy In -- fir -- mi -- ties, And
gathers thee * and gathers thee out of the land, And * land, from the East
and from the West, from the North and from the South, and from the South, And
saves thy life, And * from destruction, And crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness, And * with mercy and loving kindness*

I.
Of 5. Voices.
Verse.

^ O Praise O praise the Lord, Ye that excel in strength, ye that fulfill
ye * his Commandments, un -- to the voice of his word, And hearken unto the
voice the voice of his word,

Cho: ^ O speak good of the Lord, O * O * of the Lord, All ye works of his,
In all pla -- ces of his Dominions, In * Dominions, praise thou the Lord,
whilst I live will I praise the Lord, O my Soul whilst I * whilst I live will
I praise the Lord.

II.
Of 5. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia:

^ Hither we come in -- to this world of woe, And feeling to what end we come,
we cry, And * And * we come we cry, In The morning of our age like flowers
we blow, like flowers we blow we blow, And like Gods figures seem too good
too good to die, But let afflictions touch us and like clay, we fall to what
we are we are, we * we * we * to what we are we fall to what
we are and end the day.



III.
Of 4. Voices.
Tace: Rittornello:

^ He that loves a Rosy cheek or a Corrall lip admires, or from star like
eyes does seek does seek, fuel to mainetaine his fires.

Cho: Tace:

As old Time: Once Sung and once Playde.

Tace: Ritornell: And so all over as before.

But a smoth and steadfast mind,
Gentle thoughts and calm desires:
Hearts with equal love combind,
Kindlesse never dying fires.
Cho: Where these are not. Tacet:



IIII.
Of 4. Voices.
^ Sleep all my Joys, And only sorrow wake, let mirth to mourning pleasure
yield to plaint, whilst I consume in sigh -- thing for her sake, whose loss
to mind my heavy Soul makes faint, her love my life, * her lack my ling --
gring death, ye all my hopes are vanished, as her breath.

Cho: ^ Al -- though she is dead, yet this from death * she said, I al -- ways
al -- ways lived and dyed a perfect maid.

V.
Of 3. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia:

^ SItting once rapt with delight, In my say -- rest mystresse sight, I took
plasure to compare her eyes witness to the air, I took pleasure to compare
her eyes whitnes to the air, That which compast in the ball, I did pu -- rest
water. pu -- rest water call, And the pretty pretty inward round, I styled
earth but O I found while some part I did desire for to liken un -- to fire,
for to liken unto fire, ere I knew from whence it came I my self grew all a
flame, I my self grew all a flame.



VI.
Of 4. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia.

^ Look on me: If by so happy means I dye, my fortune it aduances, aduances.
It will revive me being dead, revive me being dead, It will revive me being
dead, revive me being dead, and I again shall love you, Think me but fair
but fair and I am fair, Think * Though all the world deny it.



VII.
Of 2. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia:

^ TEll me you stars that our af -- fec -- tions move why made you me, why
* that cruel one that cruel cruel one to love, why burns my heart, why *
her scorned sacrifice whose breast, is hard as Crystal, cold as Ice, God of
desire if all thy vo -- ta -- ries thou thus re -- pay, succession will grow
wise, No sighs for insence, Thy rytes will be despised, Thy * thy Al -- ter
Brook O, o, Or give her my flame to melt that Snow which yet un -- thawed does
on her bosom grow, or make me Ice, and with her Crystal chains bind up
all love, bind up all love with in my froten veins, Bind * fro -- zen veins.

VIII.
Of 5. Voices.
^ OLd Poets that in Cu -- pids hands put weapons first, A Chain, But now hec
finds in Celias either brow, In both her eyes in all her parts two bows, Ten
thousand fetters flames and darts, The graces and the careless snares, that in
her looser looser beauty lies, Sweet smiles and sweeter airs that fly, like
lightning from her lips, And then, Tell me how many ways love murders
murders men, Tell me how many ways love murders men.



IX.
Of 5. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia:

^ THus sung Orphius to his strings when he was almost slain, whilst the
winds soft murmuring, Answered all his woes again a -- gain, Answered all his
woes again, Answered all his woes a -- gain his woes a -- gain, Ah dear
Euridice Ah, Ah dear Euridice, the Eccoing winds replied, The Eccoing winds re
-- plied the Eccoing winds replied, Ah, Ah dear Euridice, Ah dear Euri --
dice, Ah dear Euridice the Eccoing winds replied.



X.
Of 3. Voices.
Tace Toccato:

^ ENd now my life, with daily pains afflicted, afflicted with * since that,
for all that I have wept and grie -- -- ued, for all that I have wept and
grieved my tears are not requited, and trusty faith not any whit belee --
ued, unjust rewards and scorns of her to borrow, un -- just rewards and
scorns of her to borrow, only that she would credit she would credir and
believe me.



XI.
Of 5. Voices.
Tace: Farewell once my delight, etc.

^ I Will plain no more to Love, no more to thee, but cease to mourn, where none
will pity me will pit -- tie me.

Tace: And though I hate, etc.

Cho:

And since my Love and me you disauow,
As if to Love you were to iniure you.
Tace: I Will mildly Temporise. etc.

Cho:

Nor farther seek this only shall suffice me,
My Love deserved you though you did deny me.
Tace: Farewell, Farewell. etc.

Cho:

Be you beloved of all and lastly shine,
As fair in Heavens eye as you are in mine.


XII.
Of 5. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia:

^ COme Lovers all to me, Come * and cease your mourning, cease your mourning,
Love h'has no shafts to shoot no shafts to shoot, love * to shoot no more
brands burning, Love * burning, He means my pains shall you from pains de
-- liver, For in my breast, For in my breast h'has empt'd * all his quiver, Had
he not been a child, bin * had * he would have known, h'has lost a thousand
* servants, h'has * thousand servants, h'has lost a thousand thousand servants
to kill one.

XIII.
Of 3. Voices.
Tace: Rittornello:

^ FRom us, replied the lips proceed those blisses, which lovers reepe by kind
words and sweet kisses, Then weept the eyes, Then * And from there springs did
power of liquid oriental Pearl a shower, where at the lips moved with delight
and pleasure, Through a sweet smile * unlocked their pearely treasure and bad
love Judge love Judge, whether did add more grace, weeping or smiling, Pearls
to Caelias face.



XIIII.
Of 4. Voices.
^ TEll me where the beauty lies, In my Mistress or in my eyes Beauty does
from like -- ing grow, Be she fayrer whiter then Venus Doves or Leda's
Swanes, Seen of all of none respected, Then let my Mistress that I love her,
think her fair, * cause I approve her, Then let my Mistress that I love her
think her fair, * cause I approve her* Over again Beauty does from like --
ing grow, Be she fayrer whiter then Uenus Doves or Ledais Swains, Seen of
all of none respected, Then let my Mystresse that I Love her, Think her fair
* fair cause I approve her.

XV.
Of 3. Voices.
Tace: Toccato:

^ Love in thy youth fair maid be wise, Old Time will make thee colder, and
though each morning new a -- rise, yet we each day grow older, Thou as heaven
art fair and young, Thine eyes like Twine stars shining, but ere ano -- there
day be sprung, but * all these will be declining, Then winter comes with all
his fears, and all thy sweetes shall borrow, Too late then will thou shower
thy tears, And I too late shall sorrow.



XVI.
Of 5. Voices.
First Part.
Tace: Sinfonia.

^ HAyle Cloris hayle: Fair goddess of the Spring, Fair * youth of the
year, Of thee still will we sing, youth of * Of thee still will we sing,
Hayle fairest of Jove's seed, Hayle fairest of Jove's seed only of thee of
thee, only of thee, That art earths Music shall our Music be, shall * be,
That * * be That art earths Music shall our Music be, That * be.



XVII.
Of 5. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia:

^ TThe Ecco: He Birds the wandering winds that throw through the air, The *
The * The * dring winds that throw through the air, Life's sovereign balsome
as they blow, Life's * shall with the lawds, shall * and zeal and zeal
begetting lays, breathed by us hourly in thy praise, in thy praise feast the
air, breathed * breathed * feast the air, And teach the hills the hills, And *
rocks and woods to sing, fair goddess of the Spring, fair goddess of the
Spring.



XVIII.
Of 5. Voices.
Tace Toccato:

^ YOung Thirsis lay in Phillis lap, and gazing on, and gazing on her eye,
steem'd life too mean for such good hap, * to mean for such good hap, and
feign the Boy would dye, So did these happy happy Lo -- uers dye Lovers dye,
So * happy Lo -- uers dye, That both to life Immediately, returned to dye
again, * to dye a -- gain.



XIX.
Of 3. Voices.
Tace: Rittornello:

^ THy face and eyes: And for their sakes most men * affect thee, Then outward
Repetition with the Violines. beauty, for which I affect thee I affect thee.
Thy mind is fayrer then thy face or eyes, And that same beauteous out -- side
which thou have, is but a curious Casket curious Casket in which lies, The
treasures of a mind, Tace: Repetition: -- Tace: So keep them still: --
Virtuous and chaste, Virtuous and chaste. For when through age thy beauty shall
decay, But worth will last until, last until Tace: Repetition: -- Tace: But
he that shall: -- thy dying day dying day. And think thee fair and know thy
virtues too, And much admire thee, As I swear Tace: Repetition: -- I do as I
swear I do.

XX.
Of 2. Voices.
Tace: Toccato:

^ TEll me Amyntas Cloris cries, Tell * As she was sitting by him, As * Tell
me Amint as Cloris cried, As she was sitting by him, If there be such a thing
as love, how hap how * we cannot spy him, be -- cause to fee, Two mortals
two * is forbidden, But in thine eyes, But in thine eyes even there he lies,
And in * my bo -- some hidden, Even there he lies but in thine, eyes even
there he lies, And in, And in my bosom hidden, And in, And in my bosom hidden.

XXI.
Of 4. Voices.
Tace: Sinfonia:

^ DEath there is no need of thee, Death * no need of thee of thee, Death * *
of thee, Death * Love alone, Are enough without thy Dart, with * are * Are
enough without thy Dart, to tire upon an honest heart an honest heart, For love
no pryse but love regards, And with it self it self rewards, And often in
seeking it is found, Glo -- rye that lives, glory that lives, when we are
under under ground, glory that lives when we are under under ground.



XXII. An Elogie on the Right Honorable Lady, the Lady ARRABELLA STEWARD.
Of 5. Voices.
Tace:

First Part.
^ WAke sorrow wake since she is fallen a sleep a sleep, since * since * since *
fallen a sleep, who was Entombd, who was Entombd in life, Entombd in life, who
was Entombd was Entombd in life, Eyes weep out sight, eyes * eyes * out sight,
Or see but still to weep, Who now is dead, Aye me aye me she is dead, Then mind
we still her name, Then * Then * Then mind we still her name with hearts with
hearts of Lead.

Second Part.
^ FArewell * dear widow wife, Farewell in Death, that fardst so ill in life,
that fardst so ill in life so ill in life. Sole parragon, Thy vault still keeps
still keeps our thoughts, Thy Chest our hearts our hearts, Thy vault * still
keeps our thoughts, thy Chest out hearts*



The Table of the Songs contained in this Book.
1 O Praise the Lord, Of 5. Voices. 2 Hither we come, Of 5. Voices. 3 He that
loves, Of 4. two Trebles, Alto and Tenor. 4 Sleep all my my Joys, Of 4.
Treble, Alto, Tenor and Base. 5 Sitting once, Of 3. Treble, Tenor and Base. 6
Look on me ever, Of 4. Treble, Alto, Tenor and Base. 7 Tell me you Startes, Of
2. Treble and Tenor. 8 Old Poets, Of 5. Voices. 9 Thus sing Orpheus, Of 5.
Voices. 10 End now my life, Of 3. Alto, Tenor and Base. 11 Farewell, Four
parts, Of 5. Voices. 12 Come Lovers all, Of 5. Voices. 13 In Celias face, Of 3.
Treble, Tenar and Base. 14 Tell me where, Of 4. Treble, Alto, Tenor, and Base.
15 Love in thy youth, Of 3. Alto Tenor and Base. 16 Hayle Clores hayle, First
part, Of 5. Voices. 17 The Ecco, Second part, Of 5. Voices. 18 Young Thirsis
lay, Of 5. Voices. 19 Thy face and Eyes, Of 3. Alto, Tenor, and Base. 20 Tell
me A Mintas, Of 2. Alto and Tenor. 21 Death, there is no need, Of 4. Treble,
Alto, Tenor, and Base. 22 Wake Sorrow, wake, first and Second Part, Of 5.
Voices.
FINIS.

