The most noble and famous travels of Marcus Paulus, one of the nobility of
the state of Venice, into the East parts of the world, as Armenia, Persia,
Arabia, Tartary, with many other kingdoms and Provinces.

No less pleasant, than profitable, as appears by the Table, or Contents of
this Book.

Most necessary for all sorts of Persons, and especially for Travelers.

Translated into English.

AT LONDON, Printed by Ralph Nevvbery Anno. 1579.

To the right worshipful Mr. Edward Dyar Esquire, John Frampton wishes
prosperous health and felicity.
HAVING lying by me in my chamber (right Worshipful) a translation of the
great voyage and long travels of Paulus Venetus the Venetian, many
Merchauntes, Pilots, and Mariners, and others of diverse degrees, much bent to
Discoueries, resorting to me upon several occasions, took so great delight
with the reading of my Book, finding in the same such strange things, and such
a world of variety of matters, that I could never be in quiet, for one or
for an other, for the committing the same to printe in the English tongue,
persuading, that it might give great light to our Seamen, if ever this
nation chanced to find a passage out of the frozen Zone to the South Seas, and
otherwise delight many home dwellers, furtherers of travelers. But finding in
my self small ability for the finishing of it, in such perfection as the
excellency of the work, and as this learned time did require, I stayed a long
time, in hope some learned man would have translat^d the work, but finding
none that would take it in hand, to satisfy so many requests, now at last I
determined to set it forth, as I could, referring the learned in tongues,
delighted in eloquence, to the work it self, written in Latin, Spanish, and
Italian, and the rest that have but the English tongue, that seek only for
substance of matter to my plain translation, beseeching to take my travel
and good meaning in the best part. And bethinking my self of some special
Gentleman, a lover of knowledge, to whom I might dedicate the same, I found
no man, that I know in that respect more worthy of the same, than your
worship, nor yet any man, to whom so many Scholars, (...) many travelers,
and so many men of valor, suppressed or hindered with poverty, or distressed
by lack of friends in Court, are so much bound as to you, and therefore to
you I dedicate the same, not because you your self want the knowledge of
tongues, for I know you to have the Latin, the Italian, the French, and the
Spanishe: But because of your worthiness, and for that I have since my first
acquaintance found my self without any great deserte on my part, more
bound unto you than to any man in England, and therefore for your desert and
token of a thankful mind, I dedicate the same to your worship, most humbly
praying you to take it in good part, and to be patron of the same: and so
wishing you continuance of virtue, with much increase of the same, I take my
leave, wishing you with many for the common wealths sake, place with
authority, where you may have daily exercise of the gifts that the Lord
has endowed you withal in plentiful sort. From my lodging this xxvj. day
of January. 1579.

Your worships to command, JOHN FRAMPTON.

Master Rothorigo to the Reader.
An Introduction into Cosmographie.
Because many be desirous of the knowledge of the parts of the world, what
names they have, and in what places they be, and that many and sundry times the
holy scripture does make mention, and also it is profitable for such as do
traffic and trade to have knowledge, I was moved to give notice to all such
as are desirous or have pleasure in reading.

You shall understand, that a man turning his face to the rising of the Sun,
that part that is before his eyes where the Sun does rise, is called Orient
or East, and his contrary where the Sun sets, is Occident or Weast. The
course or way of the Sun is called Media die, or South, which is on your
right hand, his contrary part that is on the left hand is called
S^ptentrion or North.

Furthermore, you shall understand, that if a man stand in the Island of
Cales, and look toward the rising of the Sun, he shall see three
principal parts of the world* divided by the Sea called Mediterraneum, that
comes on^e of the great Occean and Weaste Sea, and runs toward the
East, and by two very great and principal rivers, the one coming from the
South, called Nilus, and the other from the North, called Taenais.

Africa
YOu shall also understand, that from the entering of the strait called
Iuberaltare, upon the right hand to the river Nilus bordering upon Egypt, is
called Africa, the Sea that is toward us, is called Libya, that which is
toward the South, is called Ethiopia, which is the Occean, the Sea toward
the Weaste, is called Atlantica, and is also the great Occean Sea. It has
these famous Cities and Provinces. Over against Iuberaltar, and the coaste of
Mallaga is Mauritania, which we call Barbary. It is named Barbaria, because
the people be barbarous, not only in language, but in manners and customs.
Following toward the East is Numidia, Getulia, Tunes, a city in Africa, the
name so given by Asu, to all Syria, and Aegipt. On the South part be the
Ethiopians, which hereafter shall be spoken of.

Europa
EVropa is called al ye provinces against Africa toward the North from the
great Occean Sea, that enters into the streits to the river Tanai, and the
great lake called Meotis, where this river enters into. In this there is
comprehended Portugale, Britania, Spain, France, Almaine, Italy, Grecia,
Polonia, Hungary, or Panonia, Valachia, Asia the lesser, Phrygia, Turkia,
Galatia, Lydia, Pamphilia, Lauria, Lycia, Cilicia, Scythia the lower, Dacia,
Gocia and Thrasia.

Asia
ASia the greater is tha^ that is beyond Europa and Africa, that is to say, on
the other side o^ Nilus Southward, and the river Tanais Northward, following
the way Eastwarde, and is as big as Europa and Africa, and compassed with
three Seas, Easterly or Oriental, Indico to the Southwarde, Scythia to the
Northwarde, having provinces, Soria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, Sarmasia, Asiatica,
Arabia, Persia, Armenia, Medea, Hircania, Carmania, the Indias on this side and
beyond the river Ganges.

Also you shall understand, that the great Sea called the Occean, does
compass about the foresaid three principal parts of the world, and so
does compass all the whole world, although there be diverse regions and
places whereas they be, having diverse names.

Moreover, you shall understand, that in whatsoever parts of the Sea that do
answer to any parts of ye foresaid Countries, as there be many Islands
inhabited with diverse people, as well as the East parts, whereas is Taprobane and
Thyle, and others infinite number on their sides, as well as on the other parts
before declared, and those that be between them and al others, are to be
understood to pertain to one of these three parts of the world beforesaid, to
which it may be most properly judged to be, and lies nearest unto.

Ethiopia
Moreover, you must note, that Ethiopia is a common name to many Provinces
and Countries, inhabited with black people called Negros. And to begin with
the most Weaste parts, the first is (...), that is to say, from Cab^ Verde
or the green Cape, and following the co^st of the Sea, to the mouth or streite
of the Red Sea. Al those provinces be called Ethiopians, and of these
Ethiopians from Ginney unto Cas^ Mansa, that is to say, the Kings palace,
they be of the sect of Mahomet, circumcised the most part of them. And the
chiefest and most principal of these people be the Iolofos and Mandingos, and
be most part under the government of a King called Mandimansa, for Mansa is
as much to say as Senior or Lord, and Mandy Mandinga, so by this his title he
is Lord Mandinga. This King is black, and his abiding is in the province of
Sertano four hundred leagues within the land, in a City compassed about with a
wall called Iaga, which is rich of gold and silver, and of all such
merchaundize as is occupied in Adem and in Meca: and from thence forward the
Ethiopians be Idolators to the cape called Buona Esperanca, and there turns
again to the sect of Mahomet. Beyond these provinces following up into the
land of Sartan^ be great and high mountains or hills, called mountains of
the Moon, the tops of them be always covered with Snow, and at the foot of
the^ springs the river Nilus, and this Country is called Ethiopia beside
Eg^pt, and in Arabia it is called Abas, and the inhabitants ^^h^ssm^s, and be
Christians, and do use to be marked with an iron in the face: they be not
baptized with fire (as some do say) but as we are, but they be Heretics,
Iacobites. and Hebeyonites. They do hold on the old law with the new, and
be circumcised, and do keep the Sabbath day, and do eat no Po^ke, and some
of them do take many wives, and be also baptized, and do say, that their
King came and descended of King Solomon, and of the Queen Saba, and this King
has continual wars with the Moors.

There is another Ethiopia called Asiatica interior, which the Arabians call
Zenium, and these do extend from the said hills of the Moon, N^lus.
and of Nilus, to the borders of Barbary. And the saying is, that among all
Rivers, only Nilus enters into two Seas, that is to say, one branch into
the East Sea, and another branch into the West Sea. All these Ethiopians be
Moors, and their labor and occupation, is digging of gold out of the
ground, where they do find great plenty. There is also another Ethiopia
called Tragodytica, and this does reach or extend from the foresaid
Ethiopia, to the streyte or mouth of the red Sea, The red Sea.
and these be somewhat whyter, and the King and people be Moors, and came
out of Arabia foelix, for the Arabians came over the streyte of the red Sea,
and got that Country of the Iacobites by force, and at this day there is
robbing and stealing among them secretly, for the King of the Iacobites is of
so great power, that the Souldan of Babylon does give him tribute. Souldan.


Arabia
THat which we do call Arabia, the Arabians do call Arab, and is called
Gesyrdelaab. That which is between the red Sea, and Sinus Perficus, is
called the Island of Arabia, and this is called Arabia Foelix, by reason of the
Incense that grows there. Arabia Felix.


There be other two Arabias beside this, the one of them extendyng from the
Mount Sinay, to the dead Sea, where the Children of Israel went fortye
years, and this is called Arabia petrea, taking that name of a City that is
there. The other does extend between Syria and Euphrates toward the City
of Lep^, and this they do call Arabia desan, Alepo.
which is as much to say, as of Siria, and our Latins do call it Arabia
deserta. And whereas the vulgar people, and men for the most part, do think
that Antilla, or those Islands lately found out by commandment of the
Catholic King Don Fernando, and Lady Isabell Queen, be in the Indias, they be
deceived therein, to call it by the name of the Indias. And for because that in
Spaniola, or new Spain, they do find gold, some do not let to say it is
Tharsis, and Ophin, and Sethin, from whence in the time of Solomon, Erroneous
judgments of the voyages of Solomon.
they brought gold to Jerusalem. And thus augmenting erroures upon erroures,
let not to say, that the Prophets when they said that the name of our Lord
God should be pronounced to people that have not heard of it, and in places
and Countries very far off, and aparted, which is said to be understood by
those that be called Indians, and by these Islands, and furthermore do not let
to say to this day, that it is to be understood by the places mentioned in
the holy Scripture, and the Catholic doctors, and that this secret God has
kept hidden all this time, and by finding out these Islands did reveal it. I
seeing how they are deceived in their vain inventions, and great simplicity,
for zeal and good will of the truth, and to kill this canker, that it creep
no more nor engender greater erroures, will give light to this error,
answering to the said muttering talkers, according as to every of them does
require.

And first you shall understand, that this name India, according to all
Cosmographers, as well Christians as Infidels, of old time, and of later
years, the name does come of a River named Hynde, or Hyndo, that going
toward the East, is the beginning of the Indias, which be three in number,
Three Indias, the first is the lower India.
that is to say, the first is called the lower or nether India, the second is
called the middle India, and the third is called the high or upper India. The
first or lower India is renamed Caysar, and these do extend toward the East,
from the River India, unto a Port or Haven on the Sea side, of great traffike
and trade, called Cambaya. And the King of this India, and also the most part
of the people be Moors, and the rest Idolaters. The second or middle India is
surnamed Mynbar, The second or middle India.

Lading of Spices.


and does reach to the borders of Colchico, and this has very fair Havens,
and Ports of great traffike, where they do lade Pepper, Ginger, and other
Spices and Drugges. The Ports or Havens be called Colocud, Coulen, Hely,
Faten^r, Colnugur, and here be many Christians Heretics Nestorians, and many
Indians, although toward the North they be Idolaters. The third India, which
is the high India, is surnamed Mahabar, and does extend unto Cauch, The third
India called the higher India.

An Ox worshipped.


which is the River Gange. Here grows plentye of Sinamon, and Pearl. The
King and people of this Country worship the Ox. Besides these three Indias,
which lie toward the rising of the Sun, there can not be found neither
Author nor Man that has traveled the firm land, neither the Seas adjoining
there unto, that can say, there is any other Province or Island named India,
saving that if any would give to understand, that going toward the West, he
went toward the East, and that although he came unto the terrenall Paradise,
and that these Islands should lie in the great Weast Occean Seas, it appears
plainly, for that those that sail thither, steame their Ship toward the
Occident, and his direct wind which he sayleth withal, is out of the Orient
or the East. So it appears, that they sail not unto the India, but that they
fly and depart from the India. And thus it appears that he would say, that
the first name that ever it had, or was set, naming it Antillya, seeming,
that by the corruption of the vulgar, naming it Ante India, as to say against
India, even as Antechrist is contrary or against Christ, or Antenorth against
the North. And thus it appears, that it can not be named India, but to
understand it as an antephrase, clean contrary, as a Negro, or a black Moore
should be named white John, or a Negresse or black woman, to be named a
Pearl, or a Margarita, that for finding gold in the Island named H^spaniola, it
should have the name set Tharsia, or Ophin, or Sethin, nor believe it stands
in Asia as some would say, although the thing is so clear, that it seems a
mockery to prove it: but reason does lead, that we should give Milk unto
Children and Infantes. Saint Austine declares, that the circumstance of the
letter does illuminate the sentence. And it appears in the third Book of
Kings, in the tenth Chapter, and the second of Paralipomenon, in the ninth
Chapter, do say, that the Servants of Solomon, and of Diran, do find they
brought from Ophin and Sethin, and Tharsis, not only gold, but also Silver
and Timber, called Thina, and Elephantes teeth, and Peacocks, and Apes, and
Precious stones, the which things in infinite places of the very true Indians,
as well in Countries far within the land, as also in Countries upon the Sea
side, and also in Islands without number, that be in the Orient or East Seas,
shall be found, as by experience of the Merchantes traffiking into the East,
conforming to the holy Scripture, and to all those that do write, as well
Catholics, as Prophanes, is manifest. And in the Island called Spaniola, there
can be found no such Timber, nor all the other things before named, saving
Gold, the which as by this work will appear, is found in a great number
of places of the Oriental parts. What is he that in bringing gold from
Antilla, will prove it is from Ophin, or Sethin, or Tharsis, from whence it was
brought to Solomon. First he must prove that it was never found but in one
place, and that at this day it is not to be had, but in the same place only,
from whence it was brought to Solomon, the which is a manifest untruth or
false. And also they that understand that the story of the holy scripture,
and the holy prophets, when they do now name countries from whence those things
be brought, and far Islands of Idolatours, wheeeas the name of God was not
h^ard, did not speak but of Spaniola, and of the other West parts, he must
prove there is no other Idolatours in the world but those whom he falsely
calls Indians, nor other Ila^ds but the Spaniola, and the other West Islands,
and this is of a truth, all false, for Grecia is Islands, Scicilia, a noble
Island, and Malta, and Lipari, Yzcla, Serdenya, Corsica, Mallorca, Minorca,
Ybisa, Canarias, England, and others infinite in the four parts of the world,
before now has bin found Of the which in the Orient or east, is Taprobano,
which is the most noble Island in the world, and the I Will which is said to be so
happy and fortunate, that of never tree there falls a leaf of in the whole
year, as also by this Book of Marcus Paulus is to be seen in the 106.
Chapter, of one Island that is in the Oriental seas.1500. miles, in the which
there is found gold in so great abundaunce, that it is said the Kings Palace
is covered or tyied with gold.

And furthermore, it is said, that the fame is, that in those seas be seven
thousand four hundred forty eight Islands, in the which there is not found
one tree, but that is sweet, pleasant, and fruiteful, and of great profit,
whereby we may well conclud, that in many other Islands, there is gold to be
found: therefore it is not necessary, that the holy Scriptures should be so
understood by Antilla, when it is said, they went for gold to Tharsis, and
Ophyn, and Sechyn, yea and although they will not believe the ^ther truths,
they can not deny the saying of the holy Scripture in the Second Chapter of
Genesis, where it is said that the first river that goes out of Paradise is
^hyson, which does compass the whole country of Eiulath, where gold does
grow, and that the gold of that country is very good and pure, nor it was
not needful to have three years from Jerusalem to Antilla, as it is for the
Islands of the Indians, which is more further off, by a great deal, and with
much more difficultnesse to provide the precious stones, and all other things
they brought from thence, and also the ways be more difficulte and strange, by
reason of contrary winds, and many other incumbraunces. And that this was
not understood that the people a far of are these Islands now found, it
appears by Saint Paul in the fifteenth Chapter to the Romans, where is
expounded the saying of Esaias in the 52. Chapter, where it is said, That those
to whom it was not pronounced unto, should see, and those that did not hear
of him, should understand. And this, as a little above is said, is
understood, that from Jerusalem to the Isles of Grecia, to the sea Illyrico
which is the end of Grecia, and the beginning of Italy, by Slauonia, or
Dalmatia, and Venice, where before they had not heard the name of Christ
declared. And because the holy ghost has interpreted this sentence by Saint
Paul, applying that prophecy with other like of his works, there remains no
license for other to apply it to Antilla.

But now let us come to the sum of this reckning, and say, that if for the
gold that is found in Antilla, we should believe that it is Tharsis, and
Ophyn, and Sethyn, by ye other things that be found in Ophyn, etc, and not in
Antilla, we must believe that it is not those, nor those it. And moreover, it
appears that Asia and Tharsis, Ophyn, and Sethyn, be in the East, and Antilla
the Spanyola in the west, in place and condition much different.

FINIS.
Here follows a Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
THe Prologue of the Author, upon this present Book. How Miser Marcus Paulus
used himself in the Court of the great Cane. Cap. 1. Of the means that the
two brethren and M. Paulus found to return to Venice. Cap. 2. How they sailed
to Iaua. Cap. 3. How the said N^cholas and Mapheo and Marcus Paulus returned
to Venice, after that they had seen many things. Cap. 4. Of Armenia the lesser,
and many things that be there made. Cap. 5. Of the Turchomanos in Armenia the
less. Cap. 6. Of Armenia the greater, and of the Arcke of Noe. Cap. 7. Of
Georgiania. Cap. 8. Of the parties of Armenia which lie toward the South, and
of the kingdom Mosul. Cap. 9. Of Baldach, and of many things that be there.
Cap. 10. Of the City Totis. Cap. 11. Of a great miracle which happened in
Mosul. Cap. 12. Of Persia and of the countries of the Magos, and of other good
things. Cap. 13. Of eight kingdoms of Persia, and of things that be found
there. Cap. 14. Of the City Iasor. Cap. 15. Of the City of Cormoe. Cap. 16.
Of the City of Crerina, and of the death of the old man of the Mountain.
Cap. 17. Of that which is found in the same country. Cap. 18. Of the City of
Baldach, and of many other things. Cap. 19. Of the manner of the same country.
Cap. 20. Of the City of Hechasem. Cap. 21. ^f the manners of the same land.
Cap. 22. Of the province of B^llasia, and of their things. Cap. 23. Of the
province Abassia, whereof the people be black. Cap. 24. Of the province
Chassimuru, and of many things. Cap. 25. Of the said province. Cap. 26. Of the
province named Vochanu. Cap. 27. Of the novelties of this country. Cap. 28. Of
the desert Bosor, and of many novelties. Cap. 29. Of the province Caschar. Cap.
30. Of Sumartha and of a miracle. Cap. 31. Of the province Cartham. Cap. 32. Of
the province Chota, and of their customs. Cap. 33. Of the province Poyn. Cap.
34. Of the province Ci^rtham being in the great Turkey. Ca. 35. Of a great
desert, and of the City named Job. Cap. 36. Of the province named Tanguith,
and of the City Sanguethia. Cap. 37. Of the province named Chamul, and of
their noughtie customs. Cap. 38. Of the province Hinguitalas, and of the
Salamandra that is found there. Cap. 39. Of the city which is called Campion
and of many beastlye customs that they use. Cap. 40. Of the city called
E^cin^, and of many noble things of Tartaria. Cap. 41. Of the beginning of the
seigniorie of the Tartarians, and of many things. Cap. 42. Of the customs,
ordinances, and honoring of the great Cane, and how he goes unto the war.
Cap. 43 Of the plain of Berga, and of the customs of the people there. Cap.
44. Of the great Sea which is called Occean. Cap. 45. Of the kingdom Erguil,
and of many other kingdoms, and of the musk which is there found, and many
novelties. Ca. 46 Of the city Callacia, and of many things that be made there
Cap. 47* Of the province called Ta^guith, which is subject to Prester John, and
of the stone Lagulus, which is found there, and of Go^h and Magot. cap. 48.
Of the City Sindatoy in Cataya, where there is found silver. Cap. 49* Of the
City Gianorum. cap. 50. Of the City Liander. cap. 51. Of the sacrifice and
other manners of the living of the great Cane. cap. 52. Of a victory that the
great Cane got. cap. 53. Of the great things belonging to the great Cane. cap.
54. Of the great city named Cambalu, and of all the fair and marvelous
things that be in the seigniorie of the great Cane. cap. 55. Of the manner
that the great Cane uses in hunting. cap. 56. Of the manner of their hauking.
cap. 57. Of the manner that the great Cane uses in riding through his
countries, and being in the field in pauillions. cap. 58. Of the money that is
used in that land. cap. 59. Of the order and government which the great Cane
uses in his dominions. cap. 60. Of the same order. cap. 61. Of the said City
Cambalu. cap. 62. Of many marvelous things which are found in that country.
cap. 63. Of the City G^igu, and of many marvelous things. cap. 64. Of the way
leading to the province of the Magos. cap. 65. Of the City of Tarasu. cap. 66.
Of the City named Paymphu: cap. 67. Of a king named Bor. cap. 68. Of the City
called Caciomphur. cap. 69. Of the City Gengomphu. cap. 70. Of the province of
Chinchy. cap. 71. Of the province and City called Cinilith Mangi, and of many
other things that be there found. cap. 72. Of the province and City called
Sindariffa. cap. 73. Of the province Chelethi. cap. 74. Of the province
Thebeth. cap. 75. Of the province Mangi. cap. 76. Of the province Chandu. cap.
77. Of another province. cap. 78. Of the province Caraya. cap. 79. Of the
province Ioci, and of their beastly customs. cap. 80. Of the province Cheria^,
and of many Serpents that be there. cap. 81. Of the province Cingui, and of
the City called Canchasu. ca. 82 Of the province Machay, where there be found
Unicorns and Elephants, and many other novelties. cap. 83. Of the province
called Cingui, and of the City named Canchasu. cap. 84. Of the City named
Cianglu. cap. 85. Of the City Candrafra, and of the City Singuimat. cap. 86.
Of the river Coromoran, and of the City Coygangui, and of another City called
Cayni. cap. 87. Of the noble province of Mangi. cap. 88. Of the City
Coygangui. cap. 89. Of the City Pangay, of another which is called Cayni. ca.
90. Of the City called Thingui. cap. 91. Of the City Nangni, which has
seven and twenty Cities under it, and of an other named Saymphu, which has
under it twelve Cities. cap. 92. How this province was made subject to the
great Cane. cap. 93. Of the City called Cingus, and of many other things. cap.
94. Of the City called Ciangui. cap. 95. Of the City Pingranphu, and of other
things which be in that country. cap. 96. Of the City Singui, and of a bridge
of Marble stone, under the which City be eighteen great Cities, and of
Rubarbe, and other spices that grow there. cap. 97. Of the City Gynusay which
in compass 100. miles. cap. 98. Of the City Gansu. cap. 99. Of the division
which the great Cane made of the province of Mangi. cap. 100. Of the rents
which the great Cane has of the province of Gyn^say. cap. 101. Of the Ci^ie
Thampinguy. cap. 102. Of the City Cinanguari, and of the cruelty of the men
that dwell there, and of other things. cap. 103. Of the City Frigui and of many
other things. cap. 104. Of the City which they call Iaython and of many other
things. cap. 105. Of the Isle which they call Ciampagu, and the marvelous
things which be found there, and how the great Cane would have conquered it.
cap. 106. Of the province called Ciabam, and of the Lord that has 325. sons
and daughters, and there be many Elephants, and much spice. cap. 107. Of the
I Will called Iaua, and of many spices that grow there. ca. 108. Of the Island
Iocath and of the other two Islands, and of their conditions. cap. 109. Of the
kingdom Malenir, and of the Island Pencera, and of Iaua the less. cap. 110. Of
the kingdom of Baxina, and of the Unicorns, and other beasts. cap. 111. Of
the kingdom Samara. cap. 112. Of the kingdom Lambri, and of the kingdom
^amphur, and of things found there. cap. 113. Of two Islands, and of their
sluttish and beastly living. cap. 114. Of the I Will Saylan. cap. 115. Of the
province Moahar, in the which there be five kingdoms. cap. 116. Of the
kingdom^ Masuli, where Adamants, and many serpents be found. cap. 117. Of the
province Labe. cap. 118. Of the kingdom Orbay. cap. 119. Of the province
Ch^man, and of the people, and very straung^ beasts. cap. 120. Of the
kingdom of Hely, and of the strange beasts, which are there found. cap.
121. Of the kingdom Malibar, and of the things that be found there. cap. 122.
Of the kingdom Giesurath, and of their evil customs. cap. 123. Of the
kingdom Thoma, and of the kingdom Semebelech, which is in India the greater.
cap. 124 A rehearsal of the things already spoken of. cap. 125. Of two Islands
one of men, and the other women, Christians, and how there is much Amber. cap.
126. Of the Island called Escorsia, which are Christians, and of things that be
found there. cap. 127. Of the Island Maydegastar, where Elephants, and other
great novelties are found, and a bird called Nichia, which has the quilles
of his wings of twelve paces in length. cap. 128. Of the Island Tanguibar, where
there be men like Giants. ca. 129 An Epiloge. cap. 130. Of Abaxia. cap. 131. Of
the province, Aden. cap. 132. Of a very mighty king in the North part. cap.
133. How the Armynes and other beasts are bought. cap. 134. Of the province of
Russia, and of the things that be found there. cap. 135.
FINIS TABVLAE.
The Prologue.
TO all Princes, Lords, Knights, and all other persons that this my Book
shall see, hear, or read, health, prosperity, and pleasure. In this Book I
do mind to give knowledge of strange and marvelous things of the world, and
specially of the parts of Armenia, Persia, India, Tartaria, and of many other
provinces and Countries, which shall be declared in this work, as they were
seen by me Marcus Paulus, of the noble City of Venice: and that which I saw
not, I declare by report of those that were wise, discrete, and of good
credit, but that which I saw, I declare as I saw it, and that which I knew by
others, I declare as I heard it. And for that this whole work shall be
faithful and true, my intent is not to write any thing, but that which is
very certain. I do give you all to understand, that sithence the birth of our
Savior and Lord Jesus Christ, there has bin no man, Christian, nor
Heathen, that has come to the knowledge and sight of so many diverse,
marvelous, and strange things, as I have seen and heard, which I will take
in hand the labor to write, as I did see and hear it. For me think I
should do a great injury to the world, in not manifesting or declaring the
truth. And for better information to them that shall read or hear this work,
I do give you to understand, that I traveled in the foresaid Provinces and
Countries, and did see those things that I will declare, ye space of six and
twenty years, and caused the^ to be written to Master Vstacheo of Pisa, the
year of our Lord God.1298. He and I then being prisoners in Ianua, 1298
reigning in Constantinople the Emperor Baldouino, and in his time in the
year of our Lord.1250. 1250
Nicholas my father, and Mapheo my uncle his brother, Citizens of Venice, went
to Constantinople with their Merchandises. And being there a certain time,
with council of their friends, passed with such wares and jewels as they had
boughte in the Country of the Souldan, where they were a long time,
determining to go forward, and traveling a long journey, came to a City of
the Lord of the Tartarians, which is called Barcacan, who was Lord of a great
part of Tartaria, ^urgaria, and Asia. And this Lord Barcacan, took great
pleasure to see my father Nicholas and my Uncle Mapheo, and showed them great
friendship, and they presented to him such jewels as they brought with them
from C^nstantinople, who received them thankefully, and gave them gifts double
the value, which they sent into diverse parts to sell, and they remained in
his Court the space of one year, in which time wars began between the
said Barcacan and Alan, Lord of the Tartares of the East, and there was
between them many great battayles, and much shedding of blood, but in the
end, the victory fell to Alan. And because of these wars, my father and
uncle could not return the way they went, but determined to go forward to
the Eastward, and so to have returned to Constantinople, and following their
way, came to a City in the East parts, called Buccata, which is within the
precinct of the East Kingdom. And departing from this City, passed the River
which is called Tygris, which is one of the four that comes out of Paradise
terrenall, and going seauenteene days iourneys through a Deserte, not finding
any^ City or Town, yet meeting with many companyes of Tartares, that went in
the fields with their Cattle: being past this Desert, they came to a great and
noble City called Bocora, and the same name had that Province, which the
King of that Country had, and the City was called Barache, and this is the
greatest City in Persia. In this Country, were these two breethren thr^e
years. And in this time came an Embassadoure from Hamil Lord of the East,
which went to the great Alan Lord of the Tartares, that before was spoken
of. This Alan is otherwise called the great Cane. This Embassadoure marvelled
much to see these two Breethren being Christians, and took great pleasure
at them, because they had never before that time seen any Christians, and
said to them, Friends, if you will follow or take my council, I will show
you ways or means whereby you shall get great riches and renown. Our
Lord the King of the T^rtares, did never see any Christians, and has
great desire to see of them, if you will go with me, I will bring you to his
presence, where you shall ^aue great profit and friendship of him.

They hearing this, determined to go with him, and traveling the space of one
year toward the East Southeast, and after turning to the left hand toward
the Northeast, and after toward the North, in fine, they came to the City of
the great Cane, in the which travel they saw many strange and ^aruellous
things, which shall be declared in this B^^ke. And these two breethren, being
presented to the great Cane, were received by him very favorably, showing to
them great friendship, demaundyng of them of the Emperor of the
Christians, of his state, and how he ruled and governed his Countries, and
kept them in peace and justice. And when he made any wars, how and after
what manner he brough^e his people into the field, andeh demanded of them
the state and order of other Kingdoms and Dukedomes in Chrystendome, or their
conditions, and afterward with great diligence, he en^uyred of them of the
Pope and the Cardinals, and of their faith, and of the Catholic Church, and
of all other conditions of the Christians, to the which demaundes the two
breethren answered in order very discretely and wisely, who had
understanding, and could speak the Tartarie language. The great Cane
understanding their answers, had great pleasure therein, and speaking to his
Lords, saying, that he would send an Ambassador to the Pope, the head
Bishop of the Christians, and requested the said two breethren, that it would
please them to be his Ambassadors to the Pope, with one of his Lords: they
answered, they were ready to do all that he would command them. Straight
way the great Cane caused to be written Letters of belief in the Tartarian
tongue to the Pope, and also commanded by word of mouth to his said
Ambassadors, that they should say, and desire his holiness, that it would
please him to send him a hundred men, discrete, wise, and learned Christians in
the Catholic faith, to instruct him and his Subjects, whereas then they did
all worship Idols, and would gladly receive the true faith. And also, the great
Cane requested them to bring him some of the Oil that did burn before the
Sepulcher of Jesus Christ in Jerusalem. This done, the great Cane commanded
to be brought to him a Table of gold, and wrote in it, commanding expressly to
all his subjects that should see that his Table, that they should receive
those Ambassadors with all frendshippe, and to show them honor and obedience,
and to do al things that should be necessary, and to deliver them money, and
to provide them what they would demand, as well for shipping, as also
Horses, or any other thing, in as ample manner, as if it were for his own
person. When the said Nicholas and Mapheo, and Cocoball, Ambassador to the
great Cane, were at a point to depart, taking their leave of ye great Cane,
they rode with their company thirty days journey, and at the end of them, the
said Cocoball fell sick and dyed, and the two breethren followed on their
journey, and in every Town where they came showing the foresaid Table of gold,
where very honorably received and enterteyned, as the person of the King. And
continuing their journey, they came to a town called Giaza, and from thence
departed, and came to Acre in the month of April, 1272.
in the year of our Lord God.1272. whereas they understood that the Pope
Clement was dead, and finding there a Legate of the Popes, which was called
Miser Thebaldo, that was there for the defense of the holy Church, at the
uttermost parts of the Seas, to him they did their Embassage of the great
Cane, and when Miser Thebaldo understood their Embassage, he prayed them to
tarry the creation of a new Pope, and hearing this answer, the two
breethren departed incontinente, and went to Nigro Ponte, and from thence to
Venice, to see their houses, and found the wife of Nicholas dead, and had left
behind her a son, whose name was Marcus, of the age of fifteen years,
which never saw his father before, for he left her with child of him at his
departing, and this is the same Marcus that made this Book, as hereafter
follows. These two breethren remained in Venice the space of two years,
tarying the creation of a new Pope, and seeing how long they had tarried,
departed from Venice to Jerusalem, for to get some of the Oil that burned in
the Lamp before the holy Sepul^hre of our Lord God, for to carry with them
to the great Cane, according as he commanded, and carried with them Marcus,
son to the said Nicholas, and after they had taken of the said oil,
returned to Acre, whereas the Popes Legate Theobaldo was, and taking leave or
license of him to return to the great Cane, for whom the said Legate gave
them Letters, seeing they would not tarry to do their Embassage to the Pope,
and said, as soon as there was a new Pope created, he would do their
Embassage to the Pope, and that he should provide that which should be
convenient, and so departed the two breethren, and Marcus, and traveled till
they came to a Town called Giaza. And in this time the Legate received Letters
from Rome, that there was a new Pope created, called Gregory of Placentia. The
said Legate incontinent sent his messenger after these two breethren, that they
should return to Acre, certifying the^, yt there was a new Pope created: and
they understanding this, requested the King of Armenia to command to arm
forth a Galley, wherein they sailed incontinente to the Pope, of whom they
were well received, who having heard their Embassage, streighte way gave them
two Friars, of the order of Saint Dominike, being great Clearkes, to go with
them to the great Cane, the one of them was called Friar Nicholas of Venice,
and the other Friar William of Tripolle, the which were well seen and
exercised in disputations in the defense of the holy Catholic faith. And these
two religious men with Nicholas and Mapheo, and Marcus, traveled, till they
came to a Town called Giaza. And in this time the Souldan of Babylon came into
Armenia, and did there great hurt, and for that cause, fearing to pass any
further, the two Friars tarried there, and wrote to the great Cane, that they
were come thither, and the cause wherefore, they went not forward. The said
Nicholas and Maph^^, and Marcus his son went on their journey, and came to a
City called Bemoniphe, where the great Cane was, but in the way they passed in
great danger of their bodies, and saw many things, as shall hereafter be
declared, and tarried in going between Giaza and Bomeniphe. ^ year and a
half, by reason of great Rivers, rain, and cold in those countries: and when
the great Cane had knowledge that Nicholas and Mapheo were returned, he sent
to receive them, more than forty days journey, and at their coming received
them with great pleasure, anthey kneelyng down, making great reverence, he
commau^dded them to arise up, demau^ding of them how they spedde in their
voyage, and what they had done with the Pope, and after they had made their
answer to al things, delivered to him the Friars letters that remained in
Giaza, and the oil they had taken out of the Lamp that burned before the holy
Sepulcher of Jesus Christ, which he received with great pleasure, and put it
up, and kept it in a secret place, with also the letters, and demanding of
them, who Marcus was, they answered, he was Nicholas son, of the which the
great Cane was glad, and took him into his service, and gave order to place him
in his Court among his Lords and Gentlemen.

Here follows the discourse of many notable and strange things, that the noble
and worthy Marcus Paulus of the City of Venice did see in the East parts of
the world.
How Miser Marco Polo used himself in the Court of the Great Cane. CHAP. 1.
MArco Polo learned well not only the used language and conditions of those
people, but also other three languages, and could write and read them, and by
that means came in great favor with the great Cane, whose pleasure was to
prove what he could do, to be sent Embassage, Marco Polo was sent as Ambassador
from the great Cane.
and made him ^is Ambassador in one of his Countries, six Months ^ourney.
And he perceiving the great Cane had great plea^ure to hear news, and
oftentimes would find fault with his Embassadoures and messengers, when they
could not make ^iscourse, and tell him news of the Countries and places ^hey
traveled into, he determined with himself to note and ^nderstand in that
journey all that could be spoken, as well of ^he Towns, Cities, and places, as
also the conditions and ^ualities of the people, noting it in writing, to be
the more ^eadie to make his answer, if any thing should be demaun^ed of him:
and at his return declared to the great Cane the ^unswere of the people of
that Country to his Embassage: and withal declared unto him the nature of
Countries, and the conditions of the people where he had bin, and also that he
had heard of other Countries, which pleased well the ^reat Cane, and was in
great favor with him, and set great ^ore by him, for which cause, all the
noble men of his Court ^ad him in great estimation, calling him Senior or
Lord. He ^as in the great Canes Court.xvij. years, Ma^co Polo was in the
great Canes Court seaue^teene years.
and when any ^reate Embassage or business should be done in any of his
Countries or Provinces, he was always sent, wherefore, ^iuers great men of
the Court did envy him, but he always kept this order, that whatsoever he
saw or heard, were (...) good or evil, he always wrote it, and had it in
mind to declare to the great Cane in order.

The manner and vvayes that the two breethren, and Marcus Paulus had for their
return to Venice. CHAP. 2.
THe said Nicholas and Mapheo, and Marcus Paulus, having bin in ye great Canes
Court of a long time, demanded license for to return to Venice, but he loving
and favoring them so well, would not give them leave. And it fortuned in that
time, that a Queen in India dyed, whose name was Balgonia, and her Husband
wa^ called King Argon. This Queen ordained in her Testamente, that her
Husband should not marry, but with one of her blood and kynred, and for that
cause the said King Argon sent his Ambassadors with great honor and company
to the Great Cane, desiring him to send him for to be his Wife, a Maid of
the lignage of Balgonia his first Wi^^. The names of these Ambassadors were
called Onlora, Apusca, and Edilla. When these Ambassadors arrived at the
Court, they were very well received by the Great Ca^^* And after they had
done their message, the Great Ca^^ caused to be called before him a Maiden,
which was called Cozotine, of the kindred of Balgonia, the which was very^
fair, and of the age of seauenteene years. And as she was come before the
Great Cane, and the Ambassadors, the great Cane said to the Ambassadors, this
is the Maiden that you demand, take her, and carry her in a good hour: an^
with this the Ambassadors were very joyful and merry. And these Ambassadors
understanding of Nicholas and Mapheo, and Marcus Paulus, Italians, which before
that time ha^^ ^one for Ambassadors unto the Indians, and were desirous to
^epart from the great Cane, desired him to give them li^ence to go, and
accompanye that Lady: and the Great ^ane, although not with good will, but for
manners sake, and ^lso for honor of the Lady, and for her more safegarde, in
^assing the Seas, because they were wise and skillful men, ^as content they
should go.

How they sailed to Iaua. CHAP. 3.
Having license of the Great Cane, the said Nicholas and Mapheo, Marco Polo
and his Father and Uncle had leave to depart, and went without Ambassadors
and Marcus Paulus, as aforesaid, as his custom was, gave them two Tables of
gold, by the which he did signify that they should pass freely through all
his provinces and dominions, and that their charges should be borne, and to be
ho^ourably accompanied. And besides this, the great Cane sent ^iuers
Ambassadors to the Pope, and to the French King, and to the King of Spain;
and to many other Provinces in Christendom, and caused to be armed and set
forth foure^eene great Ships, that every one of them had four Mastes.
Fourteen great Ships with four Mastes in a Ship, and six hundred men in
eue^y Ship, and vittayled for two years. Within three Months sailing, they
arrived at Iaua.
To declare the reason wherefore he did this, it were too long, therefore I let
it pass. In every Ship he put six hundredth men, and provision for two
years. In these Ships went ^he said Ambassadors, with the Lady and
Nicholas, and Ma^heo breethre^, and Marcus Paulus aforesaid, and sailed three
Months continually, and then arrived at an Island called ^aua, being in the
South parts, in the which they found mar^ellous and strange things, as
hereafter shall be declared. And departing from this Island, sailing on the
Indian Seas ^viij. Months before they came to the place they would come to,
found (by the w^y) many marvelous and strange things, ^s hereafter shall be
declared.

How Nicholas and Mapheo, and Marco Polo returned to Venice, after they had
seen and heard many marvelous things. CHAP. 4.
AFter their arrival with this foresaid Lady to the Kingdom they went unto,
they found that the King Argon was dead, and for that cause, married that maid
to his son: and there did govern in the room of the King, a Lord, whose
name was Archator, for because the King was very young. And to this Gouernoure
or Viceroy, was the Embassage declared, and of him the two Breethren and Marco
Polo demanded license to go into their Country, which he granted, and
withal gave them four Tables of gold, two of them were to have Ierfawcons,
and other Hawks with them. The third was, to have Lions. And the fourth was,
that they should go free, without paying any charges, and to be accompanied
and enterteyned as to the Kings own person. And by this commandment, they
had company and guard of two hundredth Knights from Town to Town, for fear of
many Thieves upon the ways: and so much they traueiled, that they came to
Trapesonsia, and from thence to Constantinople, and so to Nigro Ponte, and
^^^al^ie, to Venice, in the year of our Lord God.1295.

The return of the two breethre^ and Marco Polo to Venice in Anno. 1295.
This we do declare, for that all men shall know, that Nicholas and Mapheo
breethren, and Marco Polo, have seen, heard, and did know the marvelous
things written in this Book, the which declaring in the name of the Father,
and the Son, and the holy Ghost, shall be declared as hereafter follows.

Of Armenia he lesser, and of many things that there is made. CHAP. 5.
FIrst and foremost, I will begin to declare of the Province of Armenia,
noting such commodities as there is. You shall understand, there be two
Armenias, the greater, and the lesser. In the lesser, there is a King subject
to the Tartar, and he does maynteyne the Country in peace and justice. In
this Country be many Cities and Towns, and great abundance of all things. In
this Country they take great pleasure and pastime in Hawking and Hunting, as
well of wild beasts, They take great pleasure in Hawking and hunting.
as of Fowls of all sorts. In that Country be many infirmities, by reason
the air is ill there, and for that cause, the men of that Country, that were
wont to be valiant and strong in arms, be turned now to be vile, and given
to idleness and drunckennesse. In this Province upon the Sea side, there is a
City called Gloza, whereunto is great trade of Merchandise, and all
Merchantes that do traffic thither, a City upon the Sea side, called Gloza.
have their Cellers and Warehouses in that City, as well Venetians, and
Ianoueys, and all other that do occupye into Leuant.

Of the Torchomanos in Armenia the lesser. CHAP. 6.
I Have declared unto you of Armenia the lesser, and now I will show you of
Torchomania, which is a part of Armenia, in the which there be three manner of
people, the one called Torchomanos, and those be Mahomets, and speak the
Persian language, and they live in the Mountains and fields, whereas they may
find pasture for their Cattle, for those people live by ye gains of their
Cattle. Good Horses ^alled accor^ing to the Country Torch^manos and good
Moyles.

Goodly rich and fair carpets made here.

Cloth of silk of Crimson, and other couloures made here. Here was Brio^
Blase martyred.


There be very good Horses called Torchomani, and good Mayles of great value.
The other, or second manner of people be Armenians and Greeks, and those dwell
and live together, and live by occupations and trade of Merchandises. There
they do make very goodly and rich Carpettes, large and fair, as you shall
find in any place. Also, they work there, cloth of Crymson Silk, and other
goodly couloures. The chiefest Cities in that Country be Chemo, Isiree, and
Sebasto, whereas Saint Blase was martired. There be also many Towns, of which
I make no mention, and they be subject to the Tartar of the East, and he
sets gouernoures there.

Of Armenia the greater, and of the Ark of Noah. CHAP. 7.
ARmenia the greater is a great Province or Country. In the beginning thereof
is a great City called Armenia, where they do make excellent Bochachims or
Buckrams. In this City be very good Bathes naturallye. And this Country is
subject to the Tartar, and there is in it many Cities and Towns, and the most
noble City is called Archinia, which has joining to it two provinces, the one
called Archeten, the other Arzire. In this City is a Bishop. The people of
this Country in ye summer time be in the pastures and meddowes, but in ye
winter they can not, by reason of ye great cold, snow, and waters, for then it
is so cold, ye scant the cattle and beasts can live there, Here on a high
Mounta^ne rested the Ark of Noah after the ^ound.
and for this cause they do drive their cattle into warmer places, where they
have grass plenty. In this great Armenia is ye Ark of Noah on a high Mountain
toward ye South, which does join to a Province toward the East called
Mausill. And in that Province devil Christians, which be called Iacobites, and
Nestorians Heretics, of the which hereafter shall be spoken. Here be
Chris^ians of the sect of the Nestorians and Iacobites.

Here is a well that the water is like to Oil, and is occupied for diverse
purposes.


This Country toward the North does join upon the Georgians, of the which
shall be spoken in the next Chapter. In this part toward the Georgians there
is a well, the water whereof is like oil, and is of great abundance and
quantity, that sometimes they lade.100. Ships with it. And this oil is not
good to eat, but for Lamps and Candles, and to anoint Camels, Horses, and
other beasts that be galled, scabbie, and have other infirmities, and for this
cause it is fetched into diverse places.

Of the Georgians, and of the Tovver and gate of iron. CHAP. 8.
IN Georgiania is a king called Nand Maliche, which is as much to say as
Dawnid, and is subject to the Tartar. The saying is that in the old time, the
Kings of that Province were borne with a token or sign under their right
shoulder. In this Country ye men be fair of body, venterous and valiant in
arms, and good archers, and are Christians and Greeks mingled together, and
they go all with their hear like Priests. This is the Province yt King
Alexander could not pass, Here was King Alexander put back and could not be
suffered to pass.
when he would have come toward the West parts, because yt ways were
dangerous and narrow, and compassed on ye one side with yt Sea, and on the
other side with high Mountains, that no Horse can pass, or go for ye space of
four leagues, for ye way is so narrow and strong, yt a few me^ be able to keep
it against all the hosts of ye world. And K. Alexander perceiving yt by no
means he could pass, In this country be many fair Cities and Towns where
is made great plenty of cloth of gold, and of silk.
would likewise make provision, that the people of that Country might not
pass to him. And made there a great and strong Tower, which is called the
Tower and gate of iron. In this Province of the Georgians be many Cities and
towns, and there they do make great plenty of cloth of gold, and of silk in
great abundance, for they have great plenty of silk. And there do breed
the goodlyest and best Hawks in the world. Excellent good hawks Great trade
of Merchandise.
And the Country is plentiful of all things needful. They live there by the
trade of Merchandise, and by labor of the Country. Through all this Country
is great Mountains, and the way narrow and strong, and many wells, and for
this cause the Tartars can never have the upper hand of them. There is a
Monast^rie of Monckes of the order of Saint Bernarde, A Monastery of Monckes of
the order of S. Bernard. A water or lake of six hundred miles compass,
wherein is no fish, but only in the Lent.

Euphrates.


and hard by the Monastery there is a water that descends from the
Mountain, in the which they find no fish, but in Lent, and then they do take
it in great plenty from the first day of Lent, till Easter even. The place
is called Geluchelan, and has six hundred Miles compass, and it is from the
Sea twelve days journey, and this water enters into Euphrates, which is one
of the four principal Rivers which come from Paradise terrenall, and comes
out of India, and is divided into many branches, and does compass those
hills. From thence they bring a silk called Gella. Now I have declared unto
you the parts of Armenia which be toward the North, and now I will declare
unto you of others their neyboures which be toward the South and West.

Of the parties of Armenia toward the South, and of the Kingdom of Mosull.
CHAP. 9.
MOsull is a great Kingdom, in the which dwell many generations of people
called Arabies, and all be of the sect of Mahomet, although there be some
Christians, called Iacobites, and Nestorians, and these have by themselves a
Patriarch, called Iacobia, and he does institute Bishops, Archbishops, Abbots,
Priests, and other Religious men. Here is made cloth of gold and silk,
called Mosulinus
There is made cloth of gold, and of silk, which be called by the name of the
Kingdom Mosulinus, and there is great plenty and abundance of it, and also
great plenty of spices and good cheap, and of other Merchandise. In the
Mountains of this province dwell people cal^ed Cordos, and others called
Iacobinos. The rest be Moors of the sect of Mahomet, and be good men of war,
and be all rouers and robbers of Merchants.

Of Baldach, and of many goodly things that be there. CHAP. 10.
BAldache is a very great City, Thorough this City B^l^^ch goes a River, and
enters into Sinos P^r^icus. Great trade up and down this River, to and from
the Indians.

Here is made cloth of gold and of silk, called cloth of Nafi^h. C^l^pho is
among the Moo^es, as the Pop^ is in Christ^dome. T^is City was won in Anno.
1230. by Al^n King of the Ta^tars, and he put the Calipho into a Tower among
his treasure, and so was famished.


in the which is resident one that is called Calipho, which is among yt
Moors, as it were chief governor and head. Through the midst of the City
runs a great River, and goes into the Indian Sea. And there is from this
City to the place where it enters into the Sea. xviij. days journey. From
this City to the Sea, and from the Sea to this City, there does pass daily
by this River, in many and diverse vessels, diverse kinds of Merchandise, and
they have to their neyboure the India. And in this Country is a City called
Chisi. By thi^ ^iuer they go to the Indian Sea. Between Baldach and Chisi
upon the River is a City called Barsera, compassed with great Mountains of
Palms and Date trees perfect good. In Baldach they do make cloth of gold of
diverse sorts, and cloth of silk, called cloth of Nasich, of Chrimson, and of
diu^rs other colors and fashions. There is great plenty of four footed
Beasts, and of Fowls. This City is one of the best and the noblest in the
world. There was in this City a Calipho of the Moors, wonderful and
marvelous rich of gold and precious stones. And in the year of our Lord
God.1230. the King of the Tartars called Alan, joined a great company, and
went and set upon this City, and took it by force, being in the C^tie one
hundred thousand Horsemen, besides infinite number of footmen. And there he
found a great Tower full of gold, silver, and precious stones. And King Alan
seeing this great treasure, marvelled much, and sent for the Calipho, and said
unto him: I do much marvel of thy avarice, that having so great treasure,
did not give part of it to mainteyne valiant men, that might defend me from
thee, knowing that I was thy mortal enemy. And perceiving the Calipho knew
not how to make him an answer, said unto him, because thou love this
treasure so well, I will thou shalt have thy fill of it, and caused him to be
shut fast in the same Tower, where he lived four days, and died miserably for
hunger, and from that time forwards the Moors would have no more Caliphos in
that City.

Of a City called Totis, and of other notable things. CHAP. 11.
TOtis is a great City of the Province or Country of Baldach, This City
Totis is a noble City, and of great trade of merchandise.

There is made cloth of gold and of silk very rich.

To this City there comme^h Merchants from diverse countries.


in the which Province there be many Cities and Towns, but the most noblest
is Totis. The people of this City be Merchantes, and h^ndycraftes men. There
they do make cloth of gold, and of silk, very rich, and of great value. And
this City is set in so good a place, that they do bring thither all
Merchandises of India, and of Baldach, and of Osmaseilli, and of Cremes, and of
many other Cities and Countries, and also of the Latins. There is great
plenty of precious stones, and for that cause the Merchants get much.
Thither trade the Armenians, Iacobite^, Nestorians, Persians, and these in a
manner be all Mahomets. Round about this City be many fair Gardens full of
singular good fruits, although the Moors that there do dwell be very ill
people, robbers and killers.

Of a great miracle that happened in Mosull. CHAP. 12.
IN Mosull, a City in the Province of Baldach was a Calipho, a great enemy of
the Christians, whose study day and night was how he might destroy them, and
to make them forsake their faith in Jesus Christ, and upon this, joined in
council diverse times with his wise men, and in the end one of them said, I
will tell you a way how you shall have good cause to kill, or force them to
renounce their Faith. Jesus Christ says in his Gospel, If you have so much
Faith as the grain of Mustard seed, and say to this Mountain pass from
this place to another place, it would do, therefore cause to be called
together all the Christians, and command them by their belief, that such a
hill do pass from that place to such a place: truly it is not possible for
them to do it, and not doing it, you may justly say to them, that either
their Gospel does not say truth, and by that means they follow lies, or
else they have not so much Faith as a grain of Mustarde seed. And thus as
well for the one, as for the other, you may justly put them to death, or
else force them to forsake their Faith they hold. This council pleased well
the Calipho, and those of his sect, believing, that now they had good
occasion to perform their evil purpose, and incontinent he commanded all the
Chrystians that were in his Country, to come together, which was a great
number, and they being come before him, he cause the^ to read those Scriptures
of Jesus Christ. And after that every one of them had heard it, he asked them
if they believed that these sayings were true, and they answered yea.
Incontinent said the Calipho to them, I will give you fifteen days respite, to
make either yo^der hill to pass to such a place, or else to renounce your
faith in Jesus Christ as false, and to turn Moors, and if you will not do
this, you shall all die. And the Christians hearing this cruel sentence, were
sore troubled, yet on the other part they comforted themselves, with hope in
the faith they had in the truth they believed. And incontinent the Bishops, and
Prelates, and Ministers that were among the Christians, commanded all the
Christians, men, women, and children, to fall to continual Prayer to our
Lord Jesus Christ, that he would help and council them how to rule and
govern themselves in that great trouble and need.

And after eight days were past, appeared an Angel to a holy Bishop, and
commanded him that he should say unto a Shomaker that was a Christian, that
had but one only eye, that he should make Prayers to God, the which for his
faith and Prayers, should make that hill remove from his place, into the place
the Calipho had appointed. And incontinente the Bishop sent for that Shomaker,
and with great desire prayed him to make Prayers to our Lord God, that for his
m^rcie and pity he would remove that hill as the Calipho and M^ores had
appointed. The poor Shom^ker excused himself, saying, he was a great Sinner,
and unworthy to demand that grace of God: and this excuse he made with great
humility, like a just and chaste man, full of virtue and holiness, and a
keeper of Gods commandments, devout, and a great alms man, according to his
ability.

You shall understand, that this Shomaker did pull out his eye by this means:
He had heard many tim^s this saying in the Gospel, If thy eye offend thee
pull it out, and cast it from thee. He being a simple man, thought, that so
corporally and m^terially the Scriptures should be vn^erstanded. For it
chanced on a time, there came a M^yde into his Shop to bespeake a pair of
Shoes, and to take the measure of his foot, put off her hose, and he withal
was tempted to lie with her, remembering himself, and ^hinking upon his sin
and ill intent, sent her away, without discovering any thing of his ill
thought and intent, and remembering the saying of the holy Gospel, being
overcome with zeal, and yet not having the true knowledge, plucked out his
eye. And so this Shomaker being so desired by the Bishop, and other Christians,
did grant, and promised to pray unto our Lord God for the said cause. And the
time of the.xv. days being come, that the Calipho had appointed, he caused to
come together all the Christians, which came in Procession with their Cross,
into a fair plain, hard by the hill and Mountain. And to that place came the
Calipho, with much people armed, with intention, that straight way, if the
Mountain did not remove, to kill them all. Incontinente the Shomaker kneeled
down upon the earth upon his bare knees, and very deuoutely prayed to our
Lord, lifting up his heart and hands to Heaven, praying to Jesus Christ to
succor and help them his Christians, that they should not perish: and for
that his faith was clear, making an end of his Prayer, the power of the
Almighty God Jesus did cause the Mountain to remove and go from the place it
stood, A great miracle.

A Mountain removed from one place to another.

The Calipho became christened, and a great number of his Moors


into the place the Calipho and his Council had commanded.

And the Moors seeing this great and manifest miracle, stood wonderfully
amazed, saying, Great is the God of the Christians, and the Calipho, with a
great number of the same Moors became Christened. And after this Calipho dyed,
the Moors that were not Christened, would not consent that this Calipho should
be buried, whereas the other Caliphoes were buried, for because that after that
miracle, he lived and dyed like a true and faithful Christian.

Of Persia, and of the Countries of the Magos, and of other good things that be
in them. CHAP. 13.
PErsia is a noble Province or Country, although it was much more in the old
time, than it is at this present, for it was destroyed by the Tartars. In
Persia is a City called Sabba, from the which the saying is, the three Kings
departed, In this City Sabba the three Kings met that went to worship Christ,
and here they were buried.
that went to Jesus Christ, that was newly borne in Bethleem. In this city
there are Sepulchers, very fair and beautiful, and I Marcus Paulus was in
that City, and asked of the people of that Country what they could say or
knew of the three Kings, to the which they could say nothing, but that they
were buried in those three Sepulchers. But ye other people out of the City
three days journey, talked of this matter in this manner following, for the
which you shall understand, that three days journey from the City Sabba is a
Town, which is called Calassa Tapeziston, which in our language is as much as
to say the Town of them that worship the fire for their God. And these people
say, that when the three Kings departed from ye province, for to go to the land
of the Jews, which was Bethleem, to worship the great Prophet there newly
borne, they carried with the^ Gold, The three Kings offered Gold, Incense, and
Myrre.
Incense, and Myrre, and when they came to Bethleem in Judea, found a child
lately borne, and did worship him for God, and presented to him the foresaid
three things: and that the said child did give the^ a little Box, closed, or
shut fast, commanding the^ they should not open it. But they, after they had
traveled a long journey, it came in their minds to see what they carried in
the said Box, and opened it, and found nothing in it but only a stone: and
they taking it in ill part, that they saw nothing else, did cast it into a
well, and by and by descended fire from Heaven, and burnt all the Well with the
stone. A miracle if it be true.
And the Kings seeing this, each of them took of the same fire, and carried it
into their Countries: and for this cause they do worship the fire as God. And
when it chances in any place in that Country that they lack fire, they go
to seek it in another place where they ca^ get of it, and so do light their
Lamps. And sometimes they go and seek it eight or ten days journey, and
not finding of it, they go ofttymes to the Well aforesaid, to have of the same
fire. Of all this before written, you shall take yt which does agree with the
holy Gospel, in saying the three Kings went to worship our Lord Jesus, and did
offer those gifts aforesaid. All that is declared besides that, be erroures,
and reaches not to the truth, but augme^ted with lies upon lies, as the vulgar
people without knowledge are accustomed to do.

Of eight Kingdoms in Persia, and the commodities of them. CHAP. 14.
IN the Province of Persia be eight Kingdoms, the first is called Casun, the
second which is toward the South is Curdistan, the third Lore, the fourth
Ciestan, the fifth Iustanth, the sixth Iciagi, the seventh Corchara, the eight
Tunchay. All these Kingdoms be in Persia, in the parts toward the South,
saving Tunchay. In these Kingdoms be very fair Horses and Moyles, and
coursers of great value, and Asses the greatest in the world, Here is great
plenty of fair Horses, Moyles, and Asses.
and of great price, that will go and run very swiftely, and these the
Merchants of India do commonly buy in the Cities of Atris^, and of Arcones,
which do join by Sea upon the India, and do sell the^ as Merchandise. In this
Kingdom Tunchay be very cruel me^, yt will kill one another. If it were not
for fear of ye Tartar of the East, which is their Lord and King, neither
Merchant nor other could pass, but should be either robbed or taken prisoner.
They be strong people, and be of the sect of Mahomet. There they do work, and
make great plenty of cloth of gold and silk in great abundance and rich. In
that Country gr^weth great plenty of Cotton wool. Here is made great
plenty of rich cloth of gold and silk.
Also, there is gr^ate abundance of Wheat, Barley, Dates, and ^ther grain, and
Wine, and Oils, and fruits.

Of Iasoy, and of many marvelous things there. CHAP. 15.
IAsoy is a goodly City and big, full of Merchants. Here they do make great
plenty of cloth of gold and silk.
There they do make great abundance of cloth of gold, and silk. They be called
according to the City Iasoy. The people of this Country be of the sect of
Martin Pinol, that is, Mahomet, and do speak another language than the
Persians. And going forward eight days journey from this City, through a
plain Country, but not peopled, or any Town, saving Mountains, where is
great plenty of Partriches, and wild Asses, at the end of this, is the
Kingdom of the Crerina, that is, a Kingdom of the Persians, of a great and
long inheritance.

In this Country they do find great plenty of precious stones, Precious
stones, as Turkises and others.
and of Turkies great store in the Mountains, in the which Mountains, is
great plenty of Vain, or Ore of Steel, and of Calamita. In this City, they
do make great plenty of costly saddles, bridles, and harnesses for Horses,
and for noble men Swords, Sadles and bridles, and other costly furniture for
Horses.

Cloth of gold and silk.

Excellent good hawks.


bows, and other rich furniture for Horse and Man. The Women of this Country
do nothing, but command their Servants. They make also there very rich
cloth of gold and silk. And in those Mountains be exceeding good Hawks,
valiaunte, and swifte of wings, that no fewle can escape them. And departing
from Crerina, you shall go eight days journey in plain way, full of Cities
and Towns, very fair, and there is pleasant Hawking by the way, and great
plenty of Partriches. And being past the said eight days journey, there is a
going down the hill of two days journey, whereas there is great plenty of
fruits. In the old time there was many Towns and houses, and now there be
none but heardmen, that keep the Cattle in the field. From the City of
Crerina, so this going down, all the winter is so great cold, that although they
go very well clothed, they have enough to do to live. And being past this going
down two days journey forward, you shall come into a fair plain way, the
beginning whereof is a great fair City, called Camath, the which was in the
old time noble and great, and now is not so, for that the Tartars have
destroyed it. That plain is very hot, and that Province is called Reobarle.
There be apples of Paradise, and Festucas, and Medlars, and diverse other goodly
fruits in great abundance. There be Oxen marvelous great, the hear short and
soft, and the horns short, big, and sharp, and have a great round bunche
between the shoulders, of two spannes long. And when they will lade these
Oxen, they do kneel down on their knees like Camels, and being lade^, do
rise, and they carry great weight. There the Sheep be as great as Asses,
having a great tail, and thick, that will weigh.32. pound, Sheep as great
as asses.
and be marvelous good to eat. In that plain be many Cities and towns with
walls, and Towers of a great height for the defense of the enemies, called
Caraones, which be certain Villages. The people of that Country their Mothers
be Indians, and their fathers Tartars. When that people will go a robbing, they
work by enchantment by the Devil, Enchantme^t.
to darken the air, as it were midnight, because they would not be seen a
far off, and this darkness endures seven days. And the Thieves that know
well all the ways, go together, without making any noise, and as many as
they can take, they rob. The old men they kill, and the young men they sell
for slaves. Their King is called Hegodar, and of a truth I Marcus Paulus do
tell you, that I escaped very hardly from taking of these (...), and that I was
not slain in that darkness, but it pleased God, I escaped to a town called
Ganassalim, yet of my company they tok^ and slew many. This plain is
toward the South, and is of seven days journey, and at the end of them is a
mountain, called Detustlyno, that is eighteen miles long and more, and is
also very dangerous with thieves, that do rob Merchauntes and all travelers.
At the end of this mountain is a fair plain, called the goodly plain,
which is seven days journey, in the which there be many wels, and date trees,
very good, and this plain bordereth upon the Ocean Sea, and on the river of
the sea, is a City called Carmoe.

Of the City Carmoe, and of many marvelous and strange things that be there.
CHAP. 16.
Carmoe is a great City, and is a good port of the Ocean sea, Thither do
occupy Mercha^ts of the Indeas with spices, cloth of gold and silk, and with
precious stones, and Elephantes teeth, Great trade of Mercha^ts
and is a City of great trade, with merchaundize, and is head of that
kingdom, and the king is called M^nedanocomoyth. It is very hot there, and ye
air infectious. When there does dye any Merchaunt, they do make havoc of
all his goods. In this City they do drink wine made of Dates, putting good
spices to it, yet at the beginning of dinner it is dangerous, for those that
be not used to it, for it will make them very soluble, straight way, but it is
good to purge the body. The people of that Country do not use of our victuals,
for when they eat bread of wheat and flesh, by and by they fall sick. Their
victuals is Dates and salt, Tonny, Garlike and Onyons. The people of that
Country be black, and be of the sect of Mahomet. And for the great heat in
the Summer, they dwell not in the town, but in the (...) and in gardens, and
Orchyards. There be many rivers and Wels, that every one has fair water for
his garden: and there be many that dwell in a desert, whereas is al sand, that
joins to that plain. And those people as soon as they feel the great heat,
they go into the waters, and there tarry till the beat of the day be past.
In that country, they do sow their wheat and corn in November, and gather
it in March. And in this time the fruits be greater than in any place. And
after March is pass, the grass, herbs, When the husband dies the wife and
the friends do ^eep once a day for the space of four years.
and leaves of trees do dry, saving of Date trees, which continue till May.
And in that country they have this custom, that when the husband does dye,
the wife and her friends do weep once a day, for the space of four years.

Of the City of Crerima, and the death of the Old man of the Mountain. C^AP.
17.
Leaving hers this City, and not declaring any more, of the Indians, I
return to the Northwar^^^, declaring of those prouinc^s (...) another way, to
the City Crerima, aforesaid, for because that way, that I would tell of,
could not be traveled to Crerima for the cruelty of the king of that
c^^untrie, wh^^^e is called Ren (...) ela vacomare, from whom few could
escape, bu^ either were robbed or slain. And for this cause many kings did
pay him tribute, and his name is as much to say, as the old man of the
mountain. But I will now declare unto you how this cruel King was taken
prisoner in the year of our Lord.1272. Alan King of the Tartars of the East,
hearing of the great cruelty of this old m^n of the Mountain, that he did
sent a great host of men, and besette his Castle round about, and thus
continued three years, and could never take it, till that victuals did sail
them: for it was very strong, and impossible to be gotten. At the length Alan
took the Caste^^, and the old man of the Mountain: and of al his Souldioures
and men be caused the heads to be stricken off, and from that time forward
that way was very good for ^ll travelers.

What is found in that Country. CHAP. 18.
DEparting from the foresaid Castle, you shall come into ^ very fair plain,
full of gr^sse, with all things in it fit for man's sustenance. And this
plain does last ^ixe days journey, in the which there is man^ fair Cities
and Towns. The ^^^ple of that Country ^peake the Persian language, and have
great lack of water, and sometimes they shall fortune to go.40. miles, and
not find water. Therefore it shall be needful for those that do travel that
way, to carry w^ter with them from plac^ ^o place. And being past these six
days iourn^y, there is a City called Sempergayme, fair and pleasant, with
abundance of victuals. There be excellen^e good Mellones, and the best Hunters
for wild beasts, and t^king of wild Foul, that be in the world.

Of the City of Baldach, and of many other things. CHAP. 19.
Traveling forward in this Country, you shall come to a City called Baldach,
in the which King Alexander married with the daughter of Darius king of ye
Persians. This City is of the Kingdom of Persia, and they do t^^re speak the
Persian tongue, and be all of the sect of Mahomet. And this Country does join
with the Tartar of the East, between the Northeast, and the East. And
departing from this City toward the Countries of the said Tartar, you shall
go two days journey, without finding any Town, because the people of that
Country do covet to the strong Mountains, because of the ill people that be
there. In that Country be many waters, by reason whereof is great plenty of
wild Foul, and of wild Beasts, and there be man^ Lions. It is needful for
the travelers that way, to carry provision with them that shall be needful
for themselves, and for their Horses those two days journey. And being past
that, you shall come to a Town called Thaychan, a pleasant place, and well
provided of all vittayles needful, and the hills be tow^rdes the South fair
and large. That province is.xxx. days journey. And there is great ple^tie of
salt, that all the Cities and Towns thereaboutes have their salt from thence.
Great plenty of salt.


Of that Country. CHA^* 20.
DEparting from that town, and traveling Northeast, and to the East for the
space of three days journey, you shall come to fair Cities and Towns well
provided and victuals and fruits in great abundance, and these people do speak
the Persian language, and be Mahomets. There be singular good wines, Good wines
and great drinkers.
and great drinkers, and ill people. They go bareheaded, having a Towell knit
about^ their brows. They wear nothing but skins that they do dress.

Of the City Echasen. CHAP. 12.
AFter that you have traveled forward four days journey, you shall come to
a City called Echasen, on a plain and there is not far from it many Cities
and towns, and great plenty of woods about it. There goes through the
midst of this City a great river. There is in that country, many wild
beasts, and when they be disposed to take any of them, they will cast darts,
and shoot^ them into the flancks and into the sides. The people of that
country do speak the Persian tongue, and the husbandmen, with their cattayle
do live in the fields and in the woods.

Of the manner of the Country. CHAP. 22.
DEparting from this City, you shall travail three days journey, without
coming to any town, or finding any victuals either to eat or drink, and for
this cause the travelers do provide themselves for ye time, and at the end of
these three days journey, you shall come to a province called Ballasia.

Of the province called Ballasia, and of the commodities there. CHAP. 23.
BAllasia is a great province, and they do speak the Persian tongue, and be
Mahomets, and it is a great kingdom, and ancient. There did raygne the
successors of king Alexander, and of Darius king of Persia. And their king is
called Culturi, which is as much to say, as Alexander, and is for remembrance
of the great king Alexander. In this country grow the precious stones, called
Ballasses of great value. And these stones you can not carry out of the
country without special license of the king, on pain of leesing life and
goods. And those that he does let pass be, either he does forgive tribute of
some king, or else that he does sell: and if they were not so straightlye kept,
they would be little worth, there is such great plenty of them. This country
is very cold, and there is found great plenty of silver: there be very good
coursers, or horses, that be never shod, because they breed in the mountains
and woods. There is great plenty of wild foul, and great plenty of corn,
and Myl^, and Loli^. For lack of cloth the people wear skins of such
beasts a^ they kill.
In this kingdom be great woods and narrow ways, strong men, and good Archers,
and for this cause they fear no body. There is no cloth, they apparel
themselves with skins of beasts that they kill. The women do wear wrapped
about their b^dies lik^ ye nether part of garments, some an hundredth fathom,
and some fourscore, of linen very fine and thin, m^de of flax and Cotton
wool, for to seem great and fair, and they do wear breeches very fine of
silk, with Musk put in them.

Of the Province of Abassia where the people be black. CHAP. 24.
AFter you be departed f^o^ Ballasia eight days journey toward the South, you
have a province cal^ed Abassia, whose people be black, and do speak the
Persian tongue, and do worship Idolles. There they do use Negromancie. The men
do wear at their hears jewels of gold, silver, and precious stones. They be
malicious people, and leacherous, by reason of the great heat of that
Country, and they eat nothing but flesh and Rice.

Of the Province called Thassimur, and of many things there. CHAP. 25.
WIthin the jurisdiction of this Country, between the East and the South,
there is a Province called Thassymur, and the people do speak the Persian
tongue. They be Idolaters, and great Negromancers, and do call to the Spirits,
N^gromancers.
and make them to speak in the Idols, and do make their Temples seem to move.
They do trouble the air, and do many other devilish things. From hence they
may go to the Indian Sea. The people of that Country be black and lean, and
do eat nothing but flesh and Rice. The Country is temperate. In this Country
be many Cities and Towns, and round about many hills and strong ways to
pass. And for this cause they fear no body, and their King does mainteyne
them in peace and justice. There be also Hermit^s, that do keep great
abstinence in eating and drinking. And there be Monasteries, and many Abbeys,
with Monks, very devout in their Idolatry and naughtiness.

Of the said province of Thassymur. CHAP. 26.
I Mind not now to pass further in this province, for in passing of it I
should enter into the Indeas, whereof for this time I will not declare any thing,
but at the return, I will declare of it largely, as well of the commodities
there, as also of their manner, and vsages.

Of a province called Vochaym. CHAP. 27.
DEparting from Balassia, you shall go three days journey between the
Northeast, and by a river that is near to Balassia. In this province be many
Cities and towns. The men of this province be valiant in arms, and speak
the Persian language, and be Mahomets. At the end of this three days journey
is a City called Vochayn very long, of three days journey on either side. A
City of 3. days journey long.
The people of this province, be subject to the king of Balassia, and there be
great hunters of wild beasts, and taking of wild fowls in great number.

Of the novelties of this Country. CHAP. 28.
THree days journey going forewarde, you shall go up an hill, upon the which
is a river, and goodly fruitful pastures, that if you put in your cattle
there, very lean, within ten days they will be fat. There be great plenty
of wild beasts, and among them wild sheep, that some of them have their
horns of four and some of seven, Sheep that have horns of four or five and
ten spans long.
and some of ten spannes long. And of these horns the heardemen there do
make dishes, and spones. In the valey of this mountain called Plauor, you
shall travel ten days journey, without coming to any town, or any
grass, therefore it shall be needful, for the traueylours that way, to
carry provision with them, as well for themselves, as for their horses. There
is great cold in that Country, that the fire has not the strength to seethe
their victuals, as in other Countries.

Of the Desert Bosor, and of many marvelous things there. CHAP. 39.
AFter that you be departed from thence, within thre^ days journey you shall be
feign to travel forty days journey continually upon Mountains, Heathes, and
Valleys, between the Northeast and East, and passing over diverse rivers and
deserts. And in all this way, you shall come to no town nor habitation, nor
grass, Forty daye^ journey and have no habitation.
and therefore it is needful for those that do travel that way, to carry
with them provision and victuals for themselves and their horses. And this
Country is called Bosor. The people there live on the high hills, and be called
people of the Mountains. They be Idolaters, and live by their cattle, and be
cruel people.

Of the province Caschar and of other Novelties. CHAP. 40.
Leave this province, and let us go to another called Caschar, that in old
time was a kingdom, although now it be subject to the great Cane. In this
province are many fair Cities and towns, the best is Caschar: they be all
Mahometes. This province is between the Northeast and the East. In it be many
great Merchants, fair possessions and Vines, they have much Cottenwooll there,
and very good. The Merchaunts of that country be near, and covetous, In this
province which endures five days journey, be Christians called Nestorians,
and have Churches, and speak the Persian tongue.

Of Sumarthan, and of a miracle. CHAP. 31.
SVmarthan is a City great and fair, in the which dwell Christians, and
Moors, that be subject to ye great Cane: but this king bears them no good
will. In this City chanced a marvelous thing. A brother of the great Cane,
that was Lord of that Country, became a Christian, by means whereof, the
Christians there, received great comfort, and builded them a Church, in the
name of Saint John Baptist. And it was builded in such sort, that one Pillar
of Marble standing in the midst, did bear up all the roufe of the Church,
and the Christians did put under the said pillar a goodly Marble stone, which
was the Moors, and for because the king was a Christian, they durst say
nothing of it. This king died, and one of his sons succeeded him in the
kingdom, which was no Christian, and on a time the Moors demanded their
stone of ye Christians, thinking that in taking away that stone, the whole
roufe of the Church would fall down: and the Christians did offer to pay the
Moors for the stone, what they would demand: but they would not by any
means, but have their stone, and in the end, the new king commanded the
Christians to restore the stone to the Moors, and the time appointed being
come, that the Moors would have it, the said Pillar lifted it self up, three
spannes above the stone, and so hanged in the air, that the Moors might take
away their stone, and yet the Church fell not, and so does the Pillar remain
til this day.

Of the province of Carcham. CHAP. 32.
GOing forwards, you shall come to a province called Carcham, which is five
days journey long, and is subject to the great Cane, and be Mahomets, but
there is among them Christians Nestorians. There is in this province
abundance of all things.

Of the province Chota and of their manners. CHAP. 33.
CHota is a province between the Northeast, and the East, and is of five days
journey, subject to the great Cane, and be Mahomets. In this province there be
diverse cities and towns, but the chiefest is Chota. In this province be goodly
possessions, and fair Gardens and Vines, plenty of Wine and fruits, and
Oils, Wheat, Barley and all other victuals, great plenty of Cotton-w^oll. In
this Country be rich Merchaunts, good and valiant men of arms.

Of the province of Poym and of their vsages. CHAP. 34.
POym is a small province of five days journey, it is between the Northeaste
and the East, and be subject to the great Cane, and be Mahomets, and the
principal City is called Poym. Iaspes and Calcedonies.
In this province there is a river, in the which there is found precious
stones, called Iaspes and Calcedonies, there is great plenty of all kind of
victuals, and great trade of Merchandises. In this province there is this
custom, that when the husband departs from his house for fifteen or thirty
days, or more or less, if the wife can get another husband for the time, she
takes him, and the husband takes another wife til he return home to his
house.

Of the province of Ciarchan being in great Turkey. CHAP. 35.
ALL the provinces beforesayde, from Caschar, to this, be subjects to the
great Cane, and were of great Turkey, in ye which there is a great City
called Ciarchan in a province also called Ciarcham, set between the Northeast
and the East, and the people of that Country speak the Persian tongue, and be
Mahomets. In this province be many Cities, towns, and rivers, wherein be found
many precious stones, called Calcedonies, which Merchauntes carry all the
world over to sell, and get much money by them. In this Country is
abundance of all things needful: And this province for the most part is
sandy, and the waters there, for the most part, pleasant and sweet, yet in
some places brackish. And the people of that Country, fering the ill people,
do fly with their householde stuff, and cattle, two or three days journey,
till they may come to some good place, whereas is water and grass for their
cattle, and by reason the way is sandy, their tracte is soon filled, by
reason whereof, the thieves know not how to follow in that Country.

Of a great deserte, and of the City called Job. CHAP. 36.
DEparting from Ciarchan, you shall travail five days journey in sand, and in
the way, fresh and sweet waters, and some saltish. Being paste these five
days journey, you shall find a great desert, and at the beginning of it a great
City called Job, The City Job.
between the Northeast and the East. They be under the obedience of the great
Cane, and be Mahomets. And they that will pass this desert, had need to be in
this City a week, for to provide them victuals and other necessaries for them
and their horses for a month, for in this desert, you shall find nothing to
eat or drink: and there be many sandy hills, and great. After you be entered
into it one days journey, you shall find good water, but after that neither
good nor badde, nor beasts, nor fowls, nor any thing to eat: and traveling
that way by night, you shall hear in the air, the sound of Tabers and other
instruments, to put the travelers in fear, and to make them lose their way,
and to depart from their company, and loose themselves: and by that means many
do^ die, being deceived so, by evil spirits, that make these soundes, and
also do call diverse of the travelers by their names, and make them to leave
their company, so that you shall pass this desert with great danger.

Of the province of Tanguith, and of the City Sangechian, and of many strange
things there. CHAP. 37.
AFter you be pass the said thirty days journey by the deserte, you shall
come to a City called Sangechian, subject to the great Cane. And this
province is called Tanguith, in the which al be Idolaters, saving some be
Christians, Nestorians, and some Mahomets. The Idolaters speak the Persian
tongue, and do live by the fruits of that Country. There be among them many
Monasteries of the Idolaters, where with great devotion they bring their
children, and with every of them a sheep, and do present to their Idols: and
every year they come with their children and make great reverence to their
Idols, and bring with them their sheep, and kill them, and sees them, and
present them there, before their Idols, saying to them, they must eat their
meat, the which they can not do, for they have neither mouth nor sense, and
seeing their Idols do^ not eat it, they carry it home to their houses with
great reverence, and call their kyndered together, and do eat of it, as meat
sacrificed to their Gods, and put the bones in a basket. When any man or woman
dies, they burn the body: and this they accustom to do with all the
Idolators. And in the way that the dead bodies shall pass to be burnte, A
rich mouening and good cheer.
stand all their friends and kinsfolks to accompany the body to the
sepulcher, all clothed in cloth of gold and silk: and after the burnte body
is put into the ground, they cause to be brought thither meat and drink, and
there they do eat and drink with great mirth, saying: These bodies shall be
received in the other world with like honor. When they burn the bodies, they
do also burn with them diverse papers painted, of men, women, and beasts,
say^ng, that as many pictures of men, women, and beasts, as they do burn with
them, so many servant they shall have in the other world to do them service:
and when they carry them to bury, there goes before them diverse kinds of
instruments playing. And when one of these Idolators dies, his friends
incontinentlye declare to the Astrologers, the day and the hour he was borne
in, and will not bury him before the day and hour the Astrologers do
command: by that means some they bury straightways, and sometimes, they tarry
ten, twenty, and thirty days, and sometime six months, according as the
Astrologers do command: and in the mean time, they do sire the body with
spices, and put it in a coffin, and nail it fast, and lay a cloth over it,
and every day they set their table over the Coffin, and there do eat and
drink, and pray the dead body to eat with them. And when the day appointed is
come for to bury him, the Astrologers do say, that if he has layne there one
month, it is not good to take him out of that place, by the judgment of the
Constellations, and for that cause must first remove him to some other side of
the house, and from thence carry him to bury.

Of the province Chamul, and of the evil customs there. CHAP. 38.
CHamul is a province in the which be many Cities and Towns, whereof the
chiefest is called Chamul, and this province is toward the wind called
Maistral, which is Northeast, and has two Deserts: on the one side, the
Deserte is of three days journey, and on the other side as much. The people of
this Country worship Idols, and do speak the Persian tongue. They live by
their labor in the Country, and have plenty of al things needful. They be
people given much to their own pleasure, as playing on instruments, dancing,
and singing. And if any stranger do go to see their pastime, they receive
him, and make very much of him, with feasting and cheer, and the goodman
commands his wife to make him the best cheer she can, and to obey him in all things he will command or desire, and so the goodman goes to his labor
into the fields, and leaves the stranger with his wife, willing her to obey
him as to his own person: and this custom the men and the women use there,
and be not ashamed thereof. The women be very fair there. In the time of the
great Cane that is pass, for the great dishonestie he heard of the people
of that country, and the great hurt they sustained in their houses,
commanded them that they should receive no strangers into their houses,
wherewithal the people were sore offended, and thinking themselves not well
used, sent Ambassadors to the great Cane, requesting him, that he would not
restrain them from their ancient liberties and customs, that their
anticessors had ever used, and they for their parts would continue the
same, otherwise they should be unthankful to their Idols. After the great
Cane had heard their Embassage, answered them, seeing they had pleasure in
such shameful vsages, and would not leave it, he also was contented with it.

Of the province Hingnitala, and of the Salamandra that is found there. CHAP.
39.
HIngnitala is a province set between the North and the East, and is a long
province of sixeteene days journey, and is subject to the great Cane, and
there is many Cities and Towns. There is also in that province, three linages
of people, to say, Idolators that be Christians, Nestorians and Iacobites, and
the other Mahomets. At the end of this province toward the North is a great
hill, on the which there is neither beasts nor Serpent, and from thence they
do gather that which is called Salamandra, which is a threede they do make
cloth of. They gather it after this manner, they dig a certain vain that
they do there find, and afterward they beat it in a mortar of a lofer, and
afterward wash it, and there remains small fine theedes fair and clean,
and after they have cast out that which they do wash it withal, they spinne
it, and weaue it, and make table clothes and napkins of it, then they cast
them into the fire for a certain time, whereas it waxes as white as snow:
and the great Cane once in three years does send for some of them that be made
of Salamandra. And they were wont for to se^d of these napkins, for to hang
before the vernacle of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the people of Leuant do
take for a great prophet. Departing from this province, and going between the
Northeast and East, you shall travail ten days journey and come to little
habitation, and at the end of the ten days iourny, you shall find a province
called Sanchur, in it be Christians and Idolators, subjects to the great Cane.
The two provinces beforesaide, to say, Chamul, and Hingnitala be called
Tanguth, with the province of Sachar. In all the hills of this province is
found great plenty of Rewbarbe, and there the Merchauntes do buy it, and
carry it to all places to sell. There they do not use any occupation, but the
most part do live by the labor of the Country.

Of the City called Campion, and of many evil vsages there. CHAP. 44.
CAmpion is a great City and fair, and is the head of the province of
Tanguth. In this City be three sorts of people, that is to say, Christians,
Idolators, and Mahomets. The Christians have three great Churches and fair,
and the Idolators have also Monasteries Abbeys, and religious houses, more
chaste and comely than the other, and they do kill no beast nor foul there till
the fifth day of the Moon, and in those five days they live more honest,
devout, and chaste, than in any other time of the year. These Idolators may
have thirty wives apeece, or more, if they be able to maintain them, but the
first wife is chief, and if any of them do not content him, he may put her
away. They do mary in kinreds, and live like beasts. In this City was Mapheo
Nicholas and Marcus Paulus seven years, using the trade of merchaundize.

Of a City called Eusina, and of many notable things in Tartaria. CHAP. xlj.
DEparting from the foresaid City Campion, and travailing twelve days
journey, you shall come to a City called Eusina, the which is in a field of
the Desert called Sabon, toward the North, and is of the province Targuth. In
this City they be al Idolators, and have great abundaunce of Camels and other
cattle withal: they get their living by laboring the ground. In this City
those that do travail, do provide them of victualles, and other necessaries,
for forty days journey, which they must pass through a great. Desert,
whereas be no towns nor houses, nor grass, but in the mountains about dwell
people, and also in the valleys beneath the Desert. There be many Asses and
other wild beasts of the mountains, and great Pine apple trees. At the end
of this Deserte there is a City called Catlogoria, which is toward the
North, and of this City was the first Prince or Lord among the Tartars, and
his name was Catlogoria. The Tartars dwell toward the North, whereas is but few
cities and Towns, but true it is, there be fair playnes, pastures, rivers,
and very good waters. There dwell Tartars that have no King nor Lord, they do
govern themselves in common, and do pay tribute to Prester John. It formned,
that these Tartars multiplied to so great a number, that Prester John did
fear, that they would rise against him, therefore he determined with himself
to send certain Lords of his that should be among them to keep them
asunder, and also to keep the country in good order, and to banishe or
diminishe part of them, because they should not be of so great a power. And
the Tartars perceyuyng this, joined themselves together, and took council,
determined to leave that country, and to go and dwell upon the mountains and
in the deserts, by means whereof from that time forward they stood in no
fear of Prester John, nor would pay him tribute. And at the end of certain
years, that they were not under the obedience of Prester John, they did elect
and choose among themselves a King which they called Chenchis, a valiant and
wise man: and this was in the year of our Lord God.1187. and crowned him for
King of the Tartars aforesaid. And all the Tartars that were in Persia, and
other Countries there^boutes, came to him, and put themselves under his
government, and obeyed him as their King, and he received them very friendly,
governing them justly and discreetely. And after that Chenchis was confirmed,
and had the whole government, within a short time he made war, and in short
time conquered right Kingdoms or Provinces, and when he had gotten any
Province or City, he did injury to no man, but let them remain with their
goods, saving to those that were able and fit men for him, they he took
with him into the wars, and by this means he was well-beloved, and all men
were content to go with him.

Of the beginning of the reign of the Tartars, and of many marvelous and
strange things. CHAP. 42.
CHenchis perceyuyng himself to be of such power, minding to join himself
in kindred or stock with Prester John, sent to him his Embassadoures,
requiring his daughter in marriage: and this was in the year of our Lord
God.1190. Prester John disdained that Embassage and answered, that he
maruailed much that Chenchis being his Subject should presume to demand
his Lords daughter to be his wife, saying he would rather kill her: so the
matter remained thus. Chenchis hearing this answer of Prester John, was sore
troubled and vexed in mind against him, and incontinent sent him defiaunce,
saying, he would war upon him, and of this Prester John made small reckning
saying, that the Tartars were but slaves, and not men of war,
notwithstanding he made himself in a readiness, and came upon Chenchis, who
had also made himself in a readiness, and came out against him and
encountered together in a great plain called Tanguth, where it was appointed
the battle should be of both parties, and thus joined together in a fierce
and long battle, for both parts was strong, but in the end, Prester John being
slain, and many of both parts, Prester John slain in batte^ by Chenchis King
of the Ta^tars.
the field remained to Chenchis, who conquered all the province, Cities, and
towns of Prester John, and reigned after his death six years, and at the end
of six years, laying siege to a Castle, was hurt in the knee with an
arrowe, and of that wound dyed. After the death of this Chenchis, was made
Lord of the Tartars one called Cane, and this was the first that was called
Emperor and Great Cane. The first Emperor of the Tartars called Great Cane.
And after him reigned Bathe Cane, and the fourth was called Chenchis Cane, and
the fifth was Cublay Cane, which reigns now. This Cublay Cane is the
greatest and of most power of any of al his predessors, for among the
Christians and Heathen, there is not a greater Prince than he is, nor of so
great a power, and that shall you clearly perceive hereafter, by that which
follows. All the Canes, successors of the first Chenchis, where bu^yed in a
mountain called Alchay, and there dwelled the great Cane. In this mountain
Alchay, be all the great Canes buried.
And when the great Cane dies, they carry him to be buried there. Those that
do carry him, or go with him, kill as many as they meet withal in the way or
street, and when they kill them, they say: Go, and serve our Lord in the
other world, and they believe certainly, that they go, and do him service.
And likewise by this reason, when the great Cane dies, they kill all his
Camels, Horses, and Moyles, believing that they se^d them to serve their Lord
in the other world. When Monguy Cane Lord of the Tartars dyed, there was
slain.300000. men that they encountered in the way, by those that went with
him to his burial to the said mountain.

The habitation of the Tartars in the Winter, is in the plain fields, where
it is warm, and good grass and pasture for their Cattle, and in the Summer
in the mountains and wooddes, where it is fresh and pleasant air: and they
make round houses of timber, and cover them with feltes, and these houses they
carry with them at all times when they do remove: and always they set their
door in the Summer time toward the South, and in the Winter toward the
North. These Tartars have their carts of Wagons covered with black feltes,
that never any water can pass through, and in these Carts or Wagons go their
wives, children, and family, and their Cammels do draw these Wagons. The
Tartars wives do buy and sell al manner of things belonging to householde, or
any thing needful: their husbands take no care for it, but only in hawking,
hunting, and going on warrefare. They do eat all manner of flesh, and drink
milk of all kind of beasts and mares. The Tartars may take as many wives
as they will, and may marry with any of their kindred, excepting no degree:
but their first wife is the chiefest, and is most made of: the women do give
their dowries to their husbands. There is none of them will have conversation
with an other man's wife. And when the father dies, his eldest son does
marry with his mother in law, and when the son dies, his brother marryeth
with his sister in law, and for the time do keep great solemnity and feasts
at the wedding.

Of the custom, orders, faith and honoring the great Cane, and how he goes
to the wars. CHAP. 43.
THe Great Cane Emperor of the Tartars, does worship for his God, and Idol
called Nochygay, and they say and believe, that he is the eternal God, that
takes care to preserve him, his wives, children, family, cattle, and corn,
and has him in great reverence, and every one has the figure of that Idol
in his house. And this Idol is made of feltes, or of other cloth, and of the
same felt or cloth they do make wives and children for their Idols, and the
women be set on the left side of the Idols, The Tartares do make them Idols
of feltes, and other baggage.
and the children before them. When they think it dinner time, then they do
annoynte the mouths and lips of their Idols, and wives and children, with
the fat of the sodden flesh, and do pour out the broth upon the floor,
saying, that their Idols, their wives, and children do fill themselves with
it, and they do eat the sodden flesh, and their drink is the milk of Mares
trimmed with spices, that it is like white wine, and it is very good, and is
called with them Cheminis. The Lords and men of power and riches, go
apparelled in cloth of gold, and cloth of silk, The Nobility and Gentlemen
go in cloth of gold and silk, furred with rich furs.
furred with rich furs. Their harness is the Hydes of Buffe, or other
thick and strong Skynnes. The Tartares be valiant men of arms, and strong to
abide any travel or labor, and can well suffer hunger and thirst, for in the
wars they be many times one month, and eat nothing, but of wild beasts
they do kill in the field, and drink Mares Milk. When they be in the field
day and night they be on Horseback, and the bridle in their hands they give
the Horses meat. When their King sets forward with his host, before and on
every side of him they do set four battles of the best and most valiant men,
for because their King should not be put in fear. And when he goes a
warrefare a far off, he caryeth nothing with him but his armoure, and a thing
to cover him when it does rain, and two flaggons with Milk for to drink, and
a Pot to sees his meat in when need is. In a time of need he will ride
ten days journey, without eating any sodden meat. For his drink, they will
carry Milk made like dry paste, and when he is disposed to drink, he will
take a little of that paste, and dissolve it in fair water, and so drink it:
The Tarta^es going a warfare, carry with them a thing made in paste of Mares
milk and other compounds, and do serve for his drink.
and when this shall fail him, and that he can get no other drink, he
lets his Horse blood, and drinks of it. When the Tartares will skyrmishe
with their en^mies, they hyde their Sallets secretly, and as they do begin
to skyrmishe, streightway they show as though they would run away, and that
they were overcome of their enemies, and thus fleeing, put on their Sallets,
and straight way they return valiantly upon their enemies, and by this means
commonly they do break the a ray of their enemies. The Tartares have this
custom, When any of the Tartares sons dye, and also a daughter of another,
then they do marry these two together, saying, they shall be so in the other
world.
that if one of their sons dye being young, and also of another man his
daughter, after they be dead, they marry them, saying, they shall be married in
the other world. And of this Matrimony they do make a public writing, and
this writing they burn, saying to the dead, that as the smoke thereof
ascends on high, so do they send them that writing, declaring their
marriage. And at such marriages they make great feasting and solemnity, and do
sees much victuals, and pour out the broth upon the floor, saying, that
those which be dead in this world, and married in the other, do eat of the
victuals prepared for the wedding. And besides all this, they cause to be
painted the figure of the son and daughter, upon the backside of the
foresaid writing, and withal the pictures of many Camels, and other diverse
beasts, and apparel and money, and many other things, saying, that as that
writing does burn, all those things therein go straight way to their
children, after the smoke as aforesaid, and the fathers and mothers of these
children that dyed, do take hands together, and be always after friends, and
Grandfathers and Grandmothers, and Cousens, even as though they had bin married
alive.

Of a plain called Barga, and of the customs of the people of that Country.
CHAP. 44.
DEparting from the City called Cuthogora, aforesade, and the mountain called
Acay, where they bury their Kings of the Tartars, which is the great Cane,
you shall travel through a great plain called the plain of Barga, forty
days journey toward the North. The people of that country be called Mecrith.
They be savage people, and do live the most part by killyng of read Dear
called Stagges, and other wild beasts, and do ride and travail upon hearts
or stagges, as they do in other places upon horses. They have neither bread
nor wine, and be subjects to the great Cane.

Of the great Sea called the Occean. CHAP. 45.
AFter you have travailed forty days journey, you shall come to a great Sea
called the Occean Sea, and also great mountains, in the which you shall have
goodly Hawks great plenty, and special good, called Peregrinos. And in the
Islands of the Sea breeds great plenty of Gerfalcons. In this Sea be two
great Islands, which shall be spoken of hereafter, and lie toward the North,
and have the Sea out of the South.

Of the Kingdom Erguyl, and of many other Kingdoms, and of Musk, and other
sweet and pleasant things that be there found, and many other things.
CHAP. 46.
I Have declared unto you of the provinces of the North, till you come to the
mountains, and the Occean Sea: and now I will compte to you of the other
provinces belonging to ye great Cane, til you come to his country, returning to
the country called Campion, where you shall pass.5. days iorny in length, in
the which many times you shall hear the voices of evil spirits. At ye end of
these five days iorny toward ye East, The voice of evil spirits heard.
there is a kingdom called Erguil, of ye province of Tanguth, subject to the
great Cane, and in this province there live three sorts of people, that is to
say, Christians that be Nestorians, and Idolators and Mahomets: and there be
many Cities and Towns, but the principal City is called Erguyl. From this
City traveling East Southeast, you shall come to a Country which is a
great province, in the which there is a great City called Syrygay, that has
near unto it many Cities and Towns, all subject to the great Cane, and there
be in it Christians, Idolators, and Mahomets. There be wild Oxen as big as
Elephants, very fair beasts to see, white and black, Mons^rous great O^en a^
bi^ge as El^p^ants.
al covered with hair, saving a spanne long upon the neck, which is called
Del Espinazo, which is bare, and has no hair, and many of these Oxen they do
make tame, and do labor and till the ground with them. They will carrye
great waighte, by reason they be so great bodyed. There is the best Musk in
the world. The Beast that ^hey have it off, Here is the best Musk in the
world.
is bodyed like a Catte, with four teeth, two above, and two beneath, of three
fingers long, they be slender of body, an have hear like a red Dear, and
feet like a Catte, and they have a thing like a poshe, or bag of blood,
gathered together near to their navel, between the skin and the flesh,
which they cut and take away, and that is the Musk: and there be many of
those Beasts there. The people of that Country do live by their occupations
and trade of Merchandise, and have good plenty of corn. This Country is long,
of.25. days journey. I think these be Peacocks
There be plenty of Feysants, and very great, for one of them is as big as
two of ours, with tails of eight, nine, and ten spannes long. The people of
that Country be fat, and of low brows, and black heared, and have no
beardes, but a few hears about the mouth. The women be fair and white, and
well bodyed. The people fot that Country be given much to the pleasure of
the body, for a rich man to obtain the favor of a woman, will give her a
ioynter. They be all Idolaters*

Of the City called Calacia, and of many things they do make there. CHAP. 47.
DEparting from Erguill, and traveling toward the East eight days journey,
you shall come to a Province called Egregia, that has under it many Cities,
and is of the Province of Tanguthe, and the principal City of it is called
Chalacia, and is subject to the great Cane, in the which be three Churches of
Christians Nestorians, and all the rest be Idolaters. Here be Chamlets made.
There they make excellent good Chamlets of Camels hear of white wool, and
from thence Merchantes carry them to sell into other Countries.

Of the Province called Tanguthe which is subject to Prester John, and of a
stone called Lapis laguli, that is there found, and of Gog and Magog. CHAP. 48.
DEparting from Arguill, and entering into the Kingdoms of Prester John, you
shall come to a Province called Tanguthe, which is under a King of the lignage
of Prester John, which is called George by his proper name, and he holds
that Country of the great Cane, especially those that were taken of Prester
John. And the great Cane does always take the chiefest daughters of this
King commonly, since that Chenchis the first King of the Tartares slew Prester
John in battle, as before is declared. In this Country is found Lapis laguli,
which is a stone, Here is found the stone called Lap^s ^^gu^i, wherewith
they do make a syne bl^we.
that makes a fine blew. The most part of this province be Christians, and
they be gouernoures, and chief of the Country. There be also Mahomets, which
do live by Cattle, and laboring of ye ground. In this Province be another
kind of people called Argarones, or Galmulos, this they do say, for because
they do desce^d of two several nations, yt is to say, of ye christians of
Ta^guthe, and the Mahomets. Here was the imperial seat of P^ester John.
They be fair me^, wise and discret more than the others of yt country. In
this province was ye imperial chair or seat of Prester John, when he raygned
over the Tartars: and yet there do raygne in that province, of the stock of
Prester John, of whom came this George King of this province. Here is that
place that the holy Scripture speaks of, called Gog and Magog.

Of the City Sindathoy in Cataya, where silver is found. CHAP. 49.
Having passed seven days journey in this province toward the East, you shall
come to Cataya, a broad Country, in the which there be many Christians, and
many Idolators, and many of the sect of Mahomet, and they be al handi-crafts
men and Merchauntes. There they make great plenty of cloth of gold, and also
of cloth of silk very fine. In this province is a City of the great Canes
called Sindathoy, where they do work and make all manner and kind of armor
for the wars, and in the mountains of this province be veins of fine silver,
and plenty, called there Idica.

Of a City called Giannorum, and of many novelties. CHAP. 50.
PArting from this City, and traveling.iij days iorny, you shall come to a
City called Gianorum, in the which there is a meruellous goodly Palace of the
great Canes to lodge him and his Court when he comes to that City, and in
this City he is desirous to be with good will, for because that near unto it
is a good country, Here be Cranes of five sorts or colors.
in the which be great plenty of wyld Geese, and Duckes, and of Cranes, of
five sorts or manners: the first be great and all black like Crows: the
second all white, saving the heads that be all red: the third al black,
saving the head is white and shyning: ye fourth green, with black heads:
they be far bigger than ours: the fifth be little with all their feathers
read. Near unto this City is a great valley, where the great Cane has many
wild beasts, great and small, and among the^ great plenty of Partridges, to
serve for his provision, when he goes into that Country.

Of a marvelous City called Liander, and of many marvelous and far things
they have there. CHAP. 51.
DEparting three days journey from this City, between the Northeast and ye
North you shall come to a City called Liander, which Cublay Cane builded. In
this City is a marvelous goodlye Palace made of M^rble and flint stones,
called pedras viuas, The wall of this house is gilded.
al gilded with gold, and near to this Palace, is a wall which is in compass
fifteen miles, and within this wall be fair rivers, Wels, and green
Meadows, where the great Cane has plenty of all kind of wild foul and
beasts, Her^ y^ Emperor has great store of Hawks of all sorts.
for to find his Hawks, called Faulcons, and Gerfaulcons, that be there in
mew, which he at sometimes more than 40000. yt which many times he goes
thither to see. When he does ride in these Meadows, he carries behind him on
the buttockes of his horse, a russet or graye Lion tame, and sets him to the
stagges, or read Dear, and to other wild beasts, and upon these beasts do
the Gerfaulcons and Faulcons season. In the midst of these Meddowes is a
great house, where the great Cane does resort to dinner, and to banquet, and to
take his rest and pleasure in, when he goes that way. And this house is
compassed about with great Canes, that be gilded and covered with Canes that
be varnished, and closed all in one, in such sort, that no water can pass
throughteuerye Cane is at the least three spannes compass, and from ten to
fifteen paces long. And this house is so made, that at al times they may take
it down and set it up again, upon a sudden. Here y^ Cane does make sacrifice
with milk to his Idols.
It is tied with above 200. cords of silk, after the manner of tents, or
pauilions. And the great Cane repayreth thither for his pleasure, in June,
July, and August, and there by commandment of his Prophets, Idolaters makes
sacrifice with milk to his Idols, for to preserve and keep his wives, and
sons, and daughters, and his subi^ctes, and servants, and cattle, and
fowls, corn, vines, fruit, and all other things in his countries. All the
Mares that the great Cane rides on, be as white as milk. Among the which, he
has always ten Mares that no body does drink of their milk, Al y^ Mares the
great Cane do ride on, be white.
but only he and some great men of his Court, and some others that he
called honorable and noble, because of a victory had against the ^nemies of
Chenchis the first king of the Tartars.

Of the sacrifice and other manners, of the life of the great Cane. CHAP. 52.
WHen the great Cane will make sacrifice, he pours out the Mares milk upon
the ground, A superstitious belief y^ great Cane has.
and in the air, and the Prophets of his gods say, that milk poured out, is
the holy Ghost, of the which all the Idols be full, and do believe, that this
sacrifice is the cause of his confirmation, and of his subjects, and of al his
other things. And this sacrifice he does every year ye 29. day of August. And
to those white horses and Mares wheresoever they do go, they do great
reverence. This great Cane has in his Court certain Negromanciers, which by
art of the Devil, when it is foul and troubleseme weather, it shall be fair
and clear weather in his Palace. And do give to understand to the people,
that the clearness is over the Palace where the great Cane is, only for his
deserts and holy life, and by virtue of his Idols. When any one is judged to
dye, as soon as he is dead they sees him, and eat him, but those that dye
by natural death, be meat for their Idols.

And besides this, when the great Cane is at his table, these inchaunters do
work by art of the Devil, that Cups do rise from the table ten Cubits
into the air, and do set themselves down again, Here his enchaunters do work
by the Devil.
and when they will do this, they demand of the great Cane a black sheep,
and the wood of Alloe and Incense, and other sweet spyces, whereof there is
great plenty, because their sacrifice seem the more sweeter, and he
commands to be delivered to them, what they will have, for because they
believe that their Idols do preserve and keep him and all his company. These
Prophets and Priests, do cause the flesh to be sodden with spices in presence
of their Idols, and do put incense therein, and pour the broth into the air,
and they say the Idol takes of it what pleases him: and this they do with
great singing. Every Idol has his name, and to every one they do this worship
on their days, as we do on our saints days. They have many Monasteries
deputed to the names of their Idols. There is in that country one Monastery
as big as a good City, A great Monas^erie of Monks.
in the which there be 400. Monks that go honestly apparelled, and their
beardes and heads shaven. Upon their feast days they keep great solemnity,
with singing, and praising, and lights, and some of these religious men have
many wives, and some of them live chaste: the chaste do eat the branne and the
meal kneaded together, with a little hot water, and do fast oftentimes in
reverence of their Idols, and do wear garments made of Canuas died black or
blewe, and some white, and do lie in Almadraques, sharp and hard beds, and
the other religious that be married, they go well apparelled, and do eat and
drink well, and do say that those which live the straight life be Heretics
and fools, because they do punish their bodies, by means whereof they can not
honor their Idols as they ought to do, and as reason is. All the Idols of these
married religious men, they do name by the name of women, because they be such
leacherous people.

Of a victory the great Cane had. CHAP. 53.
HEre, for your better information, I will declare unto you of a victory the
great Cane had, whereby you shall the better understand and know of his strength
and power. It was he that now reigns, which was called Cublay Cane, which is
as much to say, as Lord of Lords. You shall understand that this Cublay
Cane descended lineally of the imperial stock, from Chenchis Cane, from
whence he must descend, that shall be Lord of the Tartares: and this Cublay
Cane, began his reign in the year of our Lord God.1256. And as Chenchis Cane
by his providence and wisdom, made himself the first Lord of the Tartares,
as is before declared, so likewise this for his wisdom and providence,
contrary to the good will of his kindred, that would have put him out of it,
did so co^serue and govern his Dominions and Countries, til the year of our
Lord God.1298. so that he reigned two and forty years, and was five and forty
years old when he was made Emperor, and every year had wars, for he was
valiant and expert in the wars, but he himself after he was made Emperor,
never went to the wars but one time, but always sent his sons, or some
noble men, whom he thought best. And the cause wherefore he went at that time
in person, was this. In the year of our Lord God.1286. a nephew of his, of the
age of thirty years Lord of many provinces, Cities, and towns, perceiving
himself to be subject to the great Cane, as his predecessors had been,
determined in himself not to be subject to any, and concorded with another
kinseman of the great Canes, which was called Cardin, which might well
make.100000. Horsemen, and was mortal enemy to the great Cane his uncle, and
did move war both of them with their hosts against the great Cane, and he
having knowledge thereof, did not fear, for he was a Prince of marvelous
great power: but incontinent he called his people together for to go against
his enemies, and took an oath, that the crown should never come on his head,
till that he had cruelly revenged himself on them as Traitors and Rebels, so
that within two and twenty days, he had joined particularly a great host of
three hundred thousand fighting men, Three hundred thousand fighting men.
of horsemen and footmen, and would join no greater an host, nor have it
published abroad, that his enemies should have knowledge of it, and also for
that he had many of his men of war abroad in other places on warfare, and
could not bring them together in so short a time. But you shall understand
that when the great Cane will make his power, and take time to do it, he may
join so great a number, that it were a great trouble to number them. These
three hundred thousand of fighting men, be not all men of experience, for
there were above four thousand Falconers, and Servants, and Courtiers that
attended upon the Kings person, and served in his Courts. But thus having his
hosts joined, he commanded to be called before him his Astrologers, and would
know of them in what sort and time he should set forward on this enterprise,
and they answered him that the time was good, and that he should have victory
over his enemies, and so incontinent set forward on his way with his people,
and came to a plain, where as was Nauia with.200000. men tarrying there the
coming of Caydu with another hundred thousand of horsemen, for to set on the
Countries of the great Cane. The Lords of the great Cane had beset all the
ways, and taken all the streytes, that neither succoure should come, nor his
enemies flee, because he would take them all prisoners. Nauia knowing nothing
of this, or that the great Cane had prepared himself for any war, The
policy of the great Cane.
for the great Cane had before beset all the ways and passages, that no man
could pass to carry any news to Nauia, and by this means, not thinking nor
standing in any doubt, thought he might well take his rest that night, and all
his people: but the (...) Cane was stirring in the morning betimes with all his
ho^res, and did set his Camp hard by the place where as Nauia had his, and
found them all vna^med, and unprovided, not thinking any thing of it, and
perceiving it, he was in great fear. And the great Cane had made a great
frame upon an Elephant, wherein his standerdes were carried, and before and
behind, and by the sides went his battles of Horsemen and footmen, that is to
say.25000. in a battle. And with these battles be set all the host of Nauia
round, and when Nauia saw this, he lept on horseback, and caused his trumpets
to blow, and set his army in as good order as he could, and so joined
battle, whereas was a great and strong fight, and continued from morning till
night, and great number slain on both parties, but at the end Nauia and his
company were not able any longer to withstand the fury of the great Canes
armed men, and began to flee, in such sort, that Nauia was taken prisoner,
and his people not being able to do any good, submitted themselves to the
great Cane: and Nauia being presented alive to the great Cane, he caused him to
be bound up in a Carpet, and so long he used him to be carried, that he
dyed, A strange kind of death to his cousin.
and this death he gave him, for that he would not have the blood of Nauia
being of his kindred, fall to the ground, nor that the air should see him
dye an evil death. After that Nauia was dead, all his Lords and other
prisoners became sworn to the great Cane, to be obedient to him. These four
provinces were under the obedience of Nauia, that is to say, Furciorcia, Guli,
Baston, Scincinguy.

Now that I have showed you of the great Cane, how he paste with Nauia, I will
also declare unto you, of his manner, condition, and person, and of his wives
and children, and of other things.

Of the personage of the great Cane, and of his wives and children. CHAP. 54.
THe great Cane that was called Cubla Cane, was a man of a ^iddle stature,
well fleshte, and of good complexion, and well proportioned in all his members,
well colored of face, his eyes black, his nose well made: he has four that be
his Legitimate wives, and his eldest son, that he has by his first wife,
does keep Court by himself, and every one of these four Queens, have in
their Courts 300. waiting women, The great Cane ha^h four wives and they keep
great Courts
and many maidens, with also many me^ and women, that do service in the
Courts: for every one of these four Queens have in their Courts more than
4000. persons, of men, women, maidens, and servant. Also the great Cane has
many Concubines of Tartars, which be called Origiathe and be of a good and
honest behavior, The great Cane has many Concubines.
and of these the great Cane has a hundredth maidens chosen out for himself,
which be in a palace by themselves, and have ancient women to keep them. And
of these hundredth, every three days six of them do serve and attend upon the
great Cane in his Chamber, and the three days being past, they do return to
their Palace again, and other six come for to keep the great Canes Chamber.
The great Cane had by his four wives two and twenty sons, after his eldest
son dyed, who should have bin King. His son was heir, and kept a great Count.
And thus they do remove from three days to three days. The said great Cane
had by his said wives two and twenty Sons, the eldest of them is called
Chinchis, in remembrance of the first King of Tartares, and also to renew that
name, this first son is called Chinchis Cane, and should have succeeded his
father in the Kingdom, but because he dyed before his father, his eldest son
called Themur Cane, and this his sons son, because he should reign after
him, kept a great Court by himself.

Of a great City called Cambalu, and of all the goodly and marvelous things
that be done there. CHAP. 55.
NOw I will declare unto you of the worthy and noble City called Cambalu,
Cambalu. This is a goodly City, and well ordered.
the which is in the province of Cathaya. This City is four and twenty miles
compass, and is fouresquare, that is, to every quarter six miles compass.
The wall is very strong, of twenty paces high, and battlements of three paces
high. The wall is five paces thick, This City has twelve gates, and at
every gate is a very fair palace. And upon the top of every corner of the
said wall is also a fair palace, and in all these palaces joining to the wall
be many people appointed for to watch and keep the City. And in those
palaces be all manner of armor and weapons for the defense and strength of the
City. The streets of this City be so fair and straight, that you may see a
Candle or fire from the one end to the other. In this City be many fair
Palaces and houses. And in the midst of it is a notable great and fair
Palace, in the which there is a great Toure, wherein there is a great Bell,
and after that Bell is tolled three times, no body may go abroad in the
City, but the watchmen that be appointed for to keep the City, and the
nurses that do keep children newly borne, and Physicians that go to visit
the sick, and these may not go without light. At every gate nightlye there is
a thousand men to watch, not for fear of any enemies, At every gate is a
thousand m^n that do watch.
but to avoid thieves and robbers in the City, which many times do chance in
the City. And this great watch the great Cane does cause, to conserve and
keep h^s people and subjects, that no man should do them hurt, Without this
City be twelve suburbs very great, and every one of the^ answers to his
gate of ye City. And in these be many Merchantes and men of occupations: and
thither do resort all people that come out of the Countries, No common woman
may dwell within the City.

Above a thousand Carts with silk goes every day out of this Line.

The great Cane is guarded nightly, with twenty thousand Horsemen.

The manner of the great Cane at his ^inner with his wives and children.


and such Lords as have to do with the King or his Courts. And in these
suburbs be more than twentye thousand single or common women, and never a one
of them may dwell within the City on pain of burning. Out of this City
goes every day above a thousand Carts with silk. The great Cane is guarded
every night with twenty thousand Gentlemen on Horseback, not for any fear,
but for dignity. They be called Chisitanos, which is as much to say, as
Knights for the body, or trusty Knights. The manner of the great Cane for his
dinner, is this: They make ready all the Tables round about the Hall, and in
the midst of the Hall, is made ready the Table for the great Cane, setting
his back toward the North, and his face toward the South. His first wife
sits next unto him on his left hand, and his other wives following
orderly. On his other side do sit his sons, and his sons children, one
after another, according to his age. Those that be of the imperial lignage, do
sit down afterward at another table more lower. And the other Lords and
their wives do sit at other Tables more lower, according to their degrees,
dignities, offices, estates, and age. At the said Tabl^s commonly do sit
four thousand persons, or very near, Commonly four thousand persons do sit
in that Hall at a dinner. A vessel of fine gold tha^ will hold ten
Hogsheads of Wine, and four of silver bigger than that.
and every one may see the great Cane as he sits at his dinner. In the
midst of the Hall is a very great vessel or cesterne of fine gold, that
will hold ten Hoggesheads, which is always kept full of perfect good
drink. And near unto that vessel be other four vessels of silver bigger
than that, full of good wine, with many other vessels and pottes by them, of
gold, and of silver, which may be of pottels a piece, or as much as will serve
four men for a dinner. At dinner, out of the vessel of gold, with pottes of
gold, they draw wine for to serve the great Cane his Table, for him, his
wives, children, and kindred: and out of the vessels of silver, Every one
that sits at the tables, has a cup of gold before him.

Every one that brings meat or drink to the Table, has a towell of gold
and silk before his mouth.


with Iars and Pottes of silver, they draw wine to serve the Lords and the
Ladies, and all others sitting at the Tables, as well women as men. And every
one that sits at the tables has a cup of gold before him to drink in.
And every one that brings any service to the great Canes Table, has a
towell of gold and silk before his mouth, because his breath shall not come
upon the meat and drink they bring. When the great Cane will drink, all the
Musicians that be in the Hall do play, and every one that serves, kneeleth
down till he have drunk. In the Hall be always Iesters, Iuglers, and
fools, attending upon the Tables, to make pastime all dynner time, and after
Dinner is done, and the Tables taken up, Great feast is made every year,
the day when the great Cane was borne.
every man goes about his business. All the Tartares keep great feasting
and cheer every year on the day that Cublay Cane was borne, which was on the
eight and twentieth day of September, and that is the greatest feast they make
in all the year save one, that hereafter shall be spoken of. The great Cane
does apparel himself that day he was borne on in cloth of gold marvelous
rich, and.12000. Barons be apparelled with him after the same sort touching
the cloth of gold, He gives a rich Liuerie.
but not so rich and preciouse, and every one of the^ has a great girdle of
gold, and that apparel and girdles the great Cane gives them. Every Liuerie
is worth a thousand Marks.
And there is never a one of those garments with the girdle, but it is
worth.10000. Bisancios of gold, which may be a thousand Marks. By this you
may perceive, that he is of great power and riches. And on the said day, all
the Tartares, and Merchantes, and subjects, and those that dwell in his
Countries, be bound to present unto him every one somethyng, according to his
degree and ability, in knowledging him to be their Lord. And whatsoever he be
that does beg any office or gift of him, must give him a present, according
to the gift he does ask. And all his Subjects and Merchantes, and travelers,
or any other that be found in his Countries or Provinces, be usually bound
to pray for the great Cane to his Idols, to preserve him and his Countries,
whether they be Tartares or Christian, The Tartares begin their year the
first day of February.
or Jews, or Moors. The Tartares begin their year the first day of
February, and do keep a great feast that day. And the great Cane and his
Barons, with all the rest of the City, do apparel themselves in white that
day, making great pastymes, saying, the great Cane is bl^ssed and fortunate,
and so do desire a joyful year. And on that day there is present^d to the
great Cane more than.10000. Horses and Mares al white, Ten thousand white
Horses and Mares presented to the great Cane.
and more than five thousand Elepha^ts, with two great baskettes upon them
full of provision necessary for his Courts. And besides this, there is
presented to him a great number of Camels, covered all with white cloth of
silk, for service of their K. And when they give these presents, they do all
pass by, where the great Cane does stand and see them. On the same day that
this feast is, in the morning b^times, before the Tables be covered, all the
kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Lords, Captains, Governors, and Ius^ices of his
countries, and other officers, come into the Hal before y^ presence of the
great Cane, and those that can not come in, be in another place, where as the
great Cane may see them all: and thus being altogether as though they would
make some request, there goes one up upon a buylding or scaffolde that is
made for the same purpose, Al his nobility do ^ncle and worshi^ the Cane as if
he were an Idol.
in the midst of the hall, and with a loud or high voice, bids them al
kneel down upon their knees, and give lands and thanks to their Lord, and
straight ways every one does honor him as if he were an Idol: and this they
do four times, and this being done, every one goes and sits down in his
place, and afterward do rise one after an other, and go to an altar, which
is set in the midst of the hall, and upon it is a table set, written on with
letters of gold, and garnished with precious stones of great value, and the
writing is the proper name of the great Cane, and with Sensors of fine gold
full of incense and fire, they incense that table in honor of the great Cane.
And after that, every one in presence of the great Cane, A great and rich
offering.
does offer great and precious gifts according to his state, condition, and
ability, and this being done, they go all and sit down at the tables to
dinner. And the great Cane thirteen times in the year does give apparel to
his Barrons, The great Cane does give liueri^s 13. times in a year, and every
time he changes his colors.
in thirteen great feasts he does make, and at every time he does change
this apparel, and this apparel that he does give, is of greater and lesser
value, according to the degree of him that he gives it unto. And to every one
he gives a girdle, or a pair of hosen, or a hatte, garnished with gold, and
set with pearls and precious stones, according to the degree of the parties:
and of this apparel is every year.1^6000. and this he does for to honor and
magnify his feasts. And at every such feast the great Cane has lying at his
feet a tame Lion, upon a rich Carpet. And the great Cane is resident, during
the said three months, in Camballo, Four months he does continue in Camballo.
that is to say, December, January, and February And during the said three
months, the whole country thereabout, to say thirty days journey, is kept for
hawking, hunting, and fouling, only for to serve the Courts, and what they do
take and kill, is presented and brought to the great Canes Court, No man may
hunt no haul^ nor foul within thirty days journey of his City
and such as dwell further of in other provinces that kill wild beasts, not
able to be brought to the Court, they do trim and dress the skins thereof,
and bring them to the Court for to dress, make, and trim armor and
munitions, for the wars, which he has infinite number.

Of the manner the great Cane does use in his hunting. CHAP. 56.
THis Cublay Cane, or great Cane, has with him two noble men, that be his
brethren, the one called Baian, and the other Mytigan, and they be called
Cinicil, Two noble men be masters of his dogs, and they have ten thousand me^
apeece.
which is as much to say, as masters or governors of the dogs or Masties of
their Lords, either of these two noble men, has ten thousand men all
apparelled in one liuerye of white and read, and every one of these twenty
thousand men has charge and gouernemente of two Mastyes, or at the le^st
one, and when the great Cane will go on hunting, these two noble men go with
him with their twentye thousand men, or with the most part of them, and so
begin their hunting with those men and dogs, who be well used to it, and
the great Cane goes into the midst of the fields, having his two Lords with
their men and dogs on each side of him, and divides them into companies, in
such sort, that there shall no game rise, that shall escape them, what kind of
beast so ever it be.

Of the manner of his hauking for wildefoule. CHAP. 57.
THe first day of March, the great Cane departs from Cambalu and goes with
his Court and Barons, The great Cane has with him ten thousand Faulcons and
five thousand Gerfaulcons.
toward the South seas, named the Occean, that lies two days journey from
Cambalu, and he carries with him ten thousand Faulcons, five thousand
Gerfaulcons, and other kind of Hawks a great number, which are very singular
and good, above all other, and are bred in his Seniories, and al those that
they take in his countries are presented to the great Cane, for his own use,
Court, and Barrons, that always keep his company, which are never less than
15000. and they be called T^stores, which is as much to say, as the Lords
guard, and all these do practice hauking, and every one of them does carry his
reclayme or lewer, and hawks hood, that when he has need he may take up his
Hawk. They do never leese Faulcon nor Gerfaulcon.
They do never leese one of these Faulcons, for every one of them has fastened
unto his Belles a Scutchion of gold, wherein is written the name of his Master,
and when soever one of the^ is lost, he that finds him streyghte ways does
present him unto the great Cane, or to one of those barro^s his brethren, and
he causes him to be delivered again, to him that before had charge of him,
for he is known by the Scutchion that the Hawk has upon his belles.

Of the manner that the great Cane has in traveling in his country, and how
he abides in the fields in his tents and pauilions. CHAP. 58.
WHen the great Cane makes any journey in his country, he goes in a fair
lodge or edification, having a very fair chamber made upon four Elephants,
which is covered with the skins of Lions, and in this chamber he has twelve
Gerfaulcons, A strange going a hauking.
and certain of the Barrons in his company to give him pleasure and pastime:
and round about these Elephants there be on horseback very many barrons, and
as soon as they see any foul, or Crane fly, they declare it unto their Lord,
and he immediately, lets these Gerfaulcons fly: and after this sort he
goes through his country: and when the great Cane comes to any broad and
fair fields, which they do call Caziam^n, which he does find ready set with
tents and pauilions for him and his wives, and for his children and barrons,
and these tents and pauilions, are at the least.10000. and the tents of the
great Cane are so large, There be at the least ten thousand te^ts and pauilions
set up in the field.
that when they are set up, there may be under and walk at their ease.2000.
knights, and the entering into them opens toward the South, and one of the
tents is for the Barrons and Knights that are of the Lords guard, and in a
smaller tente that stands by it, opening toward the Septentrion, edified
with fair chambers, wrought all with gold, ordained for ye great Cane where
he keeps Courts, and audience to all them that come: and in this tent there
be two chambers with fair Halles, and the feelings is sustained upon three
pillars of a marvelous work, and are covered with Lions skins, and of other
beasts, wroughte and painted of diverse colors, so that neither wind nor rain
can enter or pass through, for they are made only for that purpose: and these
chambers and halles, are furred with Ermines and Iebelines or Sables, which
Sabels is so precious, that one furre for a Knighte are or is worth.2000.
Bysancios of gold. These two tents be of a good valor.
All the cords of these tents are of silk, and these two tents are of such
value, that a mean King though he do sell all his land, is not able to buy
them* And round about these two tents stand many other tents being very
fair, for the Barons, and for the other people, so well set and ordained, that
it seems to be a great City: and from every place there comes people to
see the mightiness and pleasure of the great Cane. There goes with the
great Cane all his Court that he keeps in Cambalu, and in the place he
remains hunting and hawking until all the month of April, for there they
find great plenty of wildefoule, for that there be great lakes and rivers.
When the great Cane goes on hawking for wild foul, there may no man hawk
near him, not within twenty days iorny, upon a great penalty. And from the
beginning of March until October, there is no Baron nor subject unto the
great Cane, that dare take any wild beast or foul* though there be very great
plenty in that country, upon great penalty, and when the time of his
hawking is ended, he returns unto the City of Cambal^, hawking by the way,
and near unto the City he does keep solemn cheer.iij. days. Within the
said City they lodge no strangers, Three days he does make great cheer
after his hunting is ended
nor bury any dead corpse. There comes unto this City merchandise from all
parts of the world, cloth of gold and of silk, precious stones and pearls,
and great plenty of other notable things to maintain the magnificence of the
great Canes Court that he has, and for the great resort of people that
come thither: and this City is situated in the midst of his provinces and
countries.

Of the money that is used in all that country. CHAP. 59.
THe great Cane causes his money to be made in this manner, causing the rine
of a Mulberry tree to be cut very thin, which is between the utter rine and
the tree, and of this he makes money both small and great, which some of them
is worth half an ounce, some an ounce, The money that is used in those
countries.
some ten groats, some twenty, some thirty, and same worth a Bisanco of
gold, and some of two Bisancoes, and so they rise until ten Bisancios of
gold. This money is sta^ped with the sign of the Lord, and it is current in all
his Country, and in all the provinces which are subject unto him, and no man may
refuse this money, for if he do he must leese his head, He that does counter^a^e
his co^ne s^^ll ^e destroyed to the t^^r^e gener^tion.
and he that does counterfeit his coin shall be destroyed unto the third
generation There comes sometimes unto the Court of Cambalu, Merchants that
bring gold and precious stones for to buy the cloth of gold and silk, and
other Merchaundizes in quantity of three thousand Bisancios of gold, and many
times the great Cane commands, that all the gold, silver, and precious
stones, that may be found in the Merchauntes hands, and subjects of his
dominions, should be delivered to his treasurers, and so they do, and they be
paid for it in this said money, which is made of the rine of a Mulbery tree,
that they may see how all the gold, silver, pearl and precious stones is closed
up in his treasury being boughte for this vile money of no value, so that
little gold, si^uer, pearls and precious stones comes out of his country:
and after this sort he makes himself the richest Prince of the world.

Of the order and rules that he has in his dominions. CHAP. 60.
THe great Cane has set ten Barons or noble men of great estimation to
govern.64. provinces and countries subjects unto him, The noble men that do
set order for all the great Canes affairs
and they ever remain in his City imperial of Cambalu, and these ten Barons
do appoint Judges, and Notaries over the Countries that are under their
guiding, of the which every one of them does exercise his office in the country
that he has charge of, and these Judges remain also in the City of Cambalu,
under the obedience of those Barons. These ten Barons do constitute
governors and officers through all the Countries, and do change them when
they list, and when they have put them in the room, they do present them
before the great Cane, and he does accept them, and gives them Tables of
Gold, and by writing the order how to use themselves: and these gouernoures
and officers do give them knowledge by letters and messengers unto the Judges
which are deputies over them, and those Judges do notify all things unto
those ten Barons, and they do make declaration of it unto the great Cane, so
that after this manner, he knows what is done in his Countries, and provides
for all things necessary.

Of the said order. CHAP. 61.
THese ten Barons are called Senich, which is to say, the principalles of the
Court: and these do provide for the preservation of the great Canes estate,
and they do ordain his wars and hosts, and Knights, and they do treat and
make peace between the Lords, and they do make provision in every manner of
thing that touches their Lords estate, and to all his dominions, but they
let nothing pass, until such time as their Lord do understand it.

Of the City Cambalu. CHAP. 62.
THe City of Cambalu has many outlettes and gates, that thoroughe them they
may go unto diverse provinces and countries, and when they go from thence,
for to go unto Cataya, they find a great mountain, where there is black
stones, and they burn like wood, when they be well kindled they will keep a
fire from one day to an other, which I suppose be of the nature of our
Sea-coles, and they do burn of them in that Country, though the have woodde,
but the woodde is more dearer than are the stones or seacoales.

Of the marvelous things that be found in that country. CHAP. 63.
THe great Cane sent me Marcus Paulus as his Ambassador toward the Occident or
Westwarde, Marcus Paulus was made the Emperoures Ambassador.
in the which message I was fourteen months, from the time that I went from
Cambalu. And here I will declare to you of the marvelous things that I saw
with mine own eyes, as well at my going outward, as at my coming homewardes, as
that at my going from Cambalu, and taking my journey toward the Occident or
Westwarde. And after that I had gone ten days journey, The river Poluisanguis.
I found a very great river which is called Poluisanguis, and runs his
course into the Occean sea. Upon this river there is a bridge, the fairest in
the world, it has three hundred paces of length, A goodly Bridge and long.
and eighte paces of breadth, so that there may go ten men in a rank on
horseback. This Bridge has four and twenty arches of Marble, very
artificially wroughte, at the head of this Bridge at the one side stands a
Pillar being very great of Marble, having a Lion standing on the top, and
an other Lion at the nether end, being very lively made, and a pace and a
half distant, from that stands an other like unto it, and so orderly
stands one by another, til you come unto the further end of the bridge, so
there is on each side of the bridge two hundred pillars, and in the mids of
every pillar, there is made Images of men very artificially.

Of the City named Goygu, and of many meruellous things. CHAP. 64.
FRom this Bridge you shall go ten miles through fields full of Vines, and
very fair palaces: at ye ten miles end, there is a City named Goygu, it is
very great and fair, in it there stra^deth a great Abbey of Idolatry. The people
of this Country live upon merchaundize, Here is plenty of cloth of Gold.
and be artificers, for they do make great plenty of cloth of gold and silk.
Also there is plenty of lodgings for those that do travail, and come thither
out of other places.

Of the way that goes unto the Country of the Magos. CHAP. 65.
Going from this City almost a mile, there parts two ways, the one goes
unto the Occident or Weast, and the other goes toward the Siroco: The way
which goes unto the Occident or Weaste, leads unto the Occean Sea toward
the high Country of the Magos, and you may travail through the province of
Cata^a ten days journey, in the which way there is many Cities and Towns.

Of the City named Tarasu. CHAP. 66.
AFter you do go from the City of Goygu travailing ten days journey, you
come unto a City named Tarasu, which is the head City of that country or
province, where there is plenty of vines and much wine, and there they do
make all kind of armoure for the great Canes Court. Here is much armor ^^^de.
In the Country of Cataya, there is no wine, for they provide themselves of
wine out of this region.

Of the City named Paimphu. CHAP. 67.
TRaueling from thence toward the Occident or Weast eighte days journey
through fair Cities and Towns, wherein they do traffike Merchandises, at
the eight days journey you shall come unto a very great and fair City which is
named Paymphu, and going two days journey beyond it, you shall come unto a
fair Town named Caychin, which was made by their King.

Of a King named Bur. CHAP. 68.
THis Bur warred a long time with Prester John, and he could never have any
vauntage of him, but at last Prester John got him by a train after this
sort: Seven young Gentlemen of Prester John's Court went from him with his
license, and came to the Court of this king Bur, showing as though they had
departed from Prester John in great displeasure, and so offered themselves to
serve the said King Bur, who retained them as squires and pages in his Court,
and after they had bin with him two years, having great confidence and trust
in them, this King Bur on a time road abroad for his pleasure, and taking
with him the said seven Gentlemen, and being the distaunce of a mile from his
Castle, perceyuyng they had him now at advantage to execute their purpose,
took him, and carried him to Prester John, and Prester John made him his
sheepehearde, and kept his sheep two years, A King was made a sheephearde by
Prester John.
and afterward gave him horses and men, and sent him to his Castle as his
sheepehearde.

Of the City named Casiomphur. CHAP. 69.
BEyond this castle twenty miles toward the Occident, there stands a great
City named Casiomp^ur, and the people of it worship Idolles. Cloth of gold and
cloth of silk made.
The like do all those of the Country of Cataya. In this City there is made
much cloth of gold and of silk.

Of the City named Bengomphu, and of many things that there is found in those
parties. CHAP. 70.
GOing from Casiomphur eight days journey toward the Occident, you shall go
always by great Cities and fair Towns, and excellent places, with goodly
and fair Gardens, with principal houses: there is great plenty of wild
beasts and fowls, for hunting and hauking, and at the end of these eight
days journey, there stands a fair City which is called Bengomphu, and is
the head City of that realm. There is in this City as king, one of the great
Canes sons, who is called Magala. The people of this Realm are Idolatours.
This City has plenty of all things, and without this City stands the
palace royal of the king, the which with the Wall of the City is ten mile
compass. In this City there is a lake made of many fountains, that runs
and serves the City. The inside of the palace wall is laid on with gold.
The Walls of this City have very fair battlementes, and on the inside of
the Wall of the Palace it is laid on with gold, like plaster, and without
this Palace, round about that lake, there is very fair and delectable ground
and fields.

Of the province named Chinchy. CHAP. 71.
GOing from this palace toward the Occident three days journey, you come
unto a plain full of fair Cities and towns, and at this three days iourneys
end, there be great mountains and valleis belonging ^o the province of
Chinchy, in these mountains and valleys there be many Cities and towns, and
all the people there are Idolaters, husbandmen, and hunters. This journey
endures twenty days, there be in it many Lions, and plenty of other wild
beasts, and in all these twenty days journey there is plenty of lodging for
those that do travel.

M^ngi a city.
Of the Country and City called Cineleth Mangi, and many other things which be
found there. CHAP. 72.
AT the end of twenty days journey stands a City named Cyneleth, a noble
and a great City, and under the obedience of this City there be many Cities
and towns towa^d the Occident. The people of this Country are Idolatours,
they have great trade of Merchandise. In this country there is plenty of
Ginger* and from thence the Merchaunts do carry it unto Cataya. Also there is
abundance of wheat and other grain. Great trade o^ Merchand^se.

M^ng^


This country is called Cyneleth Mangi, and it has two days journey of
plain country. Beyond this country, there be great playnes and valleys and
mountains, being greatly inhabited, with Cities and towns, for the space of
twenty days journey, where there be many Lions and bears, besides other wild
beasts. Here be many Musk cuttes.
Also there is great plenty of Muskcats, and other noble and fair beasts.

Of the country and City named Cindarifa, and of a marvelous bridge. CHAP.
73.
AFter you have gone these twentye days journey, you come unto a great plain,
being of the country named Cindarifa, which is twenty miles compass, and the
great Cane before he died, divided it into three parts, and al three parts be
strongly walled round about. Through the midst of this country runs a
great river, which is called Champhu, half a mile broad. There is in this river
plenty of fish, and there is situated upon this river many Cities and towns:
also by shipping upon this river they sail from City to City, with all kind
of Merchaundises^ From the beginning and head of this river, until the
entering into the maine sea, there is thirty days journey, and the chief City
of this country is named Sindarifa. From this city over the river, there is a
bridge of a mile long, and eight paces broad, made of marble stone, A bridge of
a mile long, and eight paces broad of marble and housen on it.
and covered with timber of Pineaple tree, very fair. On the sides of this
bridge, there be houses and shops for Merchauntes, and of diverse occupations,
and at the foot of this bridge there stands a custom house, very fair
made, where they do gather their Lords customs, and every day they receive
ten thousand Bisancios of God. The people of this country are Idolatours.

Of the province named Cheleth. CHAP. 74.
GOing from this country, you shall travel through a fair plain country, full
of many towns and Cities, it indureth five days journey, and then you shall
come unto a province, which is called Cheleth, which was destroyed by the
great Cane. In this province there be Canes which are called Berganegas of
fifteen paces long, and ten spannes in compass every one of them, and they
have from the one knot to the other three spans. Here be Canes of fifteen paces
long and ten spans about.
The trauellours make fire with these Canes, for they have this property, that
as soon as they feel the heat of the fire, they give such a great crack,
that the sound is hard many miles off, and the Lions and wild beasts that
are thereabou^s, be so fearful of that noise, that they do run away, and do
no hurt unto those that travel, and the horses that the trauellours do ride
on, have so much fear of that noise, being not used unto it, that they break
their brydles and haulters, and run away, so that sometimes they cannot find
them again, theref^re those that travel, do tie their horses and Asses in
certain holes or Caves that they find in the Mountains. This country is
twenty days journey long, where they find nothing to eat, nor yet to
drink, nor no habitation, therefore those that travel that way do carry
provision for those twenty days journey, which they do pass with great fear
and travel.

Of the Province named Thebet, and of the marvelous beastliness and filthy
living of the people there. CHAP. 75.
AT these twenty days iourneys end, you come unto a Province or Country, that
is full of Cities and Towns. And the custom in this Country is, that none
does marry with maids nor virgins, but that first she must be known
carnally of many men, No maidens may marry in this Country.
and specially of strangers. And for this occasion, when the mothers mean to
marry any of their damsels, the mother does carry them near the high way
side, and with mirth and cheer procures those that do travel, to sleep with
her, and sometimes there lies with her ten, and with some other twenty. And
when the stranger or traveler goes his ways from any such Damsel, he must
leave unto her some jewel, the which jewel, the said damsels or wenches do
hang at their necks, in token and sign that they have lost their virginity
with strangers. And she that has used her self with most strangers, it
shall be known by the most quantity of jewels that she wears about her
neck, and she most soonest shall find a marriage, and shall be most praised
and loved of her husband. And those of this province are Idolaters, evil men,
cruel, and robbers. In this Country there be many wild beasts, For lack
of woollen cloth, they do wear Canuas, and wild beasts Skynnes.

Maugy.


and specially of Muskettes. All those of this Country do wear Canuas, and
Cowhydes, and the skins of wild beasts, which they do take in hunting. This
Country is named Thebethe, and is adjoining unto the Province of Maugy.

Of the Province and Country named Maugi. CHAP. 76.
Maugy.
MAugi is a great province and Country, and it has under it eyghte Kingdoms
and Rivers, and in the same there is found much gold of Payulsa. And they do
use money made of Currall, Here is found plenty of gold.

Their money is made of Corrall.

Here is cloth of gold, cloth of silk, and Chamlets made.

Here grows spices. Masties as big as Asses.


and the Currall is there very dear, for that the women do use to wear it
about their necks, and do deck their Idols with it. In this Country they
do work cloth of gold and silk, and of Chamlet great plenty. Also, there
grows much spice. Also, there be many Negromancers, Astronomers, Inchanters,
and evil disposed men. Also, there be in this Country Masties as big as
Asses, and the people be subjects to the great Cane.

Of the Province and Country named Candon, and of the jewels that grow there,
and of the beastly conditions of the people. CHAP. 77.
CAndrew is a Country that lies toward the Occident, and it has under it
seven Kingdoms of Idolaters, subjects under the great Cane. In this
Country there be many Cities, Towns, and Villages. And in one place of this
Country, there is great plenty of Pearls and precious stones, Plenty of
Pearls and precious stones.
but the great Cane does not suffer them to be had out. And in the Mountains
in this Country there be found many Turquesses, and they may not be had out of
the Country, without express license of the great Cane. Also, the custom of
the people in this Country is, Here they have an ill custom.
that as soon as there comes a stranger to lodge in his house, the good man
goes out, commanding his wife, children, and servants to obey that Stranger,
as his own proper person, and he never comes home unto his own house,
until he know that the Stranger is gone from his house, and he knows it by a
sign and a token that the Stranger does leave at his going at the door. And
when the good man spyeth the sign or token, he enters into his house. This
use they do keep thorough all that Country, and take it for no shame,
although the Strangers do use their wives. But rather they do take it in
great honor and estimation, that they do so well enterteyne the Strangers. And
their Idols tell them, for that they do honor the Strangers, their Gods do
increase their substance. The people of this Country do use money made of
gold, Here is mone^ of gold.

Here is great plenty of Spices.


that every pee^e is worth.7. Ducats. In this province and Country there is
great plenty of all kinds of spice and musk, and great plentye of fish, by
reason of the great lakes and pooles that be there.

Of another Province, where there is found gold and other things. CHAP. 78.
GOing out of the foresaid province, and traveling ten days journey through
a Country full of Cities and Towns, and very much people, seming much in
their use and custom, unto those of the last rehearsed Country. And at the
ten days iourneys end, you come unto a great River, which is named Bru^,
at the which ends the Country and province named Candew. In this River there
is found great plenty of gold. Here is found great plentye of gold.

A River into the Seas.


And fast by this river grows very much Ginger. And this River falls into
the Occean Sea.

Of the Province named Caraya. CHAP. 79.
Beyond this River you come unto a Province named Caraia toward the occident.
In this Country there be seven Kingdoms, subjects under the great Cane.
Here reigns one of the great Canes sons, named Esentemur, being rich,
wise, and a valiant man, and gou^rneth his subjects with great prudence and
justice. These people be Idolaters. And after that you have passed the said
River, and traveling five days journey, Here be many Horses bredde.
there be many Cities and Towns, and there is brought up and bredde great
plenty of Horses.

Of the Province named Ioci, and of their beastly customs. CHAP. 80.
AT five days iourneys end, you come unto a City which is named Ioci, and is
very great and full of people Idolaters, saving that there be some Christian
people Heretics Nestorians. They do use for their money fine shelles white,
which are found in the Sea, and fourscore of them are worth a Sazo of gold,
which is worth two grotes of gold. A Sazo of gold is worth eight of silver,
which is an ounce.
And eight Sazos of silver, which is an ounce, and is worth a Sazo of gold.
There they do make Sault of the water of Wells great plenty. And in this
Country no man cares though another man have to do with his wife. There is a
Lake in this Province, having in compass a hundred miles. Therein is plenty
of excellent good fish. The people of this Country do eat raw flesh after
this manner. They cut it in small pieces, and sauce it with Garlike and spices,
which gives them a good taste unto the flesh.

Of the Province named Chariar, and of the strange Serpents that be there.
CHAP. 81.
GOing from this Province Ioci, and traveling ten days journey, you come
unto another Province named Chariar, subject unto the great Cane, and it is
full of people of Idolaters, and one of ye great Canes sons named Chocayo,
rules and governs them. And in this Country there is found great plenty of
gold. Here is great plent^ of gold.
And a Sazo of gold goes there for six of silver. And they do use in this
Country little white shelles of the Sea, in stead of money, which is brought
from India. In this Province there be certain Serpents of ten paces in
length, and their gaul is sold very dear, for they do use it in m^nye
medicines: for if a man should be bitte with a mad Dog, laying upon the
sore so much quantity of that gaul as will lie upon a farthing, it heals
it immediately. Also, it eases a woman of her pangs, that is in travel. The
men of this Country are perverse people, and cruel, for if they do see any
travelers that are prudente and fair, they do mark where the night does take
them, and thither they come and kill them, saying, that the fairness and
prudence of the dead, does pass unto them, and therefore they do kill them,
and not for to rob them. This perverse custom was among them before they
became under the great Cane. But.95. years hitherto that they were under the
great Cane, they dare not do any such thing, and therefore become a great
deal better people, and of a better disposition.

Of the Province named Cingui, and of many things that be there, and of the
City named Caucasu. CHAP. 82.
AFter that a man departs from Chariar, he goes five days journey toward
the Occident, and comes to another Province named Nocteam, and also the City
named Nociam, which is the head of this Province, and it is under the great
Cane. All the men of this Province have their teeth covered with gold. And the
women do dress their Horses. The men of this country have their teeth covered
with gold.
The men do no other thing, but go on Hunting, passing the time in the
fields, and go unto the war. The women do buy and sell, and do all things
necessary belonging to the house, and govern all the goods, and their men
and women Servants. Over and above this, the women of this Country have this
custom, that as she is delivered of child, she rises and wrappeth the
child, Here is a custom, that the good man is much made of, after his wife
is brought a bed.
and does all things belonging to the house, and receives no more pain, than
though she had not bin delivered of child, but in giving the child suck, and
as soon as she is delivered, the husband lies in the bed, laying the child
by him, as though he had borne it himself, for the space of fortye days, and
the woman does serve him. He is visited of the kinsmen and friends and
neighbors, as though he had bin delivered himself, making great feasts for
the space of thirty days. In this Country they do give a Sazo of gold,
which is an ounce, for five Sazos of silver, A Sazo of gold is an ounce, and is
worth five of Si^^er.
being five ounces. Also, they do use Persiuolas, being little shelles of the
Sea, which come from In^i^, in stead of money. These people have no Idols, but
every householde worshippeth their Superior and Master. None of them can
write nor read, for that they dwell among the moist Mountains, corrupted with
evil airs. In this Province, and in the other two before specifyed, there be
no Physicians, but when they do fall sick, they cause to come unto their
houses certain Ministers, which use inchantmentes by the power of the Devil,
and declare the sickness that the diseased has, and these Ministers sound
their instruments in honor of their Idols, A strange kind of Physic.
in so much that the Devil enters into one of those Ministers, Inchanters,
or Idols, and falls down as though he were dead, and those Ministers, or
Masters of the Idols, demand of him that lies enchanted, or in a trance,
wherefore that man fell sick, and he answers, for that he has angered
such or such an Idol, and then those Masters or Ministers of the Idols say
unto him that is enchanted, we request thee to pray unto that Idol that is
angry with the sick body, to pardon him, and will make him Sacrifice with
his own blood. And if he that is in this trance, do believe that the disease
is mortal, he answers, this sick man has so displeased the Idol, that
I know not whether he will pardon him or not, for that he has determined
that he should dye, and if he thinks that he shall escape he says, if
he will live, it behooves him to give unto the Idol so many Sheep that have
black necks, and to dress so many sorts of meats dressed with spices,
sufficient to make the sacrifices unto the Idol that is angry with him, and
for the ministers that serve him, and for the women that serve in his temple,
which is all fraud and guile of the inchanters for to get victuals, by this
means all are damned unto Hell. To this banquet there is conuited the masters
and ministers of the Idols, the inchanters and women that serve in ye temple of
that Idol. And before they sit down to the Table, they do sprincle the
broth about the house, singing and daunsing in the honor of that Idol. And
they do ask the Idol, if he have forgiven the sick man. And sometimes the
Feende answers, that there lacks such or such a thing, which immediately
they do provide: and when he answers that he is pardoned, then they do sit
down to eat and to drink that sacrifice which is dressed with spices, and this
done, they go unto his house with great joy. If the paciente heal, it is good
for him, but if he dye, it is an everlasting pain for him, and if he recover,
they do believe that the diuelishe Idol has healed him, and if he die, they
say that the cause of his death was for the great offense that he had done
unto him, and so they be lost as brute beasts in all that Country.

Unicorns.
Of another Province named Machay where there be Unicorns, Elephants, and wild
Beasts, with many other strange things. CHAP. 83.
GOing from the Province of Charian, you go down a great penet or hill,
which endures two days journey, without any habitation, saving one town,
where they do keep holyday three days in the week. There they do take a
Sazo of gold for five of silver. And past these two days journey, you do
com^ unto the province named Machay which lies toward the midde day or
South, adjoining unto the Indias, and through this province you travel
fifteen days journey, through deserte mountains, where there be many
Elephants, and other wild beasts, for that the country is not inhabited.
Also there is found Unicorns. When they will take any Elephant, the do compass
him with dogs, and so they do hunt him, that they make him weary, and so he
is feign to rest for weariness, and his resting is, leaning unto a great tree,
for that he has no joints in his knees, so that he can not lie down nor rise
up. The Masties dare not come near him, but bark at him aloof, and the
Elephante has never his eye off those Masties, and then those that be expert
and hunt him, hurl Darts, and to kill him. In this country is much gold and
silk.

Of a province named Cinguy, and of the City named Cancasu. CHAP. 84.
BEyond this province Machay, there is another province named Cinguy, and
traveling four days journey in it, you pass many Cities and towns, and at
these four days iournyes end, stands a great City named Cancasu, being
very noble, Great plen^^ of cloth of Gold and Silk.
situated toward the mydday or South, and this is of the straight of Cataya.
In this City there is wroughte cloth of Gold, and silk great plenty.

Of the City named Cianglu. CHAP. 85.
FRom this City traveling five days journey, you come unto another City
named Cianglu, which is very noble and great, situated toward the midday, or
south, and it is of the straight of Cataya, here is made great plenty of
salt: and there runs through this country a very great river, that up and
down this river there travel many ships with merchaundise.

Of the City named Candrafra, and of the City named Singuymata. CHAP. 86.
Six days journey beyond the City named Cianglu, toward the midday of
south, you come unto a City named Candrafra, ye which had under it before the
great Cane did conquer it, twelve Cities. In the countries about this City
there be fair Gardens, and good ground for corn and silk, and beyond this
City three days journey toward the midday, or south, there stands a fair
City named Singuymata, which has a great river that the Citizens made in two
parts, the one way runs toward the east, and the other toward the
Occident, or Weast through Cataya, and upon this river there sail ships
with Merchaundises in number incredible.

Of the River Coromoran, and of the City Choygamum, and of another City named
Cayni. CHAP. 87.
GOing from Singuymata seuenteen days journey toward the midday or south, you
pass through many Cities and towns, in the which there is great traffic
of Merchaundise. The people of this country are subjects under the great
Cane. Their language is Persian, and they do honor Idols. At the seauenteen
days iourneys end, there is a great river that comes from the Country of
Prester John, which is named Coromoran, having a mile in breadth, and it is so
deep, that there may sail any great vessel laden with Merchandise. Upon this
river the great Cane has fifteen great ships for to pass his people unto his
Idols, that are in the Occean seas, every ship of these has fifteen horses,
and fifteen mariners, and al victuals necessary. Upon this river there
stra^deth two Cities, one on the one side, and the other one the other. The
biggest of them in named Choyganguy, and the other Caycu and they be both a
days journey from the sea.

Of the noble province named Mangi, and of many marvelous things that were
there, and how it was brought under the great Canes governance. CHAP. 80.
PAssing the said river, you enter into ye province of Mangi, where reigns a
king named Fucusur, Mangi.
of more power and riches than any King in ye world saving the great Cane. In
this realm there be no men of war, nor horses for the wars, for it is
situated strongly, in a place compassed round about with many waters. And
round about his Cities and towns, there be very deep ditches and caves,
being broad and full of water. The people of this country are given to
feeblen^sse, they do live delicately: if they were given to wars, and feats
of arms, all the world could not conquer the province of Mangi. This king of
Mangi was very leacherous, but he had in himself two good properties, the one
was, that he maintained his realm in great justice and peace, that every one
remained in his place, and both day and night you might traffic and travel
surely: the other property was, that he was very pitiful, and did great
alms unto the poor, and every year he brought up twentye poor
striplings, and he gave them as sons and heirs unto his Barrons and
knights. In his Court he had always ten thousand Squires that served
him. It fortuned that in the year of our Lord.1267. Cublay Cane got perforce
the country of Mangi, Mangi.
and the said king of this province fled with.1000. ships unto his Islands
that were in the Occean Sea* He left the principal City of his province
Mangi named Gaissay under the guiding of his Queen, Mangi.
and when she knew that there was entered into her land Baylayncon Can a
Tartarous name, which is as much to say in English, as a hundredth eyes, a
Captain belonging to the great Cane with a great host, and so without any
resistance, she submitted her self with all her country, and all the cities
saving one named Sinphu, which kept it self three year^s before it yielded.
This Queen was carried unto the great Canes Court and kept like a Queen,
and the King Fucusur came not out of those Islands until he died, being out of
his seigniorie.

Of the City named Coygangui, and many other things. CHAP. 91.
HEre I will tell you of the fashion and condition of this said province
Mangi. The first City at the entering is named Coygangui, which is a great and
a noble City situated toward the wind Syroco or East southeast. The people
of this City do worship the Idolles, and have the Persian tongue. They have
many ships, and burn their dead bodies. This city stands upon the river
Coromoran. In this City they make so much salt as would suffice for forty
great cities, and of the abundaunce of this salt, there grows great
profits unto the great Cane.

Of the noble City named Panguy, and of another City named Cayn. CHAP. 92.
Passing from Coygangui toward the wind Siroco, which blows between
Leuant and the midday, which we call East Southeaste, you travail upon a
fair stonye Cawsey well made. It begins at the entering of Mangi, and there
be very deep waters on each side of the cawsey. In this country of Mangi there
is a city named Pangui, very fair, and of great magnificence. In this
province they do use that money that the great Cane does use in his
country, and here is great scarcity of corn, and of al things else that
susteineth the body. And at another journeys end toward Siroco there stands
another noble and great city named Cayn, and all the inhabitants are
Idolators, and there is abundaunce of fish and beasts, and wildfoule, so that
there is boughte three good Fesants for the value of six pence.

Of the City named Tinguy. CHAP. 93.
A Days journey beyond Cayn you shall find fair villages, and eared ground,
and so you come unto the ground of Tinguy, plentiful of Wheat, and of al
things necessary for shipping. The people of this country do honor the
Idolles, and three days journey from this City you come unto the Occean Sea:
and at the sea side there is great plenty of salt.

Of the City named Mangui, which have under their Lordship seventeen
Cities, and of an other City named Saimphu which has under it twelve Cities.
CHAP. 94.
BEyond Tinguy a days journey toward the wind Siroco you come unto a fair
Country, and at the end of it stands a City named Manguy very fair and
great, and there they honor the Idolles, and speak the Persian tongue. This
City has under it seauenteene Cities, and I Marcus Paulus did govern this
under the great Cane three years. Toward the Occident or West stands a
province or City named Manguy, where they do make great plenty of cloth of
Gold and silk. Also there is great plenty of corn, and of all manner of
victualles. And beyond this City stands the City of Saimphu which has
under it twelve Cities, which is the City that resisted it self agayn^te the
power of the great Cane the space of three years.

How this province was vvonne by the great Cane. CHAP. 93.
AFter that the great Cane had won the province of Mangi, conquested by
industry and council of Nicholao and Mathio and Marcus Paulus, as now you
shall perceive in this present chapter: From the host of the great Cane I
write unto the great Cane, that that province by no manner of way could be
won or taken, of the which news the great Cane was sore abashed, and we
perceiving his heaviness, we went unto him and said: Potentissimo and
mighty Lord, receive you no conceit nor heaviness, for we will have such
means, that this province shall come into your hands: who being comforted
with our promise, gave us full power and liberty to do all those things that
unto us should seem best, and that we should be obeyed as to his own proper
person. And then I Marcus Paulus took upon me this charge, and gathered
together certain Venetians that I found in those Countries, being discreet
men, and exercised in feats of arms, and I caused to be made three great
Trabuco or great pieces of ordinance, which shot a pellet of a thousand
pound waighte, and had them unto the camp, and planted them where they
should be shot off, and this done, by the means of these pieces I shot
into the City great pellettes, and when those of the City saw their houses
fall about their ears, by such means as they never saw nor heard of before,
they received great fear, and immediately they yielded themselves unto the
great Cane.

Of the City named Singuy, and of many other things. CHAP. 94.
Going from Siamphu, and traveling fifteen days journey toward Syroco, or
to the East southeast, you come unto the City named Singuy, whereunto
belongs a great number of ships: The river Tnoguron the greatest river in
the world,
and this City is situated upon the greatest river of the world named
Tuognrou which is.17. miles in breadth, and one hundred days journey in length,
and there is never a river in the world, Five thousan^d vessels on this river.
where there sayleth so many ships with Merchaundizes, as there. And I
Marcus Paulus was in this City, and did tell standing upon a bridge at one
time five thousand ships or barks that sailed upon this river, and upon
this river there stands two hundred Cities. being greater than this that we
have spoken of. This river passes through sixeteene provinces.

Of the City named Cianguy. CHAP. 95.
CIanguy is a small City standing upon the said river, it has nothing under
it but good ground, where they do gather plenty of corn, and rice, which is
carried unto Cambalu, that the great Cane may have great plenty of victualles
in his Court. This City stands toward the Siroco, and they do carry this
provision unto Cambalu upon this river, and not by sea. Therefore there comes
through this river great profit unto Cambalu, for it is better provided with
barks than with carts, or horses.

Of the City named Pingramphu, and of many other things that be in that
Country. CHAP. 98.
PIngramphu is a City of the province Mangi, in the which there is two
churches of Christians Nestorians, edified by Marsar Conostor, which was Lord
of that City under the great Cane, and it was in the year of our Lord.1288.
When you do go from Pingramphu, you go three days journey against Solano,
which is East and by South, through many Cities and Towns, where there is
traffiqued much merchandises, and many arts. At these three days iourneys
end stands the city of Tigningui, great, rich, and abundant of all things
to live upon, and also of Wine. On a time certain Christian men named Alanos
took this city, and that night they drunk so much wine, that they were all
drunk, and slepte like dogs all that night, and the Citizens perceiving that
they were all asleep, killed them, and Barayn King of these Alanos, as soon as
he knew this, gathered a great host, and went against this city, and took
it perforce, and caused to be killed all those that he foun^ in the city, men,
women and children, small and great, in the revenging of his Christians.

Of the City named Singuy, and of mano other things there. CHAP. 99.
SInguy is a very great and a noble city which is.40. miles in compass.
There is in this city people innumerable, where you may believe, that if the
people of Mangi were exercised in the feate of war, all the world could not
win it, but they be all Philosophers, Physicians, Merchaunts and Artificers,
Seven thousand bridges of stone.
very cunning in all arts. There be in this City.7000. bridges of stone, very
fair wroughte, and under any of these bridges there may row a Galley, and
under some two Galleys may row together. In the mountains of this City
grows Rewbarbe great plenty, and so much Ginger, Plenty of Rewbarbe. Five
pound of Ginger for six pence.
that for six pence they do give more than five pound of Ginger. Under this
City there be.17. Cities great and fair. In this City they do work great
plenty of cloth of gold and silk, for that the Citizens there delighte much
to wear such cloth, and of many colors.

Of the City named Quinsay, that is to say, the City of Heaven, which is a
hundred miles in compass, having twelve thousand Bridges, and fourteen
Bathes, and many other things of wonder. CHAP. 97. Quinsay.

GOing from Singuy, and traueling five days journey, The nobles^ City of the
world, it is an hundred miles compass
you come unto a noble and famous City named Quinsay, that is to say, the
city of Heaven. This is the noblest City of the world, and the head City
of the province of Mangi. And I Marcus Paulus was in this city, and did learn
the customs of it, and it was declared unto me, that it was one hundred miles
in compass, and 12000. bridges of stone with vaultes and arches so high,
Twelve thousand bridges of stone.
that a great ship might pass under, and this City stands upon the
water as Ve^i^e does, and the people of this city every one of them must use
the science of his fathers, and of his predecessors. In this City there
stands a lake which is in compass thyrtie miles, and in this lake there is
builte the fairest Palaces that ever I saw: And in the mids of this lake
stands two Pallac^s wherein they do celebrate all the weddings of that City,
and ever there remains within them all the things necessary which belong
unto the weddings. Also there is round about this City other Cities, but
they be small ones. In this City they do use money of Tartaria, to wit of a
Mulbery tree, as it is used in the great Canes Court, and as it is before
mentioned. Upon every one of these 12000. bridges of stone, continually there
stands watch and ward, because there shall be no evil done, and that the
City do not rebel. In this city there is an high mountain, and upon it
there stands a very high Tower, and upon it there is a thing to sound
upon, and it is sounded when there is any fire or any rumor in the
Country. There is be this city fourteen Bathes: and the great Cane has
great watch and ward in this City.

Of the City named Gansu. CHAP. 99.
BEy^nde Quinsay fifteen miles, bordereth the Occean sea between east and
North, and there stand^th a City named Gansu, which has a fair port or
haven, and thither come many ships out of the Indias: between the City and the
Sea, runs a great river, that passes through many countries, and out that
way there go many ships unto the sea.

Of the division which the great Cane made of the province Mangi. CHAP. 100.
THe province Mangi was divided into 8. kingdoms, by the great Cane, and of
every kingdom there is about.140. Cities under a king. There is in all the
province of Mangi.1202. Cities al subject unto the great Cane, and al those
which be borne in this province of Mangi, are written by days and hours,
that the province may know the number of yt people, and that they may not
rebel. When they do go on any journey, they consult with the Astrologers, and
when any dies, the parents do cloth the dead in Canuas, and burn the bodies
with papers, whereupon is painted, money, horses, slaves, beasts for their
houses, apparel, with all other things, for they do say that the dead uses
all this in the other world, and that with the smoke of the dead body, and
of those papers, whereon there is painted all those things rehearsed,
believing, that it goes all with him, into the other world, and when they
burn those bodies, they sing and play upon al kind of instruments and
music that they can find, and say, that in that order and pleasure, their
Gods do receive them in the other world. In this City stands the great
Palace of Estn^fogi, which was Lord and King of that province of Mangi.

This Palace is made after this wise, it is square and strongly walled, ten
miles in compass. It is high and fair, with fair chambers, Hals, Gardens,
fruits, fountain^s, and a lake with many fishes. In this Palace there is
twenty Halles, wherein there may sit down at meals, twenty thousand
persons: by this it may be comprehended how big this City is. In this City
there is a famous Church or Temple of Christians Nestorians, and every one
that dwells in this City has written his name, and of his wife, Children,
men servants, and women servants, and horses that he has in his house,
over the Porth of his door. Also when there is any that goes to another
City, it behooves that the Inholders that lodge strangers, do bring a
Register unto the officers appointed, giuyng relation how long they do
remain, and when they go away.

Of the rent which the great Cane has of the province of Quynsay. CHAP. 101.
Seeing I have declared unto you of the City and province of Quinsay, now I will
declare you what rent the great Cane has yearly, out of this province only,
of the salt every year 4500. Hanegs or bushels of Gold, and to every measure
goes 18000. Sazos, and every Sazo of Gold is worth seven Ducats, and of the
other rentes over and above the salt he has every year 10000. hanegs of
gold.

Of the City named Thampinguy, and of many other marvelous things. CHAP. 102.
GOing from Quinsay, traveling toward Solano a days journey, you do go by
Cities and towns, and many Gardens, and at the end you come unto the City
named Thampinguy, which is fair and great having abundaunce of all things, and
it is under the Seigniorie of ye great Cane: the people are Idolaters, and
passing other 3. days journey, you come unto an other city named Vguy, and
going two days journey beyond, toward Salano, or east and by South, there is
so many Cities and towns yt he that trauelleth, thinks that he never goes
out of towns, and there is great plenty of all provision, there is Canes
great and thick of four spannes in compass, and fifteen in length. At two
iourneys end strandeth the City named Greguy very noble and great, having
abundance of all things needeful. The people are Idolatours, and under the
great Cane. And going from this City three days journey toward Solano, you
shall find many Cities and towns, and many Lions. The people do kill them in
this manner, the man does put of his hosen, and apparel, and puts on a
weed of Canuas, carriyng a certain thing pitched, upon his shoulders, and
carries a sharp knife in his hands with a point, and in this manner he
goes unto the Lions den, and as the Lion sees him come, he makes toward
him, The manner how they do kill the Lions
and the man when he is near casts unto him the pitched thing which he
has upon his shoulders. The Lion takes it in his mouth, thinking that he
has the manne, and then the man does wound him with the sharp poynted knife,
and as soon as the Lion feels himself hurt he runs away, and as soon as
the cold enters into the wound he dies. In this manner they do kill many
Lions in that country, which is of the province of Mangi.

Of the City named Cinaugnary, and of many other noble Cities, and of the
cruelty of the people that inhabit there, and of other things. CHAP. 101.
Traveling forward four days journey you come unto a city named Cinaugnary,
a great and a famous City standing upon a Mountain, which parts a river
into two parts, and traveling four days journey forward, you come unto a
City named Signy, which is under the segniorie of Quinsay. And after you
enter into the Realm of Fuguy, and traveling forward six days journey
toward Solano, or East, and by South, through mountains and valleys, you
shall find many Cities and Towns, having plenty of all victuals, and singular
for Hunting and Hawking, and plenty of spices, and sugar so plenty, Good cheap
Sugar.
that you may buy forty pound of Sugar for a Venice groate. There grows a
certain sweet fruit like unto Saffron, and they use it instead of Saffron.
The people of this Country eat man's flesh, so that he dye not of natural
death. When the people of this Country go unto the wars, they do make
certain signs in their forheads, to be the better known: and they go all on
foot, except their Lord, who rides on Horseback. They are very cruel
people, and use the spear and sword. They do eat the flesh of those men that
they kill, and drink their blood. In the mids of these six days journey,
stands the City named Belimpha, which has four bridges of marble, with
very fair pillars of marble. Every bridge of these is a mile in length, and
nine paces in breadth. Unto this City there comes great plenty of Spices.
Also, there is in this City very fair men, and more fair women, and there be
black Hens, and fat without feathers, Fair men and women here.

Black Hen^ and fatie without feathers.


and very perfect to eat. In this country there be Lions, and other wild
and perilous beasts, so yt they travel in this country in great fear. At
these six days iourneys end, stands the City named Vguca, where there is
made great plentye of sugar, which is all carried unto the great Canes court.

Of the City named Friguy, and of many other marvelous things which be
there. CHAP. 104.
PAssing out of the City of Vgucu, and traveling fifteen miles, you come
unto the City named Friguy, which is the head of ye Realm of Tonca, which is
one of the nine Kingdoms of Mangi. Through the midst of this City runs a
River of seven miles in breadth. A River of seven mile broad.

There be many Ships made.


And in this City there be made many Ships, and is laden great plenty of
Spices, and diverse other Merchandises that is gathered near to that River, and
Precious stones which be brought out of India mayor. This City stands very
near unto the Occean Seas, and has abundance of all kind of victuals, or any
thing else needful.

Of the City named Iaython, and of many other things. CHAP. 105.
GOing from Quinsay, and passing the said River, traveling five days journey
toward Solano, or East, and by South, you find many Cities and Towns, having
abundance of all victuals. And at the end of these five days journey,
stands a great and a fair City named Iaython, This City has the best Haven
in the world.
which has a good Haven, and thither come many Ships from the Indyes, with
many Merchandises, and this is one of the best Havens that is in the world, and
there comes Ships unto it in such quantity, that for one Ship that
comes unto. For one Ship that comes to Al^xan^ria, there comes in there
a hundredth.
Alexandria, there comes.100. unto it. The great Cane has great custom for
Merchandises, in and out of that Haven, for the Ship that comes thither,
pays ten in the hundred for custom, and of Precious stones and spices, and
of any other kind of fine wares, they pay thirty in the hundred: and of
Pepper.44. of the hundred, so that the Merchants in freight, tribute, and
customs, Great custom is paid here.
pay the one half of their goods. In this Country and City there is great
abundance of victuals.

Of the Island named Ciampagu, and of things which be found there, and how the
great Cane would conquer it. CHAP. 106.
I Will pass from hence unto the Countries of India, where I Marcus Paulus
dwelte a ^ong time: and although the things which I will declare, seem not to
be believed of them that shall hear it, but have it in a certaynetie and of a
truth, for that I saw it all with mine own eyes. The Island of Ciampagu is
fifteen hundred miles from the main land.
And now I will begin of the Island named Ciampagu, which stands in the
high Sea toward the Orient, and it is separated from the main land.1500.
miles. The people of this Country are fair, and of good manners, although they
be all Idolaters. There is in this Island a King frank and free, for he pays
no tribute at all to any Prince. The people of this Country speak the Persian
tongue. In this Island is great plent^ of gold.
And there is found in this Island great plenty of gold, and they never have it
forth unto any place out of the Island, for that there comes thither few
Ships, and little Merchandise. The King of this Island has a marvelous
fair and great Palace, The Kings Palace is covered with clean gold.

The windows and pillars thereof is gold.

Great ^lenty of Precious stones.


all covered with gold in pas^e, of the thickness of a piece of two Ryals of
plate. And the windows and pillars of this Palace be all of gold. Also
there is great plenty of precious stones. And the great Cane knowing of the
great fame and riches of this Island, determined to conquer it, and caused to
be made great provision of munition and vittayles, and a great number of
Ships, and in them he put many Horsemen and footmen, and sent them under the
governance of two of his Captains, the one was named Abatan, and the other
Vonsaucin, and these two went with this great army from the Haven of Iaython
and of Glunsay, and they went unto the Island Ciampagu, where they went alande,
and having done great hurt in Mountains and valleys, there entered such envy
and hatred between these two Captains, and so much discord, that look what
the one would have done, the other did again say it, and through this means
they took neither City nor Town, but only one, and they killed all them that
they found therein, for that they would not yield, saving eight men, which
could not be killed with any iron, Men having stones that were enchanted, could
not be slain with weapons of iron, but with clubbes.
for that each of them had a precio^s stone enchanted in his right arm,
between the flesh and the skin, and these stones did defend the^ from death
to be killed with iron, and knowing of it, these two Captains procured to kill
these eyghte men with clubs of wodde, and took those stones for them selves,
and in that instant there arose such a tempest of wind of Septentrion or North
so terrible, and doubting that their Ships would break, they hoysed up
Sail, and went unto another Island, ten miles distant off from this, and the
wind was so terrible, that it opened many of their Ships, and many were forced
to make back toward their own Country again, and about.30000. of them
fled by land, of these they thought that they were all killed. And as soon
as it was caulme on the Sea, the King of this Island which had bin so spoiled,
went with a great army of Ships unto the other Island, where as they were
gone to have taken them that were fled, and as soon as he was on land with
his men, the Tartares like wise and politic men, retired back by the Island,
and went unto the Ships of this King which they had left without strength,
entered in, hoysed up the Sails, with the Auncientes and Flagges of that King,
which they left behind in the Island, and sailed unto the first Island, where
they were received, The City taken by a pretty means.
and the gates opened, thinking it had bin their own King. And in this manner
the Tartares took that City, wherein the King had his habitation, and
ransacked it. And as soon as the King of this Island knew of it, he caused
many other Ships to be prepared, and with the men that he had, and many of
her that he took of new, environed his proper City, having it beseeged
seven months. And finallye the abouesayd Tartares hopyng for no succoure,
delivered up the City unto the right King, conditionally to let them go with
their lives, bag and baggage. This happened in the year of our Lord.1248. In
this Island there be Idols, that some have heads like Wolves, some heads like
Hogs, some like Sheep, some like Dogs, some have one head and four faces,
some three heads, having one only neck, and only one right hand, some have
only one left hand, some have four hands, and some ten, and the Idol
that has most hands, is taken to be the most beautiful: and to him that
demands of them, wherefore they have so many Idols, they do give no other
reason, saving that so did their predecessors. When the people of this Island do
take in battle any stranger, if he do not caunsome himself for money, they
kill him, drink his blood, and eat his flesh. This Island is environed round
about with the Occean sea. The ports are free for themselves. The Mariners
which use that Sea, say, In this Sea is.7448. Islands, which be very fruitful
and pleasant.

Here grows white Pepper.


that there is in it.7448: Islands. There is no tree there, but he is of a
sweet odoure, fruitful, and of great profit. In this Island grows the
white Pepper. From the Province of Mangi unto the India and home, is a years
sailing, the reason is, for that there raygneth two steadfast winds, the one in
the winter, and the other in the Summer, contrary the one unto the other.

Of the Province named Ciabane, and of that King, who has.325. sons and
daughters of his own. There be many Elephants and much spices. CHAP. 107.
WHen you do go from Iaython, which is under the segniorie of the great Cane
toward the Occidente, and somewhat declining toward the midday five days
journey, you come unto a Country named Cyaban, wherein there is a City rich,
great, and famous, subject unto a King that he and his subjects speak the
Persian tongue. And in the year of our Lord.1248. the great Cane sent thither
a great Baron, named Sagato, with a great army, to conquer that Province,
and he could do nothing, but destroy much of that Country, and for that he
should do no more hurt, that King became tributarie unto the great Cane, and
every year he sent him his tribute. And I Marcus Paulus was in this country
in the year of our Lord.1275. and I found this King very old. He had many
wives, and amongst sons and daughters he had.325. This King had.325. children.
Among his sons he had.25. of them that were very valiante men of arms. In
this Country there be many Elephants and Lions great plenty, and great
Mountains of black Ebbante,

Of the great Island named Iaua, and of many Spices that grow there. CHAP. 108.
GOing from Ciaban, sailing between the midday and Solano, or East and by
South 1400. miles, you come unto a grea^e Island named Iaua, which is in
compass three thousand miles. In this Island, there be seven crowned Kings
free, paying no tribute at all. In this Island there is great abundance of
victuals, A very rich Island of spices and gold in great plentye.
and great riches, having very much Pepper, Cinnamon, Cloves, and many other
singular Spices in great quantity. The people do honor the Idols. The great
Cane could never make himself Lord of it.

Of the Island named Iocath, and of other two Islands, their conditions and
properties. CHAP. 109.
Sailing seauenteene miles from Iaua, between the midday and Solano, or East
and by South, you come unto two Islands, the one is named Sondure, and the other
Condur. And beyond these two Islands almost two hundredth miles, stands the
Country name Iocathe, great and rich. They speak the Persian tongue, and
worship Idols. They pay no kind of tribute to any man, for there is no man
that can do them hurt. There is found great plentye of gold, and a great
number of the small white shells of the Sea, Here is found plenty of gold.
which is used in some places in stead of money, as before it is rehearsed.
Also, there be many Elephantes.

Unto this Island there comes very few Strangers, for that it stands out
of the way.

Of the Kingdom named Malenir, and of the Island named Pentera, and of Iaua
the less, and of their customs. CHAP 110.
Sailing beyond Iocath five miles toward the midday, you come unto the Island
named Penthera, full of Mountains. And in the mids of this Island, about
forty miles, there is but four passes of water, therefore the great Ships do
take off their Rudders: and being paste these five miles toward the midday,
you come unto a Realm named Malenir. The City and the Island is named
Pepethan, where there is plenty of Spices. And going forward, sailing by
Solano, or East, and by South a hundred miles, you come unto the Island named
Iaua the less, which is in compass two hundred miles. In this Island there is
eyghte Kings, every one having his Kingdom by himself. They do all speak
the Persian tongue, and honor Idols. They have scant of victuals. From this
Island you can not see the North Star little nor much. Beyond it stands
the Realm of Ferlech. The people are Moors. They do honor Martin Piniolo,
which is Mahomet. There dwell others in the Mountains that have no kind of
law. They do live as beasts, honoring the first thing that they do see in
the morning, as their God. They do eat all kind of dead flesh, and the
flesh of man, caring not how, nor yet after what sort it dies.

Of the realm named Bassina, and of the Unicorns, and other wild beasts.
CHAP. 111.
GOing from Ferlech you come unto ye realm of Bassyna, where the people are
without law, living as beasts, being subject at their will under the great
Cane, although they do give him no tribute, saving, that at sometimes when it
pleases them they do send unto him some strange thing. In this realm there
be Apes of diverse sorts, and Unicorns, little less than Elephants, having a
head like unto a swyne, and always hanging it downward to the ground, and
stands with a good will in Cieno or miery puddel. They have but one horn in
their forehead, whereby only they are called Unicorns, their horn is large and
black, their tongue is rough and full of prickles long and thick. The Apes of
this country are small, having a face like unto a child, and those in that
country do flaye them, so that they look like unto a naked child. They sees
it, and dress it with sweet spices, so that they have no evil air nor strong
sent, and so sodden, they do send them about in the world to sell, saying
they be sodden children. In this country there be hawks as black as Ravens,
very strong and good to hawk with.

Of the realm named Samara, and of many strange things that are found in the
said country. CHAP. 112.
GOing from the Realm of Baxina, you ^nter into the realm of Samara being ^n
this same Island, where I Marcus ^aulus was five months, by fortune of weather,
and for fear of the evil people of that country, for the most part ^here
lives upon man's flesh. From hence, you see not the North star, nor yet the
other stars that rule the principal wind, the people there are rustical and
worship Idols, there is singular good fish, they have no wine, but they get
it in this wise. They have many trees like unto the paulme tree, they break
the branches and from them comes water, as it comes from the vine. This
licour is white and red like unto Wine, being very perfect to drink, there
is great plenty of it. Another realm there is in this Island, which is named
Deragoya, the people are rusticall, and worship Idols. They have no king, and
speak the Persian speech. In this Island there grows great plenty of the
Indian nuts. They have this custom in this Island, that when any falls sick,
his kinsfolk demand of them if the patient shall live or die. Then these
masters make Devilish inchauntments, if they say that he shall escape, they
let him lie, and if they say that he shall dye, they send for the Butchers,
which stop his breath till he dye, and when he is dead, they sees the
body* and the parents eat the flesh, and keep his bones in a chest. This they
do, saying, if the worms had eaten the flesh they should die for hunger, and
the soul of the dead body should iuffer great penury in the other world.
They do hide this chest with the bones, in a cave of the mountains, so that it
may not be found. All the strangers that they do find, they kill and eat
them, if they be not ransomed for money as soon as they take them.

Of the Kingdom named Lambry, and of the strange things there found, and of
the realm Samphur, and of the things found there. CHAP. 113.
LAmbry is another realm in this Island, where there is great plenty of
spices. The people are Idolaters. In this realm there be men that have
feathers about their priuities, great and big, and of the length of a goose
quill. The fifth realm of this Island Iaua is named Samphur, where there is
found the best Camphore that is in the world, and it is sold for the weight of
gold: here they do use the Wine of trees. In this province there is a kind of
great tree, and it has a very thin ryne, and under the ryne it is full of
singular meal, and of this meal they do make perfect meats, of the which I
Marcus paulus did eat many times.

Of two Islands, and of the evil living and beastlynesse of the people. CHAP.
114.
GOing from Lambry sailing 140. miles toward the North, you come unto two
Islands, the one is named Necumea, and the other Nangania. The people of
Necumea, live like beasts, the men and women go naked, covering no part of
their secrets: they do use carnallye like beasts or dogs in the streets, or
wheresoever they do find, without any shame at all, having no difference, nor
regard, the father unto the daughter, nor the son unto ye mother, more than
unto another woman, but every one does as he lusts or may. Here there be
mountains of Sandolos or Sau^ders, and of nuts of India, and of Gardamonia,
and many other spyces. Nangama is the other Island, it is fair and great. The
people thereof are Idolaters, they live beastly, and eat men's flesh, they are
very cruel, they` have heads like great Mastie dogs, and the men and women
have teeth like dogs. In this Island there is great plenty of spices.

Of the Island Saylan, and many noble things which be found there. CHAP. 115.
AFter that you go from Nangana, you go toward the Occident, and declynyng
against Arbyno about ten hundred miles, you come unto the Island of Saylan,
which is the best and the greatest Island in the world, being in compass
thirty thousand miles. In this Island there is a very rich king, the people are
Idolatours, and they go all naked in this Island, saving that they do wear a
linen cloth before their secrets. There is great plenty of Rice and of
cattle, and of the Wine of trees. In this Island are found the best Rubies,
that be in the world, and they be found in no other place than here. And
here there be found many precious stones, as Topases, Amatistes, and of
diverse other kinds. This king has the fairest Rubie in the world, the length
of a spanne, and is as thick as ones arm, as red as fire, glistering
without any blemmish. The men of this country are wonderful leacherous, and
they are worth nothing for the wars.

Of the province named Moabar, vvherin there be five kingdoms, and of the
noble things that be found there. CHAP. 116.
PAssing from this said place, and traveling toward the Occident forty
miles, you come unto a great province nam^d Moabar in the great India. This is
the greatest and the best province that is in ye world, standing in the firm
land, being an excellent regigion. There is in this province, Margarites very
fair and great. This province is divided into five kingdoms, whereupon
reigns five brethren legitimate. In the first beginning of this province
stands the first kingdom governed by one of those five brethren, named
Sendarba, and is entitled as king of Nor, here is fine great pearls, in great
number. This king has the tenth of all ye pearls which are found in his
kingdom. The fishermen do fish these pearls, from the beginning of April,
until the midst of May, in a gulf of the Sea, where there is great plenty
of them, they are found in the Oysters. The men and women of this realm go
all naked, saving that they do wear a certain cloth to cover their priuities.
Also the king goes naked, and to be known, he wears about his neck a lace
full of precious stones, which are in number a hundereth and four, in the
remembrance of a hundredth and four prayers, that he uses to say in the honor
of his gods morning and evening, and on his arms, legs, feet, and teeth, he
wears so many precious Stones, that ten rich Cities be not able to pay
for them.

This king has five hundredth wives, and one of them he took from his brother.
In this realm there be very fair women of themselves: also they do use
paynting, s^tting more beauty unto their faces and on their bodies. This king
ha^h always a great company with him, to serve him: when the king dies they
burn his body, and with him of their own voluntary wills, all those that
accompanied and served him in his life time, leap into the fire, and burn
themselves with him, saying, that they do go to bear their king company in ye
other world, and live as they did here in this world. Yearly this King buyeth
ten thousand horses of the country named Cormos, at the price of five
ounces of gold every horse, some more, some less, according unto the goodness
and beauty of the horse. The merchaunts of Quinsay, of Suffer, and of Beden,
sell those horses unto the merchauntes of this realm. These horses live not in
this province above one year: by this means that king consumes a great part
of his treasure in horses. In this country they do use this custom, that is,
when a man is condemned to die, he is begged of the Prince that he may kill
himself, and when they have obtained the kings good will, he kills himself,
in the love and honor of his Idols. After this wise, having obtained the kings
grace and favor, the wife of this malefactor and kindred, takes him, tying
about his neck twelve knives, and in this manner he is carried by them unto a
place of justice, where he cries as loud as he may, saying, I do kill my
self in the honor and for the love of such an Idol, and with one of these
knives strikes himself, and then with another, until such time as he falls
down dead: this done, his parents with great joy and gladness burn the
dead body, thinking that he is happy. In this country every man has as many
wives as he is able to maintain: when ye husband dies, according unto their
custom, his body is burnt, and ^is wives of their own free wills burn
themselves with him, and she that leapeth first into the fire, the beholders
take her to be the best. They are all Idolaturs, and for the more part of them,
worship the Ox, saying, he is a Saint, for that he labors and tilleth the
ground, where the corn growth, and so by no manner of means they will eat
any kind of Ox flesh, nor yet for all the gold in the world, will they
kill an Ox, and when any Ox dies, with his tallow they do rub all the
insides of their houses.

These people descend of those that killed Saint Thomas the Apostle, and none
of them can enter into Saint Thomas Church, which he edified in that
country: besides this, if one will presume to enter into the Temple, he
falls straight dead. It has been proved oftentimes, that some of them would
enter perforce into the Church, and it has not bin possible for them do it.
The king and those of this province eat always upon the ground, and if it be
demanded of them by question why they do so, they do aunsweare, for that
they do come of the earth, and to the earth they must, and they cannot do so
much honor unto the Earth as is worthy. In this province there grows nothing
else but Rice: these people go naked unto the wars, having no other weapon
but spear and shield, and they kill no wild beasts at all for their eating,
but they cause some other that is not of their law to kill them. All the men
and women do wash themselves twice aday, morning, and evening, for otherwise
they dare neither eat nor drink, and he that should not keep this use among
them, should be reputed to be and Heretic: and they do wash themselves in
this manner, as we have rehearsed: they go all naked, and so they go unto the
river, and ^ake of the water, and power it upon their heads, and then one does
help to wash another. They are good men of war, and very few of them
drink wine, and those that do drink it, are not taken to be as a witness,
nor yet those that go unto the Sea, saying, that the Mariners are dronkards.
They are desperate men, and esteem lechery to be no sin. This country is
intolerable hot, and the boys go altogether naked. It never rayneth in that
Country, saving in June, July, and August. In this Region there be many
Philosophers, and many that use Negromancie, and very many of them that tell
fortunes. There be Hawks as black as Ravens, bigger than ours, and good to
kill the game. Also, there be Owls as big as Hens, that fly in the air
all night. Many of those men do offer their children unto those Idols that
they have most respect unto, and when they worship and feast those Idols, they
do cause to come before them, all the young men and maids, which are offered
unto them, and they do sing and dance before the Idols, and this done, they
do cause their meat to be brought thither, and they do eat the flesh,
saying, that the smell of the flesh fills the Idols.

Of the Realm named Musuly, where there be found Adamants, and many Serpents,
and of the manners of those in that Country. CHAP. 117.
MVsuly is a Region that stands beyond Moabar, traveling toward
Septentrion which is the North.1000. miles. The people of this Realm worship
Idols. And in the Mountains of this Country, there be found fine Adamants.
And after they have had much rain, the men go to seek them in the streams
that run from the Mountains, and so they do find the Adamants, which are
brought from the Mountains in Summer when the days are long. Also, there be
strong Serpents and great, very venomous, seeming that they were serte there to
keep the Adamantes that they might not be taken away, and in no part of the
world there is found fine Adamants but there. Th^re be in this Country the
biggest Sheep in the world. And in the Province of Moabar aforenamed, lies
the body of the Apostle Saint Thomas, buried in a small City, whither there
goes but few Merchants, for that it stands far from the Sea. There dwell
many Christians and Moors, having great reverence unto the body of S^inct
Thomas, for they do believe and say, that he was a Moore, and a great Prophet,
and they do call him Thomas Dauana, which is to say, a holy man. The Christians
that go on Pilgrimage to visit the body of Saint Thomas, take of that earth
where he was martired, and when any falls sick, they do give him of it to
drink, with wine and water. In the year of our Lord.1297. it chanced there
to be a miracle in this wise: A Knight gathered so much Rice, that he had no
place to put it in, but put it into a house of Saint Thomas, and the Christian
men desired him not to pester the holy Apostles house with his Rice, where the
Pilgrims did lodge, yet the Knighte would not hear them, and the same night,
the spirit of Saint Thomas appeared with a Gallows of iron in his hand,
putting it about the Knights neck, and said, If thou cause not thy Rice to
be taken out of the house of Saint Thomas, I will hang thee. This miracle the
Knight told with his own mouth, unto all the people of that Country, and
forthwith the Christians rendered hearty thanks to the holy Apostle, who does
many miracles on the Christians that commit themselves deuoutely unto him:
All the people of this Country be black, not because they be so borne, but
for that they would be black, they annoint themselves with a kind of oil,
called oil of Ai^niolly, for the blackest are esteemed most fair. Also, the
people of this Country cause their Idols to be painted black, and the Devils
to be painted white, saying, that God and his Saints are black, and the
Devils white. When they of this Country go on warfare, they wear hattes upon
their heads, made of the hides of wild Oxen, and upon their shieldes. And to
the feet of their Horses, they fasten the hears of an Ox, saying, that Oxen
hears be holy, and have this virtue, that whosoever carries of them about
him, can receive no hurt nor danger.

Of the Province Lahe, and of the virtue that is in the people. CHAP. 118.
GOing from that Town of Saint Thomas toward the Occidente, you come unto a
Province named Lahe, and there dwell the men named Bragmanos, which are the
truest men in the world. They will not lie for all the world, nor yet consent
unto any falsehoode for all the world. They are very chaste people, being
contented only with one woman or wife. They never drink wine, and by no manner
of means they will take another man's goods, nor will eat flesh, nor kill
any kind of beast for all the world. They do honor the Idols, and have much
understanding in the art of Fortunes. Before they do conclude any great
bargayne, and before they do any thing of importance, first they do
consider their shadow against the Sun, whereby they judge the thing that
they must do by certain rules which they have deputed for it. They do eat
and drink temperately. They are never let blood, therefore they be very wise.
In this Country there be many religious men, which are named Cingnos, and live
a hundred and fifty years, for their great abstinence and good living. In
this Country there be also certain religious men Idolaters, who go
altogether naked, covering no part of their body, saying, that of themselves
they be pure and clean from all sin. These do worship the Ox. These
religious men wear each of them upon his forhead an Ox made in metal.
They do oynt all their body with an ointment, which they make with great
reverence of the marou of an Ox. They do neither eat in dishes, nor upon
trenchers, but upon the leaves of the Apple tree of Paradise, and other dry
leaves, and not green by no manner of means, for they say, that the green
leaf has life and soul. They do sleep naked upon the ground.

Of the Kingdom named Orbay, and of many things and strange beasts found
there, and of their beastly living. CHAP. 119.
ORbay is a Kingdom that stands toward the Orient, or the East, beyond
Marbar five miles. In this Kingdom there be Christians, Jews, and Moors. The
King of Orbay pays no tribute. Here grows more Pepper, than in any place
of the world. There is a thing in couloure read, which they do call Indyaco,
there is ple^tie, and it is good to dye withal, and is made of herbs. A man
can scarce keep himself in health, for the great heat that is there, which
is so vehemente, that if you should put an Egg in the water of the river at
such time as the Sun has his strength, it would sees it as though it were
put in seething or scalding water. There is great trade of merchandise in this
Country, Great trade for Pepper by reason of the quantity.
by reason of the great gaynes. There is very much Pepper, and very good
cheap. In this Country there be many and strange Beasts to behold. There
grows no other kind of grain for sustenance, but Rice. There be many
Physicians and Astrologers. The men and women are black, and go naked, saving
that they do cover their priuities. Here they do marry the Cosen with the
cosen, and the son in law with the mother in law, and throughout all India
they do keep this manner of wedding

Of the Province named Comate, and of the people and strange Beasts that be
there. CHAP. 120.
COmate is a Country of India, from whence you can not see the North Star,
nor yet it can not be seen from the Island named Iaua to this place. But going
from hence, sailing upon the Sea thirty miles, you shall discover the North
Star straight. In this Country there are very strange people, and very
strange Beasts, but specially Apes that are like men.

Of the Kingdom named Hely, and of the strange beasts found there. CHAP. 121.
GOing from Comate against the Occident, or the Weast thirty miles, you shall
plainly see the North Star, and come to the Region of Hely, where they are
all Idolaters. The King of this place is very rich of treasure, but he is weak
of people. This Country is so strong, that no man can enter into it perforce.
And when any Ship comes thither by force of weather, or otherwise, those of
the Country rob him, saying, that those Shyps come not thither, but to rob
them, and therefore they do earnestly believe that it is no sin to rob
them. Here be Lions, and other wild beasts a great number.

Of the Kingdom named Melibar, and of the things found there. CHAP. 122.
MElibar is a great Kingdom in India, toward the Occidente, Melibar.
and the King pays no tribute. All the people of this Country be Idolaters.
Out of this Realm and the next, there go many Ships unto the Sea a
rouing, which rob all kind of people. They do carry with them their wives
and children, and they sail in all the Summer a hundred Ships together, and
when they do come to the shore, they roue into the Country a hundred miles,
taking all that they can find, doing no hurt unto the people, saying unto
them, Go, and get more, for peradventure you shall come again into our
hands. In this Country there is plentye of Pepper, Plenty of Pepper and
Ginger, and Turbit.
of Ginger, and of Turbit, which is certain roots for medicines. Of this
Country, and their conditions, I will not rehearse, for it would be very
tedious, therefore I will pass unto the Realm of Giesurath.

Of the Kingdom named Giesurath, of their evil conditions. CHAP. 123.
GIesurath, is a Kingdom, in law, faith, and tongue of the Persians, standing
toward the Occidente. All the people are Idolaters. From hence you may
plainly see the North Star. In this kingdom be the worst and cruellest
Rouers in the world, they do take the Merchantes, not only taking their
goods, but setting a price of their ransom for their bodies, and if they do
not pay it in a short time, they give them so great torments, that many dye of
it. Here they work good Leather of all manner of colors.

Of the Kingdom named Thoma, and of the Kingdom Sembelech, which stand in
India the great. CHAP. 124.
GOing from Giesurath toward the Occidente, you come unto the Kingdoms of
Thoma and unto Sembelech. In these Realms there is al kind of Merchandises.
And these Realms have the language and faith of Persia, and in none of them
both there grows any other sustenance than Rice. They are Realms and
Provinces of India the great.

Of the things already declared CHAP. 125.
I Have only declared of the Provinces and Kingdoms of India, which stand
only upon the Sea coast, and have declared nothing unto you of the Provinces
and Kingdoms within the land, for then this treatise would be very long and
tedious unto the Readers, but yet something of those parts, I will not let to
declare.

Of two Islands, the one of men, and the other of women, Christians, and how
there is much Amber. CHAP. 126.
WHen you go from Besmaceian, sailing thorough the mean sea toward the midday
or South.25. miles, you come unto two Islands of Christians, the one thirty
miles distant from the other. The Island where there is all men, is named
Masculine, and the other where there is all women, is named Feminine. The
people of those Islands are as one. The men go not unto the women, nor the women
unto the men, but three months in the year, as to wit, August, September,
and October, and these three months, the men and women are together, and at
the third months end, they return unto their own houses, doing the rest of
their business by themselves. The children Males tarry with their mothers
until they be seven years of age, and then they go unto their fathers. In
this Island there is great plentye of Amber, by reason of the great number of
Whales that they do take. In this Island they are good fishers, and take great
plenty of fish, and dr^e it at the sun, having great trade with it. Here
they live with flesh, milk, fish, and rice, and there increases no other
sustenaunce. Here rules, and governs a Bishop suffragane of the Archbishop
of Discorsia.

Of the Island named Discorsia, which are Christians, and of the things that
be found there. CHAP. 127.
GOing from these two Islands, and sailing toward the middaye 500. miles* you
come unto an Island named Discorsia, wherein are Christians, and have an
Archebishoppe. Here is great abundance of Amber. Also they do make very fair
clothes of Cottenwooll, the people go all naked without any clothing. Here is
the stall of Rouers and Pirates, and the Christians buy with a good will the
goods which they bring, and have robbed, for that these Pirates do not rob
but only the Moors and Paynims, and meddle not with the Christians. When a
ship sayleth under sail with a prosperous wind, a whole day, the day
following the Pirates, with inchauntmentes of the Devil, cause the ship to
have a contrary wind, and so take it.

Of the Island named Maydeygastar, where Elephantes be found, and other
strange things, and the foul named Nichas, which h^th quils on his wings
twelve paces in length, and of many other conditions. CHAP. 128.
MAydeygastar is an Island standing toward the midday, distaunt from
Discorsia about a thousand miles. This Island is governed by four Moors, and
has in compass a thousand four hundred miles. Here is great trade of
Merchaundise for Elephantes teeth, for that there is great plenty: they eat
no other flesh in this Island but of Elephants, and of Cammels. Here be many
mountains of read Sandalos or Saunders trees, also there is found great
plenty of Amber. Here is good hunting of wild beasts, and hauking of fowls,
and hither come many ships with Merchaundise. Also there is very great
plenty of wild Boares. There was sent from hence unto the great Cane the
Iawe of a wild Boar which wayghed twenty five pounds. In some times of the
year, there is found in this Island a certain foul named Nichas, which is
so big, that the quill of his wings is of twelve paces long, and he is of such
bigness and strength, that he with his talents takes an Elephante, and
carries him up into the air, and so kills him, and the Elephant so being
dead, he lets him fall, and leapeth upon him, and so feeds at his pleasure.

Of the Island named Tanguybar, where there be men like Giants. CHAP. 129.
TAnguybar is an Island of great nobility, being ten thousand miles in
compass, and the people of this country are Idolatours, and so big and
gross, that they seem like Giants One of them will bear a burden as weighty
as six of our men may bear. They are all black, and go naked without any
cover. These men are fearful to behold, having great mouths, and a great
read nose, great ears, and bygge eyes, horrible in sight. The women are
filthy and evil favored. There is great trade of Merchandise. These people are
big of their bodies, strong, and great fighters, and esteem not their lives.
The wild beasts of this Island differ much from other wild beasts of other
Ila^ds and countries.

Of the things rehearsed. CHAP. 130.
YOu shall understand that all which I have declared of India, is only of the
noble and great provinces bordering upon the sea coasts, and I do believe
that there was never man, Christian, nor Jew, nor Paynim, that has seen so
much of the leuaunt parties as I Marcus paulus have seen, for I have seen
India both the great and the less, and Tartaria, with other provinces and
Islands, which are so many, yt the age of one man, yea peradventure of ij. men,
would not suffice to (...) them all. And now I will declare unto you of India
the great.

Of Abashya. CHAP. 131.
IN India the great, there is a great province named Abashia, which is to say
the middle India, for it stands between India the great, and India the
less. The king of the province is a Christian, and the Christians that be
under him carrye two tokens made with a burning iron, from the forheade unto
the point of their nose. The great King dwells in the midst of the
province, the Moors dwell toward the province of Cadamy.

The holy Apostle Saint Thomas did convert much people unto the Christian
faith in this province, and afterward went from thence unto the province of
Moaber, where he was martyred. In this province there be many valiant knights,
and me^ of arms, and they do ever make war against the Souldan of Aden. The
people of this country live upon flesh, milk, and Rice, and of no other
thing. There they use much usury, and in this province there be many Cities
and towns.

Of the province of Adem or Ades, and of the things found there. CHAP. 132.
THe province of Adem has a King, and he is named the Sowdan of Ad^m. There
be in this province many Cities and Towns, and the people are Moors, and have
great strife with the Christians. There be in this province Ports and Havens,
whither many ships come with merchaundize, and the most of this province
live upon Rice, for that they have little flesh, and less milk. This
country is very dry and without fruit, and there grows no grass, and
therefore the beasts of this province live upon dry fish, salt and raw,
which they do eat in stead of straw and barley.

Of a mighty King of the Orient parties. CHAP. 133.
Now I have told you of India the great, India the less, and of middle
India, and now I have remaining to tell you of the Countries which are
toward Septentrion or the North, where there raygneth a King of the imperial
house of the great Cane. These people do worship the same Idol that the
Tartarians do worship, which they name Nazigay. This province has plains
and mountains. There grows no kind of sustenaunce neither corn nor Rice,
and the people live only upon flesh and milk of Mares, and no man makes
war against them, nor they against no man. Here be many Camelles and
other beasts, but they are dead. Upon the Seigniorie of this King there is a
Country so strong, that no man may enter into it, nor yet beast being
big, by reason of the straites, lakes, and fountaynes which be there, and
for that always there is such fervent cold, that it is always frozen, and
unto them there can come no shipping. This Country is in compass twelve days
journey.

How Armines are boughte, and of other beasts. CHAP. 134.
I Will declare unto you how in these twelve days journey they do buy the
wild beasts for to have their skins. In every place of these twelve days
journey there is plenty of habitations, and there be masties or dogs little
less than Asses. These masties do draw after them a certain thing made of
Woodde, which is called Slioiala, which is a sleade, as the Oxen or Horses
do draw a Carte, saving it has no wheels as our Carts have, and these
Slyoialas or sleddes, are as big as two men may be in it, that is to
say, the Master of the maysties or carte, and the Merchaunt that goes to buy
the skins. And these masties cease not drawing, except it be in some myry
place, they set four or six masties to draw, as among us we do set
Oxen or Horses, and when they do come to their iourneys end, the Merchaunt
hyreth an other carter with his slead and masties, for that the first could
not endure so much labor, and so he makes his twelve days journey, till he
come to the mountains where the Armins and skins are sold, where they buy
them, and afterwa^des they return as they came. At the end of this Country
there stands a Kingdom which is named the Barkland, for it is there ever
dark, as we call the Twylight, A dark land
for the Sun shyneth not there, and is not seen. The people of this Country
have no King, but live as beasts without law. In this Country the men and
women are well made of their bodies, although they be somewhat yellowe of
color. The Tartarians that border upon them, do spoil them very much, and
when the Tartarians do go to rob in that dark valley, they ride upon
mares that have horse or mare coltes following them, for they doubt to come
out that ways that they were in, by reason of the darkness and wooddes, and
when they come near unto the place where they mean to rob, they do tie
their horse or mare coltes unto the trees, and ride upon the mare, and do
their feate, and as they have done it, they let their mares go whither they
list, and the mares go straighte unto their horse or mare coltes, where they
left them tied unto the trees. Those in that Country, with certain devises
do take many Armines, and diverse other wild beasts, and take the skins and
dress them, and make merchaundize. This obscure and dark Coun^rey, joins
one part with Ronselande.

Of Rouseland, and of other things which be found there. CHAP. 135.
ROuselande is a great Province toward Trasmontana which is the North. The
people of Russia are Christians, according to the use of the Greeks. Touching
the things ^f the holy Church, they are very simple, Rouseland is a strong
Country, and has very strong passages. There be very fair men and women,
and unto no man they give tribute, saving unto the King of Tartarie of the
Occident. There is made great merchaundize of noble furs for apparel. In
Rouseland there be found many mines of silver, also there is such fervent
cold, that the people can scarce live. This province reaches unto the Occean
Seas toward the Septentrion, in which Seas there be many Islands wherein
breeds many Gerfaulcons, and singular Hawks.

FINIS.
The Introduction.
FOr that this treatise which I found in the second Book toward the end, that
Master Pogio Flore^tine, Secretary unto Pope Eugenius the fourth writes of
the variety or change of fortune, it makes much unto the confirmation and
proof of the things that Master Marcus Paulus writes in h^s Book, for that
by the mouth of two or three (as our Redeemer says) there is proved the truth
I thought good to translate it out of Eloquent Latin, which he did write it
in, and to communicate it into my rude Castilian and natural tongue, for that
jointly such two witnesses in this present work may make a full, or almost
a sure proof of some things, for that it has not bin seen in our Europa, or
that in any ancient writing appears, it may be thought hard or difficile
credence. And the said Pogio follows in this manner, in the end of his
second Book.

IT seems not unto me a thing strange from reason, if I decline from the
style that hitherto I have used in this Book, declaring of the hard fortune
making an end, counting the diversities of things, wherein the hearts of the
Readers find more taste, and amiable gladness, than in those that already I
have written. Notwithstanding that also in the cause I will declare, appears
plainelye the force of Fortune, in retourning a man unto Italy out of the
extreme parts of the world of the Orient, after that he had suffered and
passed five and twenty years such great fortunes, as well by sea as by land.
The old Authors do write many things of the Indians with the common fame, of
the which the certain knowledge that since we have had, shows them to be
rather fables than of truth, as it appears by the referring of one Nicholas a
Venetian, that after he had travailed the intrailes of the Indias, he came unto
Eugenius the fourth Pope of that name, who then was in Florence, to reconcile
himself, and to have pardon, for that coming out of India, and ne^re unto
Egypt toward the red Sea, he was constrained to renounce and forsake the
faith, for fear of death, more of his wife and children, than of himself. And
for that I heard by many, that he declared of many singular things, I
desired much to hear him, and not only to demand of him concerning the
things which he had seen, in the presence of wise Barons, and of great
authority, but also to inform my self with him in mine own house, and to
take a note of his relation, for that there might remain a remembrance of it
unto those that hereafter should come after me. And of a truth he told so
certaynelye, so wisely, and so attentively all his travail made amongst
people of so far Countries, the use, manners, and custom of the Indians, the
diversity of wild beasts, trees, the lynages of Spices, and in what place it
grows, that it appeared well, he did not declare a fained tale, but the
truth of that which he had seen. And as it seems, this man went so
far, as none of the old time had been, for he passed the river Gangy, and
went beyond the Island Taprobana, where we read there came none, except one
Captain of Alexanders fleet named Onesycrito, and a Citizen of Rome, that by
fortune of tempest arrived in those parties in the time of Tiberius Caesar. This
Nicholas Venetian being young, was as a Merchaunt in the City of Damasco in
Syria, and having learned the Arabian tongue, he departed from the said City
in the company of.600. Merchantes, the which company they do call Carouana, or
Carauana, and travailing with his merchaundize through the deserts of Arabia,
otherwise named Petrea, and from thence thoroughe Chaldie, he came unto the
great river Euphrates.

He said, that at the going out of the Deserte, he saw a marvelous thing,
that about midnighte, being all at rest, he heard a great noise and sound,
that they thought it had bin companies of Alarabes wild naked men, or
robbers, and that they were coming to do them some hurt, and all the whole
company arose and were al ready with the fear, and they saw many battles of
horsemen which passed hard by their tents much like an host, doing unto
them no hurt at all, and those that had used that way, said it was certain
companies of fiends which did over run in that sort the Deserts.

There stands above Euphrates a noble City that the walls of it be of
fourteen thousand paces. And this City was a part of the old Babylon, and
those of that Country, name it by a new name Baldachia, and Euphrates runs
in the mids of it, and they do pass over a bridge that has fourteen
arches of each side, where appears many remembraunces of the old Babylon, and
many edifications thrown down. It has a strong and a great Pallaice royal
standing upon a mountain. The King of this province is of a mighty power.
From hence up the river twenty days sailing, he saw many noble and
populous, and earable grounds of Islands, and so he travailed eight days
journey by land unto the City Balsera, and from thence in four days he
came unto the Sea of Persia, which ebbeth and flows as ours does, and so
there saylyng five days, he arrived at a Haven called Chalcou, and from thence
he went unto an Island named Omersia, which is a small Island, and distant from
the firm la^d about.12000 paces, and from thence he passed toward India a
hundred miles, and came unto a City named Calabatia, which is a noble City of
the Persians, where merchaunts use to traffic, and here he was a certain
time, and learned the Persian tongue, and made him apparel as the Persians
had, and so he passed from thence forward al his time and travel. And here he
took shipping in a ship with company of the Persians, and of the Moors, and
among them they keep much their promise, laws, and oaths made in company,
and so sailing a month, he came unto a noble City named Cambayta, situated at
the second entrance that the river of India makes in the land. In this
Country there is found the precious stones which are called Sardins or
Sardonicas: and here when the husband dies, they do burn his wife or wives
that he has, with his body, and she that he most loved, lays her neck upon
her husbands arm, and in this wise being in her husbands arms, they burn
them: and the other wives they burn in an other fire which is made for that
purpose, and of this use it shall be rehearsed hereafter. And passing on
twenty days journey, he found two Cities, the one named Pacamunria, and the
other Hely. In this Country there grows Ginger which is called in that
country Bellyedy, Gebelly, and Belly, and it is the root of trees of two
cubits in height, the leaves are great, and after the fashion of a kettle, ye
bark is hard like ye bark of Canes, and it covers his fruit: out of it
proceeds the ginger, which mingled with ashes, and laid against the Sun, it
dries in three days. From hence he went travailing from the sea coaste three
hundredth miles, and he came unto the great City named Berengalia which, is in
compass three score miles, being environed on the one side with hard and
high rocks, and on the other side toward the valleys and plain ground with
strong adarnes and boughs. They say here is.900000. men that may wear
armoure. The men of that country take as many wives as they lift, and are
burnte with them when they dye. In this their King has over them great
vantage, for he takes twelve thousand wives, and of these there goes on foot
after him wheresoever he goes four thousand, which do only prepare and
dress his victuals: and there rides four thousand on horseback, well
apparelled, and of more estimation than the first. The other four thousand
ride in carts and wagons, and of these at the least there be two thousand or
three thousand of them that he takes with condition, that when the king is
dead, they of their own free wills must be burnte with him: unto these they
do great service and obedience. This king has another very noble City, which
has ten thousand paces in compass, being eight days journey from
Berengalia, from whence in twenty days journey by land, he came unto a
City upon the sea cost, with a good haven called Pedifetaman, and in these
twenty days journey he went through two Cities, the one named Odes Chyria,
and the other Conteri Chyrian, where there grows the red Sandolos or
Saunders. From hence he passed unto a City named Malpurya, which stands
beyond the second entering, that the river India makes in ye end, where the
body of Saint Thomas the Apostle lies honorably in a fair and famous Church,
where he is greatly honored and worshipped by the Heretics Nestorians: and
there live almost a thousand men of them in this City. These do live
throughout all India scattered as the Jews do among us. All this province is
named Mahabaria, beyond there stands a City named Cayla, where there be
plenty of pears, and many trees that bear no fruit, of six Cubits high, and
as much in compass: the leaves of these trees are so thin, that being
playted or foulded up, you may put one of them in the palm of your hand. They
do use these leaves in stead of Paper to write upon, and for to cover their
heads with when it rayneth, for one leaf will cover three or four men, when
they do travel. In the midst of this sea there stands a noble Island
named Zaylan, which is three thousand miles in compass, where there be many
precious stones, as Rubies, Saphires, Granates, and those that are named Cattes
eyes, which are much esteemed there. Also there is plentye of Synamon, which
is a tree much like unto ours of the greatest Hawtho^^es, saving that the
branches run not upward, but open and straight slopewise: the leaves be
much like unto our Bay leaves, saving that those of ye Synamon are bigger: the
rine or bark of the branches is best and thinnest, and the rine of the body
and root is thickest, and of less taste: the fruit is like unto the Baye
berries, out of which there comes a very sweet Oil, and the people use to
make ointment of it, wherewith the Indians do anoint themselves: they burn
the wood of the tree, when the rine is taken away. There is in this country a
lake, and in the midst of it stands a royal City of three miles compass.
The Lords of this Island are of the lynage of the Bragmanos, and are taken to be
of more wit than the others. The Bragmanos Study Philosophy all their life,
and also Astrology, and live honestly. From hence he passed unto the famous
Island named Taprobana, which the Indians, call Scyamucera, where is a noble
City, and there he was a twelve month: it is six miles in compass, and is a
famous City, having great trade of Merchaundise there, and in all that Island.
From hence be sailed with a prosperous wind, leaving on the right hand the
Island Adamania, which is as much to say, as the Island of Cold, which is 800.
miles compass, wherein the Euitrofagitas do live, and no strangers go
thither, except it be for necessity of weather, and immediately those barbarous
people hew them in pieces, and eat them. He said that Taprobana is 1600000.
paces in compass, the men are very cruel, and of stubberne conditions, and
the men and women have very big ears, laden with Hoopes of gold, and with
precious stones. They do wear linen and cloth of silk or cruel down unto
their knees: they take many wives: their houses are low, by reason of the
great heat that the sun has there. They are Idolatours, and have much
Pepper named the greatest, and of the long Pepper, and great plenty of
Camphore and gold. The tree that makes the pepper is like the Yedra, or Iuie
tree, the berries are green like unto the Juniper berries, and read, and being
mingled with ashes, they harden with the sun: there is a green fruit named
Durians, of the bigness of Cucumbers. And there be some of them like Orengies
or Lemans, of diverse savors and taste, as like butter, like milk, and like
curdes. In that part of this land, which is named Bateth, ye Antropophagos
dwell, and have continual war with their neighbors, and eat the flesh of
their enemies that they do take, and keep their heads for treasure, and use
them in stead of money, when they do buy any thing, in giving most heads
for the thing that is most worth, and he that has most heads of the dead
men in his keeping, is esteemed to be most rich.

Having the Island Taprobana, and sailing fifteen days, he arrived by tempest
of weather, unto the entering of a river called Tenaserim, and in this region
there be many Elephants, and there grows much Brasill. And going from thence
traveling many days journey by land, and by sea, he entered at the mouth of
the River Gangey, and sailed fifteen days up the river, and came unto a City
named Cernomen, very noble and plentiful.

This River Gangey is of such breadth, that Saylyng in the midst, you shall
see no land on neither side, and he affyrmeth that it is in some places
fifteen miles in breadth. In the arms and branches of this river there be
Canes of such a marvelous length, and so big, that scarce a man may
compass one of them with both his arms: and of the hollownesse or pith of
them, they do make things to fish with, and of ye wood which is more than a
spanne thick, they do make boats to travel with upon the river, and from knot
to knotte of these Canes it has of hollownesse the length of a man. There be
in this river certain beasts, having four feet, named Crocodiles, which live
in the day time upon the la^d, and in the night in water: and there be many
kinds of fish which are not found among us, and upon the branches of this
river be many fair Gardens, habitations, and delectable ground. On each side
there grows a kind of fruit much like unto a fig, which is named Musa,
and it is very pleasant, and more sweet than honnye. Also there is another
fruit, which we call Nuttes of India, and many other diverse fruits. Going
from hence up the river three months, leaving behind him four famous
Cities, he came to a goodlye famous City named Maarazia, where there is great
plenty of the trees called Alloes, and plenty of gold, and silver, Pearls,
and precious stones. And going from hence he directed his way unto the
mountains of the Orient, for to have Carbuncles, and traveling thirteen
days, he returned first to Cermon and afterward unto Buffetanya.

And after that, sailing a whole month by sea, he came unto the entering of the
river Nican, and sailing upon it six days, he came unto the City also named
Nican, and he went from thence seauenteene days journey through deserte
mountains, and plain country, the fifteen days of plain country, until he
came to a river greater than the river Gange, which the people of that country
call Claua, and sailing up this river a month, he came unto a famous great City
called Aua, being 15. miles in compa^^e. This province is named of the
inhabitauntes Marcin^. They have great plenty of Elephantes, for their King
does keep ten thousand of them for the wars* and sets upon every
Elephantes back a Castle, which may carry eyghte or ten men with Spears
and Shields, or Bows, or Crossebowes. He rehearsed that they took the
Elephantes in this manner, Pliny agrees unto the like. They let the tame
Elephants females go unto the mountains, until such time as the wild be
acquainted with them, for the male commonly does content himself with one
female, and when they have once acquaintance, the female brings the wild, by
little and little, grasing, unto a small yard strongly walled, having two
doors, one to come in at, and another to go out at. The female when she is in
at the first gate, she goes out at the second, and the male following her,
the two doors be locked against him, and then having him within, by certain
loupe holes made for the purpose, there comes in to the number of a thousand
men, every one with his snare in his hand, and one of those men presents
himself before the Elephant, which runs, thinking to kill the man, and then
all those men run unto the Elephant, fastening those snares on his feet, and
when they be fastened, with great diligence, they do tie the snares unto a great
post, which is set there for that purpose, and they let him alone so three or
four days, till he be more feeble, and after the space of fifteen days, they
give him a little grass, in the which time he wareth tame, and then they do
tie him among other tame Elephants, and carry him about the City, and in
ten days he becomes as gentle as one of the others. Also he said, they
did tame them in this other wise, that they had and dra^e them unto a valley
compassed round about, where they did put unto them the females that were tame,
and being somewhat feeble with hunger, they drove them into strayter places
made for the nonce, where they be made tame, and these the Kings do buy for
their own use. Some are fed with Rice, and Butter, and some with grass. The
wild Elephantes feed upon grass, and upon the trees of the fields. He that
has charge of them, rul^th them with a rod of iron, or a ring which he
puts round about his head. The Elephants have so much providence, that many
with their feet, pull away the Spears from their enemies, for that they
should not hurt those that be upon their backs. The King rides upon a white
Elephant, which has a chain of gold about his neck, being long unto his
feet, set full of many precious stones. The men of this Country have but one
wife a piece. Both men and women of this Country prick themselves, making
diverse marks, and of diverse couloures, on their bodies. They be all Idolaters,
and as soon as they do rise in the morning, they look into the Orient, holding
their hands together, and worship. There is in that Country a certain kind
of fruit, like unto the Orange, which they do call Cyeno, full of juice and
sweetness. Also, there is a tree which they do call Tall, whereon they do
write, for in all India, except it be in the City of Combahita, they do use
no paper, and it bears a fruit like unto the Turnep, but they are great and
tender like unto Gelly. It is pleasant in eating, but the ryne is more
pleasant. There be in that Country dangerous Serpents, of six cubits in
length, and as thick as a man, having no feet. The people of that Country
have great delight in eating of those Serpe^ts roasted. Also they do eat a
certain read Ante as big as a crabbe, esteeming it much dressed with Pepper.
Also, there is a certain Beast, having a head like unto a Hog, the tail
like unto an Ox, and a horn in his forehead, like unto a Unicorn, but
smaller by a cubite. He is couloure and bigness like unto the Elephante. He is
an enemy to the Elephant. The utter part of his horns is good for medicines
against poison, and for this cause he is had in great price and estimation. At
the end of this Region toward Catay, there be Oren both black and white, had
in great estimation. They have a mane and a tail like unto a Horse, but more
hearie, and reaches unto their feet. The hears of their tails be very fine,
and like unto feathers, and they be sold by weight, and thereof they do make
Moscaderos or Table clothes, for the Altares of their Gods, or for to cover the
Table of their King, or for to trim them with gold and silver, to cover ye
buttocks or breasts of their Horses, for beautyfulnesse, and they esteem the^
for principal ornaments. Also, the Knights hang of these hears fast by the
iron of their Spears, in token among them of singular nobilite.

Beyond the said Marcino, there is another Province more principal than the
others, which is named Cataya, Cataya.
and he is Lord of it that is named the great Cane, which is as much to say
in their tongue, as Emperor, The great Cane.
and the City royal, which is.28. miles in compass, four square, is named
Cymbalechya. There stands in the midst thereof, a very fair and strong
Palace, that serves for the King. At every corner stands a round fortress
of.4. miles compass, which serve for houses of all manner of armoure, and
necessary engines for the war, and combat against any City. And from the
Palace royal there runs a wall with arches unto every one of these
fortresses, whereon the King may go unto any of them, if in case they would
rise against him in the City. From this City fifteen days journey, there
stands another City newly edifyed by the great Cane, and is named Nentay. It
is in compass thirty miles, and is most populous of all the rest. And this
Nicholas affirms, that the houses and Palaces, and all other policies of
these two Cities, seemed much like unto those of Italy, the men being modest
and courteous, and of more riches tha^ the other be.

Going from Aua upon a small river seauentene days journey, he came unto a
Haven City, being very great, named Zeitano, and from thence he entered into
another River: and in ten days, he came unto another great and populous
City, which is in comapasse.12000. paces, which is called Paconya, where he
remained four months. In this City he found Vines though they were few,
for all India lacks Vines and Wine, nor they make no wine of the Grapes. This
Grape grows among the trees, and after the Grape is cut, the first thing of
all, if they do not sacrifice with it unto their Gods, it is by and by avoided
out of their sight. Also, there be in this Country Pines, Aberrycocks,
Chestnuttes, and Mellons, although they be small and green. Here is white
Sandales or Saunders, and Camphora, or Camphire.

There is in India far within, almost at the furthest end of the world, two
Islands, and both of them are named Laua, the one is of two miles in length,
and the other of three, toward the Orient, and they are known in the name,
for the one is called the great, and the other the less. And turning unto the
Sea, he went unto them, being distant from the main land a months sailing,
and the one is a hundred miles dista^t from the other. He was in these with his
wife and children nine months, for in all his pilgrimage he had them ever with
him. The dwellers in these Islands are the most cruel and uncharitable people
in the world. They eat Rattes, Cattes, Dogs, and other viler beasts. They
esteem it nothing to kill a man, and he that does any crime, has no
penalty, and the debtors be given to be as slaves unto the creditors, and some
debtors will rather dye than serve, and take a Sword, and kill those that are
weaker than they, till they find one that is of more strength than themself,
who kills them, and then they carry the creditor of that murderer before
the Judge, and cause him to pay the debtes of the debler. If any of them do buy
a new Sword or knife, he proves it upon the body of the first that he
meets, and there is no penalty for it. Those that come by look upon the
wound, and praise the hardiness of him that did it, if it be a great wound.
They take as many wives as they list. They do use much the game of
Cockfighting, and they that bring them as well as the lokers on, lay wagers
which Cock shall overcome, and win the game. In Laua the great, there is a
Foul like unto a Dove, which has no feet, his feathers light, and a long
tail: he rests always on the trees, his flesh is not eaten, the skin and
tail are esteemed, for they do use to wear them on their heads.

Sailing fifteen days beyond these two Islands toward the Orient, you come
unto two other Islands, the one is named Sanday, where there is Nutmegges and
Almaxiga or Masticke. The other is called Bandan, where Cloves grow, and from
thence it is carried unto the Islands named Clauas. In Bandan there be three
kinds of Popiniayes or Parrets, with read feathers, and yellowe bills, and
others of diverse couloures, which are called Noros, that is to say, clear.
They are as big as doves. There be other white ones as big as Hens, named
Cachos, that is to say, better, for they exceed the others, and they speak
like men, in so much, that they do answer unto the things that they are
asked of. The people of these two Islands are black, by reason of the great
heat. Beyond these Islands there is a main Sea, but the contrary winds will
not suffer men to travel on it.

Leaving these said Islands, and having done his Merchandise, he took his way
toward the Occidente or Weste, and came unto a City named Cyampa, having
abundaunce of Aloes and of Camphora, or Camphire, and of gold, and in so much
time as he came hither, which was a month, he came unto a City named Coloen,
which is a noble City of three miles compass, where there is Ginger named
Conbobo, and Pepper, and Vergino, and Sinamon, which is named Gruessa. This
Province is named Melibarya. Also, there be Serpents of six cubits in length,
and fearful to behold, but they do no hurt, except they receive hurt. They do
delight much to see children, and for to see them, they come where men be.
Their heads when they be laid, seem like to Celes heads, and when he lifts
up his head, it seems bigger. It has at the hinder parts a face like to a
man and as though it were painted of diverse couloures. They do take them by
enchantments, which the people use much there, and carry them to be seen,
and do no hurt to any body. Also, there is in this Province, and in the next
adjoining named Susynaria, another kind of Serpe^ts, which has four feet,
and a long tail like mastyes. They do take them hunting, and eat them, for
they do no hurt, and are to eat as amongst us the Hind or wild Goat. The
people say they are good meat. Their Skins be of diverse couloures, and those
people use them for diverse couerings, for it is very fair to behold. Also,
there be other Serpents of a marvelous figure in that Country, of ye length
of one cubite, with wings like unto Battes. They have seven heads, ordinarily
set of the length of his body. They dwell among the trees, and are of a
swifte flighte. The yare more venomous than the other, that only with their
breath they kill a man. Also, there be Cattes of the Mountain, that fly, for
they have a small skin from the back unto the belly, over all their body
and feet, which is gathered up when they are still: and when they will fly,
they spredde it, and move it like wings, leaping from one tree unto another.
The Hunters do follow them, till they be weerie with flying, that they fall
down, and so are taken. Also, there is in this Country a tree named Cachy,
that of the troncheon there grows a fruit like unto a Pyne, but it is so
great, that a man can scarce bear it. The hull is green and hard, but it is
of such a sort, that if you thrust it with your finger, it gives place. It
has within it two hundred and fifty, or three hundred Apples, like unto
Figs. They are of a pleasante taste, and are separated with a very thin
rine. The hull within is like unto the Chestnut in hardness and sauoure, and
in like manner they are roasted. They are windy, so that if they be put into
the fire, except they be cut, they will start out. They do give the utter rine
unto the Oxen to eat. Sometimes they find this fruit under ground in the
roots of the trees, and those be of a pleasanter taste, therefore they do use
to present them unto the Kings and Nobles. The fruit within has no rine.
This tree is much like unto a great Fig tree: the leaves are like unto the
leaves of Platanos, or ragged. The wodde is like unto Bore, therefore it is
had in estimation, and is used about many things. Also, there is another
fruit named Amba, very green, like unto a Walnut, but bigger than a Peache.
The rine is bitter, and within, it has the savor of honey. They lay them in
water before they ripe, and dress them as we do the green Olyues for to eat.

From Coloen he went three days journey unto a City named Cochin, it is five
miles in compass, situated at the entering of a River, of the which it has
the name, and sailing a certain time upon the River: he saw many fires and
nets fast by the River, and thought there had bin fishermen, and he demanded
what those fishermen did with those fires every night, and those of that
Country gave him answer yeepe, yeepe, that is to say, they were fishes or
monsters, having humane form, that on the day time lived in the water, and in
the night they do come out of the water, and gather wodde together, and make a
fire, striking one stone against another, which Monsters did take and eat
fish, for there would come many unto the light of the fire, and sometimes
there is taken some of them, and there is found no difference in them from
other men and women. In this Region, the fruits are like unto those of Col^en.
Beyond this, there stands another City named Calonguria, standing at the
entering of another River into the Sea, and beyond, there stands Paluria, and
Malyancora, and this name among them signifies a great City, it is nine miles
in compass. He went through all those, and came unto Colychachia, a City
standing upon the Sea coaste, it is eight miles in compass, it is the most
noble in trade of Merchandise, that is in all India.

There is here very much Pepper, Laccar, Ginger, gross Sinamon, and other
spices Aromatike, and of a sweet sauoure. Only in this region, the woman
takes as many husbands as she lists, and the husbands agree among themselves
what each shall give toward the mayntenance of the wife. Every husband is in
his own house, and when he goes unto his wife, he sets a sign at the
door, and when another of them comes, and sees the sign, he goes another
way. The children are the husbands that the wife lists to give them unto. The
son does not inherit his fathers land, but his sons son.

From hence he traveled ^ifteene days, till he came to a City called
Cambayta, standing near the Sea. It is twelve miles in compass toward the
Occidente. There is plentye of Espico, Nardo, or Lacca Indico, or Gome Laka,
Myrabolanos, and Crewill.

There is here a certain kind of Priests, which are named Bachales, having
but one wife a piece, and she (by their law) is burnt with her husband. This
kind of people eats no flesh, but only fruits of the ground, and Rice,
milk and herbs.

Here be many wild Oxen, they have manes like unto Horses, but longer, and his
horns are so long, that when he turns his head they reach unto his tail,
and for that they be so big, they do use them in stead of bottels to drink
in by the way. Returning to Colicuchia, he passed unto an Island named
Secutera, which stands toward the Occident, distant from the main land a
hundredth miles. It is six hundredth miles in compass, and it is replenished
for the most part with Christians Nestorians Heretics. Right against this
Island no more tha^ five miles, there stands two Islands, a thousand miles
distant the one from the other, the one is of men, the other of women,
sometimes the men pass unto the women, and sometimes the women go over unto
the men, and they return back unto their Island before six months, for if
they should tarry any longer, they think should dye.

From hence he passed by sea, unto a City named Adena in five days, which has
many edifications, and from thence in seven days he went unto Ethiopia, unto
a haven named Barbara, and from thence in a months sailing he came unto the red sea, unto a haven called Byonda, and from thence he sailed two months
with great difficulty, and landed in a country near unto mount Sinay, and
from thence traveling through the deserts, he came unto Carras, a City in
Egypt with his wife, four sons, and as many servant. In this City his
wife, two sons, and his servants died of the plague, and finallye after
long perilous and dangerous pilgrimages, he came unto Venice, his own country.

Pogio.

I Demanding him of the life and customs of the Indians, he gave me aunsweare
that all India was divided into three parts, the one from Persia unto the river
Indo, another from the river Indo, unto the river Gange, and the other stands
beyond these, and exceeds the others in riches, humanity, and policy, and
are equal unto us in customs, life, and policy, for they have sumptuous and
neat houses* and all their vessels and household stuff very clean: they
esteem to live as noble people, avoided of all villainy and cruelty, being
courteous people and rich Merchauntes, in so much that there is one
merchaunte having forty ships for his own trade, and every one of them is
esteemed in 50000. Ducats. These only use as we do, tables covered with table
clothes, and have their Cupboardes of plate, for the other Indians eat upon a
thing laid upon the ground. The Indians have neither vines nor Wine, they
do make their drink of ground Rice mingled with water, putting unto it a
certain read color all tempered with the juice of a certain tree.

Also they make their pottage like unto their Wine. In the Island named
Taprobana they do cut the branches of a certain tree, which is named
Tall, and leave them hanging, and out of them there runs a sweet licour
which they use to drink. Also there is a lake between the rivers Indo and
Gange, of a marvelous sauerie and pleasant water to drink, and al those that
dwell there about drink of it, and also far off, for they have set horse from
place to place, ^or the purpose, so that they have it brought fresh every day:
they have all want of bread: they live upon Far or Rice, flesh, milk, and
cheese. They have great plenty of Hens, Capons, Partridges, Feysauntes, and
many other wildefoules. They do use much fowling and hunting. They shave
their beardes, and nourishe a Hear tail: and some tie their hair with a
silken lace, behind their shoulders, like a tail, and so they wear them unto
the wars. They have Barbars as we have, they are tall of body as we be, and
also in their time of life, they do lie in sumptuous beds, and covered with
quilles of Cotton. Their apparel is diverse according unto the diversity of
the country. They have all scante of woollen cloth, they do use cloth of line
and of cruel, and make apparel of it. As well the men as the women cover
their secreetes unto their hammes, with a piece of linen, and upon it they put
a vesture of linen, or of silk, for the great heat will not suffer them to
wear more apparel, and therefore they do go so single tied with Crimson
lace, and of gold tied as we do see the painters make on the ancient pictures.
The women use certain thin shoes of leather, trimmed with Gold and cruel.

Also they do wear for gallauntnesse Hoopes of gold on their arms, and
about their necks, about their breasts, and on their legs, the weight of
three pound set with precious stones: the common women keep their houses as
baudes: there be many and easy to find, for they are almost in every street,
the which with perfumes and soft oyntmentes, with their tender age and beauty
provoke much the men, for in that country they are much inclyned unto
those women, and for this cause the Indians know not what thing is that
abominable sin. Of many ways they do dress their heads, but commonly
most of them use to cover their heads with fine lawnes wrea^hed, and their
hair laced with a silken lace: in some other p^aces they bind their hair up
to their heads, in manner like unto a pear, and on the knot above on their
hair they set a pinn^ of gold, whereby they do hang certain cords of gold,
being of diverse colors, hanging between the hairs. Some women use commonly
black hair, and among them it is most esteemed. Some women cover their heads
with certain painted leaves of trees, and they do not paynte their faces, but
those inhabiting the province named Cataya do.

In the India within, they do not consent to a man to have but one wife. In the
others they have as many as their carnal lust will, saving the Christian
Heretic N^storians, which dwell scattered throughout all the Indias, for they
take but one woman. The manner of their tombs is not as one in all the Indias,
for the most India exceeds other, in diligence and sumptuousness, for they
do make caves under ground, in trimming it with a fine wall, and lay in the
dead body in a precious bed, trimmed with Ornaments of Gold, setting
certain baskettes round about with his most precious apparel, and put on
rings, as though the dead body should enjoy those things in Hell. They
close the mouth of the cave very strongly, that none may enter, and upon it
they do make a sumptuous and rich tomb strong to abide rain, and to be the
more durable: but in the middle India they do burn the dead bodies, and most
commonly they do burn their wives alive with the dead body, one or many,
according as he had.

They do by law burn the first wife with him, although it be but one. Also
they do take other wives on this condition, for to honor him in death,
burning her self with him: and this among them is no little honor. They do
lay the dead body in a bed trimmed with the best apparel that he has.
They do make a fire round about with sweet wood, and when it burns, his
wife is trunly dressed with her best array, and coming with Trumpets and Shawmes
and songs merrily, as though she did sing, she goes round about the fire. At
this there is present the Priest, which they name Bachale in a Pulpit,
preaching unto her how she must not esteem the life nor death, saying, that
she shall have in the other world with her husband much pleasure, and shall
possess great riches, honor and apparel: she inflamed with those words that
he tells her, after that she has gone a certain time round about the fire,
she stands nigher the Priests Chair or Pulpit, and puts off all her
apparel, and puts on a white linen sheet, and leapeth into the fire. If
some of them be fearful (for they have seen the like of some) that lamenteth
and strives with death, after that she has leapte in, then the standers by
do throw her in wheather she will or no. After they be burnte, they gather
the ashes, and put them into pottes, and some into the grave.

They do weep for the dead after diverse manners. The inner Indians cover
their heads with a sack, and some put boughs of trees in the high ways,
and do hang from the top to the ground painted verses, playing three days
upon certain instruments of Copper. They do give unto the poor for Gods sake.
Other do weep three days for the dead, and all the kinsfolks and neighbors
go unto the dead bodies house, and they do carry victualles, but it is not
dreste in the dead man's house. In these three days, those that have buried
their father or mother, do carry a bitter leaf in their mouth, and in a whole
year after they do not change their apparel, nor eat not but once a day,
nor yet cut their nails, nor hair of their head or bearde. The women which
weep for the dead, are many, they stand near unto the dead bodies bed,
being naked unto the navel, and strike their breasts with a loud voice,
saying, alack, alack: and one of them begins to praise virtues of the
dead body, and all the rest answered unto her words, striking their
breasts: some put in certain vessels of gold, and of si^uer. The ashes of
their Prince they cause to be cast into a lake that they have, saying, it is
hallowed by their Gods, and that that way they go down unto their Gods.
The Priests which they do call Bachales, eat of no kind of beasts,
especially not of the Ox, for they will neither eat, nor kill him, saying, he
is very profitable unto men above al beasts. They do eat Rice, herbs,
fruits, and such like, and have but one wife, which is borne with her
husband when he dies, laying her arms about his neck, receiving her death
with so so good a will, that she shows no sign of pain. Through out al India
there is found a lynage of Philosophers named Bramanos, which study
Astrology, and prognosticate things to come. They are apparelled more
honestly, and live more holily than the others. Nicholas said, Men live three
hundredth years.
that he had seen amongst these men, some of.300 years, and among them it
was had for a miracle, for wheresoever that man went, the boys would
follow him, as a thing of novelty: and among them is much used the
superstition which they do call Geomancia, by the which they tell things to
come, as though they were present. Also they are given unto inchauntementes,
so that diverse times they do move and cause t^mpestes to cease, and for this
cause many do eat in secret, for that they should be enchaunted by those that
look upon them.

The said Nicholas did tell for a truth, that he being patron and owner
of a Ship, he had a calm seven days, and his mariners fearyng, they
went all unto the main maste, and set up a Table, and after they had made
their sacrifices upon it, they leapte and daunced round about, calling many
times the name of their Gods, which they name Mutia: and among these there
entered a Feend in a Alarabe or Moore, which was amongst them, he began to
sing maruellouslye, running about the Ship like a mad man, and afterward
he came unto the Table, and did eat up all the meat unto the bones and
fire. Also he did demand a Cock, and killed it, and drunk up the blood,
and immediatelye he demanded of those of the Ship, what they would have
that he should do, and they demanded that he should give them wind, he
promised to give it them within three days, and such, that they should come
unto harborowe: and he showed, setting his hands behind, from whence the wind
should come, and willed them to prepare for the strength that the wind would
bring: and when he had thus said, the manne fell down as half dead,
without any knowledge or remembrance of any thing that he had said, and in
few days after they were set in harborowe. Commonly the Indians sail by
the guiding of the Stars of the Pole Antartique, for seldom times they do
see our North Star. They use not the Loademans stone as we do: they do
measure their way, and distaunce of places, according as their Poale rises
and falls, and so they do know by this means, what place they are in.
Their Pole rises and falls.
They do make bigger Ships than we do, that is to say, of two thousand
Tons, with five sails, and so many mastes: they build their Ships with
three plancke^ one upon another under water, that they may the better resist
the tempests, for there chances many. These Ships are made with Chambers,
after such a sort, that if one of them should break, the others may go
and finish the voyage. Throughout al India they do worship Idolles, and have
Churches much like unto ours, painted within with diverse pictures, which
they do deck with flowers at their feasts. They have within Idolles of stone,
and gold, of silver, and of Iuorie, some of.60. foot in height. They have
among themselves diverse manners in worshipping, and sacrifizing. When they
enter into the Church, they wash themselves in clean water, and so they go in
the morning, and in the afternoon, they go in lying along upon the ground,
lifting up their feet and hands, and so pray a while, then they do kiss
the ground, and sense their Idolles with the smoke of sweet woodde. On this
side of Gange the Indians use no belles, but in stead of them, they do strike
upon a vessel of Copper, and with an other vessel they do offer victualles
unto their Gods as the Gentiles did, and afterward do imparte it to the
poor, that they may eat it.

In the City which they name Cambayta the Priests preach unto the people
in presence of the Idol their God, declaring how they should worship him,
and how much it pleases their Gods, when they do kill themselves for their
love: and there stand in presence many that determine to kill themselves for
them. They have a hoope of Iron about their necks, the utter part of the
hoope is round, and within, it is sharp like unto a Rasar: also they do hang
unto the fore part of the hoope down their breaste a chain, and being set
down, they fasten their feet unto it, and being thus, as the Priest says
certain words, they stretch forth their legs; and lift up their heads,
and thus with the sharpness of the hoope, cut off their heads in sacrifice
of their Idol, yielding up their lives. And they that kill themselves in
this order, are esteemed as Saints. In the City of Bizenegalia in certain
time of the year, they do carry about the City in procession their Idol
between two carts, in the company of much people, and the Damoysellesride in
carts in trim array, singing in the praise of him with much solempnitie, and
many induced by the strength of their faith, do lay themselves upon the
ground, that the wheels of the carts may go over them, to bruise their bones,
and so to dye, saying, that that death is acceptable unto their God. Others
there be, that for the better adorning of the carts, make holes through the
sides of their bodies, putting a rope through it, and tie themselves unto the
carte, and so hanging dead in the procession, accompany their Idol, thinking
that they cannot do greater worship nor sacrifice unto their Gods. And they
make their solempnity three times in a year. In one time there gather together
all the men and women, and people of all ages, washing themselves in the sea,
or in a river, having all new apparel, doing nothing else in three days but
feast, dance, and sing. Another feast they celebrate in burning many lamps
within and without their Churches, burning with oil of Ioni^lly, and the
light goes not out day nor night. In the third, they do set up poales
like small mastes through all the streets, and from the top unto the
ground, they do hang very fair clothes, wroughte with gold, belonging unto
their Gods and painted, and on the topped of these poales, all the whole nine
days that it endures, they do set a religious man that has a benign and
meek face, who suffers all that pain for to receive the grace of his God,
and the people throw unto him Orrenges, Lemmons, and other like fruits, and
he suffers it all with patience There be other three solemn days, that
they do cast Saffron water upon those that pass through the streets, and
many laughe at it. They do celebrate their weddings with banquets, songs,
trumpets, and instruments much like unto ours, saving Organs which they have
not: they do make very sumptuous feasts day and night, with instruments,
daunces, and songs. They dance round about as we do, following one after
an other in order, and two of them carrying two painted wandes in their
hands, and as they do meet, they do change sticks or wandes. And Nicholas
rehearses, that this was a fair sight to behold. They do use no Bathes,
saving the Indians beyond Gange. The others do wash themselves many times
of the day with cold water: they have scant of oil, and other fruits of
ours, as Peaches, Pears, Cherries, Damsons, Apples, and of Grapes they have
but few, and (as above is rehearsed) only in one place. And in Puditfetamas,
a province, there grows a certain tree without fruit, it grows three
cubits above ground, and they call it shamefulnesse, for when a man comes
unto it, it incloseth the branches, and when he goes away, it spreads
abroad his branches.

Birengalia is a Mountain which stands beyond toward the Septentrion
fifteen days journey. It is environed with many lakes, named Birenegalias,
which are full of venomous beasts, and the mountain stands dangerous to
be entered, by reason of Serpents. And thereon grow the Adamantes: and for
that men dare not go unto it, the policy of man found a way to enter,
and to take the Adamantes, for there stands adjoining unto it an other
mountain, being a little higher, and in certain times of the year men go
up unto the top of it, where they do kill certain Oxen that they carrye
with them, and the pieces of flesh being hot and bloody, with certain
Crossebowes for the purpose, do shoot them upon the top of that other
mountain, and with the fall, it cleaves fast unto the Adamantes, and then
the Bitturs and Eagles that fly in the air, snatche up that flesh with
their claws or tallants, and fly unto other places, where they may feed
upon it without fear of those Serpents, and so the men find the stones that
fall from the flesh: they do find with more ease the precious stones, for
they do dig in sundry places, where they use to find such stone, so
deep, til they find water mingled with gravel, and then they do take a syne
for that purpose, and put in of the gravel, and the water runs out, and
keep the stones that remain behind, and after this sort in all these parties
they do use to find them: and the Masters that set to seek them, have
great care that their servants do not steal of those stones, for they have
those that search all their apparel, yea, and so near, that they leave not
unsearched their privy parts, to know if they have hidden any. They divide
^he year into twelve months as we do, and count the months according to
the twelve signs of the Elements. They account the year in diverse manners,
and the most part do reckon it from August, for that in the time of Augustus
Octauius Caesar there was an universal peace throughoute all the world, and
they reckon from that time.1490. years. In some regions they have no money,
but use in stead of money a certain small stone which they name Cattes eye,
and in some other places they do use pieces of Iron like needles, somewhat
bigger. In other places they do use the Kings name written in paper in stead
of money. In some provinces of India more within the land, they do use Venice
ducats of gold, and also other money of two duchettes in one. Also they do use
money of silver, and of copper, and in other places they do make certain
pieces of gold, and use them in stead of money. The first Indians in the
wars use darts, and swords, a defense for their arms like Almaine riuets,
round Targes, and bows. The other Indians use skulles, backs, and breaste
plates. The Indians which are beyond, use Crossebowes and gunnes, and al other
ingenious artillery used against Cities. These those of the Weaste free, and
say, that all other people are blind, saving they, which have two eyes, and
say that we have but one, signifying, that in prudence they do exceed all the
world. And only the Cambay^as write in paper, and all the rest write upon
leaves of trees, and of them make Books of a good liking: nor yet they write
not as we do, nor as the Jews from one side unto an other, but begin above,
and so write downewardes. There be among the Indians diverse languages. They
have great abundaunce of slaves. The debtor that can not pay, they cause him to
serve the creditor, and he that is accused of any crime, there being no
certain witness against him, is quitte by his oath: they use three manner of
oaths. There comes the party before his Idol, and swears by that Idol,
that he is not faulty, and they have ready a hot burning Iron like unto a
fish hook, and cause him that swore, to touch it with his tongue, and to
lick it, and if it do him no hurt, he is quitte. And others bring the party
before his Idol, and cause him to take that same burning iron in his hand,
and so to carry it certain paces, and if it hurt him not, he is quitte, but if
it do, he is guilty. The third manner of swearing, which is most used. is
such: They do set before his Idol, a pot full of hot melted butter, and
he that swears not to be guilty, dippeth in two of his fingers into the
butter, and so wrappeth them with a clowte, and seals it, that it shall not
unloose, and at three days end they undo it, and if there be found any
sign of burning, he is guilty, if not, he is quytte. There is no pestilence
in the Indias, nor yet other of the diseases that use to trouble our regions,
and for this cause there is more Towns and people than is to be believed.
There be many that make hosts of a million of men, which is.1000000.
Nicholas declared, that of one to^^e, there went out against another tow^^
great hosts, and had battle, and when the one had overcome the other, for a
great triumph, they did bring twelve Cart loades of gold laces, and of silk,
with the which the men that remained dead, had tied their lock hayres, that
hanged down upon their backs. He said more, that sometimes he had gone to
their wars, only for to see both parties, and they did not hurt him, for that
they knew he^ was a stranger.

In an Island named Laua the great, is found in a few places a tree, that has
in the midst of the heart a rodd^ of iron, very small, but so long as the
heart goes, and he that has of this iron next unto his flesh, shall not
perish by no kind of iron, and for this cause there be many that cut their
skins and put a piece of it between the skin and the flesh, it is much
esteemed.

The things that of the bird Phoenix be declared and written in verses by
Latancio, seem not to be fables, for the said Nicholas does say, that at the
end of India, there is only one bird named Seuienda, whose bil is like unto
Alboge, or together with many hoales, and when the time of his death comes,
he gathers together dry woodde into his neste, and sitting upon it, he
sings so sweetly with his bill, that he delights and pleases much those
that hear him, and then flittering with his wings upon the wood, there
comes fire, and he lets himself burn, and then there comes a worm out
of his neste, and of his ashes, and of it breeds the bird, unto the
likeness of that birds byl. Those of that country made the Alnogue with the
which they play very sweetly. And Nicholas maruelling much of it, they told
him of what the making of it proceeded. Also there is in the first India, in an
Island called Saylana, a river named Arotanie, so full of fish, that easily
they may take them up with their hands, but as soon as a man holds one
of these fishes in his hand, there comes unto him a Feuar, and letting the
fish go, the Feuar is gone from him, the cause of it appears to be the nature
of the fish, as among us there is a fish which we call Torpedo, which fish if a
man do hold in his hand, it will be number, and grieve him: although the Indians
say, that it comes by means of their Gods, by a certain tale that they
do tell of it.

AFter, for an information to the reader, keeping ye truth of the History, I
did write those things rehearsed, as the said Nicholas gave report, and then
there came another out of the high India, which stands toward Septentrion,
or the North, and he came, sent unto the Pope for to see the things and
manners of these parties, for in those parties they had fame, that in the
Occident or west there was another world, being Christians. And this man
declared that near unto Cataya there was a kingdom, which endured twenty
days journey, the which king and people were Christians, but of the sect of
the Nestorians. He declared that the Patriach of the Nestorians had sent him
for to bring him tidings certain from these parties. He rehearsed that they
had bigger, and more richer Churches than ours, being al vaulted, and that
their Patriarch was very rich in gold and in silver, that every father of
family did give yearelye unto him an ounce of silver. I communed with this man,
by an interpretet which could the Turkish tongue, and the Latin, and I demanded
of him by means of this, the ways, and towns, houses, customs, manners, and
of other things that a man delights to hear, there was great difficulty to
learn it, for lack of the interpreter, and also of the Indian, but he
affirmed the power of the great Cane, or Emperor of al men, to be great and
mighty, for he had under him nine mighty kings.

Also he declared that he had traveled many months through the high Scithia,
is now Tartaria, and through Persia, and that finallye he came unto the river
Euphrates, from whence he entered into the sea, and sailed unto Trip^le, and
from thence to Venice, and from thence to Florence. He reported to have seen
many Cities more fai^e than ours, both in public edifications, and of
Citizens, for he declared to have seen many cities ten miles, and of twenty
miles in compass. And after that this man had spoken with Eugenius the fourth
Pope of that name, he went from Florence for to see Rome in devotion: he
demanded neither silver nor gold, seeming, that he came not for gain, but only
to fulfill the message of him that sent him.

IN the same time there came unto the Pope certain men from Ethiopia, in
devotion of the faith, with who^ I had communication, by an interpreter, to
know if they knew any thing of ye river of Nilus, and of his springing. Two of
them gave answer, that they were of a country being very near vnt^ two
welsprings, from whence the river Nilus proceeds: when I heard this, I
coueted to know the things that of this matter the old auntiente
Philosophers, namely Ptolomes, did write: first of the fountains of Nilus. It
appears not that they knew it, but only by conjecture, to appear that they
drew out some things of the Original increase of the said river. And as these
witnesses of sight, did tell me of these and of others worthy to remain in
memory, it seemed unto me very good to write them.

They declared that the River Nilus had his head and Welspryng near unto
the Region Equinoctial at the foot of very high mountains, which are
always covered on the top with Mistes, from three welsprings, two of them
standing 40. paces the one from the other, and in 500. paces they meet, and
make the river so great, that no man may pass over but with boat. The third
which is the biggest, stands a thousand paces from the other two, and he
comes into the river of the others, ten miles off. Also they said that more
than 1000. rivers did enter into Nilus, and it increases so much in those
countries, with the rain of March, April, and May, that it makes Nilus to
swell over so much, that it made wonderful great floudes. Also they declared
that the water of Nilus was very sweet and sauerie, before he enters among
the other Rivers, and it has virtue to heal those that have the leaprie and
scabs, if they wash themselves in it. And beyond the headsprings of Nilus
fifteen days journey, there be very fruitful countries, full of people, and
well tilled, having very notable Cities, and also said that beyond that
country there was the sea, but they had not seen it, and that near unto the
spring of Nilus there was a City, wherein they were borne, and it was five and
twenty miles in compass, full of people, and in the night had 1000. watches
for to defend the City from danger and alterations that might rise. This
region is temperate, and delectable, and plentiful of alll things, in so much
as 3. times in the year there springs new grass, and twice in the year it
bears corn. It has abundaunce of broad and wine, although the most part
of Ethiopia use (in stead of wine) barley sodden in water. They have figs,
Peaches, Orenges, and Cucumbers like unto our Lemmons, Sytrons, and saving
Almonds. They have al our kind of fruits* Also they named diverse trees that
they had, which we never saw nor heard of in our parties, and they are
difficult to write, ^or that the interpreter could not altogether understand
the Arabian tongue. But of one of those trees, I must needs rehearse, which
is as thick as a man may compass, and as high as a man. It has many rynes
one within another, and between those rines has his fruit like unto the
Chestnut, and being ground, it becomes meal, and of it they do make pleasant
white bread, which they do use in their ba^kets. The leaf of this tree is more
than a cubit in breadth, and more than two cubits in length. They said also,
that toward the Island Meroe, the Nilus could not be sailed, by reason of
the number of Rocks that were there, and that from Meroe unto Egypt, it was
naui^able, but they tarry six months in the Navigations, for that the river
gives many turns. Those that dwell in that Country, have the face of the
Sun toward the North, as we have it toward the South, and in March they
have it right over their heads. All Ethiopia has one manner of letters,
although they have diverse languages, according unto the greatness of the
provinces. Some of them that dwell in the regions toward the Sea coast, and in
the heart of the India, there was very much Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Sugar.
Between Ethiopia and Egypt there be deserts of.50. days journey, and they
travel so far, having with them provision of meat and drink upon Cammels.
It has dangerous passages in many places, by reason of the wild men that go
naked in those deserts, like wild beasts riding upon Cammels, whose flesh and
milk they do eat. They do rob the Cammels and provision that the
travelers carry, so that many dye for hunger, and for this cause there pass
few that way unto us. The Ethiopians most commonly are of longer life than we,
for many live until.120. years, and.150. years, and in some places they live
till 200. years. It is a Country much inhabited, and never has the plage,
nor other infirmities, so with this, and with their long lives, their multitude
is much increased. They have diverse customs, according to the diversity of
the Country. They have no wool, but wear linen and silk both men and women.
And in some places, the women wear long trains, and a girdle of a spanne
bread, trimmed with gold and precious stones. Some of them wear upon their
heads a Lawne, weaued with gold: and some wear their hear loose: and some
wound up in a lace hanging down at their backs. They have more plentye of
gold and precious stones than we. The men use to wear rings, and the women
braselets wrought of gold and precious stones. From Christmas unto Lent they
feast every day, eating and daunsing. They do use little Tables, so that two
or three may sit at one of them, and do cover them with table clothes as we
do. They have but one King, which is entitled King of Kings, after or under
God, and they say, he has many Kings under him, and that they have diverse
kinds of beasts. The Oxen are crook backed, like unto Camels, with horns of
three cubits in length bending upon their backs, so that upon one of their
horns they do carry a Rundlet of wine. Their dogs are of the bigness of
our Asses, and there is some of them that may do more than a Lion, and hunt
with them. They have very great Elephants, and bring up some of them for their
pleasure and for hostility, and some for the wars. They bring them up of
young ones, and tame them, and then kill the old. Their teeth are of six
cubits in length. Also, they do tame and bring up Lions, and to show them for
a magnifice^ce and ostentation. Also, there is a kind of beasts of diverse
couloures like unto the Elephant, but they have not such a tronke and snoute,
they do call him Belus. They have feet like unto a Camel, and two very sharp
horns, each of a cubit in length, the one stands in his forehead, and the
other upon his nose. Also, there is another beast somewhat longer tha^ a Hare,
but in all proportions like, which they name Zebet, and has such a strong
smell, that if at any time he rub himself against any small tree, he
leaves behind him such a sweet savor, that those that travel and smell it,
^utt^ off that part of the tree where the sent is, and carry it with them, and
in small (...) sell it deerer the (...) Also they reported, that there is
another kind of Beast, of nine cubits in length, and six foot in height,
having cloven feet like unto an Ox. Their body is a cubit in compass, and
much like in hair unto the Libard, headed like unto a Camel, and has a
neck of four cubits in length. His tail is very thick, and much esteemed,
for the women do work with it, emb^odering it with precious stones, hanging
them at their arms. They have another wild beast, which they do take hunting,
and he is to be eaten. He is as big as an Ass, striped with couloures read
and green, and has wreathed horns upward, of three cubits in length. Also,
there is another much like unto a Hare, with little horns, and of color
read, which gives a great leap. There is another much like unto a Goat,
with his horns upon his buttockes more than two cubits pending, and for that
the smoke of them heals Feauers, they are sold for more than forty Ducats
a piece. There is another much like unto this Beast, saving that he has no
horns. His hair is read, having a neck of two cubits in length. There is
another bodyed like unto a Camel, and of the couloure of a Lybarde, having a
neck of fire cubits in length. They said he had a head like unto a Dear.
Also they said they had a bird of the height from the ground of six cubits,
small legs, feet like a Goose, the neck and visage like unto a Hen. This
bird flies little, but runs faster than a Horse.

Many other things they told me, which I leave unwritten, for that I find my
self weerie. And they said, that there were Serpents in the Deserts without
feet, of fifty cubits in length, having a Scorpions tail, and swallow a
whole Cau^fe at once. And in these things almost they did all agree, and it
seemed unto me that they made no lie, seeing they had no cause why for to lie,
and I thought good to write it, for ye profit of those ye lis^ to re^e.

FINIS.

