A SERMON PREACHED AT The Consecration of the right Reverend Father in God
Barnaby Potter D D. and L. Bishop of Carlisle, At Ely House in Holbourne March
15. 1628.

By Christopher Potter D. D. Provost of Queens College in Oxford.

Hereunto is added an Advertisement touching the History of the Quarrels of
Pope Paul 5 with the Venetians; Penned in Italian by F. Paul, and done into
English by the former Author.

LONDON, Printed for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his shop under St.
Peter's Church in Cornehill. 1629.

REVERENDO IN Christo Patri Ac Domino D. Barnabae Potter S. Th. D. Episcopo
Carleolensi, Praesvli Sanctitatis Et Ervditionis Fama Clarissimo, Charissimo
Patrveli,

Christophorvs Potter Hanc Concionem Svmmi Amoris Et Observantiae Tenve Pignvs
Et Tesseram L. M. Q. D. D.

A Sermon preached at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God
Barnaby Rotter D. D. and L. Bishop of Carlisle.
Ioh. 21. v. 17. Jesus said unto him, Feed my sheep.
THe words perhaps may not unfitly be termed, The Consecration of S. Peter into
his Apostleship: or more properly, the renewing of his Commission, which by
denying his Master he had foully defaced and forfeited. The Text in it self is
very clear, the sense obvious and easy; no word, no phrase obscure or
ambiguous. S. Peter had three times denied his Lord, and forsworn him: which
in such a prime Apostle, such a confident Professor, so great a zelote, (Though
all should deny thee, yet will not I,) was a sin very shameful, damnable, and
scandelous. But our Lord is infinite in compassions, and no sin is
unpardonable to a penitent, and S. Peter had seriously and sadly repented; He
wept bitterly: and I doubt not his heart ble(...) fast as his eyes. Therefore
the Lord looks upon him with mercy; not only pardons his fault, but admits
him again into his favor, and here by a public solemn act restores him
again to that degree and dignity from which he was fallen.

But before his admission, his Master thinks meet to examine him, and the more
to oblige him to his service, he first requires him to give satisfaction for
the scandal which he had given, and as he had thrice renounced him, so
thrice again to protest his ardent affection and love unto him. Saint Peter's
fall had taken down his pride, and taught him the vanity and feeblenesle of a
strong presumption. He now answers his Master with no less zeal, but with
more modesty. Christ asks him, I ovest thou me more then these? A galling
question, secretly and sweetly taxing his former confidence. Peter understands
him, and humbly replies, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee. I dare say my love is true and sincere, I dare not say it is strong and
steddie, lest a second slip confute and betray me. And having thrice repeated
this protestation (and so often recanted his former denial) our Lord honors
him a new with his ancient charge, puts him again in his commission, and for
his comfort here thrice repeats it: If thou love me, (and as thou love me,)
Feed my I ambes feed my sheep, feed my sheep. ^^o, I commend to thy care and
custody (together with the rest of thy brethren) that which I have most dear
and precious, my Sheep, my people, my Church: and therefore see thou look
well to thy duty, be faithful in thine office, with all care and conscience,
with all diligence and discretion, with all wisdom and fidelity; labor
effectually to plant and propagate my Gospel, to enlarge my Kingdom, to win
and gather souls unto me; help to cherish and nourish them by wholesome
doctrine, by a holy and exemplarie life, by good discipline. For lo, have not
I called thee to this charge? and art not thou a Pastor? and are not they
sheep? and my sheep, not thine own? all pressing arguments to move thee to
hate and abandon all carnal corrupt affections, ambition, covetousness,
vainglory, tyranny in this holy work, and with a constant cheerfulness to
attend my service and thy Ministry. Jesus said unto him, feed my Sheep.

Jesus said unto Peter, but how? To Peter in particular, or as Prince of the
rest? exclusively and privatively to all the other Apostles? No: the solemnity
of this threefold repetition seems peculiar to Peter, as a salve to his
threefold abjuration; but sure the charge is general to all the Apostles, and
their dignity and duty in all regards equal: and though our Lord here speak
only to Saint Peter, yet he means it not to S. Peter only. For in the former
Chap. the same Commission which here he repeats to Peter, as his particular
case required, he gives promiscuously and indifferently to all the Apostles,
and to all their lawful Successors, Bishops and Pastors: As my Father sent
me so send Ioh 20. 21, 23.
I you: -- Whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted and whose ye retain.
-- And elsewhere in more large and ample terms, a little before he left the
world; Go into all the world, Mat. 28. 19 Mar. 16. 15
teach all Nations, Preach the Gospel to every creature; -- delivering the same
power and office which here in other words he delivers to Saint Peter, Feed my
sheep.

This is the plain and proper and native meaning of the words; and thus the
ancient Catholic Church for many ages, without seruple or question, made this
and no other construction of my Text. For those worthies of the Primitive times
were wont to bring only learning and a good conscience to the expounding of
Scripture, laying aside all passion and private interest; and they were content
to take such a sense as the holy Text offered, not daring to bring or make a
new sense of their own, such as might suit with their desire or fantasy. But
the following Ages lost by degrees first conscience, then learning, and at
length all modesty.

The first Bishops of Rome for many years, good souls, thought more of their
Martyrdom then of any Monarchy. They truly succeeded Peter, in his holiness,
in his fidelity, in his humility; and received this precept from Christ our
Master plainly, as he intended it, and with an honest simple mind accordingly
applied themselves to feed his sheep.

After a while, when the warm favor of the times had somewhat kindled their
hopes and ambition, though they began to nourish great and boundless thoughts,
and had an itching desire to enlarge their fringes; yet at first they were
reasonably moderate in their pretensions: partly out of their own ingenuity
(for they lost not all shame at once;) and partly by reason of that stout and
free opposition which upon any attempt or invasion, they found in the Eastern
and Africane Churches, which began quickly to be jealous of Romes growing
greatness. They claimed only a precedence or a primacy, not any supremacy, a
primacy of order, or at most of honor, not of power, among their Brethren, not
over them: Some contestations they had with Bishops, none with Emperors. For
they meddled yet only with the keys, not with the swords; and confessed all
the power they had or challenged, to be merely purely spiritual, for the
conduct and benefit of souls: nothing at all directly or indirectly temporal.
And to fortify all this claim, whatsoever it was, they were content to found
it upon the majesty of their Sea, being the peerlesse Imperial City, upon
the Charters and Patents of Princes, upon the piety and sound faith of their
Predecessors, upon the general and just consent of Christendom, which had
assigned them a prime place among other Patriarchs, in all Synods and
Assemblies. But their foreheads were yet too soft to plead any Scriptures for
their pretensions, or to derive their primacy from divine institution. They
began indeed to lay too violent hands, and to put upon the rack those
passages, Tues Petrus and Dabo tibi claves, and this, Pasce oves in my Text:
but it was featfully and with reluctation of conscience, with no purpose, or
with no hope to wring from them those horrible consequences, which in
succeeding times they were forced to countenance.

But when once the Prince of darkness had overwhelmed all Europe with a black
night of fatal ignorance, when he had banished all good letters, learning, and
languages, when he had silenced the Scriptures, and hoodwinkt the world; then
his work of darkness went on apace, and the mystery of iniquity was quickly
advanced to that formidable height, which at this day we see and lament. Then
began his Vicar at Rome to Pope it in earnest, and (...), to appear in his
colors, in his triple Crown, his two keys in the one hand, his two swords in
the other, and who but He? He must now be saluted Head and Spouse of the Church
universal, a See M. ^^d^l against Wadesworth, cap. 4. p. 77 etc
Vice-God upon earth, his judgment is infallible, his jurisdiction infinite,
and his Monarchy boundless, enclosing all Churches and Kingdoms: all Bishops
are but his Curates, and all Kings his vassals; and in few words, all Nations
must worship this Idol. For of him was meant that in Jeremy, Gens and regnum
quod non servierit Ier. 27.
illi, eradicabitur, The people or nation that will not serve him must be
rooted out. And good reason; for he is Dominus Deus noster Papa; (...), no more
a mortal. And the better to set out this Pageant unto the people, not only
some shapes and shadows of old Fathers and Councils; but the Scripture it
self, our Lord Christ, and S. Peter are brought upon the stage, and forced to
do reverence unto the Pope. For since Hildebrand and Boniface 8. this Papal
Monarchy is no longer a likely opinion, or a disputable problem, or an ancient
tradition or prescription; but it is now an indubitable article of the Creed, a
fundamental point of religion, nay Bell. (...) de R P.
Summa rei Christianae, the only necessary truth; and Subesse Romans Pontifici
est de necessitate salutis, Whosoever believes not in Jesus Christ, and in the
Pope, cannot be saved.

That our poor Forefathers in the times of ignorance, should be abused and
amassed with these holy frauds, we wonder not, but we pity them rather. For
alas, though they wanted not eyes, yet they wanted light to discover these
impostures and tromperies. But it exceeds all marvel, that yet at this day in
this age of light and learning, these horrible Paradoxes should be still
obtruded upon the Christian World: and (which exceeds all impiety) the
Scripture it self abused to guild this Idol, to color this monstrous
domination of the Pope, and so the God of truth, the word of truth constrained
to countenance a thick and palpable lie. For you know how Baronius,
Bellarmine, and the rest of that bran, now plead for this Monarchy, not any
longer out of the Decretall Epistles, or Constantines donation, (old Knights of
the Post that were wont to depose for the Pope;) but out of the sacred Tables
of holy Writ. Wherein though there be not one word or ^^llable, to or fro,
(...) nec vola nec vestigiu^, of the Pope or his power, (^ave only as he is
Antichrist:) yet these men with rare wit and skill have observed many new
Mysteries in the New Testament, and plainly (a thing unknown to all former
generations) see the Pope in many passages of the Text, which I dare swear the
holy Evangelists and Apostles never saw nor intended.

They discourse with much learning, of S. Peter and of his prerogatives: how
our Lord appointed him sovereign Bishop of the Catholic Church, and left him
his Lieutenant upon earth; planting in him a transcendent supereminent power of
binding, losing, feeding, etc. which power other Bishops have not immediately
from Christ, but from S. Peter and by his delegation. Well, grant all this to
be as true as it is all false: but what follows? Iam dic ^osthume de tribus
capellis; What Is all this to the Pope? Why, yes; S. ^eter was Bishop of Rome,
and there he died, and bequeathed all this sovereignty, all these privileges
to the Bishops of Rome his Successors. So then; they talk much of S. Peter,
but they mean the Pope. Gregory Nazianzene quotes a witty proverb out of
Herodotus, which fits our purpose; Vestem hanc Histiaeus Orat. 2. (...). n^mero
4.
quidem consuit, induit autem Aristagoras: Peter must make this coat, but the
Pope must wear it. As he in the Orator extolled eloquence to the heavens, that
himself might be advanced with it; so here, all these praises of S. Peter are
intended for the Pope: the business is his, though Peter must bear the name.
Here is nothing sown or reaped, I wis, for Peter, unless only this, He that
lived and died a poor Apostle, is after his death crowned a Monarch; but the
Crown fits the Popes head better then his, and it is therefore set upon him
only by way of ceremony, and he comes in only as a mute person upon the
stage, to make room for the Pope, and solemnly to lead him in by the hand. And
here all the passages between Christ and Peter, all the words of the one, all
the actions of the other are examined with a curious scrupulosity, and all at
length by the help of two or three syllogismes make clearly for the Popes
advantage.

I need not tell you what good stuff these good wits have extracted out of
those other words, Dabo tibi claves, and Oravi pro te, Petre: not to go far,
my Text is a most memorable example of their singular wit and dexterity in
abusing of Scripture. Mirth is unseasonable in discourses of moment; and for a
Christian to laugh at blasphemy is to approve it: it beseemes him much better
to lament it with tears of blood. My Text, I confess, is very rich and
plentiful in the sense, and (as by and by we shall see) will readily offer us
much excellent matter of Christian meditation and discourse. But the
collections which they of the Popes side have drawn from hence, are such and
so frivolous, that they are much more capable to move the spleen (if the
gravitie of the matter permitted) then the judgment; and are more properly
confuted with a smile, then with any strength of reason.

Here is one word in the Text pasce which the Cardinal Bellarmine has so
extended between his teeth, that it has a belly as large and fruitful as the
Trojane horse, including whole armies of arguments for the Pope. The Pope can
desire nothing which this word will not give him. He pretends to be a King as
well as a Bishop, and says his temporal power is as wide and broad as his
spiritual. And it is true, says Bellarmine, for Christ said to S. Peter, Pasce,
id est, Regio more impera; play the Rex. In the ancient Church when any heresy
disturbed the public truth and peace, a grave assembly of Bishops was called,
and the Book of God fairly laid open in the midst, and out of it were all
doubts determined. Now, Scriptures and Councills are needless: for the Pope
claims to be supreme Judge of all Controversies. And Lib. 4. de Romans P. cap.
1.
Bellarmine thinks the claim to be well grounded upon this pasce in my Text.
And it is a great wonder, the Pope was never thought infallible in his judgment,
till this last Age, since this Ibid. c. 3.
pasce implies that also so clearly. And if the Heretics do not believe that
he has power to make new Articles of Faith, and when they cry shame upon Pope
Pius the 4. for adding twelve new Articles to the old Apostles Creed; it is
because they are ignorant and know not what pasce signifies. Briefly, this one
word contains more matter then all the Bible besides: it works miracles, and
makes the Pope omnipotent; gives him all power not only in heaven and earth,
but (where God has nothing to do) in Purgatory. For if you ask, by what
authority he takes upon him to pardon sins and souls after death, to give
or sell the Saints merits, to dispense with oaths, to depose Kings and dispose
of their kingdoms, or if he list, to murder them: -- If you look into the
Popes Lexicon, you shall find that pasce expressly denotes all this
authority, and inables him to be not only a Prince, or a Pastor, or a Bishop,
but even a Butcher.

Well: the repetition of these horrid fantasies shall be their refutation.
Justin Martyr says well, (...), a gross error ever caries its Justin. M.
(...).
own conviction in its forehead. I am sorry I have spent so much of my time
and of your patience in moving this dunghill. But these weeds and thorns lay in
my way, and I must needs clear my passage. I dismisle the Popes flatterers
with my pity and my prayers, and say no more but this: If they had any fear
of God, any shame of men, any reverence to Antiquity, any feeling or care of
conscience; they would not dare thus profanely and leudly to dally with
Scriptures, or presume so to color or cover their doctrine of devils under the
name of God.

Thus far I have digressed to follow the Thieves that would steal away the
sense of my Text: for so Gregory Nazianzene wittily says of Heretics, that
they are (...). Orat. 3 6. ^ive de T^eol. 4.
And now that we have done with the corrupt Gloss, we may go forward, by
Gods assistance, with the Text.

It contains, as we have said, the renewing of Peter's commission; wherein the
parts or points observable are two; First the authority of it, Jesus said unto
him: Secondly, the matter or summary of it, Feed my sheep. Our Lord first
calls and inables him to his office, then directs him in it. First he gives him
power to execute his charge, Jesus said unto him; secondly, he gives him
instructions how to execute it, Feed my sheep. Of both these in order, very
briefly.

For the first: Peter takes not upon himself the honor of the Apostleship,
till he was called by Christ his Lord and God, as were the rest of his
fellows. In that calling of the Apostles, some things were personal and
peculiar to themselves, others general, concerning all their lawful
Successors, Bishops and Pastors. The Apostles had an immediate vocation from
Christ in person: our calling is not of men, but it is by men: theirs neither of
men nor by men. They had an universal mission, an unlimited jurisdiction, an
infallible assistance of the Spirit, the gift of tongues and miracles. All
these were privileges extraordinary, and passed with their persons. But the
warrant and work of this Commission generally and equally belongs to all us,
as well as to all them: None may usurp the charge of a Bishop or a Pastor,
till Jesus say unto him, Feed my sheep. And hence we learn two leslons of
great importance and consideration.

1. The Author of all lawful 1
vocation to the holy Ministry, is only Christ the Lord. Only Christ,
exclusively to all men, not to the two other Persons in the glorious Trinity,
which all equally concur to this external work. God the Father has placed in
the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, Pastors, etc. And God the Act. 20. 28.
holy Ghost ordained the Bishops at Ephesus; and elsewhere, Act. 1 3. 2.
Separate me Paul and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called them. For
it belongs only to the Mat. 9. 38.
Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his harvest: and who should
appoint Mat. 24. 45.
Stewards over the House, but he who is Master of the House, Father of the
family?

This consideration must first help to animate our feebleness, and add unto
us an edge and courage against all the difficulties and discouragements, which
we shall meet in our holy calling. Every good Minister must look to be
Theologus crucis, not Theologus gloriae: when he enters upon this warfare, he
may not dream of an easy or lazy life, to pass his time in pomp or
pleasure, like the glorious Clergy of Rome: but he must prepare to play the
man, and fight it out, not only with absurd and unreasonable men, but even
with beasts, as Paul did at Ephesus, yea with devils. And therefore he must
buckle himself to his work, and know that he must eat his bread, if not
with the sweating of his brows, yet (which is much sorer) with the beating of
his brains. Wherefore S. Paul wanting a word able to express the grievous
pains of our Ministry, sets it forth in two, both very sore and heavy ones:
Our calling is 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9 and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8
(...), a labor, a travail; a tiring labor, a miserable travail; a labor
like that of reapers, a travail like that of mothers. And hence in Scripture
are Ministers so often compared to Soldiers, Shepherds, Husbandmen, Nurses,
-- all callings of little ease: and sure the pastoral toil in the cure of
souls is no less then was Genesis 31. 40.
Jacobs in the keeping of Labans sheep, exposed to an infinity of sorrows,
vexations, slanders, contradictions. -- Who then is sufficient for these
things? why, in all this our comfort may be, that it is Christ the Lord who
has called us to this office; it is He that has put us upon this service, and
sure he that is oneris author, will be adjutor operis, now that he has brought
us into the field, he will not forsake us: we have his promise, Loc, I am with
you always to the end of the world: his grace shall be sufficient for us. We
fight his battles, and therefore we need not fear the success. Luke 21. 15.
He will give us a mouth and wisdom, against which none of our adversaries
shall be able to resist: and his blessing shall make the Gospel in our mouths
the arm of the Lord, the power of God unto salvation. His Iud. 6.
blessing only; for as when the Host of Midian was discomfited with a few
pitchers and lamps, and the walls of Jericho demolished with the sound of
Rams horns; the power of the work was in the first Agent, not in the weak
unlikely instrument; so here, we have nothing wherein or whereof to glory, but
our infirmities, all our sufficiency is of God; and it is by our Captain Christ
that we are more then Conquerours.

Again, seeing it is Christ who has put us in this Commission, and sends us
upon his errand; this must quicken us to a sollicitous care, a constant
diligence and vigilance in our holy vocation. We shall one day be called to a
strict account for all the souls which God has put under our charge, and woe
be to us, if any of them perish through our treachery or negligence. They shall
dye in their sins, but their blood shall be required at our hands, and we
shall hear that terrible voice, Quintili Vare read legiones, Tu Pastor, tu
Episcope read animas,] Give an account of thy Stewardship; where are my sheep
which I commanded thee to feed? Lib. 6 de Sa^^rd. cap. 1.
S. John Chrysostom professes that the continual fear and fright of that
rigorous account put him into a continual trembling agony. But it wrought
strangely upon Orat. 1.
Gr. Nazianzene, it wasted his marrow, and dried up his bones, and consumed his
spirits, and in conclusion he apprehended it so deeply, that after he had
worthily labored in three Bishoprics successively (the last being that of
Constantinople,) but not with such comfort and success as he desired, by
reason of those turbulent factious times like these of ours: Orat. 32.
at length he quitted all his honors and dignities, and retired himself into a
private life, where he might more safely enjoy God and himself. A fair
pattern for us, reverend Fathers and Brethren, to lay our charge to heart, and
keep well our watch over souls, that we may give up our accounts with joy and
not with grief: for that will be pernicious to us. But we shall touch again
perhaps on this point anon, if the time give leave.

2. S. Peter here does not intrude 2
himself into this Commission, he assumes not this holy service til Christ his
Master call him. First he is appointed and authorized, first takes his warrant,
then falls to his work. For every Minister of the Gospel must have his power
and placing from heaven, and he is no lawful messenger of God who is not
called and sent by God and the Church. Some fanaticall spirits, vagrant roving
carriers, new prophets, will needs be wandering in the Church without their
pasport; new illuminates, lately dropped out of heaven, (...) as Orat. 29. etc.
Nazian: faith of their fellows; (...), yesterday dolts, to day Doctors; for
they have all learning by revelation. They must needs be running, though they
know not why or whither, when none sends them, like 2 Samuel 18. 22.
Ahimaaz, and at length, like him, they can tell no tidings. No wonder. For
Romans 10. 15.
how can they preach that are not sent? and these are they of whom God speaks
in Jeremy, Ier. 23. 21
I have not sent these Prophets, and yet they run. But so far is the Lord
from accepting or approving the service which these voluntaries will needs
force upon him, that he has punished no sin more severely and exemplarily then
this sacrilegious and saucie intrusion. K. 2 Chronicles. 26. 18.
Vzziah for putting his hand to the incense, and usurping upon the Priests
office, was suddenly smitten with leprosy; and 2 Samuel 6. 6
Vzzah struck dead in a moment for but touching the Arc, as before him 50000
Bethshemites for but looking into it. A holy vocation is necessary to a holy
function. Jesus Christ himself submitted himself to this rule; He preached
not till he was solemnly ordained by a voice from heaven, he took not upon
himself the honor, till his Father called him.

Now the calling necessary to every lawful Pastor at this day, is twofold; one
inward from God, the other outward by the Church.

The inward calling is that whereby God touches the heart of a man with a holy
desire to consecrate himself to the service of his House, and inables him by
his grace to edify his Church by word and work. The principal evidences of
this calling are two. 1. The testimony of a man's conscience, that he enters not
into holy Orders for any carnal byrespect, but only or chiefly to honor God
by his labors. And 2. a tolerable competent measure of learning, piety,
zeal, discretion, wisdom, eloquence, and such other gifts requisite for the
discharge of so high an office. Gods sending and gifting go still together. He
is not wont to send unto his people any headless or heartlesse Messengers; His
calling either finds us or makes us fit for his service. A Minister grossly
ignorant, or scandalously profane goes upon his own errand, he may be sure
God never sent him; He never imployes such unworthie Ambassadors. And here how
many amongst us abuse themselves, and mistake a rash presumption for true
zeal? How many undertake the holy Ministry upon unholy and corrupt ends and
motives? Some to set out their plumes before the people, and to fill the gazing
gaping multitude with an admiration of their empty eloquence: mere animalia
gloriae, as De anima cap. 1.
Tertullian speaks of such, Apolog. c 46.
fame negotiatores, and as Orat 27.
Nazianzen, (...), men that hunt applause, and like feathers lifted up far
above themselves by the breath of the people. Some to satisfy their ambition;
for it is not the (...), but the (...), the dignity, not the duty which they
affect. Some (too many) pretending to be Physicians of the soul, intend indeed
to cure their own poverty or necessity; as if the Church should be a refuge
for needy persons, or a sanctuary for malefactors. Many that cannot thrive in
any other course of life, when they are driven to their last hopes and
extremities, at last shift themselves into the coat and calling of Ministers,
and he that knows himself unfit in any other employment to serve men, yet
thinks himself fit enough to serve God in this sacred calling. All these
intruders and mercenaries shall be sure to fail of their hopes, and shall one
day receive other kind of wages then they did expect.

Now besides this inward calling which serves only to settle our own
conscience; it is needful that the Church do externally call and install us
by some public solemnity, before we may adventure upon the exercise of this
holy function. After grave and due examination of our life and learning, if the
Church of God do approve us, if by the hands of such as are in authority she
ordain and admit us; then may we lawfully and safely enter upon this holy
charge, not otherwise.

Now here all our Reformed Churches are a^fronted by the Romish faction, and
proudly challenged, just as the Priests of old challenged our Master Christ,
Mat. 21. 23.
Whence have you authority to teach? and who gave you this authority? They
ask, where is our lawful vocation? where our orderly uninterrupted succesion
from the Apostles? and blush not to affirm (which is one of their unwritten
traditions, M. (...) letters, cap. 11.
and as true as Lucians true Histories, or their Homilies out of the Legend)
that our Bishops in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, consecrated
themselves, one another, contrary to all Canons of the ancient Church; and
thence infer, that all our after-ordinations are pure nullities, that we have
no Ministers, no Faith, no Gospel, no Sacraments. Thus of old, when Jeremy and
Ezechiel went about to repair the ruins of the Church, and to purge the
worship of God from unsufferable corruptions and abuses, the Priests of Israel
and Judah resisted, called for their warrant, and pretended themselves only to
be the Temple of the Lord, and that the Law of God could not depart from them.
But for answer to our Adversaries, we need not say that our first Reformers had
an extraordinary calling from God: we constantly affirm, that those worthy
Ministers who in the age of our Fathers first began this glorious work of
Reformation, had that same ordinary vocation and succession whereof our
adversaries vaunt so much. But that vocation which the Romish Priests abused to
the dishonor of God, and the suppressing of his truth, our Reformers
(according to their duty and conscience) used for the reestablishing of pure
doctrine. Thus Wiclif, Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Martyr,
etc. the first purgers of the Church from Roman superstition and tyranny, were
al created and ordained by the Church of Rome it self, Priests or Doctors of
Divinity, by an ordinary, usual, public vocation, and that with a solemn
adjuration, that they should duly and diligently teach the truth of God in his
Church according to his word. And thus in our Church of England the
consecration of every Bishop has been still solemnly and canonically
performed by three other Bishops at the least, as has been confessed by
Cudsemius in viv^ effigy Sectae Calvinist. cap. 11.
some Papists, and Fr Mason de Minister. Ang
proved against the lies and slanders of others out of public and
authentical records. Now then, we demand of our Adversaries; Has the Church
of Rome any lawful ordinary vocation, or has she none? If she have none her
self, why is she so scrupulous to enquire of ours? If she have any; our
Ministers had the same, being all at first called and ordained by her. For
howsoever the Church of Rome has adulterated and obscured her Catholic
verities with intolerable superadditaments; yet has she still notwithstanding
power to confer a lawful vocation. It is the consenting judgment both of
Con^il Nic. 1. Can. 8. Codex can. Eccl. Af^ic. can 68. H^eron di^l. adv.
Luciferian. Aug tract (...). in Johan. and cont. Epist Parm. l. 2. c. 13 Synod.
7. act. 1.
Antiquity and of the late M^g. Sent. lio. 4. did. 25. and ibi DD. S^hol.
Aqui^ Suppl. qu. 38. art. 2 ^^llar* de Sacr. in gen l. 1. c. 26
Roman Doctors, that heresy it self may infect but cannot annull
ordinations, and that Clerks ordained by heretical Bishops are sufficiently
in holy Orders, and may not be re-ordained For whosoever be the instrument,
the principal Author of our holy charge is Christ the Lord; upon him alone
originally it depends, and from him may be conveyed by polluted hands, as the
clear water of a fountain may pass through a filthy pipe or channel, and
though it be vitiated in the passage, yet it is not abolished. And therefore that
we may retort this crimination upon the Adversary, albeit we confess our
Vocation to be derived to us by the mediation of the Church of Rome, (not by
her authority) yet we both avouch our vocation to be holy and lawful, and
challenge theirs to be sacrilegious. For in the Roman Priesthood are
confusedly intermingled things holy and profane; it is partly a Rose, partly a
Nettle; it consists of a double power, one sacred, to absolve sinners by the
Ministry of reconciliation, which we embrace and retain; the other impious to
sacrifice again Christ Jesus in the Mass, which we reject and abominate. So
then the Rose we pluck, and leave them the Nettle; whatsoever they deliver in
the name and by the commission of Jesus Christ, we humbly receive it and use it
to his glory: but for that which is authorized only by the Popes warrant and
institution, we leave it to them who are his servants, and love to wear his
liveries. BUt in this question (as in others) our Opposers are long since victi
and triumphati, reduced to a perpetual silence, by the learned labors of our
Worthies, M. Francis De Minist Anglican.
Mason for our Church, and for the foreign Churches, by the noble De Eccles.
cap ult.
Mornay, De ^egit. vo^c. Minist.
Sadeel, and De la voca ion des P^steurs.
Peter Moulin, in a just Treatise of this argument.

But being now upon this discourse of vocation, I may not wave this fair
occasion, to note the rare and exemplary calling (Sine ambitu, more majorum,)
of that Reverend man, whose Consecration gives occasion to this meeting. But
because what I now speak of him, must be spoken to him; neither his modesty,
nor mine permits me to say much. Only thus much I cannot forbear: Our dear
Sovereign, his gracious Master, has honored not Him so much, as Himself and
the Age, in the freedom of his noble and unexpected choice. And that elogie
which Nazianzene gives to S. Basil, truly and Orat. 20.
properly fits our Bishop; he was promoted, (...), he did not steal or shuffle
himself into the chair, he did not invade it, the honor sought and followed
him, and (though he acknowledge a deep obligation to many great and
honorable Friends, yet) he owes it to no thing, to no man, but to God and the
King. And thus shall it be done to all them which truly honor God and the
King; God and the King without doubt will honor them.

Thus at length we have done with the first part of the Text, the authority of
Peter's commission, Jesus said unto him; the next now follows, expressing the
matter or sum of it, Feed my sheep. A rich and copious argument, wherein it
were easy to be endless. But because the time which remains is not long, I
will be short, and with a light foot slip over this boundless field, wherein
otherwise if I durst presume, I could desire to expatiate.

In the words our Lord imposes a necessity upon al his holy servants and
officers, and requires their constant continual care in the instruction of his
people, by sound doctrine and a holy life. The charge is given in metaphorical
terms, and the metaphor is very proper and significant; Feed my sheep. Every
word caries the weight of an argument, and implies a pressing motive to this
duty. The words are three, so are the arguments. The first taken from the
quality of the Minister; Thou art a Pastor of the People, therefore feed them:
The second from the quality of the People, they are Sheep, therefore feed
them: The third from their relation to Christ, they are my sheep, not thine,
and therefore as thou will answer me feed them.

For the first, the Emblem and image of a Shepherd sets out to the life all
the sweet and gracious qualities, the tenderness, providence, innocence,
benignity, fidelity, prudence, diligence, etc. that should be in every good
Governor. Therefore no Metaphor more emphaticall, none so frequent in all good
Authors, holy and profane, throughout the body of Scriptures, as this. There we
find God himself often termed a Psa (...). 1.
Pastor, and Christ our Lord, the Ioh. 10. 14
good Pastor, the 1 Pet. 5. 4.
chief Pastor, all Kings and Prophets are Pastors: and for us of the
Ministry, we may say as they to Pharaoh, Genesis 46. ^4
We are all Pastors from our youth; we and our Fathers, and all our Tribe. What
are the dut^es of a good and wise Pastor, we may collect from that description
of a wicked and foolish Pastor in the Prophet Zechar. Zech. 11. 16. Ezech. 34.
Lo, says God, I will raise up a Shepherd in the land, who shall not visit
those that be lost, neither shall seek the lambs, nor beale that that is
broken, nor feed that which stands still; but he shall eat the flesh of the
fat, and tear their claws in pieces. Woe to the Idol Shepherd that leaves
the flock. To do the contrary to all this, is to do the part of a good
Pastor. One word in my Text implies all, Feed. Shortly, the principal Vid. Naz
Orat. 7.
cares of a good Shepherd are three; which accordingly require three
principal virtues; first valor to keep off the thief, the Wolf, the Fox,
and all ravenous beasts. Secondly, wisdom, to keep all his flock within the
pale of good order; and if any unruly disorderly Ram will be ranging, to
curb and call him in with his whistle if he can, or if not, with his crook.
Thirdly, fidelity, to provide his lambs and sheep of wholesome convenient
pasture.

These same cares and virtues, in proportion, are required in all spiritual
Pastors, specially and eminently in every good Bishop.

1. Such as professedly or secretly corrupt the true doctrine of godliness,
bringing in either profane novelties, or destroying opinions; they are Thieves,
Wolves, 2 Timothy 2. 16 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Foxes, and must be opposed, convinced, confounded, by the valor and learning
of the Bishop. But especially if he love his Master or his flock, let him
beware of that Monster, compounded of a Wolf and a Fox, that brand and
boutefeu of all Churches and Kingdoms, the Jesuit. A thing that was never of
Gods making, created only by the Pope: and yet though he owes his being to the
Pope, (and the Pope again reciprocally his being now to him,) and would seem
to honor him whose name he leudly assumes, yet the truth is (as that prudent
French Cardinal d'Ossat, well Epistre 8. a Mons Villivey.
observing the maxims of the Iesuitical Cabale, and their practices, long
since rightly defined him) A Jesuit (some few excepted) is one that neither
believes in Jesus Christ, nor in the Pope.

2. Such as walk disorderly, and are scandalous in their evil life, likely to
taint all the flock with the contagio^ of their bad example; these the Bishops
wisdom and authority must either reclaim by sweet words of admonition if he
can, or otherwise repress them by the sharp edge of Ecclesiastical censures.
And it were perhaps to be wished that the spiritual sword were both more
tenderly used in some cases, and more severely in others, more blunted against
some offenders, and better edged against others.

But 3. the prime care and virtue of a good Bishop is faithfully and fruitfully
to dispense the word of life, the doctrine of salvation to his people; and to
live himself the life which he commends: that so he may be an absolute pattern
of piety, and his life a clear commentary upon his doctrine. This I call his
prime care and virtue; for it is this which our Lord principally intends in this
charge to Peter and all Pastors, Feed my sheep: and therefore here we will
insist a little. This care requires, as I have said, 1. wholesome doctrine; 2. a
holy life. Of either a few words.

By wholesome doctrine I mean not any vain jangling about unprofitable
questions, not any nice or curious speculations in forbidden mysteries; which
serve more to amaze or distract the people, then to instruct them; and more
enlarge the kingdom of Sa(...)an then of Jesus Christ, planting rather
Atheism and irreligion, then sound knowledge and devotion. But I mean the
plain preaching of that truth which is according unto godliness, the laying
of the foundation of faith in Christ, and repentance from dead works, and new
obedience. Which howsoever now adays we put off to our Curates and
under-journeymen, as a thing unbeseeming our learning and greatness; yet Saint
Paul is of another judgment, and accounts this the masterpiece of a wise
Architect. And sure (that 1 Cor. 3. 10
I may borrow the words of a reverend Prelate of this Church) the D. H.
most useful of all preaching is Catecheticall: this is both food and
physic, both a cordial to comfort and settle the heart in truth, and a
preservative against all error: this is the ground, all other discourses
(though profitable) are but the descants. If any dainty palate distaste this
bread of Angels, he is distempered and worthy to fast. Whose heart (that has
any compassion) bleeds not to see the strange growth of ignorance and
infidelity in this age, and the poor Church every where miserably laboring
under her woeful Schisms and ruptures! Certainly, the ground of all this
calamity is, because the old rudiments of piety, the principles of saving
truth are every where neglected, and new subtle inventions with great vehemence
pressed. Men are fallen from living to disputing, and whilst their hands are idle
and their heads empty, yet their tongues must needs be working. And after a
while it will be a matter of great wit to be a Christian, for he must be feign
every year to learn a new Creed. Each private opinion must needs be matter
of faith, and it contents not many zelotes of each side to enjoy their own
conceits, they are out of charity with all that are not of their judgment.

I verily think it might be a happy means to settle many unfortunate
Controversies, and to unite us all in blessed truth and peace, if men would
give themselves leave without passion, rightly to apprehend and consider the
diversity and degrees of divine truth. Many truths are profitable, very few
Ioh. 17. 3 -- 20. 31. Rom 10. 9. 13. Luke 7. 48. -- 8. 48. -- 2^. 4^. Act 8.
^7. -- 1^. 31.
necessary. As in the practical part of religion, true sanctifying grace has
a wide latitude, very strong and vigorous in one, very weak and feeble in
another, yet in both saving: So in the intellectual or dogmaticall part of
Christianity, R^^ I^cobus in (...) Casaub Epist. ad Card P^rron. G^^^ve
^spraefat. and Observe. (...) Harm. confess. G^^l^rt observe. in H^^min gij
Opuscula D. Usher Sermon. of the unity of faith. -- Vi^c Lirin. cap 39. Petrus
Mol^ntus in Confilio Gallice scripto.
all divine verities are not of equal moment and necessity. S. Paul has
taught us a distinction between foundations and superstructions, (1 Cor. 3.)
and among these latter some border more closely upon the foundation then
others. Where there is a distinct and explicit assent in all the maine
Articles of the Catholic faith, and in all conclusions clearly, immediately,
necessarily issuing from those principles, and no poison after mingled with
this milk: Other truths more subtle may admit an (...), or a non liquet, both
ignorance and error without danger, as being disputable in themselves, and
happily by plain Scripture indeterminable. To be free from all error and sin
is the privilege of the Church triumphing; in this life, where there is so
great variety of the Spirits illuminatio^, so great imbecility of all men's
understanding, and so many mysteries inscrutable; to expect an absolute and
general consent in all particles of truth, were a great vanity; to exact it a
greater tyranny of pernicious consequence in the Church: The best of men are
but men at the best; and if any in this s(...)e of mortality think or hope to
reach all incomprehensible Mysteries, he mistakes his measure, and forgets
that his dwelling is in the dust, that he is yet on earth, not yet in heaven.
So long as we are here below on our way, ignorance and infirmity will accompany
us, they will not leave us till we leave the world, and be admitted into our
heavenly Country. When once 1 Cor. 3. 10 12. 2 Cor 5 7. 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
the time of perfection is come, then (not before) shall all defects be
abolished, all imperfections perfited, then shall our Faith be turned into
vision, our dark knowledge into clear comprehension: I^s. Scal Ele^c. Orat.
Chron^^.
Elias quum venerit solvet dubia.

Now those maine Articles whereof we spoke, the wisdom of the ancient Church
contracted out of Scripture into a short Creed, which they called the Rule of
faith, and placed in it the Mr Brad. ford Mart. conference with Heth and Day.
unity of the Church; which Ire^ l^b. 1. cap. 2. 3.
Iren^us says admits neither addition nor diminution, being common to small
and great. And Te^tul de Virg Vel. c. 1. Vide et^^m Ambros Ser 38 de Iejun. and
Quadr. in fine. Rufi^. in Ex^os. Symb. in p^aefat. August. d^ Temp. Ser. 115.
and 119 and 181. in praef. Leon. Epist. 13. ad fin.
Tertullian to the same purpose, Regula fidei una omnino est, immobilis,
irr^formabilis; -- then after a brief repetition of it, he adds, Hac lege
fidei manente -- caetera admittunt novitatem correctionis. But above all the
rest, Naz orat. 3. de pace, number. 14. and 26. Vinc. Lirin. Iud. 3
Gregory Nazianzene most excellently and judiciously handles this argument in
his 14 Oration, and his 26, which he entitles de moderatione in disputationibus
servanda. This was the faith once given to the Saints, for which those ancient
Worthies contended so stoutly even unto blood: And which they did all so
diligently inculcate unto their auditors, as it appears by lustine Martyr his
Exposition of the faith, S. Basil his Treatise or Homily de vera fide;
Athanasius in his Creed, Epiphanius in his Ancoratus, S. Augustine his
Enchiridion, and the Books de Doctrina Christiana; Gregory Nyssen, and Cyrill
of Jerusalem in their Catecheticall Orations etc. upon this evidence they
convicted and condemned all ancient heresies; and I am confident, were they now
alive, they would all side with us in our necessary separation from the
abominations, idolatry and tyranny of the Papacy, with which no good Christian
can hold any union in faith, any communion in charity.

Now for our Controversies, first let me profess, I favor not (I rather
suspect) any new inventions; for ab Antiquitate non recedo nisi invitus:
especially renouncing all such as any way favor or flatter the depraved nature
and will of man, which I constantly believe to be free only to evil, and of
it self to have no power at all, merely none to any act or thing spiritually
good: Most heartily embracing that doctrine which most amply commends the
riches of Gods free grace, which I acknowledge to be the whole and sole cause
of our predestination, conversion, and salvation, abhorring all damned
doctrines of the Pelagians, Semipelagians, Jesuits, Socinians, and of their
rags and relics, which help only to pride and prick up corrupt nature;
humbly confessing in the words of S. Test ad Qui^. lib. 3. c. 4.
Cyprian, (so often repeated by that worthy champion of grace, S. Cont. du^s
Epist Pel^g. l. 4. cap. 9.
Austine) in nullo gloriandum est, quandoquidem nostrum nihilest: It is God
that works in us both the will and the deed, and therefore let him that
glories, glory in the Lord. But for the points in question, they might sure
be debated with less edge and stomach, as they are at this day in the very
Jnter aliqu^t Iesuitas and Dominicanos.
Church of Rome: and it were happy, if we could suffer charity to moderate in
all our disputations. If it be truth we seek, and no^ victory, why take we
not the counsel of Saint Paul, (...), To seek and speak Ephesians. 4. 15.
truth in love. Since the matters questioned are clogged and perplexed with so
many insuperable difficulties: that the greatest Wits and Spirits of all Ages
have here found themselves entangled in a maze, and at length after all vexing
disquisitions, seeing no evasion, no issue out of this Labyrinth, no bank or
bottom in this Ocean, were forced to check their restless repining
understandings with S. Paul's, O Altitudo! Since on all hands they are Pareus in
Iren. Frid. 3 Palat^n Confess ad fin. ^dmon. Ne. ^stad.
confessed to be not fundamental, not essential to the faith, since our own
Church (as the C^lestin. Epis. (...) ad Epist G^ll. c. ult. Vide Epistolas
Prosp. and Hilarij ad Aug.
Primitive) in great wisdom has thought meet here to walk in a latitude, and
to be sparing in her definitions; why should we not all be wise unto sobriety,
and let God alone with his secrets? why may not our Romans 141 Phil. 2 3. -- 3.
15. 2 Timothy 2. 22. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 7. See Perkins in Gal 1. 2. and Gal 3. 15 Vid.
in g nem S(...). erga dissen tientes a se mo lestiam epist. 73. ad Iubaian. in
fine; and in praefat. council. Ca^th^^g. ^audat^^ sepeab ^^ag de bap. cont.
Donat l. 2 6. ult. and l 2. c. 3. and l. 4 c. 8, 9. etc.
hearts be united, though our heads do differ? why do we not desire rather
safely and sweetly to compose these differences, then rashly and with Aug.
Enchir. ad Laurent c. 59.
danger to define them: and forbear all Capital censures either way, which
must needs involve many holy souls now at rest with God, many Bez. Annot
major. in Rom 11. v. 35. and Calv. Inst. l. 3. cap. 22. Sect. 1. and Sect 8
vid.*
Catholic Bishops of the ancient Church, many learned and godly Doctors of
our own, nay entire reformed Churches, all which have varied in these
opinions, though most nearly linked in their affections? The fair and moderate
carriage of these controversies between those P. Melans. in Rom 9. Sixth. Sen.
lib. 6. ann. 251.
two reverend men (whose memories we justly honor) Vide cum in praefat. ad Loc
com Melanct. Gallice a seversos. and epistolas (...).
John Calvin, and Philip Melancthon, easily persuades me that their violent
followers at this day are not more learned, but more uncharitable. And it
appears by that which M. Exam. of Ioh. Careless.
Fox has recorded, that our own blessed Martyrs in the days of Queen Mary,
in their very prisons freely disputed and dissented in these opinions. And
Bishop Hooper has left his judgment to posterity, in the Preface to his
Exposition of the Decalogue, which happily he learnt at Zurich of H. Bullinger
his intime friend and familiar. In all likelihood, the wit of man cannot better
determine these doubts, then as our most gracious and religious Sovereign has
done, by silencing them; for the best charm against a Spirit of contention, is
to strike it dumb. Wherein he has worthily imitated the wisdom and piety of
his blessed Father (our late great Peacemaker) who by the same means quenched
a dangerous sparkle kindling upon the Protestants of France, and likely to
inflame them, in a nice question about justification. God Almighty grant us
here the same success, give us holy wisdom to temper our zeal, and unite us
all in the holy bond of truth and love. I pass from our Pastors wholesome
doctrine, to his holy life.

For 2 Timothy 2. 15.
(...) to talk aright is but one part of our duty, the other is Gal. 2. 14
(...), to walk aright. Doubtless, the life of a Minister should be most
exemplary in holiness, he should be a pattern of sanctification to all his
people. Like Catoes Orator, he must be Seen praf. ad Controv.
Vir bonus dicendi peritus, it is not enough for him to teach the way to
heaven, he musttread it. His speech should be (...), as Lib. 3. ^p. 202.
Isidore Pelusiota, a speech quickened and enlived with action. For sure, there
is no life in his doctrine, who has not doctrine in his life. Our works must
feed as well as our words; and our hands teach piety, no less then our
tongues. Our people with Thomas in another case, except they see, they will not
believe: their eyes must be taught, as well as their ears: therefore said
Paul to his Philippians, Do those things which you have heard Phil. 4. 9.
and seen in me. It was an excellent elogie which Nazianzene gave to great
Basil in his Epitaph, (...), his words were thunder and his life lightning:
Thus it should be with all us, my holy brethren: If sin now grown shameless
and impudent, be deaf to the thunder of our voices, we must discountenance
and strike it dead with the lightning of a pure conversation: if we cannot
outcry it, we must outlive it. And no wonder, if such strict mortification,
such severe Christianity be looked for in us: for our devotion must set many
hearts on fire, and like burning Beacons give warning to all the Country.

On the contrary, as in a writing Copy an error does not only show, but even
teach it self, the common lines still aiming at their original; so here, the
sins of teachers are the teachers of sin, others lewd example does but
countenance evil, theirs in a sort commands it. And therefore as Isidore
Pelusiota has judiciously Lib. 2 ep. 121.
remarked, in ^evit. 4. the Lord appointed as great a sacrifice, yea the same,
for expiation of the Levit 4.
Priests sin and for the sin of the whole Congregation; implying that all our
sins are public and scandalous; that which is but a small blemish in any
other coat, is a foul stain in a linen Ephod; infirmities in other men, are
enormities in us; and that which is sin in them, in us is more then sacrilege.
A wicked Priest is the vilest creature upon earth, and most disnonors God; for
the people quickly loath the sacrifice, if once the sons of Eli be sons of
Belial.

What then shall I say, but pray with Moses, Lord let thy Vrim and Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
thy Thummim be with thine Holy ones; or with David, Let all thy Priests he
clothed with righteousness, let Holiness to the lord be written upon al our
hearts and foreheads, that we may all endeavor to be seriously and solidly
pious, and be able to say to our people, as Gideon to his soldiers, Look on
me and Iud. 7. 17.
do likewise, as ye see me do so do you. Inducements are many and weighty,
some you have heard, many more there are. The glory of God, the credit of
Religion, the honor and propagation of the Gospel, the winning of others
souls, the comfort of our own; all these are much advantaged where
unblameable conversation walks along with wholesome doctrine: and they are no
less endangered where this friendly couple is divorced, where doctrine is
livelesse. Who sees not the persons of unreformed Ministers despicable, their
admonitions cold and heartlesse, their instructions without authority, their
reproves without liberty? and no wonder! For whilst they should summon their
hearers before Gods tribunal, and arraigne them for pride, ambition, luxury,
drunkenness, covetousnes, -- or such vices, their own conscience within will
needs answer and cry guilty. And experience sometime tells us what combats such
men have when they fall upon Texts that point the finger at their own sores.

My censure then must needs be sharp against those unworthy sons of I evi,
who carry fire in their doctrine, but water in their lives; whose tongues are of
a large size, but their hands are withered, who are Divines as Epictetus in
Noct. Attie. lib. 17. cap. 19.
Agellius said that many were Philosophers, (...), Philosopha sententia, ignava
opera, Stoickes in word, Epicures in deed; who by their loose and dissolute
manners pour contempt not only upon their own faces, but upon their whole
Tribe, and their venerable calling. These are they that expose us all to
public reproach, whilst the world gathers an ignorant and malicious conclusion
from a premise borrowed from these; Some Ministers are unsavory salt, therefore
let them all be trodden under foot. But our personal contempt is nothing to the
dishonor of God, the blemish of religion, the blasphemy of aliens, the loss of
innumerable souls that are ready to follow these wandering guides by heaps and
hundreds into the mouth of hell. Surely, these verbal Doctors, these worklesse
talkers shall one day stand dumb and speechles, when God shall pose them with
that terrible question, P^ 50. 16 Romans 2. 21.
Why do thou take my laws into thy mouth, thou which hate to be reformed?
Is not this in Naz. orat. 1.
Nazianzens proverb, to be (...), to profess thy self a Chirurgian to heal
the sores of others, whilst thine own body runs with bloody issues? Nay first
of all, Physician, heal thy self; try the virtue of thy drugs upon thine own
diseases, lest otherwise thou prove like that ridiculous Apothecary in Lucian,
who sold medicines to cure the cough, and was shrewdly troubled with one
himself. As when the hand is tuned to the tongue, it makes a sweet and
delightful harmony, so no discord so harsh and incongruous as when the hand is
jarring, and runs in a contrary tone. A Kingdom divided against it self,
cannot stand, says our Savior; no more can a Ministry: and such a divided
Ministry is that, where the doctrine condemns the life, and the life confutes
the doctrine. The importance of the matter makes me thus tedious. We have done
with one argument pressing our Pastor to his Cure, taken from the quality of
the Minister, he is a Pastor, therefore to feed. Two more follow in the two
last words: 1. drawn from our peoples quality, they are sheep, 2. from their
relation, Christ's sheep, not ours: Of these two in one word, for I will not
handle, but touch them.

The simplicity and stolidity of sheep is such, that it has given occasion to
a proverb In De Hist. Anim. lib. 9. c. 3.
Aristotle, (...), sheepish manners, is a proverbiall form of speech: and
therefore sheep stand in need of a Pastor to feed them. Though now adaves
((...)) some of our sheep will take upon them to feed and teach their Pastors.
It Is true, a very sheep is not such a stupid thing but it can by a natural
judgment make choice of good nourishment. If it be turned into a pasture where
there are some venomous herbs, some grass sweet and convenient; by instinct of
nature it can distinguish the one from the other, feeds, upon the one, and
abstaines from the other. And the reasonable sheep of Christ shall thy be
unprovided of the like necessary prudence? No, himself gives them this
testimony, that they hear his voice, they know it, they follow it, and they
fly from the voice of strangers. Ioh. 10. 4. And therefore we have great reason
to think and hope very well, of our poor Forefathers that lived and died
under the darkest, times of Popery. They had then indeed a pack of blind and
wicked Pastors, which were (as S. Cyprian* Epist. 11. speaks of such) Lanii
magis quam Pastores, rather Butchers then Shepherd: Those deceitful nurses
tendered to Gods people the milk of his word, but mingled with poison; offered
bread, but mixed with leaven. As in false coins of brass or copper. ^ever some
fragments of good gold and silver are intermingled to add a color: so those
compounded or rather confounded pure truth and religion with false and
pernicious error and corruption. But no doubt the good people of God took
only the milk, left the poison; received the bread, rejected the leaven; fed
heartily upon the plain word of grace and mercy by Christ, and scantly touched
the new dishes and devices of Rome, which (by Gods especial providence) were
of so hard digestion, of such a high and subtle strain, that vulgar capacities
could not reach them, and so could not be poisoned by them.

Again, a sheep is a creature not more simple then innocent: And to this end
must all our labors with our People, all their endeavors aim, that they may be
at length presented as a flock of harmless sheep to the immaculate I amb of
God, the soverain Pastor. Otherwise he will not acknowledge the^ for his. For
his Church is a Communion of Saints, a flock of sheep, not a herd of swine or a
kennell of dogs, or a den of wolves, tigers, etc.

Last of all, the most considerable and pressing motive to care and diligence
in our holy calling, is that which now in the last place I can but mention. It
is the flock of Christ which thou art charged to seed; they are his sheep, not
thine. His, dearly esteemed, dearly purchased with the price of his blood, and
thy soul for theirs if any miscary through thy perfidiousnesse. Now then,
can thou neglect so precious a pledge which thy Master has deposited with
thee, and committed to thy trust? can thou think much to spend a few dropps
of thy sweat upon them for whom Christ shed so much of his blood? If thou have
no pity on their souls, yet have pity on thine own, and be persuaded to
diligence either by the love or by the fear of that Lord who will one day make
just retribution, and either richly recompense thy faithfulness, or severely
punish thy treachery. For conclusion, let me bespeak and entreat you, Reverend
Fathers and Brethren, in the words of a divine Apostle, Act. 20. 28. Take heed
to your selves and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you
Bishops, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood.
and 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the flock of God which depends on you caring for it,
not by constraint, but willingly not for filthy lucre but of a ready mind: Not
as if ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that you may be ensamples to the
flock. And when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive an
incorruptible Crown of glory.

Soli Deo gloria.
Page 4 lin. 17. for So read Lo.

Pa. 24. l. 19. (...), r. (...).

An Advertisement to the Reader, touching the History of the Quarrels of Pope
Paul 5. with the State of Venice.
The Translator to the Reader.
IN a more perfect Copy of that History pretended to be printed at Lions,
but indeed at Venice, M DC XXIV (which I have lately seen by the courtesy of
my worthy and learned friend M. W. Boswell,) there is annexed at the end, by
the same judicious Author of the History, (and wanting in that Copy of Geneva,
which before I followed,) a particular and memorable Information touching some
essential circumstances in the Accommodation of that great Difference. Which
because it is the life of the whole History, and serves much to clear the
Venetian cause from the forgeries of the Court of Rome, (which was the Authors
maine intention,) I have thought meet here to communicate it with the Reader,
done out of Italian into English with fidelity: as follows.

BEing a thing which has never happened, that a Breve of Censures, so solemnly
published by the Pope, and resisted with so great constancy, should be
abolished without any writing or act done in Rome: it has bred in many persons
a curiosity to know the truth of all passages in this business; and has given
matter to those, who in all such contestations would seem to have the victory,
and are wont to countenance their Designs with forged writings, to use also
this same artifice upon this present occasion. And therefore they have in this
case also counterfaited 4 writings, to wit, 1. A Breve unto the Card. of
Ioyeuse, which gives him faculty to take away the Censures: 2. An Instrument of
Absolution by the said Cardinal, dated 21 April: 3. An Instrument of the
delivery of the Prisoners; and 4. A Decree of the Senate for the restitution of
the Religious, and for releasing the sequestration of the revenewes of such
Ecclesiastics as were gone out of the State. Which writings they have not
dared to divulge in formal Copies, but only dispersed underhand some
abridgments of them: with intention it may be, that after some time (when they
may not be so easily detected and confuted, as at this present) they may be
produced and pretended to be true, yea and so to be believed of necessity, as
this Policy has often well succeeded to These men, who have many times given
color to many such false writings, prejudicial to diverse Princes.

Now purposing to speak particularly of all those four false writings, we
will begin with the first, which contains a forged Breve unto the Card. of
Ioyeuse, giving him power to take away the Censures.

Whether the Pope has indeed dispatched such a Breve unto the said Card.
prescribing him a form of Absolving from the Excommunication, Protestation,
Reservation, and other clauses (the summaries whereof are scattered abroad,) I
can neither affirm nor deny. Only I will say, that many times at Rome they
publish such Breves, though they that have interest never saw them; which yet
are extant: and yet the memory does remain in the Histories, that all the
Business had passed quite contrary to that which in such Breves is reported.
Gregory 2. having commantled Alphonsus King of Spain, that leaving the office
of the Mozarabes he receive that of Rome, Innocentius 3. writes lib 9. epist.
2. that it was accordingly received: yet all the Historians of Spain do agree,
that the King would never endure any alteration in this office, nor admit the
Roman. In Cap. 1. de postul. Praelatorum. Innocent 3. in the year 1199.
says, that the Interdict against France, (because the K. Philip Augustus had
put away his wife Isemberg) was observed in that Kingdom: Notwithstanding all
the French Historians with one voice accord that it was not observed, and that
the King punished all such of his Clergy as dared to execute the desires, or to
approve the pretensions of the Pope. I will further add, that many times when
such Bulls have been published under the name of the Popes, they themselves
have been constrained afterward to deny them, or confess them to have been
extorted. Adrian the 2. anno 870. sent a severe Monitorie to Charles the Bald
K. of France, commanding him to forbear to seize upon the Kingdom of
Lotharius his deceased Nephew, and to the same effect writing his Letters to
the Prelates and Nobility of the Realm. The King nevertheless prosecuting
his purposes, answered the Pope with freedom and bitterness. Wherefore his
Holiness in his reply to the King, first amply commends the Royal virtues
wherewith he heard that he was adorned, then testifies his great good will
toward him, and concludes that if he had formerly received from him any
Letters of another tenor, or of a more hard or sharp or rough style, he prays
him to believe that he was surprised, and that they were stolen from him
unawares, or when he was sick, or happily counterfaited.

The Lawyers do all consent, that no man can prove himself to have
Jurisdiction over another by showing a Citation, or Decree, or Sentence,
unless he can show that the Citation was intimated, and the Decree obeyed, and
the sentence put in execution. Be it that the Pope did dispatch this Breve in
question unto the Cardinal of Ioyeuse, (which I neither believe, nor deny,)
yet seeing it was here never seen, either by the Prince, or by any public
Minister, nor even by any private person of this State, (so far as that is
known) what ever it contain, that cannot be any prejudice to the Reasons and
Rights of this Republique. And if any will pretend to found or infer ought
upon this Breve, it belongs to him to make proof that it was received, or else
presented, or finally at least seen or known or brought to some man's notice;
nothing of which is true in this whereof we speak. And if in time to come any
Breve be fained or produced of what tenor soever, it ought not to prevail
against the faith and testimony of true histories, which will bear witness to
Posterity that no Breve at all passed in this action. Wherefore it remains
only to be considered, what the Cardinal has done or executed.

Concerning which, there is 2
dispersed a certain Instrument of one Paul Catel an Apostolic Protonotary,
wherein (to give more credit to the forgery) are named particularly 6
Counselors, 3 of the chief of the Council of 40, and 16 Sages: which
affirms, that the Cardinal did absolve them from the Excommunication,
imposing penance upon them at the pleasure of their Confessor, and that the
Duke, the Counselors, and Sages aforesaid did humbly receive it: in the
presence of Monsieur de Fresne, and Peter Posier Sieur de la Paume.

In this particular, any person may easily discern (by the sole evidence of
the fact known to all the world, and more clear then the Sun at midday,)
whether the Republique has desired or received Absolution, as the said
Instrument does falsely suggest; or rather has always constantly persisted in
defense of their innocence, which had no need of any Absolution. It is a case
evident out of the Word of God, that the Church has no authority to remit the
sins of any, or to grant Absolution to any, save only to such as are
penitent: But in the opinion of all Divines and Canonists there is not the same
reason of Censures, from which (as they jointly affirm) one may be absolved
though he do not repent, though he demand it not, yea though he resist and
refuse to accept absolution. This has bin done by some Popes of Rome, and one
memorable example we have in Philip le Bell K. of France, who imprisoned the
Bishop of Rimini for some bold words and commandments, which he delivered in
the name of Pope Boniface 8. Whereupon the Pope excommunicated him, in the
year 1300, and the year following 1301 thundered out another Excommunication
together with an Interdict, because the King refused to acknowledge him for his
temporal Superior; and the heat of these matters passed so far, that the King
chased out of France the Archdeacon of Narbon the Popes Nuncio, and cast the
Popes Bull publicly into the fire: and this Controversy continued till the
year 1303: when the Pope sending out a third Excommunication against Philip,
the King sent to Anagni (where then the Pope was) Mons de Negaret, who (with
the Colonnesi and some others) there took the Pope prisoner, who died after
some few days. The King never sought after any absolution from the former
Censures, but notwithstanding, Benedict 11. (who succeeded Boniface) in the
same year 1303, absolved the King from them, making express mention in his
Bull, that the King had not required it. All this is recorded by the Historians
of France and England. This demeanor of the king did not proceed from pride or
any evil mind, but from the conscience of his innocence: In testimony whereof
Clement 5 anno 1305 declared in Consistory, that all which the King had done
against Boniface was done with a good intention, and afterward 1311 in the
General Council of Vienna, the Council and the Pope made declaration that
the censures fulminated by Boniface against the king were unjust.

It remains therefore a thing apparent and manifest, that although commonly
such are assoiled from Censures, as do acknowledge* themselves rightly
censured, and being sorry for their faults require penance and absolution; yet
sometimes the Prelate himself, who has unduly proceeded in his Censures
against an innocent, for his own reputation or some other cause may give him
absolution though he desire it not, nay though he openly protest that he has
no need of it. Now our false Paul Catel pretends that the Cardinal de
Ioyeuse did absolve the Duke and the College: But did they demand it! or did
he require them to confess their fault, or assoile them upon their petition?
This he cannot say; for the Prince and Senate having from the beginning
protested to esteem the Popes Censures as null, and commanded that his
Interdict (as null in like manner) should not be observed, they never after
altered their judgment and resolution. And therefore Divine Service was still
continued both in Venice and throughout the State. Yea that very morning of
April 21, (being the day of the pretended Absolution) Mass and other divine
Offices were celebrated (as they are wont) throughout all the City, and in all
the Cities of the Signory, and that same morning (according to the custom of
other days) the Prince together with the College heard Mass in his Chapel,
before the coming of the Cardinal. Wherefore the Republique has never
acknowledged any error committed, or departed from their first deliberation. If
they had, it had been meet at least that they should correct their error, if
not do penance. And the Ecclesiastiques are so curious in the proclaiming of
their Rights and Conquests, that when any one repents and craves their
Absolution, they are wont to make thereof public demonstrations, cautions for
the time to come, and the like things, wherewith their Decretals are full, and
many such examples recorded in Histories, which cannot be denied or blamed by
them who have confessed their fault and asked pardon. Seeing therefore it is
true and notorious to all the world, that this pretended Interdict was not
observed for one moment; what man can be so foolish and simple, as to believe
that the State has any whit repented? But if they say, that Absolution was
given to the College without their consent, who could hinder them to do it in
such a fashion? Absolution from Censures may be thus given to him that is
willing, and to him that is unwilling, as well in absence as in presence,
either with words, or after any other manner. And therefore they may make short
and tell us, that the Cardinal in his lodging, or in his Barge has given this
solemn Absolution: for who can deny it? they say no more in effect, when they
say that he did secretly under his hood make the sign of the Cross, which
served for an Absolution; if he did so, who could hinder him?

It is true, the Cardinal had a design to give Absolution, if he could have
prevailed: And he attempted much to this end, but always without success, by
reason of the Senates constancy, who ever refused it as being well assured of
their innocence. Wherefore being prevented, he endeavored to do some action in
public which might carry some appearance of a Benediction or an Absolution. And
to this purpose, first he desired that he might say Mass unto the Prince, then
that he might accompany him to Mass in the Church: But being not able to
obtain his consent to either of these, he desired him to receive at least his
Benediction (as we have Hist. lib. 7. page 415.
said) alleging that the Apostolic Benediction ought not at any time to be
refused. To which when it was replied, that verily it ought not in other cases,
when it gave no suspicion of a fault confessed, but it ought in this where it
might cherish such a suspicion: though the Cardinal (either as he walked, or
sitting in the College with the Senators,) did make a Cross under his Hood,
yet no man can hence argue that Absolution was received, no more then he can
draw the like conclusion from a thousand Crosses which the Cardinal might have
made in his Lodging, or in his Barge, or elsewhere. But what kind of
Absolution was that, whereof 22 persons named whilst the Cardinal was in the
College, not any one arose from his seat, or took his bonet from his head?
what sign did there appear of receiving absolution? Add hereunto, that the
Pope in his Breve excommunicated the Duke, the Senate, and their Adherents: it
was necessary then to absolve all these. The counterfeit Paul Catel says,
that the College represented them all. But where were the Letters of
Procuration? where will he find this representation? On other like occasions,
when a Community is assoiled, they are careful at Rome to have their
Instrument of Procuration registered. They may remember that anno 1606 they did
imprint at Rome the Procuratory Letters of them who represented the Republique
to Pope Clement 5. and three other Procurations of them who represented it to
Pope Julius: But now they pretend that all the Senate was absolved in some
persons, to whom they gave no such mandate or commission. This is a passage
well beseeming their sufficiency and learning in the Laws.

But by one clear and brief reason we may dispell all doubt, and convince
these falsaries. In the Hist p. 402.
accommodating of these differences there was not any authentic writing made,
presented, or intimated either by the Pope, or by the Republique, or by their
Ministers as all confess; saving only the Prince his Letters to the Prelates
of the State, published 21 April, and delivered the same day to the Cardinal
de Ioycuse, and by him received and sent unto the Pope: In which was said, that
By the grace of God, a means was found, Hist p 423.
whereby the Popes Holiness was certified of the uprightnese and sincerity of
the Republique in their actions: -- Which words whosoever will consider though
but superficially, and weigh withal the time wherein they were delivered to
the Cardinal, being the very same time which Catel assigns to the supposed
Absolution; he will surely rest well satisfied that the Prince and Senate have
ever disclaimed any error or trespass, and did profess so much to the
Cardinal in writing, in that very point of time wherein Catel faineth them to
have received Absolution.

Much more might be said in confirmation of this truth; but what has been
spoken may abundantly suffice. Yet we will a little further discover the
forge^ie of this Instrument, by some other circumstances. The Cardinal de
Ioyeuse coming that morning, was met by the Prince (accompanied with the
College) at the stairs of his Lodging, and conducted by a private passage
into the Hall of the College, where the Secretaries enter first, then followed
the Prince, and with him the Cardinal, whose train was carried by one of his
Servants; after them Monsieur de Fresne, and then the Senators. And being come
to their ordinary seats, each one took his place, and the Traine-bearer went
out. Then the Cardinal spoke according to the written tenor. Where were then
Paul Catel and Peter Posier, the one a Notary, the other a witness? Certainly
both were not present, but one of them it may be, which bare the Train of the
Cardinal: See here, the first falsitie. But when did the Cardinal give that
Absolution? before he sat down, or after? If before, verily he might give
many such Absolutions, as we said before, in his way, or in his Barge, before
he came to the Palace, or even in his Lodging, which might be as effectual. It
is a thing known to the Canonists, that Absolution may be given to one that
seeks it not as well in his absence, as if he were present. But if they say,
that it was no ambulatory Absolution, but done in the College after they were
set, where were then Paul Catel and Peter Posier? since none remained there
save only Monsieur de Fresne.

To be short, the world cannot be deluded. Either they have absolved the
Republique upon their request, or against their will. If they confess this
Absolution to have passed on them against their will, to what end do they
busy themselves to forge writings and Attestations for a thing which might be
done in a thousand fashions? Which practices as they are in their power, so can
they not any ways prejudice the innocence of the Republique, nor derogate from
their rights. But if they pretend that the Absolution was received and desired
by the Republique, let them forge as many writings as they please, yet shall
they be all convicted by this, that the Interdict has not been observed for
any one moment of time, as also manifestly appears by the Letters of the
Prince, published, imprinted and received by the Cardinal.

Now touching that Instrument 3
of the delivery of the prisoners, it is no wonder that we have Hister. page
422.
before related, how Marc Ottobon Secretary of the State required an Instrument
or act to be made by Hieronimo Polverin and John Rizzard the Dukes Notaries,
containing, that he Ottobon had consigned the Prisoners to Monsieur de Fresne
in gratification of the most Christian King, with protestation not to prejudice
hereby the authority which the Republique has in judging the Ecclesiastiques.
For now quite contrary, on the other side, they have divulged abroad the
abridgement of a certain Instrument, wherein the foresaid Paul Catel
Apostolic Protonotary does affirm, that Marc Ottobon the Secretary and John
Moretto Captain Major have consigned the same into the hands of Claudio
Montano a Minister of the Popes, without protestation, condition, or any
reservation. About the year 1185 in Verona fell out a controversy between
Lucius 3 Pope, and the Emperor Frederic 1. about the patrimony of the
Countess Matilde, which both of them pretended to belong unto himself; The
Pope pleaded that the Countess had bequeathed it unto the Church, and the
Emperor that she did confer it upon the Empire, and both parties produced
writings, in authentic form as from the Countess who was dead 76 years
before. By reason of which contradiction, the difference could not be
determined, the Pope persisting on the one side, and the Emperor on the other,
and each grounding his claim upon their contrary writings. But in the occasion
whereof we speak, not so much because the memory thereof is fresh as because
the reasons are manifest, it will be an easy matter to discern the truth.

And first for the fact it self, the Republique in the cause of the prisoners
has not had any Treaty at all with the Pope, or with any of his Ministers; but
only resolved to give them to the most Christian King by way of gratification.
Now by this donation no man can pretend, that any prejudice was done to their
Rights and Authority; since, howsoever afterward the most Christian king
disposed of the prisoners, that did not any way appe^taine to the Signiory. And
therefore the Secretary required notice to be taken only of his delivering
them to Monsieur de Fresne, it no way importing him what the said Lord should
after do with those prisoners. Though he saw when the said Ambassador
consigned them to one there present, who touched them; yet he judged not fit
for him to enter hereupon into any act, and therefore he did not interpose one
word in any sort. Wherefore a true Narrator of this action, ought not to say,
that Ottobon delivered the prisoners into the hands of Claudio Montano, without
protestation, condition, or any reservation; but that Monsieur de Fresne
delivered them in presence of Marc Ottobon, he being silent. And this much be
said touching the verity of these two forenamed contrary Instruments, which as
they are very different in the substance, so are they no less diverse in their
lawful form. For in the one is observed all that which is needful for a
legal validity; and the other is defective in things essential. All Lawyers
agree, that to the framing of an Instrument, must be presupposed the person of
a Notary, created by the lawful authority of the Sovereign in that place
where it is to be framed, and for the form it is necessary that he be
acknowledged for such by both the parties, and required by them both, or at
least by one of them, according as he has interest.

Now in our case, the prisoners being presented to Monsieur de Fresne by Marc
Ottobon, who spoke in the name of the Senate unto the Ambassador, both he
himself and the other two Notaries of the Duke, are lawful and public
Notaries of Venice, The Secretary alone was he, who, in all that number of
persons which were present at the consigning of the prisoners, had interest in
that action: and therefore he might lawfully require the Notaries to do their
duty. But on the contrary, who is this Paul Catel, that he should come to draw
an Instrument at Venice, where he is unknown? If it be answered, that he is an
Apostolic Protonotarie, and therefore has power to form Instruments
concerning Ecclesiastiques: to pas^e by that power which we will not now
dispute, though it were not hard to show that this universal proposition
stands in need of many limitations to make it true: But not to touch now upon
that point, in the case whereof we speak, one of the parties was Claudio
Montano, and the other Marc Ottobon and John Moretto. Since then a Notary ought
to be one acknowledged by them both, he could not be Paul Catel, whom one of
the parties did not know at all. Again, it is needful that a Notary be
required to do his part, either by both the parties, or at least by one of
them in the presence of the other, otherwise the act is invalide. Now will they
have the boldness to say that Paul Catel was required by either of them? For
although that Marc Ottobon was present when Monsieur de Fresne said unto the
Cardinal, These are the prisoners, and when Claudio Montano touched them, and
prayed the Officers of Justice to keep them, Ottobon himself being all this
while silent: Yet it was not therefore lawful for Paul Catel to retire
himself, to make an Instrument, and to say that Marc Ottobon did actually
deliver the prisoners without protestation, condition, or reservation; but it
was necessary that Claudio Montano at least should have desired the Notary to
make a public Instrument to this effect, that when Marc Ottobon had heard him
desired to make an Instrument, and thereby known him to be a Notary, and
having occasion to speak, yet notwithstanding kept silence, in this case a
Notary might have recorded his silence, but he could not say that he delivered
the prisoners to Montano, that being an untruth. I wish these prudent men would
take leisure to consider, whether reason of Government do permit unto them,
that a Notarie being in an Assembly where some action passes, should privately
withdraw himself, and without the knowledge of one party form an Instrument:
this considered, if they will not dissemble with their own conscience, they
must confess that they have divulged an untruth, and a nullitie.

The following actions of the State will give yet more light and attestation to
the truth. For in the very year 1607, and also afterward, many Ecclesiastical
persons, both Priests and Friars, were imprisoned, impleaded, and (according to
their merit) absolved or punished: Some for their seditions chased out of the
Signiory and banished, and the Ban of one put in print, to the public notice
of all the world.

Now to that which concerns 4
the fourth Writing, which is a Decree of the Senate for the readmission of
the Religious fugitives, which Paul Catel says he transcribed out of the
Register of the Pregadi, or a Court of the Senate; it is not needful to say
much of this matter. For it is true, that the Senate did consent that such
Religious as went out of the State for the Interdict might return, excepting
only the Jesuits; and that such Religious persons as were gone out only upon
this occasion might be re-established, and their goods and Benefices restored.
And it is true in like manner, that there was a release of sequestration made
upon the revenewes of such as were in Rome or elsewhere out of the Dominion;
true also, that that Decree of the Senate was written, and recorded in the
secret Books of the Counsel of Pregadi. For not any thing of the least moment
is there put in deliberation, which is not first written and read; and being
resolved on, it is registered in those secret Books, and all this was done in
that act of the Senate touching the restitution of the Religious. But these
books are not shown or seen by any person whatsoever, unless he have part
in the Government, or be a Minister of the Senate. And if they think meet to
publish any thing, it is copied out and signed by the hand of a Secretary
only, and of no other. But when the Senate deliberateth to give answer to an
Ambassador or to any other person, calling him into the College, the Secretary
reads it to him: And if that reading do not seem sufficient for the memory
of that Personage to whom it is made, the Secretary reads it over and over
again, until he be fully satisfied. And this same form is observed when the
Person is not called into the College; then a Secretary is sent unto him, and
carrying with him one leaf, which contains the resolution of the Senate, he
reads it to him once and again. In this manner notice was given to the
Cardinal of the Senates Decree touching the restoring of the Religious, which
happily after was communicated by the Cardinal to Paul Catel. But that he has
seen it in the Book, or copied it thence, that he might have it in a more
notable and authentic form, this is a plain and shameless lie: like others
of his, which are apparent by the evidence of the facts themselves.

No discreet person ought to marvel, that the passages of this Treaty are
vainly represented by diverse, and that each one, according to his affection,
draws things to the advantage of the party which he favors: but every man
ought to resolve himself in things that are evident, and believe that the
truth cannot be suppressed: Considering that the Interdict was not observed for
one moment either in Venice, or in any place within the Dominion; that the
Jesuits do still remain banished out of the State; that no writing in this
business was published by either of the parties, save only one with consent
of them both; which was the revocation of the Protestation with Letters from
the Prince directed unto the Prelates of his State, dated April 21, by which
any man may comprehend how things were understood; that such Ecclesiastiques as
committed any great trespasses after the accommodating of these Controversies,
were imprisoned and punished; that if Churches or Religious Houses have a
desire to purchase any immoveables, they must first demand License; and
briefly, that all the Laws heretofore questioned are still punctually executed
and observed; And informing his judgment by these evidences, he ought to
reject all forged and counterfeit Libels, whereof as the former times have
been fruitful and brought forth innumerable, so we cannot hope but that the
times to come will produce some such like, until our Lord enlighten all things
with the glory of his appearing.

FINIS.

