A Consideration of the Deprived and Silenced Ministers Arguments, for their
Restitution to the use and liberty of their Ministry; Exhibited in their
late Supplication, unto the Honorable States assembled in this present
Parliament.

By Gabriel Powel.

Genes. 13.8. Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me, for we
are Brethren.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Thomas Adams. 1606.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of the high Court of Parliament.
WHereas the Solon, or rather the Solomon of this age and Monarchy, our most
gracious and peerless Sovereign, has according unto his singular wisdom
and sincerity of heart, by all good means, labored the Reformation, as of all
his Subjects in general, which refuse to serve GOD with us, in such holy
exercises of Religion, as are already established amongst us, so especially of
such our Brethren in the Ministry, as emulating foreign Noveltie, refuse to
conform themselves unto the ancient approved discipline and ceremonies of our
Church: whom therefore his Highness sought the more earnestly to reclaim,
(as he loved them dearliest) by some correction of their obstinacy, by Silence
and Deprivation, according to the laudable custom and sanctions of the
Ecclesiastical Courts in this behalf.

Now (Right Reverend and Honorable) there are which greatly complain of this
moderate Severitie, and both unfitly and undutifully term it by the most
hateful and odious names of Oppression and Cruelty; which they do as well in
their private talk, in their public Sermons and writings, as also in a late
Supplicatorie Pamphlet directed unto your grave Wisdoms, wherein the Auctor is
not affraide to persuade and provoke your Honorable Court (these are his own
words) to intercede with his Majesty, that he would compel the Reverend
Prelates of this Church, to surcease their rigorous and cruel dealing, who
have soberly and temperately carried themselves in the execution of such
Decrees and Sentences upon them, as their obstinate Superstition had worthily
made them subject unto. By which boldness he takes occasion so to complain
and cry out, as if the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS were banished out of this
Kingdom, GODS worship profanely adulterated, and our whole Ministry
strangely corrupted, to the eternal perdition and destruction of many thousand
Souls. Which grievous complainte, seeing it cannot be unknown to any that
live within these Dominions, to be utterly unjust and untrue, I can but wonder
with what face he could once dare to present it to the most Reverend Senate of
your most Honorable and judicious Court. For howsoever he might persuade
himself, that some preiudicate persons would affect his cause, and embrace his
accusations; yet could he never have the least hope, so to abuse your Wisdoms,
who of your own knowledge are able to convince him of malepert Sycophancie,
and manifest untruth. Notwithstanding all which, this Auctor fearing no rebuke
or shame for his unconscionable dealing (as speaking from Cimmerian darkness
by concealing his name) is enboldened to offer it even unto your Honors, to
provoke you to become suppliants and Su^ters unto his excellent Majesty in
behalf of their cause, or else (at length) to Determine of it your selves,
before you dissolve your meeting.

This Discourse (such as it is) I was commanded (by some in authority) to
peruse, and briefly to refute, which I confess at first I was very unwilling
to take upon me; notwithstanding, I saw the great advantage I should have of my
Brethere^, in the defense and maintenance of a most just and holy Quarrel. For
(besides that I was exceeding loath to intermedle in these domestical
Controversies, and indeed as Abram said unto Lot; ( Genesis 13.8.) Why should
there be strife between them and us, for we are Brethren?) I saw many
excellent wits sit quietly at their studies, being better furnished and more
able to deal in these cases then my self, who come so far behind them in
all sufficiency for this purposse. And specially, waighing my own weakness,
I justly feared to practice this kind of pleading in so high a Court, and
before such Judges, whose wisdoms can so easily discern any which come
before them. But on the other side, when I had thoroughly weighed the equity of
the Cause, the quality of my Vocation, the necessity of the Church, and the
duty of obeying the Authority, whereby I have been enjoined this task, I
presently resolved with my self, to stand in the gap and breach between our
Brethren and us, and according to my poor ability, ability, to perform a
service so just, holy, dutiful and necessary; albeit I knew my Brethrens
affections to be somewhat unkind, and their pens foul and shameless. But
seeing it lies not in our power to make them modest and peaceable, and that we
are called to serve God and his Church, which we are bound to do in good and
evil report, in honor and dishonor, in wealth and woe, in life and death, I
willingly forgive them any injury that may be done unto me for this cause, and
pray our Heavenly Father, that of his infinite mercy and love in Jesus Christ,
he will not impute it unto them.

So being satisfied of all scruples concerning this matter, and knowing no
sufficient cause to the contrary, or other impediment to stay my course, I have
not withdrawn my self, no not for the estimation and reverence I must needs
have of the grave judgment of your Honors, which I saw I could not escape,
but have deemed this Defense to be my most bounden duty to almighty God, to
his excellent Majesty, to your honorable Court, and to this whole Church and
State. Wherefore I have presumed by your Honorable leave and favor, to
maintain against this Plaintiff, to my small power, the glory of God, in the
just defense of his Church, and the honor of the reverend Prelates in their
most lawful proceedings, against such, as by their schism and faction,
disturb the quietness both of our Church and commonweal.

Thus having in all submission and humility, rendered some reason of this my
doing unto your high and Honorable Court, I come now to join issue with my
Antagonist, not doubting but that your Honors, according unto your rare
Wisdom and special love unto Justice, as you do in all other Causes
depending among brethren, so in this, will give equal hearing unto both
parties, and (without partiality and preiudicate affection) will judge
righteous Judgment, that is, simply and absolutely according unto the truth.

The Title of the Supplication.
Certain Arguments to persuade and provoke the most honorable and high court
of Parliament now assembled, and also all other in any high authority, or in
any grace, and credit with them that are in high authority, to promote and
advance the sincere Ministry of the Gospel; as also Zealously to speak for
the Ministers thereof now Degraded, Deprived, Silenced, or Admonished, or
afterward like to be called into question, for Subscription, Ceremonies, strict
observation of the book of common prayer, or for other conformity.

Them that honor me I will honor: and they that despise me, shall be despised.

1. Sam. 2.30. He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not
with me, scatters.

Math. 12.^0. Therefore,

Watch ye: stand fast in the faith; quit you like men, and be strong.

1. Cor. 16.13. To the Christian What here is pretended to the Reader in
general, is indeed specially intended and directed unto the Parliament: as
appears toward the latter end of this first Paragraph.
Reader, Honorable, Worshipful. etc.
TOuching these arguments following, my humble petition to the This pretense
unto the Christian Reader, is because they would not seem to be petitioners
unto the Parliament.
Christian reader (of whatsoever sort and condition) is this, that they may not
be taken as proceeding from one suspecting any religious Noble man or Gentleman
of the Parliament house, but rather from one as with all thanks to God,
acknowledging the godly forwardness of many in both houses, so also earnestly
desiring to quicken the zeal of the best, and to provoke all other, to take
the cause here handled to heart, not only as the cause of poor distressed
men, but as the cause of God; yea to account it also the The Suppliants make
the profession of the Gospel and all Religion, to consist in refusing cap,
surplice, cross, etc Great cry little wool.
maine cause of the whole land, of your selves and all your posterity, and
therefore to prefer the same (according to the daily most godly prayer of
your selves, in your house of Parliament) before al other causes whatsoever,
either concerning any particular persons, or the whole common wealth.

Whereas I have persuaded them to whom I have directed these reasons, to use
all means they may for the doing of any good; I desire that my words may not
be uncharitably construed, of any other means then such, as are suitable to
the cause, viz. of good honest, lawful, peaceable and agreeable to every man's
calling. The like charitable construction I crave of any other words, which
some perhaps may maliciously wrest against my self and the cause.

Whereas also some may seem to pretend fear of his most excellent Majesty's
As if his Majesty would be displeased, if any promoted a religious or honest
cause. A malepert and presumptuous (if not disloyal) Censure.
displeasure to hinder their zeal and courage, such I entreat to consider, how
dishonorable (if not disloyal) it is in good causes to fear the displeasure
of a Prince, who besides his most Christian education from his infancy, has I
know not whereto all his whole paragraph tenddeth if the Suppliants deem not
his Majesty to have forsaken his first love and to have revolted from Religion,
at least in show for a time.
long time publikly given so many worthy testimonies of his piety and
godliness. Love thinks no evil of any, much less of such a Christian
Prince. It believes all, and hops all of every brother, much more of a
religious King. It is the glory of a King not only to find out the secrets of
other, but also sometime to conceal his own. Therefore it is not meet by
present words or deeds, (whereof sometime there may be a deep reason)
always to judge of the mind. Iehu pretended one thing (when he proclaimed a
sacrifice for Baal) but he intended another: Joseph a long time dealt roughly
(both in word and deed) with his brethren yet in the end he showed himself
most loving and kind unto them. Our Savior (for the trial of the woman of
Canaan) seemed a long time to repel her suit, for her daughter, first by
silence, 2. by a sharp reprehension of his disciples, petitioning in her
behalf: and 3. by a more sharp answer to her self. At the last
notwithstanding, he did most graciously open the treasures of his rich
compassion toward her, and sent her away with abundant comfort. Constantius
the Father of Constantine the Great (as Eusebius reports, lib. 1. de vita
Constantini, cap. 11.) at his first entrance into the Empire, made solemn
proclamation, that all which A malicious uncharitable, and unchristian
allegation, to be applied unto the whole state (that loyally obey his Majesty)
especially his Nobles, and Servants. See the Answer.
served him in his court, should either worship Devils, (after the manner of
the Heathen) or give over their places of dignity and honor, and so to be
banished from his court. But by this means when he had tried them that were
faithful, then (to the far greater honor of his Princely wisdom and
piety, than if he had plainly and simply at the first professed the Christian
religion) He disgraced those that had so revolted from God, and rebuked them
with a most Princely and religious rebuke, saying, That they were Traitors to
GOD, and unworthy the service of an Emperor. For how (quoth he) can they keep
faith inviolate toward the Emperor, which are manifestly convinced to be
unfaithful to the most excellent and mighty God.

On the contrary, those that for conscience had forsaken their places, and
given over their honors, he most highly graced, as those that would be
faithful to the Emperor, because they had been so unto God: yea, he
pronounced them worthy to be reckoned among the chief and principal friends
of the Emperor, and to be worthily much more esteemed then Treasuryes full of
great riches. Therefore also he preferred some of them to special attendance
upon his own person, and other some he advanced to the chief government of
the Empire under himself.

I leave the For if they had particularly applied these things, their malice
had bin the more manifest
application of these things. Only I wish such consideration of them, that men
may not be rash (upon any supposed apparences) to judge Christian Princes,
especially who in former times have many ways testified their sincere
religion: yea I wish less censuring No bolder and securer censurers of al
sorts and degrees of men under the cope of heaven, then these singular and
self conceipted Refractaries.
of them, and more earnest praying for them in secret, before him that seeeth
in secret and has promised to reward openly: yea as David blessed the Lord God
of Israel, and the counsel of Abigail, and Abigail her self, for keeping him
from sheading innocent blood, 1. Sam. 25.32. etc. so (to omit what How
prodigal they are of the Kings thanks!
thanks you may have from his excellent Majesty) who also knows, how even
they, that for the present do most resist the matters hereafter pleaded for,
will in the end bless God and your counsel, and your selves, for staying them
from their proceeding in their hard courses against An evident slander of the
State: as if notorious and manifest Schism were the Ministry of the Gospel.
the ministry of the Gospel, and the salvation of the people depending
thereupon?

Finally, albeit I could have added many other arguments to these that I have
here written for the further whetting of the zeal of those to whom these
causes principally appertain yet seeing these do arise to such a Is a
triobolar Pamphlet such a huge quantity or volume? It might seem the penman
of this Supplication was the worthy Author of many of the late two leand Libels.
quantity: I thought it best to spare the further pains of my self, and of
the reader: hoping that these which I have written shall be sufficient so to
kindle the zeal of them that love the Lord Jesus and his truth, that they
shall be so full of matter ( as Such presumptuous and self conceipted Elibues
are these malcontent Ministers, who take upon them to instruct such as be wiser
then themselves. Vide Gregorin hunc locum.
Elihu speaks of himself) Job. 32.19. that their spirit within them, shall
compel them, and that their bellies shall be as the wine which has no vent,
and like the new bottels that burst, that so they may speak to take breath,
and open their lips, for answer of them (if any such do show themelues) that do
oppugn, or shall oppugn the sincere ministry of the Gospel. In which hope I
commend them to God, and to the word of his Grace.

A Consideration of the Preface.
IN the Preface, by way of Anticipation, the Authors of this Supplication
labor to express their meaning more plainly, and to clear some words and
phrases, which otherwise might seem subject to missinterpretation, and (as
they speak) to uncharitable construction: which cautelous dealing verily is
most necessary in this carping age, wherein the common Adversary, to cover
his own shame for his rebellious and traitorous Positions and Practices, lies
houering in the wind, ready to catch at any thing that may advantage himself,
and prejudice our cause.

And surely for my own part, I am so far from taking any exception against my
Brethren in this kind, Of the obedience of Precisians toward their Prince.
that I verily think, that all we professing the Gospel within this kingdom
of England, howsoever some have folishly made a breach and division amongst us,
about Cross, Surplice, etc. do as heartily and faithfully love, and as
dutifully affect and embrace our Prince or King (yea of whatsoever Religion)
and are as ready and willing to defend his Person and Honor against all
adversary power or treacherous attempt whatsoever, as any other people or
nation under the sun.

Wherefore, as I cannot allow the opinion of such as give out, that these our
factious Brethren, are as dangerous enemies unto the State, as the Papists,
those Antichristian and bloody Traitors, that never are faithful unto any,
but unto the Pope and the Devil: So I cannot but worthily commend that
memorable apothegme of that reverend and learned Prelate Doctor Elmer of happy
memory, sometimes L. Bishop of London, who when this question was debated in
his hearing, gravely answered. If I were in the company but of one Papist, I
might justly fear the loss of my life, but being amongst ten thousand
Precisians well might I be affrayde of my Byshoprike, but never of my throat.
And again, An Apothegme of Bishop Elmer,
The one would cut my coat, and the other my throat.

Neither do I speak this, absolutely to free such as be Refractarie among us,
from all disobedience unto Magistrates, but only from suspicion of Treason and
Rebellion. For otherwise it cannot be denied, That Precisians are Schismatic
and turbulent.
but that presumptuously and wilfully they contend with the Magistrate,
impugning his authority in things indifferent, and sovereignty in
Ecclesiastical causes (though not in the same sense and degree as the Papists
do) and also that they make a faction and manifest Schism in the Church of
GOD: which all of them do for carnal respects: And why
some because they know not otherwise how to be maintained but by depending
upon that faction, some to gratify their Benefactors and Patrons, and to
please their Friends, some for coffeehouse and want of preferment, some for
giddiness of innovation, some for pride of heart and self-loue, some for
hatred of order and restraint of their liberty, some still to retain the
opinion of constancy in perseuering singular, and others of mere ignorance.
which yet is wilful and affected, seeing they will not learn the State of the
Controversy which they are bound to know, and therefore cannot be excused.

But two things specially may be justly censured and taxed in this Preface:
whereof the first is, that herein they have quite altered the state of the
question in controversy, between us: which surely argues a desperate
diffidence to prevail in their suite, by declining the (...), or special
matter of difference: For, whereas it is confessed by themselves, as well in the
very Title, as afterward in the Book it self Arg. 16. and Arg. 18. that the
whole controversy between us is, but about Subscription, Ceremonies, the
strict observation of the book of Commen Prayer, and other Conformity unto
the Discipline and order of our Church (for this I take to be their meaning)
which are but matters of indifferency and of small moment in themselves: Now
they seem to account it, forsooth, the Cause of GOD, the Ministry of the
Gospel, the salvation of the people, the maine cause of the land, of all the
States of this kingdom and all their posterity; and such a cause, as is to be
preferred before al other causes whatsoever, either concerning any particular
persons, or the whole Commonwealth: as if all Religion and Piety depended upon
refusing of Cross and Surplice, and such other accidental circumstances.

The Latter is, that they boldly, presumptuously and undutifully censure his
Majesty, for coldenesse in Religion, in relinquishing his former profession,
or at least for deep dissembling in seeming to pretend one thing, and to
intend another: as if he had bin trained up and taught in the Jesuits schools,
to Equivocate: (which fault, would God, some of their faction and followers did
so little practice, as his Highness abhors it.) Whereas his Highness religious
heart is evidently and easily discerned, to be fully seasoned with true piety
and devotion, as well by his present sincere profession of the Gospel, and
unfeigned love unto the Ministers thereof, as also by daily effects of says and
a good conscience, which as sweet smelling fruits do lively demonstrate the
goodness and excellency of the tree. But I refer the farther consideration
of this point unto your grave wisdoms: only it suffiseth me to have detected
the license of their raving pens, the restraint of which fury, specially
belongs unto your Honorable and judicious Court. Which (questionles) your
Honors will the rather perform, considering what an unchristian conceit they
have as well of your Honorable Assembly, as also of all other his Majesty's
loving Subjects and Servants, who loyally obey him and serve the Lord of
Hosts, according unto the Religion established; as is manifest by their
instance and allegation of that example of the Emperor Constantius his Nobles,
who became Idolaters and Atheists, to curry favor with the Emperor: as also
because afterward, in the 8. Argument, they boldly censure your Honors, as
not regarding the Church, nor the cause of God, faining moreover, how GOD and
his son CHRIST JESUS stand, as it were, at your Parliament House door
knocking, and craving to be let in, insinuating thereby, that GOD is not
President of your honorable Assembly, and that all your godly and Religious
Acts have been hitherto decreed and concluded, I know not by what spirit. Now
let us examine their Arguments.

Certain Arguments to provoke this present high Court of Parliament to zeal,
for the Ministers now silenced.
ANSWER.
THe maine Proposition of this Supplication is this, All the Nobles and States
assembled in the present Court of Parliament, are bound, zealously to speak
for the Ministers now degraded, deprived, silenced, or admonished, or afterward
like to be called into question, for Subscription, Ceremonies, strict
observation of the Book of Common Prayer, or for other Conformity. This
Proposition being laid down almost in so many words, both in the general title
of the Book, and also in the 16. and 18. Arg. the Suppliants labor to prove
by XIIX. sundry Reasons, all which, albeit they be Common Arguments (excepting
one or two) and may be urged for Popery, or any other Heresy what soever,
which the learned know to be an intolerable fault in a Scholar, and were a
sufficient answer unto them all; yet we will examine the^ severally.

I. ARGUMENT.
FOr the ground of all that follows (to That is but justly omitted that can
make nothing to the purpose.
omit without long discourse that principal point that the Gospel is the
power of God unto salvation (as that which I hope is doubted of none:) It is to
be considered that the Ministers in particular above mentioned, are the So be
others also, which (I hope) the Suppliants will not deny.
Ministers of Christ, sent by God, and ingrace and favor with God. This is They
might have spared labor in proving what we never denied. And yet their proofs
are such, that they prove not their intent.
evident. 1. Palpable ignorance. Many laymen are 1. hated of the world. 2.
lead an unblameable life. and 3. have sufficient gifts. Ergo, They are Ministers
of Christ, sent by God, etc. Inconsequent. Absurd.
By the hatred of all sorts of the wicked and ungodly men, Papists, Atheists,
and Carnal Gospellers, in special manner against them. If ye were of the
world (says our Savior,) the world would love his own, but because ye are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. Ioh. 15.19. 2. By their unblameable life They have ill neighbors
that commend themselves. But I could wish they were such indeed: albeit they are
generally noted to be great teachers and practisers of usury.
in all other things, the matter only of Conformity excepted. This has bin
and daily is acknowledged by Why do not you name them?
those that are Judges against them for the said Conformity. And albeit
contempt, singularity and ambition be objected unto them, yet how unjustly this
is objected, does All this evidence can make but a conjecture, and that scarce
probable, seeing many Heretics, Papists, etc. have suffered nore then all this
comes to, for their heresy and superstition.
evidently appear by the manifold reproaches, the great molestations, loss of
living, to the undoing of themselves, their wives and Children, and many other
wrongs, injuries, and indignities which they have suffered and daily do suffer.
3. As by their As we envy not their gifts, so we commend their pains, and
wish that they had not put then hands to the plough and looked back, etc.
gifts wherewith they are furnished for their callings, and by their pains and
diligence accordingly in their callings, so especially by the blessing of GOD
upon It seems they favor the doctrine De opere operantis: especially waighing
the latter part of this pharisaicall comparison.
their said pains and diligence in the knowledge and obedience of the people,
in such places where they live, and in the mutual love and peace of such
people among them selves: whereas in other places men, for the most part, are
They commend themselves by disgracing others. A lying and malicious censure.
ignorant of all duty to God and man, and therefore profane, irreligious,
contentious, and apt to sedition and rebellion, as all experience teaches us.
This argument justifies their It is not their calling, but innovation and
schi^me that is blamed.
calling. For how could they so preach to such effects of knowledge, The
Refractarie faction have no great cause to brag of these effects in themselves.
Godliness, loyalty peace and love, except they were sent, Romans 10.15. That
which the Apostle says to the Corinthians in the like behalf touching his
Apostleship, may also be said in this touching the ministry and calling of
these men unto those people where they are, and among whom the Lord has so
blessed their ministerial labor, Are ye not my work in the Lord? If I be
not an Apostle to other, yet doubtless I am unto you for ye are the seal of my
Apostleship in the Lord. 1. Cor. 9.1.2. And Again, ye are our Epistle written
in our hearts, which is understood and read of all men, in that ye are
manifested to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us, and witten not with
ink, but with the spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in
fleshly tables of the heart. 2. Cor. 3.2.3.

Since it is so; not to speak and put forth your selves in behalf of these men,
is to spare speech and pains for As if the Refractarie Ministers Superstition
and schism were Gods cause.
God himself and for Christ Jesus. Ex. 16.2. 1. Sam. 8.7. Lu. 10.16. If they
are said to deny bodily food, apparel and lodging unto Christ himself, that
deny these things to the least of his elect, Math. 25.40. May not they much
more be said, to spare speech and pains for Christ, that spare their speech
and pains for the everlasting As if the kingdom of heaven consisted in meat,
drink or other outward thing. Gross impudency, or blind ignorance.
salvation of many thousand solues? Yea this cannot be denied, since all the
They spare speech for Christ VVheafore? Because the Godly have put on the Lord
Jesus etc. A ridiculous conclusion.
Godly have put on the Lord Jesus, Gal. 3.25. And are flesh of his flesh and
bone of his bones. Ephesians. 5.30.

Finally, let this argument the more prevail with all men, in regard of all that Christ Jesus (whose cause this is ( Where, when, and by-whom?
showed to be) has suffered and done for us.

Resolution of the 1. Argument.
The Refractary Ministers are the Ministers of Christ sent by God, and in grace
and favor with God. Not to speak for them, is to spare speech, for God
himself, for Christ Jesus (Ex. 16.2.1. Sa. 8.7. Lu. 10.16.) and for the
everlasting salvation of many thousand souls. Ergo. The Honorable and high
Court of Parliament ought to intercede with his Majesty for them.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
the Ministers of Christ in the ministration of his Gospel, neither is their
calling brought in question: and we hope also that they are sent by GOD, and in
grace and favor with GOD. Yet must they remember, that their Sanctification
being in part, they have but their measure of gifts and graces: for our
knowledge is but in part, as the Apostle testifies; and therefore that they
may be ignorant and ouerseene in some things, wherein they ought not to flatter
themselves, but by all means labor to come to understanding, that they may
attain unto the knowledge of the truth.

2. It is true also, that not to speak and take pains for the Ministers of
the Gospel, for such things as properly belong unto their Ministry, or are
requisite unto the performance thereof, is to spare speech for GOD, and for
Jesus Christ, according unto the places quoted in the Argument, and also to
hinder the salvation of Gods people.

3. The Error is (...). This is not the Refractary Ministers case: wherefore I
answer

II. To the Consequence.
1. If the Suppliants had prayed your High Court of Parliament to entreat in
their behalf for matters which had necessarily concerned the Gospel of Christ,
or their Ministry thereof, or the Salvation of many thousand Souls, then had
your Honorable Assembly some reason to mediate for them: But seeing it is but
only to free them from the Cross and Surplice, and such other laudable
ceremonies of our Church, commanded for order and decency sake, which may well
stand with the purity of the Gospel, seeing the kingdom of heaven stands not
in meat and drink. etc. Then have these importunate Suppliants greater reason
patiently to bear that burden in the diligent applying their vocation and
calling, then to trouble your Wisdoms with such petty and small matters.

2. The Error is two fold. 1. (...). 2. (...).

II. ARGUMENT.
IT is also to be considered that the ministry of the Gospel, is not only
for earthly men, but also An absurd Paradore.
for heavenly Angels. Therefore as the Cherubins were commanded to be set with
their faces toward the Mercy seat. Exodus 25.20. as looking and listening
after the Oracles of God that should be given from the mercy seat to the
Church so it is not only somewhat obscurely said concerning those things that
are showed by them that preach the Gospel by the holy Ghost, that the Angels
do What consequence is this? The Angels desire to see into the s^crets of our
Red inption. Ergo. The Ministry of the Gospel is prepared for them. A baculo
ad angulum.
desire to behold the said things, 1. Pet. 1.12. But least any man should
think that to be understood only of the accomplishing of the matters preached
in the final, and perfect salvation of the elect and whole Church, it is also
plainly and most perspicuously written, that one chief end, purpose, and
intent of preaching the said Gospel, and the unsearchable riches of Christ in
the Gospel contained, and of making clear unto all men the fellowship of the
mystery of the Gospel, was this, that now unto principalities and powers in
heavenly places, (that is unto Angels) might be known by the Church (not the
great salvation of the Lord) but the manifold wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3.10.

To speak therefore for the Gospel, and for the sincere ministry and
Ministers thereof is to speak not only for But to speak in a schismatic
cause, is to speak neither for God nor for Angels.
God, but also for the Angels. To spare speaking and other pains taking for
the Their contention with us is neither about the Gospel, nor the sincere
Ministry thereof.
Gospel and sincere ministry thereof, is to spare speaking and taking pains
for God him self and for his blessed Angels: and so consequently, to provoke
both the Lord himself of heaven and earth, and also the whole host and army of
heaven against us. For, what else may be hoped for where there will not so
much as earnest words be spoken for God, or for his Angels?

Resolution of the 2. Argument.
The Ministry of the Gospel is not only for earthly men, but also for
heavenly Angels. To speak for the Ministry and Ministers thereof, is to
speak not only for GOD, but also for the Angels.

Ergo. The high Court of Parliament is bound, to plead for the Ministers:
otherwise by sparing speech, they shall provoke both the Lord himself, and
also the whole host and army of heaven against them.

ANSWER.
1. To the Antecedent.
1. THat the Ministry of the Gospel is for Angels, is an ambiguous and
perplexed speech. and savors of a Paradoxe. For how will the Suppliants
understand this saying? Is the Ministry of the Gospel, so ordained for
Angels, that they should be Ministers thereof? Impossible. Is the Ministry
ordained to convert them, and to preach repentance unto them? Absurd. Seeing
they never sinned. Or is it because thereby they might learn and know the
Wisdom of God? But so do they also by all other the creatures and actions of
God.

2. What can this make for the Suppliants? The Controversy between them and
us, is not concerning the Ministry of the Gospel, but touching a few petty
accidental circumstances: for which, if any man forsake the necessary
function of his Ministry and calling, he has the more to answer for.

3. Every man is bound to promote the Ministry of the Gospel to his power,
and also to help and further a Minister thereof, as he is a Minister, not as
he is in error, or carried away with faction.

4. The Error is (...) in Theologia. Also, (...)

II. To the Consequence.
1. It does not follow, that because the wise and judicious assembly of
Parliament justly refuse to intermeddle in the quarrel of Schismatic
Ministers, farther then to admonish them to desist from their singularity and
turbulent dealing, that therefore they shall provoke the Lord of Hosts and all
the Angels and Saints in heaven against them. But rather it follows on the
contrary.

2. If that Honorable Court should take part with Schismatikes, and intercede
for them, to detain both them and the people still in faction and error, then
certainly they should provoke the wrath of God, and the whole host of heaven
against them: Psalm. 50.17.18. etc.

3. The Error is (...).

III. ARGUMENT.
AS This and the most part of the subseque^t Arguments are grounded upon a
false principle, to wit, that the Refractary Ministers quarrel against the
Church of England, is the Ministry of the Gospel, the Salvation of the people.
etc. Whereas indeed all the contention is about Cross, Surplice, and some
other in different Ceremonies and Actions in the Church. And all these
Arguments do make specially against the^, seeing they be only disturbers of
the sincere profession of the Gospel and work of the Ministry, yea seeing
they forsake their calling and move so great concentions and brawles about so
small matters.
Joseph having interpreted the dream of Pharaoh his chief Butler, touching
his reconciliation again to the grace of Pharaoh, and the recovery of his
former place of honorable service before Pharaoh, desired him to hace him in
eeme^brance, when he should be reconciled and restored, Genesis 40.41. So it is
recorded by the holy Ghost, and acknowledged by the said Butler as a great
fault, that he had not remembered Joseph but forgotten him. Genesis 40.23. and
41.9. If it were so great a fault in Pharao his butler not to remember and
speak for one Joseph, that had interpreted one dream touching his
reconcilement to a mortal Prince, and the recovery of an earthly preferment,
(neither of which notwithstanding he knew not how long he should enjoy, at the
most he could not enjoy them any longer then during only natural life) how
great them is the fault of all those, that neglect to speak for many ministers
of the Gospel, that have not once, but often, and daily interpreted many
mysteries of God, touching their reconciliation with God himself and their
everlasting advancement in heavenly places. Ephesians. 2.6. To walk in white with
Christ Jesus, yea to sit also with him in his throne, as he himself sits in
the throne of his Father? Apoc. 3.5. and 21. Yea verily, as the fault of the
Butler was the less, because being enlarged, he had none to remember him of
that duty so the fault of those shall be the greater, that have many Would God
they were half so diligent in a good cause as they are importunate to sow
schism and sedition amongst Brethren. But they deserve small commendation and
thanks of any good Christian for their importunity and earnestness herein.
daily to put them in mind thereof, and to provoke them thereunto, and yet for
all that do hold their peace.

Resolution of the 3. Argument.
It is a sin not to recompense a good turn received.

Ergo. The refractary Ministers are to be regarded and spoken for.

ANSWER.
1. It is true good deeds must be rewarded, specially the Ministers faithful
labors. The Apostle says (1. Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto you spiritual
things is it a great thing etc.

2. But in that the Refractary Ministers have looked back, and withdrawn
their hands from the plough. Luke 9.62. making a manifest schism and
disturbing the peace of the Church, this deserves no recompense.

3. The error is (...). And (...).

IV. ARGUMENT.
THe whole Army of Israel spoke with great courage in behalf of Jonathan
thus, Shall Jonathan dye who has mightily delivered Israel? God forbid. As the
Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he
has wrought with God this day. 1. Sam. 14.45. Were this common people that
lived under the Law, and which had not had so plentiful and clear
instruction as is now revealed by the Gospel: were this common people (I say)
so Ionathans case and the Schismatical Ministers is altogether unlike, See the
Answer. And the urging of this zeal, having not the like cause, seems to be
very dangerous But I spare my Brethren.
zealous for Jonathan in regard only of a bodily deliverance, from bodily
enemies, whereof he had not been the Author, but only an instrument of God;
and shall not this high Court of Parliament now assembled, being the chief
flower of this whole Realm of England and representing the whole Realm, be
zealous and earnest for many whom God has used as his instruments, and who
have wrought with God, and daily would so work with God (if The greater is
their sin, whose Superstition and wilful obstinacy has restrained their
liberty, and made them unserviceable in the Church.
they may have liberty) for the spiritual deliverance of many thousands from
spiritual enemies, even to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God, that they may have forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ. Act. 26.18.

Resolution of the 4. Argument.
Such whom the Lord has made his instruments, for the spiritual deliverance
of many thousands from spiritual enemies, are to be respected and recompensed.

Ergo. The Refractary Ministers are to be remembered and restored.

ANSWER.
1. This Argument is parallel unto the former, and is there fully answered.

2. The Ministers, in delivering thousands from spiritual enemies, did but
their duty, for which they deserve love of the people and commendation of all
men: but they should still have continued faithful in their Ministry, and not
shamfully have forsaken their calling.

3. Ionathans example, alleged by the Suppliants, is unlike unto the
Ministers case. For Saul in deep hypocrisy, had made a rash vow, that
whosoever did taste any food etc. (1. Sam. 14.24.) should be accursed, and die
the death, wherefore the people justly rescued him from the fury of Saul. But
the actions of our dread Sovereign are not so exorbitant, they are not rash
and heady, but advised and just, intended for unity and quietness in the
Church, to prevent and repress phanaticall giddiness, schism, factions and
innovation.

4. The Errors of this Argument, are as well the same with the former, as also
(...); in the allegation of an impertinent Example.

V. ARGUMENT.
IT is not to be forgotten, with what courage and good success Impertinent
Examples.
Nehemiah spoke for the material Jerusalem, to Artashasht an heathen and
profane King, Neh. 2.2. etc. as also how most virtuous and noble Q. Esther,
being indeed provoked by poor Mordecai, adventured her self, to speak to
the like conditioned King Ahashuerosh, in behalf of the old people of God the
Jews, for preventing of their bodily bloodshed, notwithstanding she had not
been called unto the King in thirty days before, and notwithstanding there
were a law of the King, that whosoever, man or woman should come unto the King
in the inward Court, not called, should die, except such as to whom the King
should have held forth his golden rod. It is not (I say) to be forgotten, but
religiously to be remembered, how notwithstanding the foresaid danger and her
former fear and weakness in that respect, yet at the last she promised
Mordecai to adventure her self, saying, If I perish, I perish: and how also
after prayer and fasting of her self and her ladies, and of the rest of the
Jews in Shushan for her, she entered to the King and spoke for her people: and
what gracious success she had, notwithstanding the power and might of their
chief adversary, and his great grace and favor with the king. Did these
persons so adventure themselves to speak before such Kings, and did the GOD of
heaven give such gracious success in their attempts? And shall Christian
Noblemen and Gentlemen now assembled in high Court of Parliament: where they
may speak, and other in other places of authority and grace and favor with
christian Princes, fear to speak for the Afoule begging of the Question: as
if the Schism of a few, were-so just and important a matter, as the deliuety
of the whole church of God from intended certain destruction.
people of God, to a christian King, whose education from the Cradle, in all
piety, former reign and government, and religious profession hitherto, do
give better encouragement? God forbid. And far be al such fear and
cowardlinesse from all that profess and know the Cospell of Jesus Christ. Yea
if there be any so fearful and cowardly, let them seriously consider the
second words and message of Mordecai to Ester. Think not that thou shall
escape in the Kings house, more then all the Jews: For if thou hold thy
peace at this time, comfort and deliverance shall appear to the Jews out of
another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall perish. Who knows whether
thou art come to the Kingdom, for such a time. Ester. 4.13. Let them (I say)
wisely and in the fear of God consider this message, to provoke themselves to
the more zeal and christian boldness, with all humility and modesty. Let them
not think that they by their greatness shall procure These pure Angels of
light, forsooth think all the world in darkness besides themselves.
a better ministry of the Gospel to themselves and their houses, then other
have. If it be restrained from other, as of late it An impudent untruth of a
false Prophet. They made themselves incapable of any place in the Ministry.
has been, they shall not long enjoy more liberty thereof then other. Yea, if
they at this time and in that place where there is such freedom of speech,
hold their peace, and do not with all their gifts and graces of knowledge,
wisdom, zeal, compassion modesty and humility, that may be, put forth
themselves in furtherance of the They mean their Presbitery etc
sincere ministry of the Gospel and Note this. These Suppliants would have
all the Bishops removed and depri. priued.
removing the lets and impediments thereof: surely help may come in these
things unto the Church by some other means, but let them take heed that the
Lord of Hosts call them not to an account and other reckoning for this their
fearfulness. Further to add one other example briefly. If fearful Joseph
of Arimathea went boldly to Pilate and asked the body of Jesus: And if
Nicodemus (before as fearful as the said Joseph) joined with him in the
honorable burial thereof, (when Christ was dead, and the whole state being
enemies unto him) had now prevailed and gotten that which long they had
labored for against him: yea, when all the Disciples had forsaken him, and
some of the chiefest Champions had denied him, oh how dishonorable with men
and inexcusable and unanswerable before God shall it be, that so many having
learned more of Christ then either Joseph and Nicodemus, or all the Disciples
themselves had then learned, and having also before boldly professed and
promised much for him, and living in a Kingdom If we profess Christ and
maintain his Gospel what do they plead for then? And wherefore have they
denied it all this while, pretending they labor for nothing but the Gospel and
ministry thereof.
professing Christ and maintayning his Gospel, and under a most gracious
religious King, and being in place of freedom of speech, and now also
assembled chiefly and principally for that end: (for what are all statutes for
the Common wealth, without regard of the Church) how dishonorable (I say)
with men, and how inexcusable and unanswerable before God and his Son Jesus
Christ, when he shall come to judgment, shall it be, that such persons, in
such a kingdom, under such a King, in such a place, at such a time, shall not
dare to speak for Lo, now the Disciplinarian ataxie, for which the Suppliants
plead so much is whole Christ I sus! Intolerable Blasphemy.
whole Christ Jesus, risen again from the dead ascended into the heavens,
there sitting in all power, glory and majesty? Yea finally being ready to come
to judge both the quick and the dead, both men and Angels? Oh therefore, ye
that lone this Lord Jesus Christ, take heed of such fearfulness: yea, fear
so to be afraid of speaking for him, for his Gospel and for his servants.

Resolution of the 5. Argument.
Many spoke earnestly: yea, and some have adventured their lives in behalf of
the Church of God, as Nehemiah, Hester: so also did Joseph of Arimathea, and
Nichodemus for Christ's body.

Ergo. So should the high Court of Parliament do, for the Refractary
Ministers, and for whole Christ.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
The zeal and courage of such as have been earnest, or adventured their lives
and estate in Gods cause, for defense of his eternal truth and Church, is
certainly much to be commended and imitated (to their utmost power) of all
such as desire to be called and be indeed members of the Church of God. But it
would be wisely considered, that it were rashness and foole-hardinesse, for
any to adventure hazard, or manifest danger, by intermedling in a frivolous and
unnecessary quarrel, and much more for such cause as can not be justified by
any probable reason. Wherefore I answer

II. To the Consequence
1. THis Consequence has no coherence with the Antecedent. For there are great
ods between these examples proposed and the Refractarie Ministers case.

I. In the time of Nehemiah, the Church of the Jews, having bin long
captiuated, was in great affliction and reproach, and the walls of Jerusalem
were broken down. ( Nehem. 1.3.) which was not so in the days of their
fathers. But our Church having (by the mercies of God) now long continued in
prosperous and flourishing estate, is (God be thanked) glorious still, yea more
now then ever it was in the days of our fathers.

Furthermore, Nehemiah, after he had wept, mourned, fasted and prayed ( Nehem.
1.4.) spoke unto King Artashaste, an heathen and profane man, and finding
grace in his eyes, obtained leave to build up Jerusalem. ( Nehem. 2.6.) But
Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem and others deriding and despising the Jews, labored
to hinder the work, but prevailed not ( Nehem. 2.19. and 4.7.15.) Then
Nehemiah prayed, My God, remember thou Tobiah and Sanballat, according unto
these their works. ( Nehem. 6.14.) So even in the very beginning of our
religious Sovereigns reign, many worthy Nehemiahs finding grace in his eyes,
have moved his Majesty for the continuance of the prosperous estate of our
Church, as it was in days of our late blessed Queen, albeit his Highness was
more ready to grant their request, then they to ask it. And now, so many
Sanballats, Tobiahs, and Geshems, as there be Refractarie: Ministers and
Papists, deriding and despising us, labor to hinder our Ministry,
blaspheming the same, either to be none at all, or adulterate and very corrupt,
but (Godwilling) shall not prevail. And we still thinking that most of them do
sin of ignorance, cease not to pray unto God: O Lord, open the eyes of these
men, and lay not this sin to their charge.

II. In the days of the noble and renowned Q. Hester, all the Jews should
have bin swallowed up by the manny of Haman, had not that virtuous Queen, by
aduenturing her own life, delivered her people from destruction. But I hope
the Suppliants do not think our Church to be in so desperate a state, neither
outwardly, nor spiritually. And if they do, yet none can be so foolish as to
believe it.

III. The examples of Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus are altogether
impertinent: for neither had Pilate any reason to deny the burial of Christ's
body being dead: nor is the Ministers requests concerning Cross, and Surplice
any thing of such importance, as was the burial of Christ's body. For it is not
true that they contend about Whole Christ Jesus, and the Ministry of the
Gospel, as the Suppliants here suggest.

2. The Error is threefold. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...).

VI. ARGUMENT.
LEt the great heaviness of many Mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur. The
Refractarie Ministers ought to have had compassion on these Sheep, and not
desperately have forsaken the^, for Cross and Surplice.
Congregations Men, Women, children, Masters and servants, of all ages and
conditions, be pitifully considered. God regarded the weeping of bond Hagar,
and reprobate Ishmaell, in the want of the water of this life. Genesis 21.16. He
graciously respected the poor women that complaining of the cruelty of their
Husbands in forsaking them, and vexing them by taking other wives, had covered
his Altar with their tears. Malac. 2.13.14.

The Lord Jesus also pitied the people. yea, his bowels yerned within him to
see them scattered as sheep without a Refractary Shepherds run away and
forsake their flocks.
shepherd: Math. 9.36. Mark. 6.34 Yea he did graciously respect the petitions
of many touching the bodily miseries of their children, friends and servants,
yea the suits of some for bodily comfort of their children, though themselves
were not of the children of Israel but Heathen and Cananites and little better
in that respect then Absurd. The woman was such as that Christ himself
testified of her, that he had not found so great faith in Israel Read the place.
Dogs? Math: 15.12. How then should the spiritual miseries of many
thousands, partly already And all by reason of the wilfulness and
superstitious obstinacy of the pastors themselves.
deprived, and partly like to be deprived of their Oh, wonderful faithful,
that for sake their flock in the plain field.
faithful Pastors, who have broken the bread, and powered out the water of
eternal life unto them, and performed the duties as it were of loving Only
Christ is the Hu^band of his Spouse. Here the Suppliants blasphemously papize.
For I think they mean not this literally, if they do, they are (surely) very
honest men in the mean time.
husbands, and who by such Pastors and Preachers, have been turned from
darkness to light, and delivered from the power of Satan unto God, and who
now therefore in the want of them, do A lying Hyperbole.
cover the Lords Altar with tears, and make lamentable moan (as the Turtle
Dove, that has lost her mate) for help to themselves and theirs, against the
present and future spiritual calamities: how I say ought all these things to
wring, and wrest, pity and compassion If the Refractarie Ministers be so unkind
and hard hearted, that they will have no pity upon the^, they may be otherwise
relieved well enough, See the Answer.
from all in auctority toward them? O therefore let not their moan and
lamentation be neglected.

Resolution of the 6. Argument.
Many Congregations, Men, Women, Children, Masters and Servants, of all ages
and conditions, are in great heaviness for their Pastors, and do make
lamentable moan for them.

Ergo: The States of the Parliament must needs be Suitors unto his Majesty
for restoring of them again.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1. IF the Antecedent be true, as the Suppliants seem confidently to affirm,
then surely the more hard hearts have those cruel Tyrants, rather then
Shepherds, that having no pity nor compassion upon those silly sheep,
desperately forsake their flocks, over whom the Lord had made them overseers;
and relinquish their vocation, for little or no cause at all.

2. Those Congregations, Men, Women, Children etc. may cease to mourn any
longer, and comfort themselves herewith, viz. that seeing their unfaithful and
ungrateful Pastors have dealt so unkindly and undutifully with them; yet (God
be thanked) the Lord has store of good and faithful Servants, which he will
send forth into the Harvest, who both can and will break the bread, and pour
out the water of eternal life unto them, and perform the duties of faithful
Shepherds, that will never forsake them, nor run away when they have most
need of their help,

II. To the Consequence.
1. The Consequence follows not from the Antecedent, but this rather: Ergo,
The Pastors must needs have pity upon their miserable distress, and obeying
the wholesome ordinances of the Church, return again and comfort them.

2. The Error is,(...).

VII. ARGUMENT.
TO regard these Ministers hitherto spoken of, is to regard the Is a handful of
Refractarie Ministers the safety of the whole land?
whole land. For it is not to be doubted, but that it may be spoken of them, as
well as of some other, that, they are the Chariots and Horsemen of England, as
the like is acknowledged for Israel, not only of Elia by Elisha, 2. King.
2.12. but also of Elisha by Ioash a wicked King of Israel, 2 King. 13.14. If
God be with us, who can be against us, Rom 8.31. And if the Almighty be our
defense (as Eliphas speaks to Job, Job 22.25.) We cannot but be in peace and
safety.

Now God has not promised to be with any for their defense, but such as As if
God never had defended any Pagan in case of Justice and Innocence. But set
this pass as impertinent to our question.
receive his Gospel. In the Ministry also of the Gospel, consists the
wealth and honor of every people, Pro. 3.16. Psa. 46.12. And the glory of every
kingdom, as the glory of Israel did in the Arc. 1. Sam. 4.21.22. And the
peace of Nations. For therefore, as well as for other respects, the Gospel is
called the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. compared with Isai. 2.4. and 11.6. and
65.25. Finally, the whole Outward prosperity consists in pure worship. They
speak so profoundly, as an intelligent and sensible man cannot understand
them. As if the ungodly flourished not oftentimes as a green Bay tree, and the
outward prosperity of the Persians, and Romans did not surpass the mean
estate of the Jews, the true Church of God.
outward prosperity of all Kings and kingdoms consists principally in the
pure worship of God, and the means that commends the same 2. Chro
14.14.17.10.27. 6.24.26. 2. King. 18.7. Therefore they cannot be faithful to
Kings and kingdoms, neither to themselves that This cannot be applied unto our
state. Let the Refractarie faction look into themselves, that they do not
thus, in forsaking their calling and vocation.
neglect the true worship of God, and the means thereof. Therefore also, as
Ester said of those that provoked Ahashuerosh against the Jews, so may it be
said of all those that persuade the suppression of the Gospel, and of the
Ministers thereof, Such adversaries cannot recompense the Kings loss. Ester,
7.4.

If therefore ye will not respect the state of Ministers, their wives and
children, yet respect your selves, your wives and children, yea, our King and
whole kingdom, even touching the outward estate of your selves and yours, of
King and kingdom. And if ye love the safety, peace, wealth, and glory of
King and Kingdom, and of your selves and yours, then speak and do, what you
all, and every one of you may, for the What is this ad Rhombum? So they will,
though you had never excited them unto it.
Gospel and ministry thereof.

Resolution of the 7. Argument.
To regard the Refractarie Ministers, is to regard the whole land, the States
of Parliament, their wives and children, the King and Kingdom.

Ergo. If the high Court of Parliament love the safety, peace wealth, and
glory of King and Kingdom, and of themselves and theirs, they must speak and
do what they may, for the Gospel and Ministry thereof.

ANSWER.
1. What can a sensible man make of this Enthymeme? The Refractarie Ministers
are the safety of the whole land. Ergo; The Court of Parliament must speak
for the Gospel.

2. The Antecede^t is very improbable, if not altogether false; both because
there be thousands of Godly, faithful Ministers in this kingdom, which are not
of their faction, that are as Charets and Horsemen: and also because the
Ministers are therefore termed Charets and Horsemen, because they are Gods
instruments for gathering of his Saints by the exercise of their Ministry.
But these men refuse to exercise their Ministry, they have relinquished and
forsaken their calling; wherefore they can by no reason be termed Charets and
Horsemen. And so far are they from being the safety of the Land, that would
God they were not the Sores of the Church, and Sowers of Sedition, I mean,
Schism and Faction.

3. For the Consequence, I am sure it is from a Topique place called A baculo
ad angulum, from the Staff to the corner, for it has not the least coherence
with the Antecedent, except the Suppliants mean that these words, Refract
arie Ministers, the Gospel, the Ministry of the Gospel, be conuertible
terms: which were absurd and impossible.

4. The Error is (...).

IIX. ARGUMENT.
IT is the duty of all Princes and Magistrates, and also of their Courts, to
execute If Justice be executed, how can Schismatikes look for any favor then?
How well they plead for themselves.
justice and judgment in the morning, and to deliver the oppressed etc. Ier.
21.12.22.2. especially to do justice toward the souls of men. Therefore this
especially does belong to this high Court of Parliament, as being the highest
Court we have for justice and judgment upon earth. As Abraham therefore said
unto God, Shall not the Judge of all the world do right Genesis 18.25. so say I
to this present Court, shall not the highest Court of all this Kingdom do
right? Yea, this is the more at this present to be considered, because this
justice that now I speak of, is not only the Justice of God, but also of
this Land. For it is abundantly of late By whom?
proved, that all the late proceedinges, against the ministers, in repressing
of their ministry, and in depriving them of their free holds, is Most false.
See the Answer.
contrary to the laws of this kingdom, both to Charta Magna, and also to many
statutes.

The same is to be understood of the Object against these, and you shall be
answered.
oath ex officio of many of the late Canons, and of diverse other things. It is
also against These men would bring all things to popular trial.
reason, that the basest Cobbler and Tinker cannot be eiected from his free
hold of but ten shillings by the year, but by a Jury of 12. men, and before
some of his Majesty's Judges in solemn form of law, and A senseless
sentence. How can a man in matters of eternal life be cast out of his
freehold?
that the ministers and Ambassadors of Christ Jesus, in the matters of eternal
life, should be cast out of their free hold, of what worth soever, by one man
only, and not only without any Jury, but also The Ecclesiastical Judge may
proceed Ex officio.
without any complaint or accusation against them.

If it be objected that this that I have said, to be the justice of this
Kingdom, is but the Directly against the Statute of. 1. Eliza. c. 2.
opinion of some private persons: Let the ministers find favor with this high
Court of justice, to have the former causes in the said Court debated, as many
the like have been heretofore and daily are. Shall private causes be respected
by you: yea shall matters of pourueyors and such like, of small moment for the
commonwealth, come before you, and be so largely discussed and handeled by
you, and shall not so many public causes, of so many, of such quality, and
for the Begging of the Question.
Church, be regarded? yea not the cause of GOD himself? Shall GOD and his
son Christ Jesus, in the cause of his Gospel and ministers thereof, stand as
is were at your Parliament house As if they were not President of that
Religious Assembly already. An unchristian suggestion.
door knocking, and craving to be let in, and to have their cause heard, and
shall not your door be opened? Beware of this, least ye knock also at heaven
door, and there be none found to open, or to answer unto you.

Resolution of the. 8. Argument.
The Magistrate ought to execute justice and judgment and to deliver the
oppressed.

Ergo. Much more ought the high Court of Parliament to do so, and to deliver
the Refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
I Am constrained to dance, as the Suppliants please to pipe. They lead, and I
follow. Hitherto they prayed your Honors, but to Speak for them unto his
excellent Majesty: which Proposition they have labored to enforce by sundry
Arguments, but how happily and with what success, your wisdom can best judge.
Now they urge, that it would please your Honorable Court to Determine somewhat
in their behalf, and actually to Decree, that they may be restored and not
farther molested, how singularly or factiously soever they shall behave
themselves in their places. Neither will I reprove my Brethren, for disloial
presumption in soliciting your Honorable assembly, absolutely to Determine any
thing herein, which they know his Majesty will not co^descend unto, seeing it
may be they comprehe^d his Highness under the general term of Court of
Parliament. but will I briefly answer the Argument.

To the Consequence.
1. The Consequence has two parts. I. That the Honorable Court of Parliament
is to execute Justice and Judgment, which I grant. Il. That they ought to
deliver and restore the Refractary Ministers. That restes to be proved still:
because they have not yet justified their cause, and declared that they are
unjustly oppressed, nor can ever do.

The Suppliants instance. It is abundantly of late proved, that all the late
proceedings against Ministers, in repressing of their Ministry, and in
depriving them of their free-holdes, is contrary to the Laws of this kingdom,
both to Charta Magna, and also to many statutes. The same is to be understood
of the Oath ex Officio, of many of the late Canons, and other things.

I answer. 1. Touching him, that the Suppliants say, has of late so
abundantely proved the unlawfulness of the proceedings against the Refractary
Ministers, I am out of doubt, Of the Proceedings against the Refractarie
Ministers. Whether the Deprivation of them be warrantably by law.
he is no Judge, nor yet any good Civilian or Common Lawier. But how
sufficiently he has performed that work, it shall (God willing) shortly
appear.

2. In the mean time I would propound two or three Questions unto the
Suppliants, or their Late abundant Probator, wherein I would crave their
Resolution, and direct Answer.

I. Quaere. Whether the Church under Christian Godly Magistrates, has any
Tribunal proper unto it self, for deciding of Controversies, and punishing of
such persons, as shall refuse the ordinances thereof?

II. Quaere. Whether so many judicial Acts of deprivation of Bishops,
Priests, Ministers from their Benefices etc. since the Conquest to the time of
Magna Charta, and sithence that to this age, were ever held to be contrary to
the Laws of this Kingdom, and Magna Charta?

III. Quaere. Whether any Judge of this Realm, or any chief officer learned
in the Laws, be of opinion, that such Sentences of Deprivation, as have
lately passed in due form in any Ecclesiastical Court, be contrary to any,
much less, to many Statutes?

A place of Magna Charta, alleged by the Suppliants, cleared.
3. But howsoever the Suppliants pretend Magna Charta, ( cap. 29. for this is
the place they aim at, as I think) where it is said, No free man shall be
taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold or liberties etc. We shall
not pass upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or
by the law of the Land: Who, having but half an eye, does not evidently see,
that they would not only weaken, but also subvert and utterly overthrow, the
whole Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, the Sentences and grave Determinations
whereof were never yet in any age or Country submitted to popular trial, by
the Judgment of Peers, that is, by a Jury: as indeed their new Discipline
and Presbytery cannot stand, but by such popular trial and assistance.

4. Yet I answer. I. The place of Magna Charta cannot be understood of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or the practice thereof: specially if we consider
the End, why that law was made; or the Time when. The End was this, that the
Kings of this Realm should not challenge an infinite and absolute power to
themselves (as some Kings elsewhere did, and yet do) without judgment and
lawful proceeding, to take away any man's liberty, life, country, goods or
lands. And it was at such Time, when the Kings themselves thought, that
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical was not in right, no more then it was in fact at
that time, belonging unto the Crown: therefore in that it is there said, We
will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the law of the land; it is manifest, that the words have no
relation to Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical: for that which was done by that
Jurisdiction, was not at that time taken to be done by the King, or by his
Authority: and the laws which Ecclesiastical Judges practiced, were not then
held to be the Laws of the Land, or the Kings laws; as (since the lawful and
necessary restitution of the ancient Right in that behalf to the Crown) they
be often called, the Kings or Queens Ecclesiastical laws. 1. Elizab. cap. 2.
and alibi passim.

Bishops may Deprive etc.
II. As Institution unto a Benefice, both before and after Magna Charta,
belonged always to Ecclesiastical Persons and Jurisdiction; so did also the
Destitution or Deprivation of a Benefice by the Common law: for, Cuius est
instituere, eius est destituere. In which respect, Bishops (that claim not the
patronage) do always plead to a Quare impedit, thus, Nihil clamat praeter
Institutionem and Destitutionem Clericorum, vt Ordinarius etc. Whereby may
appear, that a man might (by law) be put out of his Benefice (being his
freehold) otherwise then according unto the form of that Statute.

III. An Ordinary in his Diocese (even at the Common law) might and may
Condemn a man for Heresy, whereupon (being committed to Secular power) such
an Heretic was put to death. But this was not done by Judgment of his
Peers, and therefore those words of Magna Charta, are no way to be understood
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

IV. Besides the Judgment of a man's Peers, there is added, Or by the law of
the land; which permits other trial, then by Peers; as by Battle etc.

V. And now seeing all Jurisdiction and authority in this Realm, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, was ever in right, but now is absolutely
acknowledged, and is in fact, united and incorporated unto the Crown of this
Realm: therefore that judgment that is duly given by the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, is given by the Law of the Land; and so not contrary unto
Magna Charta.

5. As touching those Many other Statutes, if the Suppliants had alleged or
pointed at them, they should have received their Answer in like manner.

Deprivation adjudged lawful.
6. Briefly, the lawfulness of the Deprivation of the Refractarie Ministers, is
a plain case adjudged in open Court, as appears in Sir Edward Cooks
Reports, part. 5. in Caudreies Case: according unto a Statute of 1. Elizab.
cap. 2. in these words. Be it ordained and enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that all and singular Archbishops and Bishops, and every of their Chancellours,
Commissaries, Archdeacons and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, shall have full power and authority by virtue of
this Act, as well to enquire, (which they may do ex Officio) in their
visitations, Synods and elsewhere, within their Jurisdiction, at any other time
or place, to take accusations and informations of all and of every the things
above mentioned (touching the Book of Common prayer etc.) done, committed or
perpetrated, within the limits of their Jurisdictions and authority, and to
punish the same by admonition, excommunication, sequestration or DEPRIVATION,
and other censures and process, in like form as heretofore has been used in
like cases by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws.

7. Concerning the Oath ex Officio, and many of the late Canons, and other
things; if the Suppliants had objected any thing against them, they should have
been considered. Eadem enim facilitate reijcitur, quod sine ratione affirmatur.

8. The Error is, (...). And (...).

IX. ARGUMENT.
MAy it further please them to whom this present writing is directed, to call
to mind the promises made to them, that show any kindness to any of the
Children of God, and disciples of Christ, especially to any Prophet in the name
of a Prophet, Mat. 10.41. As also to consider, that God is not unrighteous,
that he should forget such works and labor of love. Heb. 6.10. but that he is
faithful that has promised. Heb. 10.23. and that God is not as man, that he
should lie, neither as the son of man, that he should repent: has he said
it, and shall not he do it? and has he spoken, and shall not he accomplish it?
Number. 23.19.

He that made Saul, (though unnatural to his own children, 1. Sam. 14.49. and
a cruel murderer of the Priests of the Lord. 1. Sam. 22.18.) to show mercy to
the Kenits, (as it were the Rock to yield water). 1. Sam. 15.6. for the
kindness of Iethro, (otherwise called Keni, Judge. 1.16.) toward the
Israelites, in giving only good counsel to Moses, for the better outward
government of the Israelites, 400. years before. Exodus 18.17. Shall he forget,
the kindness that shall be showed to the Ministers are to be rewarded, as
they be such, and in their Office: but not as they be schismatikes and
disturbers of the peace of the Church.
Ministers of the Gospel, and to the people committed unto them, and depending
upon them, for the food and salvation of their souls?

Was the kindness of the Shunamite, toward one prophet Elisha, plentifully
recompensed, 1. by the gift of a Son after long barrennes, 2. by restoring
her said son to life being dead, 2. Kings. 4.16.3. by forewarning her of a
famine to come, and admonishing her, to provide for her self Chap. 8.1.4. by
directing her, by God his gracious providence, to come with petition to the
King, for restitution of her lands (that had been seized in her absence to the
kings use) at that very instant, when Gehazi was telling the King the great
acts of his M. Elisha, and particularly how he had raised this woman's son from
death to life: (by which her coming in such a season she presently obtained,
not only her lands, but also all the mean profits that in time of her
peregrination, had been taken by the Kings receiver:) was (I say) such little
kindness of this woman, to one prophet, so plentifully recompensed, and shall
not the favor that is showed to many Ministers of the Gospel, (the least
whereof, for Arcadian wisdom: The place is to be understood, not in regard of
the Office, but in respect of the clear knowledge that they should have of
Christ after his Resurrection.
office is greater then John the Baptist, who notwithstanding was greater then
any prophet, and then whom there was not a greater, among the sons begotten
of women, (Math. 11.9.) shall not (I say) such kindness toward such Ministers
as are in How great, I pray you?
so great reckoning with God, be remembered and rewarded?

Resolution of the 9. Argument.
God does ever plentifully recompense any kindness showed unto his Children,
specially unto the Ministers and Disciples of Christ.

Ergo: The high Court of Parliament ought to show kindness unto the
Refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
To the Consequence.
1. Our Savior says, He that receives a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet,
shall receive a Prophets reward. ( Math. 10.41.) So shall he also that does any
kindness unto a Minister, as he is a Minister. But if a Minister do otherwise
then he ought, (as these Refractaries do) what kindness then ought such to
have done unto them?

2. Let the Refractarie Ministers dutifully serve GOD and his Church, in their
diligent and humble obedience, in the work of their vocation, and then let
them supplicate for kindness to be showed unto them.

3. The Error is, (...).

X. ARGUMENT.
ON the contrary consider, who has said, Touch not mine anointed, and do
Well My Prophets, not false or schismatic Prophets.
my Prophets no harm: Psalm. 105.15. As also what is threatened to the^ that do
the least harm to the least of the children of God, even in their outward
states. Yea, what God commanded to be written against the Amalekites, and swear
to perform, only for resisting his people, in their journey toward the
earthly Canaan, which was but a type of the heavenly. Exodus 17.14.15. And what
also afterward (even 400. years after the premises) he caused to be executed
by Saul against them, without any pity or compassion, toward any man, woman,
infant, or suckling, Ox, Sheep, Cattle, or Ass, 1. Sam. 15.3. Was it so
heinous before the Lord, to hinder his people in their journey toward the
earthly Canaan, and shall it be a light thing with men now, not to They cannot
be said to farther the Elect, that wilfully forsake the Ministry of the
Gospel, as the Refractaryes do.
further the elect in their means of, and in their journey unto the heavenly
Canaan, typically prefigured, by that earthly?

If the Lord did also swear, by the excellency of Jacob, that surely he would
never forget the cruelty, that was exercised by the rich men of Judea, against
the poor of the land, in their outward state: yea, that the very land should
tremble, and that every one should mourn that dwelled therein etc. for the said
sin. Amos 8.7. Will the same Lord then, which is always the same in Justice,
as well as in mercy, lightly pass by any They may be said to be Cruel toward
the souls of m^^, that for little or no cause, leave then diligent and honest
calling in the Ministry of the Gospel.
cruelty toward the souls of his people?

Let not the states assembled in this High Court of Parliament, or in any place
of authority, grace, and favor, where their word spoken in his place, may be
like unto Apples of gold, with pictures of silver, Pro. 25.11. Let them not (I
say) wash their hands off this argument because they have no hand in any You
should first have proved the Proceeding unlawful.
proceeding against the Ministers, or in restraining of their ministry since it
is all one so to proceed etc. and not to help them that are so proceeded
against by other, especially when power is in their hands to help. For it must
never be forgotten, which is written for an everlasting truth, and a perpetual
instruction, Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord
against the mighty, Judges 5.23. In which place this is likewise worthy the
observation of all men, that they are esteemed not to help the Lord, that came
not out to help his people. If there were so fearful a curse pronounced by
the Angel of the Lord against them that did not help his people, against the
mighty enemies of their outward state, may they think themselves secure and
without danger, that help not the Still they beg the Question.
Lord and his people, against the mighty that oppugn the everlasting salvation
of their souls?

Resolution of the 10. Argument.
God threatens severely to punish the wrongs and injuries done unto his
children and Servants, even in their outward states; much more the cruelty
toward their souls.

Ergo: The high Court of Parliament should neither proceed so hardly against
the Ministers, nor wink at others that do so proceed.

ANSWER. To the Consequence.
1. NEither did the Honorable Court of Parliament, nor the Magistrates of this
Land, ever intend the least wrong to any Subject in this kingdom, much less
to any of the Ministers of the Gospel, no not in their outward estate, much
less toward the salvation of the peoples souls. And certainly it is an
ungrateful, yea an ungracious part of these Supplia^ts, to tax that Honorable
Assembly, or any Magistrate in this land, so undutifully and unchristianly, for
unjust, cruel and merciless dealing.

2. The Refractarie Ministers were never proceeded against for preaching the
Gospel, or for opportune and sober executing their Ministerial function: but
only for giddie innovation and noveltie, for faction, schism and impugning
the Magistrates auctority, or disturbing the peace and quietness of the
Church. And would they request these vile enormities to be left unpunished? An
unreasonable Suite.

3. The Error is (...), Also, (...),

XI. ARGRMENT.
PHarao in the time of dearth, provided at his own cost for the Idolatrous
Priests of Egypt, that they might not sell their land: Genesis 47.22. Shall then so
Christian a kingdom, as this long time has been in the time of plenty,
proceed so hardly against the painful ministers of the Gospel, that they,
their Where Superstition sits Judge, there neither Nature, nor Reason may
dare to plead the Cause. Alas! It is very lamentable, that some men (I know
not for what carnal respects) had rather currie favor with others and be
beholding unto other men, then conscionably live of their own. They should
well consider the saying of the Apostle. 1. Tim. 5.8.
wives and children shall weep and mourn for want? And will no man open his
mouth in their behalf? Were the Monks and Friars at the dissolution of their
Idolatrous houses, (in the twilight of the Gospel,) provided for during their
lives, though they never had done any good? And shall the ministers of the
Gospel that have converted many to God, and spent themselves, and wasted their
patrimony, first, in fitting themselves for the work of the ministry, and
after by their sufferings and troubles, so that they have nothing left for
their comfort in their ^ge, be Alas! Let them have pity upon themselves, and
leave their quarelling, and they shall not be neglected.
neglected? Though this has not been regarded, by those that deprived them:
yet far be it from this most Honorable Court, that any heart would be found
therein so hard and stony, as not with commiseration to pity them.

Resolution of the.XI. Argument.
Pharao provided for the Idolatrous Priests of Egypt. And the Monks and
Friars at the dissolution of their Idolatrous Houses, were provided for during
their lives, though they never had done any good.

Ergo. Much more ought the Refractarie Ministers be provided for, having done
so great good in the Church of God.

ANSWER. To the Consequence.
1. THe Argument does not follow, because of the dissimilitude that is in the
instances or examples and the Ministers cause.

I. Pharao ministered daily Food unto such Priests, as he thought professed
true Religion, and diligently obeyed him in the function of their Office. A
rate example of a bou^tiful and magnificent Prince, though otherwise in Error.

But the Refractary Ministers, though professing true Religion, yet do they
obstinately, being blinded by Superstition, refuse to serve GOD and his Church
in the faithful and diligent function and exercise of their Ministry.

II. The Monks and Friars were deprived of al, against their will, for
Sodomie, Heresy and Idolatry, which they had embraced in time of their
ignorance.

But the Refractary Ministers are willingly deprived, for obstinate
Superstition, in refusing sincerely to preach the Gospel of Christ with us, not
being conformable unto the Christian laws of our Church and Magistrate.

III. The Monks and Friars could not have retained their places and
possessions, no not by submitting themselves: But the Refractarie Ministers
may, if they will but conform themselves unto the lawful ordinances of our
Church.

2. For the Good which the Refractary Ministers have done in the Church of
GOD, I will no way extenuate their deserts. but could have wished that they had
made greater conscience of their Ministry, whereby they might have done more
Good still: and not like Ephraemites, have turned their backs in the day of
Battle.

3. The Error is, (...). And, (...).

XII. ARGUMENT.
MVch also may the prayers of such ministers, for this Court of Parliament, and
for every state and degree thereof, and for other, be True: if they continue
diligent in their vocation. But being members rent and cut from the body of the
Church of God in this land they are unserviceable for the same.
regarded: for the prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent,
James 5.16. And the prayers of the Saints are compared to Harpes and golden
vialls full of odours etc. Apoc. 5.8. God would have Abimelech King of Gerar,
to make such account of this argument, that for the same he would have him to
use Abraham the better, Genesis 20.7.

Neither did the Apostle Paul only, for this cause, most earnestly crave the
prayers of the meanest Christians, in those Churches to which he wrote: b^^
^lso wicked Pharao did earnestly desire the prayers of Moses and Aaron, Exodus
8.8. Darius also, though an heathen King, did therefore command all things
necessary for the building of Jerusalem, to be abundantly ministered to the
Jews, that they might pray for the Kings life, and for his sons, Ezra. 6.10.
How much more then ought such Christian assemblies as this present High Court
of Parliament is, to labor the more, for the comfort of God his children,
especially his Are they Faithful, that fall from their rule and obedience?
faithful ministers, that thereby they may be encouraged to prayer, the more
earnestly, for them and theirs.

Resolution of the 12. Argument.
The Prayers of faithful ministers of the Gospel, are very effectual in
behalf of Christian Assemblies.

Ergo: The high Court of Parliament, even for this cause, ought somewhat to
regard the Refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER. To the Consequence.
1. NEither are the prayers of Schismatiques, much to be regarded neither will
the Honorable Court of Parliament altogether neglect the Refractarie
Ministers, but will labor by all good means, for their recalling: neither can
the Refractarie Ministers in Charity, but still pray for that high Court, yea
in case they did not satisfy their desire.

2. If they had still made conscience of their duty in their Ministry, their
prayers had been much more effectual.

3. The Error is, (...). And (...),

XIII. ARGUMENT.
SVurely (says our Savior) The harvest is great, and the laborers are few,
pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust forth
laborers into his harvest. Mat. 9.37.38. Will our Savior, have all to pray
the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest?
and may any men then, by head and shoulders They are not thrust out that run
away. And they run away, that leave their necessary calling for little or no
cause at all.
thrust laborers out of his harvest? It would be accounted madness, for a man
to thrust laborers out of his own harvest, when his harvest is ready for the
sickle, and he has not laborers enough. But it is impiety to thrust laborers
out of the Lord his harvest, especially such as whom himself had before thrust
forth into his harvest, furnishing them with sickle and all other things
necessary. And lastly such as had done good service in his harvest. Again,
will our Savior, have men only to pray the Lord of the harvest, for thrusting
forth of laborers into his harvest, and will he have them to do nothing else
in this behalf? As well may they think that they are only to pray for their
daily bread, and that they need to do nothing else for the getting thereof.

Resolution of the 13. Argument.
Our Savior wills all to pray the Lord of the Harvest, that he would thrust
forth laborers into his harvest.

Ergo No man ought by head and shoulders to thrust out laborers out of the
harvest.

ANSWER.
1. I Grant the whole. If the suppliants will instance, Why then do you silence
and deprive the Ministers?

2. I answer. They are not such laborers, whom our Savior means: neither
are they thrust forth of the harvest, for laboring, but for laboring as they
ought not, for sowing the tares of sedition, schism and faction, for
disturbing the peace of the Church, and for molesting other sincere and
faithful laborers.

3. The Error is, (...). Also, (...).

XIV. ARGRMENT.
Whosoever (says our Savior) shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of them
shall the son of man be a shamed, when he shall come in his glory, and in the
glory of the father, and of the holy Angels: Luc. 9.26. Is this to be
understood only of the time of persecution, and not also, and much more, of
the days of peace? Or are not they ashamed of Christ and of his words, that
will not speak for him and As if the disciplinarian giddiness were Gods word.
his word? Nay let the contrary branch of the opposition touching the promise,
made by our Savior for the confessing of them before his Father which is in
heaven, that shall confess him before men, suppress this vain imagination:
Lastly touching this point, will they not be ashamed of Christ, but confess
him and his words before Tyrants in the time of fiery trial, that will not
show themselves zealous for Christ and his words, before a Here again the
suppliants confess that we profess Christ and his word. Why do they exclaim
the?
State favoring, and professing Christ and his words, in the days of peace?
Truly God by his almighty power and rich grace, may mightily Fear and
weakness forsooth, because they will not part-take with Schismatikes.
strengthen such men in the days of trouble, (notwithstanding their present
fear and weakness) but certainly in reason this is little to be hoped for.
Let no man therefore flatter or deceive himself with any such poor, simple
and shiftfull conceit.

Resolution of the 14. Argument.
Every man ought freely to confess Christ before men in the time as well of
trial and persecution, as of truce and peace.

Ergo. The high Court of Parliament ought earnestly to speak for Christ and
his word.

ANSWER.
1. I Grant the whole again. What can this advantage the Refractarie
Ministers? It follows not, that therefore their Honors should speak for the^.
For they are neither Christ, nor his word^ neither is their quarrel and
contention, either for Christ, or for his Word, as has been declared before.

2. The Error is, (...).

XV. ARGUMENT.
YOur zeal touching the Papists for more severity against them hereafter, that
thereby they may be the more easily converted from their damnable heresies; is
worthy everlasting renown. But may it also please you to consider, to what
end there shall be more severe laws made, for the bringing of the^ to church,
if there shall not likewise be As who would say, there can be no sufficient
provision of able Ministers except Schismatic Ministers to make up the
number.
provision, that when they come there they may have such Ministers as shall be
able substantially, and sou^dly to confute their heresies, and to instruct them
in the truth and not such, as against whom, in respect of their insufficiency
and weakensse, they shall be able to take exception: yea whom also they shall
deride: yea, and finally, by whom they shall be more confirmed in their
heresies: or at the least, the more hardened against the truth? Willany man
Why not?
say, there may be sufficient ministers enough, though all those that are
called refractary and uncomfortable, be expelled? I Vain hope. It should seem
these suppliants are but little acquainted with the Universities.
hope the wisdom of the meanest of your Honorable assembly is such, that he
will hear this an hundred times, before he will beceue it once: For since all that
now are, and were before any proceeding against those before mentioned, were
not enough, sufficiently to furnish every congregation, what will the paucity
be, when from those so many An Hyperbole, to make their number seem the
greater.
hundreds, as able as any other shall be detracted.

Resolution of the 15 Argument.
It is necessary that there be made provision of sufficient able Ministers, one
in every congregation, to instruct the people in the truth, to confute the
Papists, etc.

Ergo. The refractary Ministers must needs be restored.

ANSWER.
1. AS if there were not able Ministers enough, (God be praised) in both
universities and other parts of this kingdom, (if competent maintenance could
be procured for them) sufficiently to furnish every Congregation, to instruct
the people in religion, to refute the Adversary, etc. but that the small
handful of Schismatic Ministers must needs be entreated to make up the
number.

2. Suppose there were not able ministers enough, for this purpose: have not
the Refractary Ministers then greater reason to iome with their Brethren, in
preaching the Gospel, confuting the Papists, etc. then superstitiously to
quarrel about cross and surplice, and to sorsake their necessary vocation and
function?

3. The Error is, (...)

XVI. ARGUMENT.
TOuching the matters of trouble, and molestation to the ministers, hither to
mentioned, viz. Hence appears what they be, that the Refractaries are
offended with. Why then do they pretend the Gospel of Christ, the salvation of
the people, reconciliation with God etc. Ad populu^ phaleras
Subscription, Ceremonies, the strict observation of the book, and other
Conformity, all men know, what And all by reason of the Refractary ministers
obstinare superstition.
division and contention there has been betwixt the ministers of the word in
this kingdom, and their brethren, as in other Churches reformed, so especially
in the former part of his Majesty's Dominion in Scotland, and what has been
written by one part (especially by the O, Martin was a modest man.
conformable part) They will offend, and yet will not be told of it.
in disgrace and reproach of the other. But especially great has bin the
e^tention and controversy here at home: much more indeed for and about these
things, then for or about any point of doctrine.

This is evident, not only by most bitter Heat of contention may carry men
farther then were expedient. But are the Refractaries milder in this kind?
Witness all their pamphlets and Libels written against us.
inuectiue sermons private raylings, and public disgraceful books against
them: (the most A disgraceful term. But do they acknowledge themselves Non
conformitanes and schismatic?
Co^formitants Suam scabiem aliis affricant.
thinking that they never preach, speak, or write any thing well, except in
their preaching, talk and writing, they scourge those whom they call Puritan,
prescise, schismatical, and refractary ministers) but also by the actual
severitie against them. For it may be truly said, that in A malicious lie.
There are few or none in the Church of England, so ignorant, and so scandalous
in the Ministry as here the Suppliants insinuate: and if any such be amongst
us, sure I am, that (upon complaint or intimation otherwise) they are seuerly
censured and punished for it. Yet I must give them to understand, that
Scandalous Ministers for life, are more tolerable in the Church, then such as
be factious, schismatic, or scandalous for doctrine and phanaticall
conceits, Plus enim nocent doctrinae scandala, quam morum delicta.
one year, and in one Dioces, more have been for these causes suspended and
deprived, then in full 46. years throughout the whole Realm of England,
either for insufficiency, or for any matter of scandal: albeit it cannot be
denied, that in some one Diocese, there are more ignorant and scandolous
ministers worthy of deprivatio^ the^ there are Animpud ^t and loud lie, without
any show of probality.
comfortable ministers in all Diocesses.

By this controversy and contention among the ministers, there has been no
less dissension and alienation of minds and hearts, betwixt The more have
the Schismatic Ministers to answer for, by whose default all these stirs
and broils are raised in the Church.
other of his Majesty's subjects for the same things: yea, much separation of
many from their ministers, as likewise betwixt themselves. Now how dangerous
this is for his Majesty and for the whole Land, as it does appear by the And
all by reason of the pertinacy of the Refractary Ministers.
increase and courage of the common adversaries the Papists, according as the
ministers and people for those causes have bin molested and disgraced, so it is
further evident by reason. Because as the concord peace, and good agreement is
a principal part of the strength of a King and kingdom so their discord and
contention, cannot but be dangerous for King and kingdom. For our Savior
himself (speaking according to the common speech of other, says, That a
kingdom Wherefore then do not they join themselves unto the Church, and cease
to make a division amongst us?
divided against it self, cannot stand. Mar.

What is therefore to be done in this case? How may these contrversies and
contentions be well pacified, and best compounded Verily by imitating therein God
him self, the God of peace. For as he is and must be acknowledged best of also
herein also, he has given us the best president, the best pattern. What is
that? (...). The time of the old Testament being exspited, Christ abolished the
Ceremonial law, and ordained the new Testament What will they conclude from
hence?
When he saw the great division and hatred betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles,
he took away the partition wall betwixt them, which was also called by the
name of hatred, because for it the Jews had hated the Gentiles, and the
Gentiles likewise the Jews. What was the partition wall? The law of
commandments standing in ordinances, that is, in Ceremonies, which he
himself had given to the Jews. Ephe. 2.14.15. For thereby, cannot be
understood the moral law, which from the beginning had as well concerned the
Gentiles, as the Jews: But the Ceremonial law being that, in respect whereof,
the Jews in pride had co^te^ned the Gentiles, and for which the Gentiles
likewise, in no less malice had envied the Jews, as having such a law by
themselves as for the which, they neither would nor might communicate with the
Gentiles in their heathenish worship: the Lord therefore did altogether remove
the same, that so not only they which were once far from God, might be made
near by the blood of Christ (whereby the partition wall was broken down) but
that they also that had bin before twain, might be made one (as it were two
houses made one, by breaking down of one wall, or two fields laid into one by
taking away of one hedge) that so there might be peace.

The Lord might have communicated the Ceremonies of the Jews unto the Ge^tils,
or given new unto both. But since he made this peace only by removing those
Ceremonies altogether, that himself had once instituted, and did What? Not
any? No Sacraments? nor other ceremonies?
not ordain any in their place, then consider (I beseech you) in your godly
wisdoms, how much more it behooves all those Ceremonies and ordinances, which
we e only in vented by man, to be They would bring Cyclopicall ataxie into the
church.
utterly removed, having especially False. They are as it were the bonds of
society, besides other uses for edification
no necessary use, but being rather bones of contention betwixt brethren, and
children of the same Father and Mother, and coheyres of the same inheritance:
as also people of the same Nation, and subjects of the same King and
Sovereign. Yea, consider (I beseech you again) the more seriously, how
necessary it will be, thus to make If the Suppliants request were granted in
the Ceremonies, yet would the Refractary Ministers be restles still, until they
had altogether brought in their New Discipline: and (peradventure) more restles
then also then ever they were before.
peace, not only because this peace will be exceedingly beneficial (as has
been showed) to King and kingdom, especially the common adversaries so now
combining themselves against us) but also because it will be a work most
acceptable to God. For Blessed are the Sound and solid Peace will never be
wrought, but by recalling the Refractary Ministers from Schism and faction
unto perfect obedience.
peace makers for they shall be called the children of God. Math. 5.9.

Resolution of the 16. Argument.
The matters in question, viz. Subscriptio^, Ceremonies, the strict Observation
of the Book, and other Conformity, are not of any necessary use, but are
causes of division, and bones of contention amongst us.

Ergo. They both conveniently may, and ought to be taken away.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1. IF the matters in question between us, be but Subscription, Ceremonies,
etc. as here the Suppliants ingenuously confess, wherefore then have they
hitherto mainely cried out, that their contention was about the Cause of God
and his Word, whole Christ and his Gospel, the Ministry thereof and Salvation
of the people?

2. Albeit we also do not hold Subscription, Ceremonies etc. to be absolutely
necessary to salvation, nor to be imposed upon every Church (for why should not
other Churches use their own liberty?) yea and our Church has power to alter
these particulars: yet we know, that some Ordinances and Ceremonies, are even
necessary for the gathering of assemblies, establishing of a Church, and be as
it were the bonds and linkes of society.

3. Yea even these particulars, Subscription, Ceremonies etc. being imposed by
the Church, and commanded by the Magistrate, are necessary to be observed under
pain of sin, seeing he that resists auctority, resists the ordinance of
God. Romans 13.

4. And that they are things indifferent in themselves, and may be used without
sin, we have proved at large, in a peculiar book written of that Argument.
Lib. de Adiaphoris.

5. Now that they are become the bones of conte^tion, and causes of division
among us, is very much to be lamented, seeing the free course of the Gospel is
somewhat troubled, and the common Enemy adua^taged thereby. But the fault
tests on the^, who of mere superstition and gross ignorance, cannot find in
their consciences to embrace the wholesome Ordinances and Constitutions of the
Church, not any way prejudicial unto the Gospel, nor repugnant unto the word
of God, but most agreeable and consonant unto the same.

16. The Error is, (...). And Crimen falsi

II. To the Consequence.
1. The Antecedent being declared to be false, the Consequence cannot be true.

2. The Error is, (...).

XVII. ARGUMENT.
IN the next place (that I may heap up many things together, and contriue many
arguments into one) I do offer to your wise and godly considerations, the works
of God amongst us: his works of Justice, and his works of mercy: together with
the They mistake the Ends: as those Gentiles did, who offirmed, they were
plagued, because of the Christians contempt of their Gods.
ends for the which he has wrought them before us and the uses, which he would
have us to make of them. First therefore be ye pleased to call to mind, the
late mighty and fearful pestilence whereby in all places (almost) of the
land, but chiefly here in London, the Lord made heaps upon heaps. Does the
Lord chastise particular persons, that he may teach them in his law, Psalm. 94,
12. draw them nearer unto him, and make them more plentifully partakers of his
holiness? Heb. 12.10. Yea, and that they may be more zealous and amend. Revel.
3.19. And are not these as well the ends, why he chastises whole States,
Churches and kingdoms, as the It is true: the Lord corrects us for our
sins, and the Refractary Ministers, schism is no mean cause of our
punishment.
sins of whole States, Churches and kingdoms are the causes that first move
him so to chastise them? Yea, is not this the more to be considered, because
this rod of God does still remain and linger, as here in London, so also in
diverse other places of the land? for does not the Lord hereby intimate unto us,
that yet that is not performed by us, which he looked for from us?

Again, is it altogether to be neglected, that he has so mittigated this his
severity toward us as he has? And that he has in part commanded his Angel to
put up his sword, and not to smite so many as before he had done? And does not
the Lord by smiting us in such sort, threaten, that if for all this we show no
better fruits of amendment, he will plague us yet seven times worse? Levit.
26.18. By healing us also in part, does he not admonish us, that if we do not
yet repent, but continue still to sin against him, a worse thing shall come
unto us? Ioh. 5.14. O This Apostrophe should have bin more fitly applied unto
the Refractary Ministers,
ye that do now represent the body of this land, consider of this matter.

What shall I here speak of our late great danger by the late most bloody,
horrible, unnatural and monstrous conspiracy of the Papists; as against all
in general so specially against you that are now essembled, in this high Court
of Parliament? Would the Lord have every person to provoke his own soul to
praise the Lord, for redeeming his soul from the grave, Psa. 103.4. And would
he not have the whole land and specially you that are now assebled in high
court of Parliament, representing the whole land and in special manner
delivered, to enter into serious consultatio^ and deliberatio^ with your
selves, what to render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward you, Ps.
116.12 Though I will not descant on the Suppliants meaning in alleging this
example. The wise may consider it.
Hezekiah having recovered health, went first into the house of God, and made
there a Psalm of thanksgiving for his recovery, which yet remains in holy
writ, as an everlasting monument of his thankfulness; yet because in other
things, he was not generally so circumspect and careful, of all obedience to
God as he should have been, but his heart was lift up within him, it is said
that he rendered not unto the Lord, according unto the reward bestowed upon him;
and that therefore wrath came from the Lord against him, against Jerusalem, and
against Judah. 2. Chro. 32.25. So let this be considered, that ye may provoke
your selves to the more public testimony of thankfulness, for our late
public deliverance. And because mercy (even toward the bodies of men) is more
desired then sacrifice, and that therefore mercy toward their souls, is much
more acceptable unto God, for which cause it is there said, that the Lord does
also more desire the knowledge of God, then burnt offerings. Hos. 6.6. Therefore
also, as God his goodness toward the whole land is known to all the world,
so let all the world know, and let all ages to come be witnesses, of our
thankfulness for the same, by your present mercy toward the To wit, by
settling the state thereof, and providing severe laws against heretical
Papists, and schismatic Refractaries.
Church. He that bids us to call upon him in the day of our trouble, and
promises to deliver us, requires also that we should glorify him. Psalm. 50
15. How much more then ought we to glorify him, being in the day of our
trouble delivered before we called upon him?

Verily (most Honorable assembly) in this respect our deliueracce is the
greater, then the deliverance either of the Jews from the bloody intent of
Haman, or of our selves in the year. 1588. For the Lord did not work those
deliverances without the means of prayer and fasting: but this, his own right
hand has brought to pass, before that ever we did open our lips unto him in
that behalf. Yea, herein is our deliverance also the greater, because, though
the mischief plotted against us was but bodily, yet the mischief plotted
against ours and all posterity was spiritual, even to have reduced them to the
former bondage of popish blindness, superstition and Idolatry, so to have
perished everlastingly: and therefore we that should have been consumed
touching our bodies, and outward states, in this intended massacre, (if it had
proceeded) should have been much better, then they that should have lived. As
it belongs therefore to all, at all times to glorify God for this great
deliverance, so specially it belongs to you that are now assembled in this
high Court of Parliament

The Lord eareth not for any observation of a day only, in remembrance of his
me eyes, nor for bare words in commendation and celebration of his goodness,
except that otherwise we do dispose our way aright: For this is the best
praise whereby he is glorified. Psalm. 50.25. Yea even now, and at this
Session, does the Lord require this of you. For has not his hand of sickness
in many places continued, and does it not still hoover over us from before the
first summoning of this Parliament, to this present Session? And did not God
reveal his mercy in revealing the late treason, and delivering us from it,
immediately before the last Session, that your meeting might be proroged,
whereby in the time of Interim, ye might have the more leisure, the better to
deliberate and consult, what at this your assembly might most make for the
glory of his name, and the good of his Church? And will ye now dissolve your
metting without doing of further matter in As if no good could be done unto the
Church, but the Restitutio^ of the Scumaticall Ministers, which indeed is no
good.
that behalf then yet ye have done?

Again, are not many of you ancient, and in that respect never again like to
be of any other Parliament? which also of the youngest and lustiest of you
knows, either that he shall live to an other Parliament* or to another
Session of this Parliament: Or if he shall live to another Parliament, that he
shall be chosen to be again thereof? Or livyng to another Session of this
Parliament, that he shall have health and strength to be present thereat? Are
not some worthy men, that were at the former Sessions of this Parliament, now
at rest with the Lord? Yea, are not some other that were living and in health
at the time of the last Session, now also (before the beginyng of this Session)
gathered to their Fathers?

Yea further, because diverse of the ministers deprived and silenced (being
partly very aged, and partly consumed with What godliness is there in wilful
and malicious co^fronting the Magistrate, in repining at their brethren and
superstitious forsaking their calling, livings, flock and all, to the undoing
of themselves, their wives, children and friends?
Godly grief,) not so much for their own troubles, as for the desolation of
the Churches, both presently seen, and for future times by the present to be
prognosticated, in as much as many most A c^lumnicus Censure.
unworthy persons are thrust into their places, (in which consideration, as
Elisha wept, by the spirit of prophecy, to foresee the miserable havocke that
Hazael should make of the people of Israel touching their bodies, 2 Kings
8.11.12. So what Christian heart can refrain weeping and bleeding, to
forethinke of the spiritual spoil, that will be made in the Church by A
manifest slander. But if it be so, wherefore do not the Refractary Ministers
ret^ine their places to keep out such?
blind guides, corrupt teachers, and careless: yea wicked and ungodly Pastors:
because (I say) many faithful ministers deprived and silenced, partly by age,
and partly by Godly grief, are so near the finishing of their race, that the
ground for their grave is in a manner already measured: therefore ye that are
the Lords worthies, now assembled in this High and Honorable Court, do that,
that is to be done by you, for the glory of God, and comfort of his Churches
and Ministers, with the more speed and expedition, that such servants of God as
are so near their end, may yet be somewhat reviued and comforted before their
end, bless you and yours before they die, and so take their leaves also of you
and yours, with the more peace and joy to their own souls.

As your house of Parliament at the last Session thereof, should passiuely have
been the house of blood, yea the fountain (in some sort) of blood, that even
from thence should have flowed streams and rivers of blood through out the
whole land: so let it at this Session be actiuely the house of comfort yea a
fountain of comfort, that from thence may flow a river (as it were the river
of God) and a floude of spiritual comfort, icy and gladness to all the land. To
all the land* Yea to all Nations that know the Lord and call upon his name: yea
to al posterity. As the first day of the last Session, should have bin, a day
of darkness and of blacknes, a day of clouds and of obscurity (as Joel speaks
chapter 2.2.) so let the last day of this Sessio^ be a bright and clear sunshine
day, a day of light, a day of comfort and refreshing from the Lord. As the
Lords enimyes, the bloody and merciless Papists (merciless to them selves, in
murdering themselves heretofore and of late, and therefore much more merciless
unto other) As these men would have made themselves as a fire to devour all
before them, and as a flame to burn up all behind them. Joel. 2.3. So be ye
that are the Children of God, and should therefore be merciful, as your Father
also is merciful, Luke 6.6. Be ye (I say) as it were the rain: even as the
first and the latter rain, (Joel. ^.24) as their wrath should have bin like the
roaring of a Lion (as Solomon speaks of the wrath of a King) so let your
favor be (as Samon speaks of the favor of a King) like the dew upon the
grass. Pro. 1.12.

By this mercy that hitherto I have (as it were at the bar of your Justice)
pleaded for, and provoked you unto, ye shall not only treasure up The
Suppliants speak by contraries.
comfort to your selves against the day of your death, when ye shall most stand
in need of comfort, but ye shall also make your old age the more honorable:
yea after your days here ended, your name and memory will be honorable with
all posterity. Whe^efore did Deborah say, that Iael the wife of Heber should
be blessed above other women, yea blessed above other women dwelling in tents?
Judge. 5.24. Because with an hammer she had driven a nail so deep into the
head of Sisera sleeping in her tent, that he did never awake.

If such a sentence of blessedness were prophesied of Iael, for making away
only an outward enemy of the outward state of the Church, how much more shall
ye be blessed: yea blessed above many former Parliament men, if as some have
made a beginning of the desolation of the whore of Rome in these lands so ye
shall make perfect that beginning, and utterly take away whatsoever of her We
must wisely distinguish between such things as are proper unto the Papacy and
what they have by usurpation, but are proper unto the true Church of God.
ornaments yet remaining, wherewith she and her Priests were wont to be decked,
and are yet decked, and wherewith also her Idols were wont to be worshipped, and
are yet worshipped? And if as other have already (in some sort) begun to
drive the nail into the head of the Archenimy (next under Satan himself) of
the spiritual state of the Church, so ye shall also drive the same further?
Yea if likewise as the Papists comforted themselves touching their contrived
and hoped for destruction of our persons, and of our religion, saying (in
dreaming sort) among themselves, as Moses said to the Israelits, these men and
this religion which ye have hitherto seen, ye shall never see again: so
likewise ye by the sword of the word of the Lord, and of your authority, (as it
were) by the sword of the Lord and of Gideon, Judge. 7.20. if (I say) ye shall so
cut of the tail of the said whore of Rome, and (as it were) her branch and
rush, that there shall be no more hope left to her lovers here amongst us, of
ever committing the like spiritual fornication with her hereafter, that
heretofore they have done: that so we may comfortably apply the former words of
Moses to our selves and to our children, touching the Romish religion and all
the Proper thereunto.
appurtainance thereof, which we have seen, that we shall never see them
again, Exodus 14.23.

Yea, let the late conspiracy of Papists before mentioned, provoke you so much
the more carefully, and firmly, to abolish their whole religion, to the least
hem of every garment and Ceremony thereof, as also the more surely to establish
the Gospel with all things appertaining thereunto, and every holy means for
the best supporting thereof, by how much more, the cursed fruits thereof have
proclaimed it, and daily do proclaim it, to be odious and abominable in the
sight of God. Lastly, though they were then disappointed, yet your wisdom is
such, that I hope ye need not be admonished, either not to think that they
will hereafter be idle and give over their occupation, of wicked and
treasonable imaginations, or not to neglect, by all good means possible, to
prevent whatsoever future treachery and conspiracy, yet they shall in their
darkness, further practice against us.

Resolution of the 17. Argument.
In this Argument the Suppliants, heaping (as themselves profess) many things
together, and contriving many Arguments into one, do certainly very worthily
and Christianly discourse, as of sundry other things, so especially concerning
the Lords great mercies, in the miraculous deliverance, as of your Honorable
House of Parliament, so also consequently of the whole State and Kingdom,
thereby redeeming both our Bodies from corporal, and our Souls from
Spiritual intended captivity of that bloody Man of Sin, the child of
Perdition. Which verily should provoke every good Christian to special
thankfulness unto our heavenly Father, to repentance for our former
transgressions, to present diligence in our several vocations, and ever
hereafter to keep a more vigilant and watchful eye over the perfidious and
treacherous Adversary. But let us examine how the Suppliants apply these
things to their purpose.

I. REASON.
God sent lately amongst us a mighty and fearful pestilence, for omission of
some duty which should have been performed.

Ergo. The high Court of Parliament is presently to restore the refractarie
Ministers, especially seeing the plague does still hover over our heads.

ANSWER.
1. TO let the Antecedent pass, which yet is not so fully and warily laid
down, as it ought to have been. Who does not see the weakness of the
Consequence. For does GOD plague us because of the proceedings against the
Refractarie Ministers; and not rather for our horrible sins of security,
pride, unthankfulness etc. This is certain: and that rests to be proved
still.

The Error is manifold. 1. (...).2. (...).3. (...).4. (...).

II. REASON.
God has lately delivered the House of Parliament and the whole land from a
bloody intended massacre.

Ergo. That honorable Court specially ought to testify their thankfulness
unto God, by restoring the Refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
1. AS if there were no other means whereby that honorable Court might
testify their thankfulness, but by restoring Schismatic Pastors unto the
Church, the more to disturb the peace thereof.

3. The error is, (...). Also, (...).

III. REASON.
Many of the honorable Lords, and other members of the Parliament, are very
ancient and stricken in years; and therefore never again like to be of any
other Parliament.

Ergo. They ought to do good now, by restoring the Deprived and Silenced
Ministers.

ANSWER.
1. But it has not been yet proved, that to restore the Refractarie
Ministers, is to do Good, and not rather to do hurt; and to sin by being
cause of nourishing faction and dissension in the Church.

2. The Errors be, 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...).

IV. REASON.
The Refractarie Ministers would be very glad, if they were comforted,
restored, and let alone.

Ergo. They ought so to be.

ANSWER.
SO would all Schismatiques, Heretics, Papists, Atheists, yea all
malefactors, murderers, thieves, cut purses, be very glad, if they were
comforted, delivered, and let alone.

V. REASON.
The House of Parliament, by their mercy showed toward the Refractarie
Ministers, shall not only treasure up comfort unto themselves against the day
of their death, but shall also make their old Age the more honorable, and
their names memorable amongst all posterity.

Ergo. They ought so to do.

ANSWER.
1. IF by Mercy, they mean their reclaiming from Schism and faction, I grant
the whole.

2. But if they mean their Restoring again, they continuing still the same
men they are now: then is the Antecedent a foul begging of the Question, and
the Argument inconsequent.

3. For, contrariwise it may be concluded. The House of Parliament, by
restoring Schismatic Ministers, to disquiet the peace of the Church; shall
not only attract guilt and remorse of conscience; but also prejudice their
honorable Age, and make their names reproachful amongst all posterity.

VI. REASON.
As Iael was blessed above other women dwelling in tents, for driving a nail
into Siseraes head: So should these Parliament Men, be blessed above many
former if they utterly took away all the Whore of Romes ornaments yet
remaining etc.

Ergo. They ought to do so.

ANSWER.
1. THe instance is altogether different. For Sisera was a special enemy of
the Children of Israel, and of the Church of God, ( Judge. 4.2.) But the
Ornaments the Suppliants speak of, are the good Creatures of God, having no
hurt or ill in them.

2. Neither were the Popish idolatrous Priests ever decked with our Ornaments,
neither are they now.

3. Neither were our Ornaments ever worshipped or abused to Idolatry, neither
are they yet.

4. Neither if they had been, is it absolutely necessary to destroy the
Substance of them, together with the abuse: but the abuse is to be abolished,
and the true use restored. The reasons hereof, and cautions to be used in this
point, I have laid down in another place. Chap. 11. Lib. de Adiaph.

5. The Error is, (...). And, (...).

XVII. ARGUMENT.
TO conclude therefore, whilst ye have time, and whilst it is called to day,
fear that ye shall never hereafter have the like time and opportunity that now
ye have: and therefore as Bathsheba said to her most princely son Lemuell,
Open thy mouth for the dumme, and in the cause of all the children of
destruction, open thy mouth: judge righteously, and judge the afflicted and the
poor. Pro. 31.8.9. So say I, to all them that by their place may any way do
good to the Church of God, and to any afflicted and poor members thereof. Yea,
as the said Queen Bathsheba says before, give ye strong drink, to him that
is ready to perish, and wine unto them that have grief of heart, that he may
drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more, Pro. 31.6.7.
So I do wish all them that are of any authority, or in any place of grace and
favor, especially this present high Court of Parliament, to give a plentiful
boll of the strong drink of their comfortable favor, yea an whole flagon full
of the wine of their grace, that they that are now poor, and have bin long
heavy hearted for the Beging of the Question. Let the suppliants look into
themselves and bewail the corruptions they shall see there.
corruptions and ruins of Syon and that in the grief of their hearts are ready
to perish, may drink so deeply thereof, that they may forget their poverty, and
remember their misery no more. Job said, that he had not conte^ned the judgment
of his serva^t, neither of his maid, when they conte^ded with him. Job. 31.13.
How much less the^ is the Impudent begging the Question.
judgment of the ministers of the gospel, yea, of the mother 06 of us al (the
Church of God) yea, of God himself, of Christ Jesus, of the holy Angels, of our
selves and our posterity, and finally of king and kingdom (as has bin showed)
to be neglected? As Hama^ said of the Jews to Ahashuerosh, that they were a
people scattered and dispersed among the people in all provinces of his
kingdom, having laws diverse from all people, and not observing the Kings
laws, and that therefore it was not for the Kings profit to suffer the^.
Ester. 3.8. So I am not ignorant that these ministers of the Gospel. of whom I
have now in these Arguments made so often mention, are And that justly, if you
mean the state of the Church.
charged as enemies to the state, perturbers of the Church, seditious,
schismatic etc.

But if it were lawful and free for these men to expostulate with the state
touching the former matters, as David did with the Lords anointed Saul, they
might not only say with David Wherefore do ye give ear to men's words, that
say, behold David seeks evil against you? 1. Sam. 24.10. But they might also
plead their innocence, as David does his, verse. 12. Understand and see, that
there is neither evil, nor wickedness in us, neither have we sinned against
you. But in the mean time, this they may boldly say, that as the former has
bin an old accusation in all ages, even against the best friends of the Church
and state, so it is answered by the D. King in his 42. lecture upon Jonas, page
171. out of Augustine, that such accusations are rather by confiction then by
conviction. And therefore as our most gracious Queen of most happy memory
Queen Elizabeth, before she was Queen, in her distress, in the days of
Queen Mary, wrote with her Diamond in a glass window at Woodstocke.

Much suspected by me,
Nothing proved can be.
Even Not so.
so may these men both speak and write, the same of themselves.

As for such An unjust calumny.
accusers as are always provoking all men, especially Princes, and Nobles
against them, I wish them to take heed of that fearful curse, wherewith As if
David's case and the Schismatic Ministers were the same.
David cursed those children of men before the Lord, that had sturred up Saul
against him, and that by that means had cast him out from abiding in the
inheritance of the Lord, saying go serve other Gods, 1 Samuel 26.19. For my part,
I pray that God may give them a better mind, that so they may rather be the
blessed of the Lord.

Touching other also that have been, or are forward, in In obeying the
Superiot Magistrate, and executing Justice.
silencing, depriving, or otherwise molesting of ministers, for omission of
Ceremonies, not observing the book of Common prayer in that strict manner that
they do urge the same, and for other conformity, (though in other things they
do and cannot but justify them) I am so far from wishing the least evil
unto them, that I do heartely pray the Lord (who has the hearts of all in
his hands) to work such a gracious change in them, that they may by all
means as much further the work of God, as by their former dealing they have
False.
hindered the same. That so they may have all true honor in this life, and be
eternally blessed in the life to come. Finally concerning our most gracious
Sovereign, I have prayed, I do pray, and whilst I live I will pray for him,
as Solomon prayed for himself, 1. Kings 2.45. Let King James be blessed, and
let his throne be stablished before the Lord for ever: yea, so I pray the Lord
to bless him, with our Noble Queen, and all their Royal issue, that their
earthly kingdom being ended, they may have the heavenly, and there reign with
Christ Jesus the King of Kings for ever, and ever. To this prayer, Let all the
people say, Amen.

Resolution of the 18. Argument.
The high Court of Parliament is bound speedily to open their mouth for the
dumb, to judge righteously, to judge the afflicted and the poor, to give
strong wine to him that is ready to perish; and not to contemn the judgment
of the meanest Subject.

Ergo. They are bound, speedily to restore the Refractarie Ministers.

ANSWER.
1. THis Argument is parallel, and the very same with the 8. Argument before,
and is there answered.

2. In one word. I grant the Antecedent, and deny the Consequence; because the
Refractarie Ministers are not such, as be specified in the Antecedent, as is
often declared before.

3, The Error is, (...).Also, (...).

The Conclusion.
HItherto (Right Reverend and Honorable) according unto my weak ability, I
have with as much breuity as I could (seeing words ought to be numbered unto so
great States) defended the equity of the proceedings against the clamors of
these phantastique Plaintises. Wherein, as I cannot but very much lament this
their contentious and wrangling humor. So also (albeit in the eclipse of
their charity, they esteem of us, that stand in the breach, as of the greatest
enemies they have) I cannot in like manner, but grieve in my very soul, when I
hear them complain of their Poverty and want of the benefits of this life, as
they do in sundry places of this Supplication: which would God their
singularity hindered them not to enjoy, as well as we. For (alas!) what pleasure
can we take to see them deprived thereof? We al believe in one Christ according
unto the truth of his Gospel, we do, or should obey one King, our peace is
their peace, and our liberty theirs, if they will be content (as they ought) to
enjoy it: We can afford them room amongst us, we envy them no preferments and
places of any good and honorable service in the Church, according to their
worthiness and ability to deal therein. And whereas they lay the blame upon
us, who are their Brethren, to be always at the Nobles and Princes elbowes to
stir them up, and to provoke al men against the^: let them look into
themselves, and acknowledge their own error, and we assure our selves, upon
the compassionate clemency and merciful nature of our sovereign Lord, that
they shall be graciously and lovingly embraced, and that they shall want no
manner of thing that is fit for them. Let them be ashamed of their feeding of
shales and husks at other men's trenchers, as they do, without respect, either
unto the necessity of their estate, or to the dignity of their calling: whereas
the sincere Ministers of the Gospel (as a learned Man well observes) ought to
be maintained, not by popular contributions, but by set stipends or tithes, and
that for many reasons. Aret. in Probl. loc. 142. page 426.
1. That the occasion of marchandizing the word of God might be avoided. For
otherwise, crafty, unfaithful and hypocritical Ministers would apply themselves
to their affections, whom they supposed would give them most. 2. That
Evangelical liberty of reprehension might still be retained. For otherwise the
Ministers, either durst not tax the vices of their peculiar Benefactors, or,
if they did, it would turn to their own hurt. 3. That suspicion of flattery
might be eschewed. For either the Ministers would frame themselves to please
the wealthier sort, or, in case they did not, wicked and envious people would
judge it so. 4. That the honor, shame fastness and honesty of the Ministers
might be preserved. For what ingenuous man would not be ashamed, either to lay
open his estate and poverty to every base fellow, or to send forth his servants
to beg necessaries for him from door to door. 5. That all fraud and deceit
might be preuen^^^on ministers. who otherwise would never acknowledge
themselves wealthy, but would craftily dissemble their estate. 6. That envious
worldlings might have no cause to calumniate the Ministers, to have received
more then indeed was given them. 7. That the poor people might not be
prejudiced. For they must either contribute something toward the Ministers
relief, having more need to be relieved themselves, or they must endure shame
for staying their hands, when others showed their liberality. 8. That men might
not seek occasions to put away their Ministers, upon dislike either of their
continual charge in maintayning them, or of the liberty in reprehending their
vices. 9. That the ministers might not seem to be maintained by wicked and
ungodly persons, Idolaters, Heretics, Atheists, Swiggerers etc. with whom
good men ought to have no communion. 10. That the Ministers might not be
burdensome unto the poor, to Widows, Pupils, Orphans, Sick, needy etc. whom
it were sin to rob. 11. That prodigal and arrogant men might not, by their
large contributions, take occasion of boasting, and extolling themselves above
others. 12. Because there is no commandment in holy scriptures, that
Ministers should be so maintained in all places, and at all times. Let them be
ashamed, I say, of such base popular exorbitant dependence, when they may be
maintained with their Brethren at home, and feed of the finest of the wheat.
Lo the malice, the envy and spite, which we, whom they term their Accusers,
do bear unto them, God being witness unto our consciences, that we wish
them all the good that may be.

Revel. 7.12. Amen. Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor, and
Power, and Might, be unto our God for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

