LIFE ETERNAL OR, A TREATISE Of the knowledge of the Divine ESSENCE and
ATTRIBVTES. Delivered in XVIII. Sermons.

By the late faithful and worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN PRESTON, D. in
Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel College in
Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of LINCOLNS Inn.

JOHN 17.3. This is Life Eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

Imprinted at London by R. B. and are to be sold by Nicholas Bourne at the
Royal Exchange, and by Rapha Harford, in Paternoster Row, in Queenes-head
Alley, at the sign of the guilt Bible. 163^.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM; VISCOUNT SAY AND SEAL, INCREASE OF GRACE.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
SO waking and omnipotent has ever been the eye and hand of God, that nothing
by himself designed to worth and use, could wholly be debased or laid aside.
Moses and Cyrus devoted in their infancy to ruin and obscurity, were by that
eye and hand kept and advanced to highest honors and employments for his
Church.

Some footsteps of which care and power, we have observed, upon the birth and
bringing forth to light of this Orphane: which, in relation to the painful
labor of him, who (as the Mother) brought it forth, and dyed in travel with
it, we thought might well be styled BENNONI, Son of my sorrows; But, when
we saw the strength and holiness imprinted on the child by God the father of
it, we doubted not to call it BENJAMIN, Son of the right hand. For, as dying
Jacob laid his right hand upon the youngest son of Joseph: So God did stretch
forth his on this, the last issue of the dying Author; when out of a womb (as
then) so dead and dried, he brought forth a Man-child so strong and vigorous:
As also, when by the Parents immature departure, it seemed to be adjudged to
death and darkness, that yet by the same hand it was preserved, and at last
through many hazards delivered unto us, who by the dying Parent, were appointed
to the Mid-wives Office, in bringing it forth to the public view.

And, if we may estimate the writings of men, by the same rule whereby we are
to judge of the works of God himself; and those works of God excel the rest,
which do most clearly show forth him the Author of them: and therefore Grace,
though but an accident in the soul, is of far more price with God, than all
men's souls devoid of it, because it is the lively Image of his Holiness,
which is his beauty. We could not imagine, how this work should not be valued
when it came abroad, that presents to all men's understandings so clear,
evident and immediate expressions of God, his Name and Attributes. And indeed
what vast and boundless volumes of heaven, earth and hell, has God bin pleased
to publish to make known his wrath, eternal power and Godhead? and how long
has he continued that expensive work of governing the world, to show forth
the riches of his goodness, patience and forbearance? Yet when all were bound
together; so little knew we of him, that he set forth his Son, the express
Jmage of his Person, as the Last, and best Edition, that could be hoped for.

And, it being much more true of God which is usually said of knowledge in the
general, Non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem, that being so good, he has no
enemies nor strangers to him, but those that know him not; surely then the
knowledge of him is a most necessary and effectual means to friendship with
him.

And indeed, As, that God knows us, is the first Foundation of his Covenant
of Mercy with us, 2 Timothy 2.19. So, our true and savoury knowledge of him, is
made the first entrance into covenant, continuing of acquaintance, and
increasing of communion with him, Jerem. 31.33, 34. Yea further, as to make
known himself was the utmost end of all his works; Romans 1.19. So rightly to
know him, is the best reward attainable by us for all our works. Joh. 17.3.
This is eternal Life to know thee, the only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom
thou have sent.

Which great reward we doubt not, but this servant of God attained. Who,
after he had spent the most of his living, thoughts and breath in unfolding and
applying, the most proper and peculiar Characters of Grace, which is Gods
Jmage; whereby Believers came to be assured, that God is their God, and they in
covenant with him; was in the end admitted to exercise his last and dying
thoughts, about the Essence, Attributes and Greatness of GOD Himself, who is
their portion and exceeding great reward.

In the very entrance almost into which, he was carried up so nigh to Heaven,
that he came not down again, but dyed in the Mount into which (by Gods
appointment) he was ascended; and before many of Gods glorious backparts were
passed by him, he was taken up to view the rest more fully Face to face. So
that, as he was often in his sickness wont to say, J shall but change my place,
and not my company; we may also truly say, he did but change his studying
place, not his thoughts nor studies. God being the only immediate subject about
which the studies of men and Angels are wholly taken up for all eternity.

Which change, though to him full of gain, had been to us more grievous, had
not this little piece, like to ELIAHS mantle fallen from him, as he was
ascending. Wherein we have those lofty speculations of the schools (which
like empty clouds fly often high, but drop no fatness) digested into useful
applications, and distilled into Spirit-full and quickening cordialls, to
comfort and confirm the inward Man.

Not only showing (as others) what GOD is; but also what we therefore ought
to be. At once, emblazoning the Divine Essence, and glorious Attributes of
God; and withal delineating the most noble dispositions of the Divine Nature
in us, which are the prints and imitations of those his Attributes, applying as
a skillful builder, the pattern to the piece he was to frame. So, as by his
unfinisht draught, it may be gathered, what enlarged and working apprehensions,
and impressions of the Deity possessed his heart. He speaks of God, not as one
that had only heard of him, by the hearing of the ear, but whose eye of faith
had seen him.

But needs he, or this relict of his, Epistles of commendation from us unto
your Honor, who knew him so well? Or unto others, besides this Inscription of,
and Dedication to your Name? which we account our only choice, and best
Epistle to the Reader; You, are our Epistle, etc. Seeing in your Honor, those
more Heroical Graces, and Noblest parts of Gods Image, which in these SERMONS
the Author endeavored to raise his hearers to, are found already written, and
imprinted not with ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God: yea, and not
only written, but also by reason of the greatness of your birth, the
nobleness of your deportment in your country, known and read of all men. Such
ingenuous simplicity lodged in depth of wisdom: Holiness of life so set in
honor and esteem, and immoveably settled with evennesse of vvalking in midst
of all vanities: Such humility in height of parts: gratiousnesse of heart in
greatness of mind. So rare, fixed and happy a conjunction, in an house so
eminent, does not fall out, without a general observation.

To your Name and Honor, therefore, we present it (most Noble LORD) as the
last Legacy bequeathed by him to the Church, as a pledge of our service, and a
counterpane of your Lordships most raised thoughts and resolutions.

And likewise unto others, as honored with your Lordships name; that those
who study, either men or books, may read these SERMONS together with your
Lordships VERTVES, each as the coppie of the other, to invite them to the
imitation of the same.

And that the World, which (like that Indian Monarch) accounts such true
Pictures of the beauty of Holiness as this, to be but counterfeit, because
not tawnie, like their own; and look upon so high Principles of Godliness,
as empty notions raised up by art and fancy to make a show, may see and know
in you, the true, real, uniform subsistence of them; and that God has indeed
some such living, walking Patterns of his own Great Holiness, and more
transcendent Graces.

Which Graces, He, who is the God of all Grace, increase and perfect in your
Lordship here, that hereafter you may be filled with all the fullness of him;
So pray

Your Honors ever to be commanded, THOMAS GOODWIN, THOMAS BALL.

THat there is a God proved: Page 5 1 By the Creation. Ibid. By the law,
written in men's hearts. Page 13 By the Soul of man. Page 15 USE 1. To
strengthen faith in this Principle. Page 22
USE 2. What consequences to draw hence. Page 28 Objections against this
Principle. Page 30 2 That there is a God proved by faith. Page 19.45 The
Scripture proved true by four things. Page 48
USE 3. To confirm us in this Principle. Page 61 Difference in the assent of
men to this. Page 62 4 Means to confirm our Faith in this. Page 68 Three
Effects of a firm assent to this Principle. Page 70 3 That there is no other
God, but GOD. Page 75 Five Arguments to prove that there is no other God. Page
76 The gods and religion of the Heathens false, proved three ways. Page 80
Religion of Mahomet false. Page 82
USE 1. To believe that our God is God alone, and to cleave to him. Page 85
USE 2. To comfort us in this, that God will show himself the true GOD, in
raising the Churches. Page 87
USE 3. To keep our hearts from Idolatry. Page 88 Three grounds of Idolatry.
Page 89 What God is. Page 94
Doctrine. God only and properly has being in him. Page 97 What the being of
God is, explained in five things. Ibid.
USE 1. There is something in Gods Essence not to be inquired into. Page 100
USE 2. To strengthen our faith and encourage us in wants and crosses. Page 103
USE 3. To give God the praise of his being. Page 112
USE 4. To learn the vanity of the creatures, and the remedy against it.
Page 116 Attributes of God of two sorts. Page 119

The First ATTRIBVTE.
The perfection of God. Page 120 Five differences between the perfection of
God, and the creatures. Page 121 USE 1. All that we do cannot reach to God to
merit. Page 123
USE 2. To see the freeness of Gods grace. Page 125
USE 3. To go to God with faith though we have no worth in us. Ibid.
USE 4. God has no need of any creature. Page 126
USE 5. Though many perish it is nothing to God, he is perfect. Page 127
USE 6. Gods commands are for our good, he is perfect. Ibid.
USE 7. To give God the honor of his perfection. Page 129 Four signs of
exalting Gods perfection. Ibid. The creatures of themselves can do nothing for
us in three respects. Page 137

The Second ATTRIBVTE.
God without all causes. Page 140 Reason 1. Else something should be before
him. Ibid.
Reason 2. That which has a part receives it from the whole. Page 141
Reason 3. All other things have a possibility not to be. Page 142
USE 1. God wills not things because they are just, but they are just because
he wills them. Page 143
USE 2. God may do all things for himself and his own glory. Page 144
USE 3. We should do nothing for our own ends but for God. Page 146 Eight
signs to know whether a man make God or himself his end. Page 148

The Third ATTRIBVTE.
Doctrine. God is eternal. Page 156 Five things required in Eternity. Page
157 Reasons why God must be Eternal. Page 158 Four differences between the
Eternity of God, and the duration of the creatures. Page 159
Consect. 1. God possesses all things together. Page 159
Consect. 2. Eternity makes things infinitely good or evil. Page 160
USE 1. To mind more things Eternal. Page 161 Motives to consider Eternity.
Page 167
USE 2. Not to be offended with Gods delaying, he has time enough to perform
his promises, being Eternal. Page 168
USE 3. To consider Gods love and enmity are eternal. Page 171
USE 4. To comfort us against mutabilitie of things below. Page 172
USE 5. God is Lord of time. Page 174

PART II.
The Fourth ATTRIBVTE.
God is a SPIRIT. Page 2 Four properties of a Spirit. Ibid. USE 1. Gods eye
chiefly on our spirits, therefore they must be kept fit for communion with him.
Page 4 How to fit our spirits for communion with God. Page 6 Directions for
cleansing the spirit. Page 10
USE 2. Gods government chiefly on the spirits of men. Page 25 Proved by 3
Demonstrations. Page 28
USE 3. To worship God in spirit. Page 32 Which consists in three things. Page
33 What necessity of the gestures of the body in Gods service. Page 38 How to
conceive of God in prayer. Page 44
The Simplicity of GOD. Gods simplicity proved by six reasons. Page 48
Consec. 1. To see what a stable foundation faith has. Page 51
Consec. 2. God cannot be hindered in his works. Page 52
Consec. 3. The Attributes of God are equal. Page 53
USE 1. To labor to be content in a simple condition. Page 54
USE 2. To labor for singleness of heart. Page 59 Two things in simplicity.
Page 60
USE 3. To go to God rather than to the creatures. Page 67

The Fifth ATTRIBVTE.
Gods immutability. Page 72 Five Reasons of Gods immutability. Page 73 Two
Objections against Gods immutability. Page 76 Consec. 1. How to understand
several places of Scripture. Page 78
Consec. 2. Love and hatred in God eternal. Ibid.
USE 1. Take heed of provoking him to cast us off. Page 80 The time of Gods
casting off a man, unknown. Page 83
USE 2. Gods gifts and calling without repentance. Page 84 How to know we are
in Covenant with God. Page 85 The unchangeablenesse of God takes not away
endeavor. Page 93 The occasion, end, and use of revealing the doctrine of Gods
unchangeablenesse in Scripture. Page 96
USE 3. God dispenceth mercies and judgments, now as in former times. Page 98
Two cases wherein God punishes his own Children. Page 99 GODS Judgments
different in time and means. Page 101
USE 4. To see a difference between God and the creature. Page 103 Forgetting
the creatures to be mutable, three inconveniences of it. Ibid.
USE 5. To esteem things by their unchangeablenes. Page 106
USE 6. To judge our own spirits by constancy in well doing. Page 111
USE 7. To go to God to get it. Page 113 Two causes of inconstancy. Page 115
3 Helps to strengthen purposes. Page 117 Means to help resolutions. Page 119

The Sixth ATTRIBVTE.
The greatness of God. Page 123 The greatness of God in six things. Ibid.
The greatness of God proved by four Reasons. Page 127 USE 1. To know our
interest in God, and to get an answerable greatness of mind. Page 129 Why men
are led aside by outward things. Page 130 How to come to true greatness of
mind. Page 137
USE 2. To fear him for his greatness. Page 140
USE 3. To think no affection or obedience enough for him, and therefore not
to limit our selves. Page 142
USE 4. To reverence before him. Page 145

The Seventh ATTRIBVTE.
Gods immensitie. Page 147 3 Reasons of Gods infinite presence. Page 148 USE 1.
God governes the world immediately, a remedy against complaint of ill
Governors. Page 150
USE 2. To choose God, and rejoice in him, as a friend in all places. Page 152
USE 3. To see a ground of Gods particular Providence in the smallest things.
Page 154
USE 4. To be patient and meek in injuries offered by men. Page 156
USE 5. To walk with God. Page 159 How we are present with God. Page 160 How
to make God present with us. Page 161 Why men desire company. Page 166
USE 6. God observes all the evil and good we do. Page 168
USE 7. Terror to wicked men, God is an enemy they cannot flee from. Page 174
The Eighth ATTRIBVTE. God is Omnipotent. Page 176 Omnipotency of God,
wherein. Page 177 4 Reasons of Gods Omnipotency. Page 178 Objections against
the Omnipotency of God. Page 181
USE 1. To rejoice in our God, who is Almighty. Page 186
USE 2. To make use of Gods Power, in all wants and straits. Page 191
USE 3. To believe the Omnipotency of God. Page 194 Men doubt as much of the
power of God, as of his will. Ibid.
USE 4. To seek and pray to God in all straits with confidence. Page 198 2
Instances of Gods Power. Page 201

GODS NAME, AND ATTRIBVTES. THE FIRST SERMON.
HEBREWS 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that seek him.


HAVING undertaken to go through the whole body of Theology, I will first
give you a brief definition of the thing it self, which we call Divinity, it
is this;

It is that heavenly wisdom, What Theology is.
or form of wholesome words, revealed by the Holy Ghost, in the Scripture,
touching the knowledge of God, and our selves, whereby we are taught the way to
eternal life.

heavenly wisdome] for so it is called, 1 Cor. 2.13. 1 Cor. 2.13.
The wisdom which we teach, is not in the words, which man's wisdom teaches,
but which the Holy Ghost teaches. So likewise the Apostle in another place
calls it, The form of wholesome words; 2 Timothy 1.13.
that is, That systeme, or comprehension of wholesome Doctrine delivered in the
Scripture.

Now it differs from other systemes, and bodies of Sciences: Theology wherein
it differs from other Sciences.


1 Because it is revealed from above; all other knowledge is gathered from
things below.

2 Again, all other sciences are taught by men, but this is taught by the Holy
Ghost.

3 All other knowledge is delivered in the writings of men, but this is
revealed to us in the holy Word of God, which was written by God himself,
though men were the mediate penmen of it; therefore, I add that, to
distinguish it from all other Sciences; that, It is not revealed by men, but by
the holy Ghost, not in books written by men, but in the holy Scriptures.

the knowledge of God, and of our selves. And so it is likewise distinguished
from all other knowledge, which has some other objects. It is the knowledge of
God, that is, of God, not simply considered, or absolutely, in his Essence, but
as he is in reference and relation to us.

And again, it is not simply the knowledge of our selves, (for many things in
us belong to other arts and sciences) but as we stand in reference to God; so
that these are the two parts of it; the knowledge of God, in reference to us;
and of our selves, in reference to him.

teach us the way to eternal life: And therein it differs from all other
sciences whatsoever; for they only help some defects of understanding here in
this present life: for where there is some failing or defect, Arts, why
invented.
which common reason does not help, there arts are invented to supply and
rectify those defects; but this does somewhat more, it leads us the way to
eternal life: for, as it has in it a principal above all others, so it has
an higher end than others: for as the wellhead is higher, so the streams
ascend higher than others. And so much for this description, what this sum of
the doctrine of Theology is. Parts of Theology.


The parts of it are two: 1 Concerning God. 2 Concerning our selves.


Now concerning God, 1 Concerning God.
2. things are to be known: 2. Things.
1 That he is; both these are set down in the Text. 2 What he is. both these
are set down in the Text.


1 That God is, 1 That God is.
we shall find that there are two ways to prove it, or to make it good to
us: 1 By the strength of natural reason. 2 By faith. 2 What God is.



That we do not deliver this without ground, look into Romans 1 20. Romans
1.20.
For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power, and Godhead,
are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his works, so that
they are without excuse. So likewise, Act. 17.27, 28. you shall see there what
the Apostle says, Acts 17.
that they should seek after the Lord, if happily they might grope after him,
and find him: for he is not far from every one of us: for in him we live,
move, and have our being: That is, by the very things that we handle and
touch, we may know that there is a God; and also, by our own life, motion,
and being, we may learn that there is a Dietie, from whence these proceed: For
the Apostle speaks this to them, that had no Scripture to teach them. So
likewise, Act. 14.17. Acts 14.17.
Nevertheless, he has not left himself without witness, in giving us
fruitful seasons: As if those did bear witness of him, that is, those works
of his in the creatures. So that you see, there are two ways to come to the
knowledge of this, that God is; One, I say, is by natural reason: Or else to
make it more plain, we shall see this in these two things:

1 There is enough in the very creation of the world, to declare him unto us.

2 There is a light of the understanding, or reason, put into us, whereby we
are able to discern those characters of God stamped in the creatures, whereby
we may discern the invisible things of God, his infinite power and wisdom;
and when these are put together, that which is written in the creature, there
are arguments enough in them, and in us there is reason enough, to see the
force of those arguments, and thence we may conclude that there is a GOD,
besides the arguments of Scripture, that we have to reveal it. For, though I
said before, that Divinity was revealed by the HOLY GHOST, yet there is this
difference in the points of Theology: Difference in points of Theology.
Some truths are wholly revealed, and have no footsteps in the creatures, no
prints in the creation, or in the works of GOD, to discern them by, and such
are all the mysteries of the Gospel, and of the Trinity: other truths there
are, that have some vestigia, some characters stamped upon the creature,
whereby we may discern them, and such is this which we now have in hand,
that, There is a God. 1 That there is a God.


Therefore we will show you these two things: 1 How it is manifest from the
creation. 2 How this point is evident to you by faith.


3 A third thing i will add, that this God whom we worship, is the only true
God.

Now for the first, to explicate this, that, The power and Godhead is seen in
the creation of the world.

Besides those Demonstrations elsewhere handled, See the sensible
Demonstration of the Deity in the beginning.
drawn from the Creation in general, as from:

1 The sweet concent and harmony the creatures have among themselves.

2 The fitness and proportion of one unto another.

3 From the reasonable actions of creatures, in themselves unreasonable.

4 The great and orderly provision that is made for all things.

5 The combination and dependence that is among them.

6 The impressions of skill and workmanship that is upon the creatures. All
which argue that there is a God.

There remain three other principal arguments to demonstrate this:

Original of all things, which argues that they must needs be made by GOD,
The consideration of the original of all things proved.
the Maker of Heaven and Earth; which we will make good to you by these
particulars:

If man was made by him, for whom all things are made, 1 By the making of man.
then it is certain that they are made also. For the argument holds; If the
best things in the world must have a beginning, then surely those things that
are subserving, and subordinate to them, must much more have a beginning.

Now that man was made by him, That man was made.
consider but this reason;

The father that begets, knows not the making of him; the mother that
conceives, knows it not; neither does the formative virtue, (as we call it)
that is, that vigor that is in the materials, that shapes, and fashions, and
articulates the body in the womb, that knows not what it does. Now is is
certain; that he that makes any thing, must needs know it perfectly, and all
the parts of it, though the stander by may be ignorant of it. As for example;
he that makes a statue, knows how every particle is made; he that makes a
Watch, or any ordinary work of art, he knows all the junctures, all the
wheels, and commissures of it, or else it is impossible that he should make
it: now all these that have a hand in making of man, know not the making of
him, not the father, nor the mother, nor that which we call the formative
virtue, that is, that vigor which is in the materials, which works and
fashions the body, as the workman does a statue, and gives several limbs to
it, all these know it not: therefore he must needs be made by God, and not by
man: and therefore see how the Wiseman reasons, Psalm. 94.9. Psalm. 94.9.
He that made the eye, shall he not see? he that made the ear, shall not he
hear? etc. that is, he that is the maker of the engines, or organes, or
senses, or limbs of the body, or he that is maker of the soul, and faculties
of it, it is certain that he must know, though others do not, the making of
the body and soul, the turnings of the will, and the windings of the
understanding; all those other are but as pensils in the hand of him that does
all; the pensill knows not what it does, though it draws all, it is guided by
the hand of a skillful Painter, else it could do nothing; the Painter only
knows what he does; so that formative virtue, that vigor that forms the
body of a man, that knows no more what it does, than the pensill does, but he
in whose hand it is, who sets it on work, it is he that gives vigor and
virtue to that seed in the womb, from whence the body is raised, it is he that
knows it, for it is he that makes it. And this is the first particular by which
we prove that things were made, and had not their original from themselves.
The second is:

Because else the creatures should be Gods.
Now to have a being from it self, is nothing else but to be God: for it is an
inseparable property of God, to have his being from himself. Now if you will
acknowledge, that the creatures had a being of themselves, they must needs be
Gods; for it belongs to him alone, to have a being of himself, and from
himself. The third follows, which I would have you chiefly to mark.

Else the creatures should be without Causes.
as for example; That which has no efficient cause, (that is) no maker, that
has no end. Look upon all the works made by man (that we may express it to
you;) take an house, or any work, or instrument that man makes; therefore it
has an end, because he that made it, propounded such an end to himself; but
if it have no maker, it can have no end: for the end of any thing is that which
the maker aims at. Now if things have no end, they could have no form: for
the form and fashion of every thing arises only from the end, which the maker
propounds to himself; as for example, the reason, why a knife has such a
fashion, is, because it was the end of the maker, to have it an instrument to
cut with: the reason why an axe or hatchet has another fashion, is, because it
might be an instrument to chop with; and the reason, why a key has another
fashion different from these, is, because the maker propounded to himself
another end, in making of it, namely, to open locks with; these are all made
of the same matter, that is, of iron, but they have diverse fashions, because
they have several ends, which the maker propounds to himself. So that, if
there be no ends of things, there is no form, nor fashion of them, because the
ground of all their fashions, is their several ends. So then we will put them
all together; if there be no efficient, no maker of them, then there is no end,
and if there be no end, then there is no form nor fashion, and if there be no
form, then there is no matter, and so consequently, they have no cause; and
that which is without any cause, must needs be God; which I am sure none dares
to affirm; and therefore they have not their being of themselves. But besides
that negative argument, by bringing it to an impossibility, that the creatures
should be Gods, we will make it plain by an affirmative argument, that all
the creatures have an end.

For look upon all the creatures, and we shall see that they have an end; All
creatures have an end.
the end of the Sun, Moon and Stars is, to serve the Earth; and the end of
the Earth is, to bring forth Plants; and the end of Plants is, to feed the
beasts: and so if you look to all particular things else, you shall see that
they have an end, and if they have an end, it is certain, there is one did
aim at it, and did give those creatures, those several fashions, which those
several ends did require: As for example, What is the reason, why a horse has
one fashion, a dog another, sheep another, and oxen another? The reason is
plain, a horse was made to run, and to carry men; the oxen to plow; a dog to
hunt, and so of the rest. Now this cannot be without an author, without a
maker, from whom they have their beginning. So likewise this is plain by the
effects: for this is a sure rule: Whatsoever it is, that has no other end, but
it self, that seeks to provide for its own happiness in looking no further
than it self; and this is only in God, blessed for ever; he has no end but
himself, no cause above himself, therefore he looks only to himself, and
therein does his happiness consist. Take any thing that will not go out of
its own sphere, but dwells within its own compass, stands upon its own
bottom to seek its happiness, that thing destroys it self; look to any of
the creatures, and let them not stir out of their own shell, they perish
there. So, take a man that has no further end than himself, When a man makes
himself his end he destroys himself.
let him seek himself, make himself his end in all things he does, look
only to his own profit and commodity, such a man destroys himself: for he is
made to serve God, and men, and therein does his happiness consist, because
that he is made for such an end: take those that have been serviceable to
God, and men, that have spent themselves in serving God, with a perfect heart,
we see that such men are happy men; and do we not find it by experience,
that those that have gone a contrary way, have destroyed themselves? And this
is the third particular.

Else, where be any monuments of times before those mentioned the Scriptures.
if the world was from eternity; what is the reason there are no monuments of
more ancient times, than there are? For, if we consider what eternity is, and
what the vastness of it is, that when you have thought of millions of millions
of years, yet still there is more beyond: if the world has been of so long
continuance, what is the reason, that things are but, as it were, newly
ripened? what is the reason, that things are of no greater antiquity than they
are? Take all the Writers that ever wrote, (besides the Scripture) and they all
exceed not above four thousand years; for they almost all agree in this, that
the first man, that had ever any history written of him, was Ninus, who lived
about Abraham's time, or a little before; Trogus Pompeius, and Diodorus Siculus
agree in this. Plutarch says, that Theseus, was the first, before him there
was no history of truth, nothing credible; and this is his expression: Take the
Histories of times before Theseus, and you shall find them to be but like
skirts, in the maps, wherein you shall find nothing but vast Seas. Varro, one
of the most learned of their Writers, professes, that before the kingdom of
the Sicyonians, which begun after Ninus time, that before that time nothing was
certain, and the beginning of that was doubtful, and uncertain. And their
usual division of all history, into fabulous, and certain, by Historians, is
well known, to those that are conversant in them; and yet the Historians, that
are of any truth, began long after the Captivity in Babylon; for Herodotus,
that lived after Esthers time, is counted the first that ever wrote in Prose,
and he was above eight hundred years after Moses time. For conclusion of this,
we will only say, that which one of the ancientest of the Roman Poets, drawing
this conclusion from the argument we have in hand, says, If things were from
eternity, and had not a beginning; Cur supra bellum Thebanum and funera Trojae
Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae?
If things were from eternity, what is the reason, that before the Theban and
Trojan war, all the ancient Poets, and ancient Writers did not make mention
of any thing? Do you think, if things had been from eternity, there would
be no monuments of them, if you consider the vastness of eternity, what it
is? So likewise for the beginning of Arts and Sciences; what is the reason that
the original of them is known? why were they no sooner found out? why are
they not sooner perfected? Printing, you know, is a late invention; and so is
the invention of Letters: take all Sciences, the ancientest, as Astrology and
Philosophy, as well as the Mathematickes; why are their authors yet known, and
we see them in the blade, and not in the fruit? So for the Genealogies of men
(for that I touch, because it is an argument insinuated by Paul, when he
disputed with the Heathens, Acts 17.26. That God has made of one blood all
mankind) you see evidently how one man begets another, and he another, etc.
and so go and take all the Genealogies in the Scripture, and in all other
historiographers, we shall see, that they all come to one wellhead. Now, I
ask, if the world was from eternity, what is the reason that there is but one
fountain, one blood whereof we are all made? Why should they not be made all
together? Why was not the earth peopled together, and in every Land a multitude
of inhabitants together, if they had been from eternity, and had no beginning?

there is a God, That there is a God, proved by the Law written in men's hearts.
that made Heaven and Earth, is, the testimony of God himself. There is a
double testimony; one is the written testimony, which we have in the Scripture;
the other is, that testimony, which is written in the hearts of men.

Now, you know that all Nations do acknowledge a God, (this we take for
granted) yea, even those that have been lately discovered, that live, as it
were, disjoined from the rest of the world, yet they all have, and worship a
God; those Nations discovered lately by the Spaniards, in the West Indies, and
those that have been discovered since; all of them, without exception, have it
written in their hearts, that there is a God. Now the strength of the argument
lies in these two things:

1 I observe that phrase used, Romans 2.15. It is called a law written in their
hearts. Romans 1.1^.
Every man's soul is but, as it were, the table or paper, upon which the
writing is; the thing written is this principle that we are now upon, that
there is a God, that made Heaven and Earth: but now who is the Writer? surely
it is God, which is evident by this; because it is a general effect in the
heart of every man living, and therefore it must come from a general cause:
from whence else shall it proceed? no particular cause can produce it; if it
were, or had been taught by some particular man, by some sect, in some one
Nation or Kingdom, in one age, then, knowing the cause, we should see that
the effect would not exceed it, but when you find it in the hearts of all men,
in all Nations and ages; then you must conclude, it was an universal effect,
written by the general Author of all things, which is God alone; and so
consequently, the argument has this strength in it, that it is the testimony
of God.

2 Besides, when you see every man looking after a God, and seeking him, it is
an argument that there is one, though they do not find him: it is true, they
pitch upon a false god, and go the wrong way to seek him, yet it shows that
there is such a Deity. For as in other things; when we see one affect that
thing which another does not; as to the eye of one, that is beautiful which is
not to another, yet all affecting some beauty; it is an argument that beauty is
the general object of all, and so in taste and other senses. So when we see men
going different ways, some worshipping one God, some another, yet all
conspiring in this, to worship a God, it must needs argue that there is one:
for this law engraven in every man's heart, you will grant that it is a work of
Nature at least, and the works of Nature are not in vain; even as, when you
see the fire to ascend above the air, it argues that there is a place where it
would rest, though you never saw it; and as, in winter, when you see the
Swallows flying to a place, though you never saw the place, yet you must needs
gather that there is one which Nature has appointed them, and has given them
an instinct to fly unto, and there to be at rest; so when you see in every
man's soul such an instigation to seek God, though men never saw him, and the
most go the wrong way to seek him, and take that for God which is not, yet
this argues there is a Deity which they intend. And this is the third.

The same truth is proved by the soul of man.
the fashion of it, and the immortality of it.

God is said to have made man after his own Image; he does not mean his
body, for that is not made after the Image of God; neither is it only that
holiness which was created in us, and now lost: for then he would not have
said, Genesis 9.6. Genesis 9.6
He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the Image of
GOD made he man. The principal intent of that place, is (for ought I can see
or judge) of that Scripture (speaking of the natural fashion of things, and
not of the supernatural graces) it is, to express that God has given a soul
to man, that carries the Image of God, a likeness to the Essence of God,
immateriall, immortal, invisible; for there is a double Image of God in the
soul, one in the substance of it, which is never lost; another is the
supernatural grace, which is an Image of the knowledge, holiness, and
righteousness of God, and this is utterly lost. But the soul is the Image of
the Essence of God, (as I may so speak) that is, it is a spirit immateriall,
immortal, invisible, as he is; has understanding and will, as he has; he
understands all things, and wills whatsoever he pleases. And you see an
expression of him in your own soul, which is an argument of the Deity.

God; it came from GOD, and to GOD it must return; that is, it had not any
beginning here, it had it from him, and to him again it must return. For what
is this body, wherein the soul is? it is but the case of the soul, the shell,
and sheath of it; therefore the soul uses it but for a time, and dwells in it,
as a man dwells in a house, while it is habitable, but when it is grown
ruinous, he departs: the soul uses the body, as a man does a vessel, when
it is broken, he lays it aside; or as a man does an instrument, whilst it
will be serviceable to him; but when it is no longer fit to play upon, he casts
it aside; so does the soul, as it were, lay aside the body: for it is but as a
garment that a man uses; when it is worn out, and threed-bare, he casts it
off: so does the soul with the body. And for the further proof of this, and
that it depends not on the body, nor has its original of it, or by it;
consider the great acts of the soul, which are such, as cannot arise from the
temper of the matter, be it never so curious: As the discourse of the soul
from one general to another; the apprehension of so high things, as God, and
Angels; the devising of such things as never came into the senses. For, though
it be true, that sounds and colors be carried into the understanding by the
senses; yet to make pictures of these colors, and music of these sounds,
this is from the understanding within: So the remembrance of things past;
observing the condition of things, by comparing one with another. Now, look
upon bruit beasts, we see no actions but may arise from the temper of the
matter; according to which their fancy and appetite are fashioned; though some
actions are stronger than others, yet they arise not above the Wellhead of
sense: all those extraordinary things, which they are taught to do, it is but
for their food, as Hawks, and some Pigeons, it is reported, in Assyria that
they carry Letters from one place to another, where they use to have food; so
other beasts that act dancing, and such like motions, it is done by working on
their senses: but come to man, there are other actions of his understanding and
will in the soul: It is true indeed, in a man there are fancy and appetite,
and these arise from the temper of the body; therefore as the body has a
different temper, so there are several appetites, dispositions and affections;
some man longs after one thing, some after another, but these are but the
several turnings of the sensual appetite, (which is also seen in beasts)
therefore when the soul is gone, these remain no longer; but come to the
higher part of the soul, the actions of the will, and understanding of man,
and they are of an higher nature; the acts which they do, have no dependence
upon the body at all: Besides, come to the motions of the body; the soul
guides and moves the body, as a Pilot does a ship, (now the Pilot may be safe,
though the ship be split upon the rock.) Look on beasts, they are led wholly
as their appetite carries them, and they must go that way; therefore they are
not ruled, as a Pilot governes a ship: but in men, their appetites would carry
them hither, or thither, but the will says no, and that has the understanding
for its counselor. So that the motions of the body arise not from the
diversity of the sensual appetites, as in all other creatures, but of the will
and understanding; for the soul depends not upon the body, but the acts of the
body depend upon it: therefore, when the body perishes, the soul dies not;
but, as a man that dwells in a house; if the house fall, he has no dependence
on it, but may go away to another house; so the soul has no dependence upon
the body at all; therefore you must not think that it does die when the body
perishes.

Besides, the soul is not worn, it is not weary, as other things are; the
body is weary, and the spirits are weary: the body wears, as does a garment,
till it be wholly worn out: now, any thing that is not weary, it cannot
perish; but, in the very actions of the soul it self there is no weariness,
but whatsoever comes into the soul perfects it, with a natural perfection,
and it is the stronger for it; therefore it cannot be subject to decay, it
cannot wear out, as other things do, but the more notions it has, the more
perfect it is: the body, indeed, is weary with labor, and the spirits are
weary, but the soul is not weary, but in the immediate acts of it, the soul
it works still, even when the body sleeps: Look upon all the actions of the
soul, and they are independent, and as their independencie grows, so the
soul grows younger and younger, and stronger and stronger, senescens
juvenescit, and is not subject to decay, or mortality: as you see in a
Chicken, it grows still, and so the shell breaks, and falls off: so is it
with the soul, the body hangs on it, but as a shell, and when the soul is
grown to perfection, it falls away, and the soul returns to the Maker.

The next thing that I should come to, The second way to prove, that God is, is
by faith.
is to show you how this is made evident by faith. When a man has some rude
thoughts of a thing, and has some reason for it, he then begins to have some
persuasion of it; but when, besides, a man wise and true, shall come, and tell
him it is so, this adds much strength to his confidence: for when you come to
discern this Godhead, and to know it by reasons from the creatures, this may
give you some persuasion; but when one shall come, and tell you out of the
Scripture, made by a wise and true God, that it is so indeed; this makes you
confirmed in it. Therefore the strength of the argument by faith, you may
gather after this manner: Ye believe the Scriptures to be true, and that they
are the Word of God; now this is contained in the Scriptures, that God made
Heaven and Earth; therefore, believing the Scriptures to be the Word of God,
and whatsoever is contained in them; hence faith lays hold upon it also, and
so our consent grows strong and firm, that there is a God: After this manner
you come to conclude it by faith. For what is faith? Faith is, but when a thing
is propounded to you, even as an object set before the eye, there is an habit
of faith within, that sees it what it is; for faith is nothing else, but a
seeing of that which is: for though a thing is not true, because I believe it
is so, yet things first are, and then I believe them. Faith does not believe
things imaginary, and such as have no ground; but whatsoever faith believes, it
has a being, and the things we believe, do lie before the eye of reason,
sanctified and elevated by the eye of faith; therefore Moses, when he goes
about to set down the Scripture, he does not prove things by reason, but
propounds them, as, In the beginning GOD made the Heaven and Earth; he
propounds the object, and leaves it to the eye of faith to look upon. For the
nature of faith is this: God has given to man an understanding faculty,
(which we call, Reason) the object of this is all the truths that are delivered
in the world, and whatsoever has a being. Now take all things that we are said
to believe, and they also are things that are, and which are the true objects
of the understanding and reason. But the understanding has objects of two
sorts:

1 Such as we may easily perceive, as the eye of man does the object that is
before him.

2 Such as we see with more difficulty, and cannot do* it, without something
above the eye to elevate it: As the candle and the bigness of it, the eye can
see; but to know the bigness of the Sun, in the latitude of it, you must
have instruments of art to see it, and you must measure it by degrees, and so
see it: So is it here, some things we may fully see by reason alone, and those
are such as lie before us, and them we may easily see: but other things there
are, that though they are true, yet they are more remote, and further off;
therefore they are harder to be seen; and therefore we must have something to
help our understanding to see them. So that indeed, Faith, it is but the
lifting up of the understanding, by adding a new light to them and it; and
therefore they are said to be revealed, not because they were not before, as if
the revealing of them gave a being unto them; but, even as a new light in the
night discovers to us that which we did not see before, and as a prospective
glass reveals to the eye, that which we could not see before, and by its own
power, the eye could not reach unto. So that the way to strengthen our selves
by this argument, is to believe the Scriptures; and the things contained in
them.

Now you should see, why we are to believe the Scriptures; but this we must
leave till the next time. We will now come to some use of the point, for we
are not to dismiss you without some application, but we must insert some uses
here and there.

there is a God, To strengthen this principle, that there is a God, more in our
hearts.
the use you should make of it, is, to labor daily to strengthen our faith in
this principle, and to have an eye at God in all our actions, for this is the
reason given in the Text, why one man comes to God, because he believes that he
is, and another does not, because he believes it but by halves; if they did
believe this fully, they would serve God with a perfect heart. What is the
reason, that Moses breaks through all impediments, Hebr. 11.27.
he had temptations on both sides; Prosperity and preferment on the one side,
and adversity and afflictions on the other, yet he passes through wealth and
poverty, honor and dishonor, and goes straight on in the way to heaven, and
(...) reason is added in the Text, because he saw him that was invisible; even
so, if you did see him that was invisible, the God we now speak of, as you
see a man that stands before you, your ways would be more even, and we should
walk with him more uprightly than we do, if we did but believe, that it is he
that fills the heaven and earth; as he says of himself, Ier. 23.24. Ier.
23.24.


Some may here say; oppositum in adjecto, to see him that is invisible.

God that fills Heaven and Earth, as the soul does the body. Now to draw this
a little nearer, that invisible, immateriall substance, the soul of man which
stands at the doors of the body, and looks out at the windows of the eyes,
and of the ears, both to see and hear, which yet we see not; yet it is this
soul that does all these; for if the soul be once gone out of the house of
the body, the eye sees no more, the ear hears no more, than an house or
chamber can see, when there is no body in it; and as it is the spiritual
substance within the body that sees, and hears, and understands all; so apply
this to God that dwells in Heaven and Earth; that as, though you see not the
soul, yet every part of the body is full of it; so if we look into the world,
we see that it is filled, and yet God (like as the soul) is in every place,
and fills it with his presence; he is present with every creature, he is in the
air, and in your selves, and sees al your actions, and hears al your words;
and if we could bring our selves to a settled persuasion of this, it would cause
us to walk more evenly with God than we do, and to converse with him after
another manner; when a man is present, yea, are sollicitous, thinking what that
soul thinks of you, how that soul is affected to you; so if you believed God
were in the world, it would make you have an eye to him in all your actions, as
he has an eye to you, and to have a special care to please him in all things,
rather than to please men. And this is the ground of all the difference
between men: One man believes it fully that there is such a mighty God;
another believes it but by halves; and therefore one man has a care, only to
please God in all things, and to have an eye to him alone; the other believing
it but by halves, he seeks and earnestly follows other things, and is not
so sollicitous what the Lord thinks of him.

The thing therefore which we exhort you unto, is, that you would endevor to
strengthen that principle more and more. We speak not to Atheists now, but to
them that believe there is a God, and yet we do not think our labor lost: For,
though there be an assent to this truth in us, yet it is such an one as may
receive degrees, and may be strengthened: for I know that there are few perfect
Atheists, yet there are some degrees of Atheism left in the best of Gods
children, which we take not notice of; for there is a twofold Atheism:

Two kinds of Atheism.
1 One is, when a man thinks that there is no God, and knows he does so.

2 Another kind of Atheism is, when a man doubts of the Deity, and observes
it not. There are some degrees of doubting in the hearts of all men, as we
shall see by these effects, that this untaken-notice-of Atheism does produce.
As, God goes with it, which is the greatest evil that can befall us: What is
the reason of it? That whereas the greatest cross is exceeding light, if the
wrath of God be put in the other balance, what is the reason that yet this
should overweigh the other, in our apprehension, if we be fully persuaded of
this principle, that God made Heaven and earth? What is the reason that when
crosses and sin come into competition, as two several ways, that we must
go one way; why will men rather turn aside from a cross, to sin against
God, and violate the peace of their consciences, rather than undergo losses,
or crosses, or imprisonment?

God? If this principle were fully believed, that there is a God, that made
Heaven and Earth, you would not do so. The Prophet Isaiah does express this
most elegantly, Isai. 51.12, 13, 14. Isai. 51.12, 13, 14.
Who art thou that art afraid of man that shall die, and the son of man,
which shall be made as grass, and forgettest the LORD thy Maker, which
stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundation of the Earth? As if he
should say, what Atheism is this in the hearts of men?

Whence else are also those deceits, lies, and shiftings, to make things fair
with men, when they know that God is offended with it, who sees all things.

What is the reason that men are so sensible of outward shame, more than of
secret sins; and care so much what men think of them, and speak of them,
and not what God sees or knows? Does not this declare that men think as those
Atheists of whom Job speaks, Job 22. and do they not conceive in some degree,
as those do, as if GOD did not descend beneath the circle of the heavens to
the earth, Job 22.
and his eyes were barred by the curtains of the night, that he did not take
notice of the ways of men; and look how men do this in a greater measure, so
much greater Atheism they have.

God, what is the reason when you have any thing to do, that you run to
creatures, and seek help from them, and busy your selves wholly about outward
means, and seek not to God by prayer, and renewing of your repentance? if you
did fully believe that there is a God, you would rather do this.

Aristotle calls it, (...), this same very (nunc) does transport a man from the
ways of virtue to vice, that they are too busy about the body, and are
careless of the immortal soul, that they suffer that to lie, like a forlorn
prisoner, and to sterve within them? Would you do so, if you did believe that
there is such a God, that made the soul, to whom it must return and give an
account, and live with him for ever?

God, and regard not eternity in which the soul must live? I say, what is the
reason of this, if there be not some grounds of secret Atheism in men?

Gods promises and rewards; Why will you not forbear sin, that you may
receive the promises, and the rewards? Whence is this stupiditie both ways?
Why are we as beasts, led with sensuality, that we will not be drawn to that
which belongs to God* and his Kingdom? Is not this an argument of secret
Atheism and impiety in the heart of every man, more or less?

God, they carry themselves so negligently, not caring how their souls are
clad, and what the behavior of their spirits is before him? If you should come
before men, you would look that your clothes be neat and decent, and you will
carry your selves with such reverence, as becomes him, in whose presence you
stand; this proceeds from Atheism, in the hearts of men, not believing the
Lord to be he that fills the Heaven, and the Earth: Therefore, as you find
these things in you, more or less, so labor to confirm this principle more
and more to your selves; and you should say, when you hear these arguments,
certainly I will believe it more firmly, surely I will hover no more about it.
To what end are more lights brought, but that you should see things more
clearly, which you did not before? So that this double use you shall make of
it:



God, then labor to draw such consequences as may arise from such a
conclusion. Draw such consequences as may arise from such a conclusion.


As, if there be such a one that fills Heaven and Earth; then look upon him, as
one that sees all you do, and hears whatsoever you speak: As when you see a
ship pass through the sea, and see the sails applied to the wind, and taken
down, and hoysed up again, as the wind requires, and shall see it keep such
a constant course, to such a haven, avoiding the rocks and sands, you will
say, surely there is one within that guides it; for it could not do this of it
self: or as when you look upon the body of man, and see it live and move, and
do the actions of a living man; you must needs say, the body could not do
this of it self, but there must be something within that quickens it, and
causes all the actions; even so when you look upon the creatures, and see
them to do such things, which of themselves they are no more able to do, than
the body can do the actions that it does, without the soul: therefore hence
you may gather that there is a God, that fills Heaven and Earth, and does
whatsoever he pleases; and if this be so, then draw nigh to him, converse
with him, and walk with him from day to day; observe him in all his dealings
with us, and our dealings with him, and one with another; be thankful to him
for all the blessings we enjoy, and fly to him for succor in all dangers,
and upon all occasions.

THE SECOND SERMON.
HEBREWS 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that GOd is, etc.


BEfore we come to the second sort of arguments to prove this principle, that
GOD is, by faith, we think it necessary to answer some objections of
Atheism, which may arise and trouble the hearts of men.

Pet. 3.4. 2 Pet 3.4.
All things have continued alike since the creation. That is, when men look
upon the condition of things, they see the Sun rise, and set again, and see
the rivers run in a circle into the sea, the day follows the night, etc. the
winds return in their compasses, and they have done so continually, and there
is no alteration; therefore they doubt whether there be such a God, that has
given a beginning to these things, and shall give an end?



See what the Apostle says in this place, though all things continue alike;
yet there are two reasons, whereby he proves that God made the world, and that
the world shall have an end.

1 The first is laid down in verse 5. Verse 5.
For this they are willingly ignorant of, that by the Word of GOD the heavens
were of old, and the earth standing out of the waters, and in the waters. That
is, naturally the waters would cover the earth, as it did at the beginning; for
the natural place of the waters is above the earth, even as of the air above
the waters: Now who is it that has drawn these waters out of the earth, and
caused it to stand out of the waters, and made it habitable for men and beasts,
says he, was it not the LORD?

2 And was not this proved by the Flood, verse. 6. whereby the world, Verse. 6.
that then was, being overflowed with waters, perished; that is, the waters,
when God took away his hand, returned to their place, and covered the face of
the earth. Now, who was it that did dry the earth again, and now reserveth it
to the day of Judgment to be destroyed by fire? And this he proves by the
famous story of the Flood: You have heard of it (says he) but of this they are
willingly ignorant, that is, they are such things as may be known; but by
reason of your lusts, which obscure your knowledge, and hide those parts of
nature and reason, which God has planted in your hearts; therefore, of these
things you are willingly ignorant.



1 The course of Nature has been turned many times, as those miracles that
the LORD wrought in stopping the course of the Sun, and making of it go
backward; he made the waters to run a contrary course, and stopped the heat
of the fire, and the efficacy of it, so that it could do the three Children
no harm.

2 Besides those miracles, look upon the things done amongst us, and you shall
see, though they are not contrary to Nature, yet Nature is turned of its
course, as in our bodies there be sicknesses and distempers, so there are in
the great body of the World, strange inundations, stirs and alterations; now
if there were not a free Agent, that governes these, why are these things so,
and why no more? why do these things go so far, and no further? why are there
any alterations at all? and when any alterations come to pass, who is he that
stops them? why does the sea overflow some places, and go no further? who
is he that sets bounds to them, but only the Lord? Therefore this we may learn
from it, the constancy of these things shows the wisdom of God; as it is
wisdom in us to do things constantly: and again, the variety of things
shows the liberty of the Agent; for the actions of Nature are determined to
one, but God shows his liberty in this, that he can change and alter them at
his pleasure.

Besides, the things that are ordinary amongst us, wherein there is no such
swarving, but they are constant in their course; does not God guide them, and
dispose of them as he pleases? as the former and latter rain: does not God
give more or less, according to his good pleasure? which shows, that all
things have not continued alike, but that there is a God, that governes the
world. And as it is thus with natural things, so in other things also; you
shall see some judgments and rewards upon some, and not upon others.

the world has continued very long, and there is a promise of his coming, but
we see no such thing?

the LORD, A thousand years are to me but as one day, and one day as a
thousand years. As if he should say, it may seem long to you, who measure
time by motion and revolution, to your narrow understanding it may seem long;
but to God it does not: A thousand years with him, is but as one day. Where,
by the way, we shall answer that fond objection:

Lord employed himself before the creation of the World?

Lord has done? Indeed he made but one world to our knowledge, but who knows
what he did before, and what he will do after? who knows his counsels? and
who is able to judge of him or of his actions? we can know no more, nor judge
no otherwise than he has revealed, we have no other book to look into, but
the book of his Word, and the book of this World; and therefore to seek any
further, is to be wise above sobriety, and above that which is written.

God that rules heaven and earth?

Ezekiel. 1. where you have an expression of this, Ezekiel. 1.
of things running upon wheels: wherein you may observe these things:

1 That all things here below are exceeding mutable; and therefore compared to
Wheels, and they are turned about as easy as a wheel, so that a man may
wonder at their variety and turning.

2 But yet, these wheels have eyes in them, that is, though we see not the
reason of things in them, yet they have eyes in them, they have something to be
discerned; the speech is a metaphor, and a metonymie too, showing that there is
something in their events, that may show the reason of their Turning, if we
could discern it, but it is often hidden from us.

3 And these Wheels are stirred, but as the beasts stir them; that is, there
is nothing done here below, but they are done by the instruments of God,
namely, the Angels.

4 And these Angels, first, have faces like men, that is, the wisdom of men;
and on the other side, secondly, a face like a Lion, for their strength;
thirdly, there is service, and laboriousnesse in them, as in Oxen: fourthly,
there is swiftness in them, as in Eagles; and this is meant of the Angels,
that order and guide the course of things, and change them, as we see
continually.

5 Again, as these Wheels move not, but as they are guided by them, and both
move by the Spirit, that is, what God commands them, they execute, they go,
when he would have them go, and stand still, when he would have them.

6 Again, for the manner of their motion; every one of them had four faces;
that is, they could look every way, from East to West, and from North to
South, when as man can see but one way, before him, he cannot look on the
right side, or the left, or behind him, and therefore he may be deceived; but
these look every way. So also the feet, on which they go, are not like men's
feet, to go forward only, but like calves feet, that is, they were round feet,
which go either forward or backward, so, as they are easily turned; and as
they see every way, so they are apt to go every way, and this with the
greatest facility that can be. Let a man set any thing on work, and it must
needs run in such a channel, in such a way, he cannot change it suddenly: But
it is not so with God, he can alter a thing as easily to the left hand, as to
the right, and that in an instant.



Lord, this is to be considered further, that one wheel is within another,
and the wings of the Angels are one within another; there is a sutablenesse,
and an agreeableness between them: so that take the changes of a thousand
years, and, if you sum them up, you shall find them, as wheels, one within
another. Therefore I would sum up the answer thus; this deceives us, we look
upon Gods providence, in some few particulars only, that we look upon a wheel
or two, and not as they are one within another; for then, indeed, we should see
things that might cause us to wonder: as we see Joseph, an innocent man, lying
in disgrace and imprisonment; and David, though innocent, yet a long time
disgraced in the Court of Saul, and afterward Shimei cursing him; yea, we see
Jesus Christ himself delivered and condemned for an impostor, and that by
witnesses, and in a legal manner: so we see Paul, one that was a man, full of
zeal, yet accounted one of the worst men, that lived in his time: and Naboth,
an innocent man condemned to death by witnesses, and stoned, and who shall rise
again to show his innocence? If you look but upon a wheel or two, you shall
find the Church ready to be swallowed up in Esters time; but if you look
upon them all at once, then you will see, that these passages have eyes in
them, and that they have Angels, and the Spirit to guide them. As for example,
look on all the wheels of Joseph's life, you shall see the envy of his
brethren, selling him to the steward of Pharaohs house, and there his falling
out with his mistress, his casting into prison, and there meeting with
Pharaohs officers; he was thereby made known to Pharaoh, and so he became
great in Pharaohs Court; and then you see it is a goodly work. So in David,
take all the wheels together, and you shall see a glorious work; how God
brought him along to the Kingdom; God was with him, and wrought his works for
him, when he did sit still; and when his hand was not upon Saul, then he sent
the Philistines to vex him, and to end his days: and first he gave David the
Kingdom of Judah; and then afterward Abner and Isobosheth fell out about a
word, and one of them was slain; and then also came two wicked men, and took
off the others head, and so came home the whole Kingdom of Israel into his
hand. So also in Esthers time, take all the wheels together, and you shall see
an excellent act of Gods providence, when the Church was ready to be destroyed,
when the neck was upon the block, and the sword drawn out ready to strike, and
that that night the King should not sleep, but that a book must be brought,
and rather that than another, and that the place should be opened, where he
should find Mordecai his revealing of the treason against him, and thereupon
the decree was revoked, and the Church delivered: I say, take all these
together, and we shall plainly see, that in this strange administration of
things, there is still a providence, and that there are eyes in the wheels,
and a spirit to guide them.

God that made the Heaven and the Earth; what is the reason then, that we see
things are brought to pass by natural causes? If there be a cause for such a
thing, the effect does follow; when there is no cause, then the effect does
not, as a wise man does bring a thing to pass, but the foolish miscarry in
them, we see the diligent hand makes rich, and he that labors not, has
nothing; and things that are strong prevail against those that are weak; and
so God is forgotten in the world, and his wisdom and power is not seen?

God does carry it often another way, as it is, Eccles. 9.11. Eccles. 9.11.
Always the battle is not to the strong, but chance and accident befall them
all; that is, the LORD of purpose does often change them, that his power and
might may be seen. We see often, that Princes walk on foot, Eccles. 10.
like servants, and servants ride like Princes, as in Chap. 10. that is, things
do not always come to pass according to their causes; for, when the cause is
exceeding fair to bring forth such an effect, yet we see it is an abortive
birth, and such things come to pass that we looked not for; as he that was
diligent, many times comes to poverty; the wise do often miscarry in bringing
their enterprises to pass.

Rehoboams Kingdom, the ill counsel that was given him by the young men; but
who was it, that fitted the cause thereunto? was it not the Lord? So on the
contrary, we see that godliness is the cause of good success, and makes men
to prosper, but who is the cause of that cause, is it not the Lord himself?

oftentimes it comes to the wicked according to the work of the righteous,
and contrarily. If there be a God, what is the reason that this comes to pass?

Lord with a perfect heart, that there is a sentence of good and evil goes
with it; but God does often suspend the reward to the godly, and of punishment
to the wicked; the execution of them is deferred. Besides, we are often
mistaken; for that which we think to be ill to us, is many times for our good;
and that which we think is very happy and prosperous, may be hurtful to us.
As for example, when Jacob came from Laban, GOD said to him; Be not afraid, I
am with thee, and I will do thee good. You see, Jacob was no sooner gone, but
Laban follows him, and would have done him much hurt, had not the Lord taken
him off: No sooner was Laban gone from him, but Esau comes against him, and
when the Lord had rescued him from him; when he was come nearer home, when he
might have expected some rest after his weary journey; yet then his daughter
was ravished, and his two sons were rebellious, and committed murder; after
that Rachel died, and Deborah, who was Rebeccah's nurse, who was a good woman,
and therefore a great loss to his family; after all this, a famine fell upon
him; yet for all this, God said that he would do him good; and doubtless, God
was as good as his word, and he did him good: for that medicine is good, that
does us good, though it be bitter, and so was it with these afflictions. So
Paul, he prayed that he might have an happy journey to Rome, and no doubt, the
LORD heard his prayer, as appears by the Lords appearing to him; yet see what
a kind of prosperous journey he had; what a deal of trouble did he meet with?
Being in great afflictions, he went to Jerusalem, thinking there to be
comforted by the Saints; and when he came thither he went into the Temple,
thinking he had well provided for himself; but then he was hardly entertained,
put into prison, and sent bound to Caesarea, and afterward, was in many perils
upon the sea. And this was the prosperous journey that Paul had, and surely it
was happy, and did much good to his own soul, whereby he did good to others;
a journey that led him into many experiments of Gods providence, and goodness
toward him: therefore we must not judge according to the outside, or that
which the world accounts of, and appears to be evil, for they may be causes
of much good to us: therefore Saint James wills us, James 1.2, 3. to rejoice
when we fall into diverse temptations, James 1.2 3.
(...) because it is but a trial of your faith. These varieties of afflictions
are as fire to cleanse your faith, and make it shine more, and grow more:
therefore, says he, rejoice, when you fall into variety of them; for the
variety of them will cure that variety of evils and diseases in us; as poverty
may do that which sickness cannot do, and imprisonment may heal that which
poverty or disgrace cannot do, etc. So on the contrary, those good things are
not always good, which we account good; as when a man goes on from one good
blessing to another, and is carried with a prosperous wind, and finds no
change in any thing; this may also tend to his hurt and destruction, as the
other to his salvation; these slay the foolish, even as the other save the
godly: for these oftentimes do make the soul fouler and fouler, and make it
to be more rustie. This want of changes makes men to depart from God, and fall
into evil; whereas the other makes us the more carefully to cleanse our ways,
and to cleave more firmly to him: Therefore, let us take heed that we be not
deceived about these evils.



Christ come into the world, from the bosom of the Father, and he has brought
us news, what is done there. Besides, we have God himself, who is, as it
were, come from heaven, and has revealed many things unto us, and has
declared his will, what he would have us to do, as to Moses upon Mount Sinai,
and he would have done it to this day, but that our weakness cannot endure
the mightiness and greatness of his Majesty, but would say, as the people
did; Let not the Lord speak to us any more lest we die, but let MOSES, let him
send his messengers, let him speak no more. Again, the Spirit whereby the
Prophets and Apostles spoke to us, was it not sent from heaven?

Again, suppose one should come from either of those two places, would you
believe him? It might be a false relation, would you believe him without
further ground? But it is a direct answer which our Savior gives to this
question, Luke 16. the two last verses, Luke 16.
it was the objection of Dives, if there came one from the dead again, they
would believe it; Abraham answers, They have Moses and the Prophets, and if
they will not believe them, they will not believe, though one should come from
the dead: as if he should say, these carry greater evidence in them, they have
more power to confirm the truth that they delivered, that it came from the
great God of heaven and earth, than if a man should arise from the dead, if we
consider the many miracles which they did, and holy life which they led.

arise from the dead; but if one should come from the dead, this would be much
to show the eternity of things, and the immortality of the soul.

Christ did arise, then many arose from the dead.

THE THIRD SERMON.
HEBREWS 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that God is, etc.


NOw we proceed to that which remains; The second sort of arguments.
we will show you how this point is made manifest to you by faith, that GOD
made the Heavens, and the Earth. It is done after this manner;

When you believe the Scriptures to be true, How this is proved by Faith.
and find this set down in the Scripture, that God made Heaven and Earth,
then you believe that there is an eternal Deity, that is the Author and Maker
of all these things: and thus faith gathers the conclusion:





God did not reveal himself, but they lie before us, and reason can find
them out: but Faith believes things that are revealed by God, yet so, as that
there is no reason for them, as well as for the other. For if one come and tell
you any thing, and if you believe it, you can give a reason of it, and why you
believe it, as well as of any other natural conclusion; as that he is a wise
man, and one that I know will tell the truth, I have had experience of him
heretofore, etc. Even so, when you believe the Scriptures, you can give a
reason for it; it is, because God delivered it, and he cannot lie; but now, how
do ye know that God delivered it? Because the men that delivered it, in his
Name, did confirm it by works, and miracles, and predictions of times; so
that reason runs along together with Faith: Only there is this difference
between them; Faith adds to the eye of reason, and raises it higher; for
the understanding is conversant, as about things of reason, so about things of
Faith; for they are propounded to the understanding, only they are above it,
and must have faith to reveal them; as when Moses says, In the beginning, GOD
made the Heaven and the Earth: when we hear such a proposition, reason does
but look upon it, and cannot see it at first, but Faith helps reason to go
further: therefore Faith is but an addition to the strength of reason; when it
could go no further, Faith makes it to go further: as one that has dim
eyes, he can see better with the help of spectacles: even so does the eye of
reason, by a supernatural faith infused. So that all the things which we
believe, have a credibilitie and entity in them, and they are the objects of
the understanding; but we cannot find them out, without some supernatural
help. As if you would choose a right jewel; (you know there are many
counterfeit ones) how should you know a true one? The stander by cannot tell,
but brings it to a Lapidary, or a Ieweller, and he knows it, because he is
skilled in it. Now, as there are the Jewels, and they are to be discerned and
differenced, but all lies in the skill. So is it in the things that are
revealed by God, and by natural reason, to know which are of God, which not;
there are the things, and they are to be seen, yea, the things themselves have
characters, by which they may be discerned; but let two men look upon them,
one believes, and the other does not; one man goes no further than reason, but
the other does; the reason is, because one is helped from above, and the other
is not, he wants that light, that habit of skill which another has.

Now, this being premised in general; let us see how faith gathers, that the
Scriptures are true, and that all that is in them is true; and consequently,
that there is a God that made the world. Three ways, whereby Faith gathers
that the Scriptures are true, and consequently, that there is a God, that made
the World.
It gathers it by these three heads:

Thus says the Lord; he considers, if this be from God, then it must needs be
true. But now the question is, whether it was delivered truly, and therefore
he looks upon the men that did deliver it, as upon Moses, etc. and if he can
find any evidence in them, that they delivered it truly, without collusion,
then he believes that it is so, and so faith lays hold and pitches upon it;
and gives solid assent unto it.

Now the proofs, whereby we show that these men have spoken by the Holy Ghost,
Proofs that Moses and other Penmen of Scripture, spoke by the Holy Ghost.
are these three:

The miracles which were:
they were not done in a corner, where two or three were, 1 Visible.
and so related to the people, as many false miracles are, but they were done
before many thousand; as the standing still of the Sun, the plagues of
Egypt, the dividing of the waters, the Mannah, that came down from Heaven,
the water flowing out of the rocks, the miracles that were wrought by Eliah,
and Elisha, they were all openly done, in the view of all the people.

2 Real.
they have only a shadow and not the substance, they have no solidity in them,
as the miracles that Inchanters do, they are but (...), as we call them; they
are only appearances, and no more, as, if they give money, it will afterward
prove but dry leaves; and such were the miracles of the Inchanters in Egypt:
but look upon the miracles of Moses, they were solid, as the Mannah fed the
people many years; the water that came out of the rocks did refresh them, the
plagues of Egypt were real; the miracles of Christ were all of use to
mankind, as when he turned water into wine, it was such as they were refreshed
by; so, when he healed the people, when he gave sight to the blind, they were
all useful, and had a reality in them.

Besides, consider the miracles which were wrought at the delivery of the Law,
Exodus 19. as the thunder, Exodus 19.
the lightning, the sound of trumpets, etc. whatsoever was done then, all the
people saw it, and their senses were taken up about it, so that they could not
be deceived. The laws that Numa Pompilius brought from the gods, he related to
them, but the people saw and heard nothing; but these miracles the people all
saw, the Mount burnt with fire, and thick darkness round about it; and there
was thunder and lightning, and the Mount trembled. And as their eyes did see
(...) things, so their ears were busied.

In hearing the voice of the trumpets sounding louder and louder, a great
while, and hearing the voice of God himself. And this was not done only in the
sight of the Elders of Israel, but all the people saw it, and heard the voice
of the Lord. And such were all the miracles of the Apostles, and of all the
Prophets. And this argues that they came from God himself; because they could
not be done, but by a supernatural power.

The prophecies which were,
for that is one of the ways by which the Lord confirms his word unto the
sons of men, Isa. 41.22, 23. Esaias 41.22, 23.
Show to us the things to come, that we may know that you are Gods, etc. As if
he should say; If any man be able to foretell things to come, he is God: for
it is the property of God alone; and therefore he can do it.

Now I will name some prophecies, to instance in; and I will show the
difference between them, and the predictions of Southsayers; for you shall
find that these prophecies were Particular, 1 Particular.
and not general, they were Perspicuous and plain, 2 Perspicuous.
and not obscure, and they had fixed times set, 3 Limited to a set time.
and not left at random: As in the prophecy delivered to Abraham, that the
Children of Israel should be strangers, and in bondage in Egypt four hundred
years: now, says the Text, that very night they went forth of Egypt, the
four hundred years were expired. Exodus 12.


Moreover, that prophecy, that Judah should have the Scepter, it was a thing
could not be foreseen; Judah was not the elder brother, and it was long first
before it was brought to pass: therefore Moses could not see it by any thing
at the present; and besides that, he should not only have the Scepter, but he
should have it till Shiloh come, that is, CHRIST JESUS, which was about two
thousand years after; which was not like to the prophecies of other Nations.

Moreover, the prophecy of Jericho, that he that did begin to build it
again, should lay the foundation of it in his eldest son, and set up the
gates of it in the youngest, which was fulfilled, 1 King. 16. last. 1 King. 16.
ult.


So likewise, the prophecy of Josiah, it was a distinct prophecy, you have it
in 1 King. 13.1, 2, 3. where the Prophet comes from the Lord, 1 King. 13.1, 2,
3.
and cries, Oh Altar, Altar, behold a child shall be borne, Josiah, by name,
etc. he names the very man that should perform it.

The like is the prophecy of Cyrus, long before Cyrus was borne, that he
should deliver the Jews, and take off the yoke of their captivity, etc.

So likewise, come to the prophecies of Daniel, the prophecy of the four
Monarchies you see, how particular it was: Daniel, he lived but in the two
first, which were the Chaldean and Persian Monarchy, it was not possible, by
any thing that was then done, that he should have been able to see the
succession; yet then after them was the Grecian, and then the Roman Monarchy.

So likewise the prophecy of the captivity, seventie years, and of their
deliverance, you see, how distinct and particular it is.

Moses is very ancient, it is out of memory, and it might be some fained
story, those things were done long ago, they that saw them are all swept
away, and who can say that they were done so?

Moses and all the people should consent together to leave a false monument
behind them, (which was impossible) yet consider that many hundred years
after the same was confirmed by all the Prophets, who had miracles to confirm
the same, and they all agreed in one; and it is impossible that such an
imposture and falsehood should be compacted together, and carried down so
strongly, for they differ not a jot: all the Prophets repeating that which was
delivered by Moses. Consider the strength of this argument, for it admits of no
ambiguitie. If you will add to this the holiness which appears in their
writing, and of the men, as in Moses; look upon the holiness in his doctrine
and Law: Look upon Paul, see with what Spirit he wrote his Epistles; so
consider the spirits of them all in their writings, they did, as it were,
transcribere animas, they did not forbear to publish their own faults: see
how they were handled, they suffered persecution, and in this, what end could
they have? Moses sought not his own glory, he does not deliver the Scepter to
his own Tribe, but in his prophecies he speaks worse of that Tribe than of any
other, of Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, and this will confirm it, and take away
all doubts of it. And this is the first proof.

The second Argument, Arg. 2.
by which we confirm the truth of the Scriptures, is taken from the
testimonies that are given to them by our enemies; The testimonies that are
given to the Scriptures by adversaries.
the Gentiles themselves being Judges: As, to instance in the Flood, there are
many that have made mention of it. Those Floods that are related by the ancient
Greek Historians come so near it, that they must needs have the relation of it
from the Jews, though they have mingled it with many falsehoods, we have not
the Writings of them, but fragments in the Writings of others, as of Alexander
Polyhistor, in Josephus and Cyril: They say that there was a great Flood, and
that there was one Nicurus, to whom Saturn revealed it, and bade him make an
Arc; and he did so, and gathered some of all beasts into it, and that the Arc
was in Armenia, and that the fragments of it are in Heliopolis. And Abidenus
says, that it was a common opinion, that the men, that the Earth brought
forth, gathered themselves together and builded a great Tower, which was Babel;
and the gods being angry with it, threw it down with a great wind, and thence
came the confusion of tongues. And for the pillar of Salt, Josephus says, that
some of it was remaining in his time. And for Abraham, many speak of him, and
also of Moses, there are many that agree in their story of him, but the Chaldee
Historians especially, and some of the ancientest Greek Historians. Diodorus
Siculus relates the history of him, though mingled with falsehoods, of what he
did in Egypt, and what laws he gave the people, and how he cast out the
Canaanites, and that he said he received his laws from a God called Iah, and
that they were such laws as separated that people from all others, and that
his God was such an one, as could not be seen, etc. And Strabo says, that he
reproved the Egyptians for worshipping visible gods, and therefore he was cast
out, and his people with him, etc. After this, when Cyrus did restore the
Kingdom of the Jews, and had overcome Darius, Zenophon reports this, that
when he came into Babylon, he gave commandment, that no Syrian should be hurt:
now Syria lies upon Judea, even as one Shire does upon another, so that they
were all called Syrians. Moreover, Megasthenes, the Chaldean Historian,
relates, that Nebuchadnezzar had conquered Egypt, Phoenicia, and Syria, and
all those parts he brought into captivity; and after that, he made him a
great Palace, which is spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, and how he ordered the
people of the captivity. Moreover, Berosus says, that afterward he was
stricken with madness, and Evanuit, he vanished (for that is his word) he
departed from amongst men. (Indeed one Annius, a Monk, has put forth some
books under the name of Megasthenes, but they are but supposititious.) So
likewise, of Senacherib and Salmanasars war, and of the building of Salomons
Temple, they are recorded in the Annals of the Tyrians. This is related by
those that are neither Jews nor Christians; and these testimonies are fetched
from those that are our enemies, which are more fit for the Press, than for
the Pulpit, and to be written, than delivered in a popular congregation.

I will add to this but this one; consider the exact Chronology, which is
found in all the Scriptures, The exact Chronology in the Scriptures.
and the agreement of them with the Heathen Histories.

In latter times there have been great confusions, but the greatest evidence,
that is to be found, is the Tables of Ptolomy, lately found, which does exactly
agree with the Scripture; he exactly sets down the time that Nebuchadnezzar
and Cyrus reigned; compare them with the Scripture, and you shall find these
agree with Daniel and Jeremy, otherwise Chronologers differ very much: for in
Joseph Scaligers time, that Table they had not, but it was found since: So in
the time when Jerusalem was taken, they agree exactly; and this is the greatest
testimony that the Scripture can have from Heathen men.

Moses, that these are they, that there is no alteration in them, or
supposititious prophecies put in?

Jews agreeing with the Christians, who were enemies, and the Jews kept it
exactly, yet theirs agree with ours.

Jews are true?

Samaritans, and they were enemies to the Jews, and there being once a rent
made, were never reconciled again: yet in the Samaritan Bible, there is no
difference at all, to any purpose. Now add to this the testimony of the
Churches from Christ's time downward, still it has continued; so as in Eusebius
and Baronius you shall see plentiful testimonies thereof.

Arg. 3.
The third Argument is from the Scriptures themselves, From the Scriptures
themselves.
if you consider but these three things;

1 The majesty and plainness of the style, 1 Their majesty.
and the manner of the expressions, a mere relation, and no more. In the
beginning was the Word, etc. Where does any book express it self, in a
manner, in the relation of any stories? So as that it carries evidence from
God; so that Iunius reading the first Chapter of John, was stricken with an
amazement, by a kind of divine and stupendous authority, and so he was
converted from Atheism, as himself said in his life.

2 Purity.
2 If you consider the purity of the doctrine. If a man would deceive the world,
then the things that he teaches, must needs be to please men; but the Scripture
is quite contrary, it ties men to strict rules, and therefore see how it is
etertained, and how hard it is for men to keep it in the purity of the
doctrine, which is an argument it came from God. If the Scriptures were
delivered by men, then either by good men, or by bad; if by holy men, then they
would speak the truth, and not lie; if by bad men, then they would never have
set down such strict rules of doctrine that they must live by, and which
condemn themselves.

3 Consider the an^^quitie of them, 3 Antiquity.
they were before all other Heathen stories, which will answer an objection,
namely, why there is no more testimony from them of the Scriptures: The answer
is, that when Scriptures ended their writings did but begin, there being little
use and trading of learning in those days, but it seems the Grecians were the
first, or rather the Chaldees, but there were not so many books written then,
as afterward.

Now when all these things are considered, we are brought to believe the
Scriptures are the Word of God, and you find this in the Scriptures, that
there is a God, that made Heaven and Earth, then this begets faith; and so, By
faith we believe (as here says the Apostle) that there is one GOD. I confess
all this which has been said is not enough, unless God infuseth an inward
light by his Spirit to work this faith, but yet there is enough left in the
Scriptures to give evidence of themselves.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
HEBREWS 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that God is, etc.


THere is one reason more remains, and that is from the testimony of the
Church; doubtless, it is an argument of great strength; The fourth argument,
from the testimony of the Church.
That so many generations since CHRIST'S time, and before, have, from hand to
hand, delivered it unto us, and that so many holy men, as the Martyrs were,
and, as the Fathers were, when they lived, that these all gave testimony to
this Scripture in all ages.

But yet we will add something to it, because the Papists have abused this,
and say, they would have the truth of the Scriptures to depend upon the
authority of the Church, and not so much upon the testimony it has received
from all ages and generations; they would have it to be such a testimony as the
present Church gives of it; because, say they, that can err in nothing;
therefore not in this: and therefore they say, This is the Bible, and the very
Dictate of the Pope, in cathedra, with his Council (some say,) makes it so,
and you must receive it for Scripture, upon this ground, without any further
inquiry. But, with us, who do not receive that conclusion, that the Church
cannot err; it is out of question, that the Scripture does not depend on the
authority of the Church.

But yet we will give you this reason against it. Ask that Church, that Synod
of men, what is that which makes the Church to believe that the Scripture is
the Word of God? Surely, they will give the same answer, that we shall deliver
unto you; that it could be nothing else, but the Scripture it self, which
therefore must needs be of greater authority than the Church it self, for the
declaration of themselves, and the Scriptures manifestation of this argument,
be of more force than the authority of the Church, as the cause has much more
strength, than the effect. Again, the Church has no authority to judge of
the Scripture, till it be known to be the Church, which cannot be but by the
Scripture. Moreover, the Scripture has a testimony more ancient, than the
authority of the Church, and therefore cannot receive its authority from any;
the Scripture being the first truth, it cannot be proved by any other; it is
the confession of their own Writers, that Theologia non est argumentativa;
Theology is not argumentative, to prove its own principles, but only our
deductions out of it: As also, they say, we cannot prove the Scriptures,
probando, sed solvendo, by answering, and resolving objections made against it.
In all other things, you see, it is so; as the Standard, that being the rule of
all, cannot be known but by it self; the Sun that shows light to all
things else, cannot be known by any other light but its own: so the
Scripture, that is the ground of all other truths, cannot be known, but by the
evidence of those truths, that it carries in it self.

We have only this word to be added more concerning the Scriptures. You shall
observe this difference between the Writings of the Scripture, that were
written by holy men inspired by the Holy Ghost, A difference between the
Writings of the Penmen of Scripture, and other holy men.
and all men's Writings in the world. In men's Writings, you shall see that men
are praised and extolled, something spoken of their wisdom, and of their
courage, and what acts they have done; there is no story of any man, but you
shall find something of his praise in it: but you shall find the quite
contrary in the Book of God, there is nothing given to men, but all to God
himself; as Moses, David, Paul, and all the Worthies in the Scripture, you
shall find nothing given to them: But of David, it is said, that he walked
wisely, because the LORD was with him, it was not his own strength; so, when
they had any victory, it was not through their own courage, or stratagems,
that they used, but the LORD did give their enemies into their hands. And Paul,
that was the means of converting so many thousands, he ascribes nothing to
himself, but it was the grace of GOD, that was with him. So, Samson was
strong, but yet he had his strength from God; and therefore this is an
argument, that the Scriptures were written by holy men inspired by the Holy
Ghost.

Seeing we have such just ground to believe, Use.
that there is a GOD, that made Heaven and Earth, To confirm our faith in this
first principle.
and that this word, which testifies of him, is indeed the word of GOD. This
use we are to make of it, that it might not be in vain to us; it should teach
us to confirm this first principle, and make it sure; seeing all the rest are
built upon it, therefore we have reason to weigh it, that we may give full
consent to it, and not a weak one.



For two reasons.


Because these principles, though they be so common, Reason 1.
yet there is a great difference in the belief of the Saints, Because there is
a great difference between common faith and that of the elect in these
principles.
and that, with which common men believe them; the difference is in these four
things: both of them do believe, and they speak as they think, yet you shall
find this difference:

A regenerate man has a further and a deeper insight into these truths, he
gives a more through and a stronger assent to them; Diff. 1.
but another man gives a more slight and overly assent; that faith, with which
they believe them, is a faith that wants depth of earth; therefore, if any
strong temptation comes upon them, as fear of being put to death, etc. they
are soon shaken off, and do often fall away, when they are put to it; they
shrink away in time of persecution: for their faith wants depth of earth, that
is, the assent, they give to the Scripture, is but an overly, and superficial
assent, it does not take deep root in their soul, and therefore it withers in
time of temptation, they do not so ponder them, as others do; and therefore
they are not so grounded in these first principles, as others are; though they
have some hold, (...) yet not so great a hold, as the godly have: So as they
are not so firmly established, so grounded in the present truth, they are not
so rooted, as the Saints are.

Diff. 2.
That, which breeds this assent in them, is, but a common gift of the Holy
Ghost; but that, with which the Saints believe them, is a special grace
infused, wrought by the Holy Ghost: now, that which has a weaker cause, must
needs have a weaker effect; that which is wrought by a common, cannot be so
strong an assent, as that which is wrought by an infused habit of the Holy
Ghost; therefore the faith of the Saints is stronger than the faith of the
wicked.

The Saints, the regenerate men, Diff. 3.
build their hope, comfort and happiness upon the truth of these principles,
as that there is a GOD, that rules Heaven and Earth, and that the Scriptures
are his Word, and whatsoever is in them, is truth, they build all upon these;
therefore, if any doubts arise, they can never be at rest, till faith has
resolved them, and wrought them out: with another man it is not so; he takes
these things upon trust, and believes them, as others do, but he does not much
trouble himself about them; and therefore, if any doubts come against them, he
suffers them to lie there, and goes on in a careless manner: But with the
Saints it is not so; they building their hope upon them, do therefore resolve
to suffer any thing for God, they will be content to lose all for Him, if
occasion requires, and therefore they are upon sure ground; but the other, they
do but receive upon trust, and therefore they do not cleave to him in that
manner that the Saints do.

Regenerate men have a lively and experimental knowledge, that there is a GOD,
Diff. 4.
and that the Scriptures are his Word, from the communion that they have had
with this God, and from the experience they have had of the truths delivered in
the Scripture. They know very well, and that experimentally, what difference
there was between; what they were once, and what they are now; what it is to
envy the Saints, and what it is to have an affection of love to them; they
know the time, when they slighted sin, when they made no reckoning of it;
they know again the bitterness and sorrow of sin, when the commandment came,
and showed it unto them in its colors: they know a time when they judged
perversely of the ways of God, when they had a bad opinion of them, and how
now they are changed: besides, they know, how that once they did admire, and
magnify worldly excellency and preferment; but since they were enlightened,
their opinion is otherwise; I say, they know all this experimentally. Take the
whole work of regeneration, they know it in themselves; and so for God
himself, as he is described in the Scriptures, such have they found him to
themselves: Now where a man does know things thus experimentally, it is another
kind of knowledge, than that which is by hearsay: so that though there is a
belief in them both, yet there is a great difference between them.

Motive 2.
We must labor to confirm our faith in these principles, because they are of
exceeding great moment, and consequence, in the lives of men; Because these
principles have a great influence into men's lives.
though they seem to be remote, yet they are of more moment than any other; as
of a house, you see a fair top, but yet the foundation is of more moment, and
that cannot be seen; the streams are seen, but the Wellhead cannot: so all
the actions of the lives of men are built upon these principles, and as they
are more strongly, or weakly believed; so have they more or less influence
into the hearts and lives of men. As take a man that believes fully, that there
is a GOD; and that, the Scriptures are his Word: this breeds an unresistable
resolution to serve, and please him, notwithstanding all oppositions he meets
with: Take the greatest things that use to daunt men, as take a man that is to
die, if he considers that there is a God, with whom he is to live for ever,
what is death then? no more than the stones flying about Stevens ears, when he
beheld the heavens opened; so when men speak against him, and slander him;
when they scoff, and revile him, and trample upon him; yet, if God be with
him, he can boldly say, I care not for man's day, nor for the speaking against
of sinners; he is not moved a whit with them; they pass away as a vapor, that
moves him not: so when he sees the current of the times to run against him,
yet, when he sees that there is an Almighty GOD that takes notice of him, he
is able to stand against and despise them all, and is not stirred an hairs
breadth out of the way for it, they are as waters beating against a rock.
Consider the Martyrs, that died in the fire, if you had stood by, you would
have said; Surely, that man has a strong faith, that can go out of this life,
and suffer such a kind of death; but why does he do it? because he believes
that there is a GOD, Hebr. 11.6.
that is a rewarder of them that seek him. So every regenerate man, whatsoever
he does, he does it with the same faith that they did, only here is the
difference; the Martyrs spent all at once, and these do it but drop by drop:
as when a man forbeares all present joys, which this life consists in; it is,
as it were, a dying by peece-meales, a dying drop by drop, as Paul said, I dye
daily. If one of us were to suffer, as the Martyrs did, what is it that would
establish our souls? it is the belief of these principles, that inables the
Saints to do all this: you live by your faith in these principles, though you
observe it not; for this is a thing that is to be marked to this purpose, that
the opinions of men, their imaginations and thoughts, they all proceed from
such notions, as lie more overly in their hearts, but their actions proceed
from the strong settled notions and principles that are riveted in their inward
heart. And therefore, observe the lives of men; such as their principles in
them are, such are their actions: For as it is true, on the one side, where men
believe, there they come to God; so it is true on the otherside, if men be not
grounded in these first principles, if they do not believe, they do not come
to him; but go on unevenly in their ways, and forsake their profession.

Now, whence comes this uneven walking, this exorbitance of the wheels, but
from the weakness of the maine spring, that sets all on motion? because these
are the first springs, that set all the rest on work. For, could a man be
carried away by the praise of men, by the voice and breath of man, on the one
side; or could he be discouraged by the scoffs of men on the other side, if he
did fully believe this principle? it is impossible he should, as Esaias 52. Esaias
52.
As if he should say, It is impossible that men should shrink so, at the face
of man, if they did not forget the Lord their Maker. Hence it is, (although you
do not observe from whence it comes) yet hence do come all those fruits of
Atheism in the lives of men; all that unthankfulness, that men can take
blessings at GODS hands, and never give him thanks, nay rather, they render
evil for good; hence it is, that men trust in means more than in God; hence
it is, that men are so unholy when they come into his presence, they are not
struck with fear and reverence of his Majesty, when they come before him;
hence also comes that carelessenesse in the lives of men that fear not his
Word, but walk on in a careless and remiss manner; and hence also is that
hasting after honors and profits, with the neglect of better things; they all
arise from hence, even the weakness of the assent to these maine principles:
for there is a double kind of Atheism in the heart; there is a direct thought
of Atheism, when a man doubts of the truth of these principles, and knows he
does so. Secondly, when a man doubts, and knows not that he doubts.



1. Means.
not to give over pondering of them, till your hearts be established in the
present truth. To confirm our faith in these principles.
It is good to do with your selves, as Eliah did in the case of Baal, Why halt
you between two religions, come to that disjunction, If Baal be god, follow
him? So I say to you in this case; examine it to the full, 1 Search and examine
them to the full.
if these principles be not true, walk according to your liberty and lusts,
take no pains, but live as your nature would have you; but if they be true,
then walk so, as if thou did thoroughly believe them so to be; the belief of
them is that which will carry us through all losses and slanders, through good
report and ill report; if thou did thoroughly believe them, they would make
thee do any thing for God; I say, it is very profitable to come to this
disjunction, and it strengthens our faith much; and this being laid, then draw
the conclusion from it, that we thus here must live, and that it is here best
for us to do so.

2 Means.
To pray to God to strengthen our faith in these common principles, Prayer.
to say as the Disciples did, LORD increase our faith: you see that Christ did
it, when Peter's faith failed him, he prayed that it might be strengthened; and
when you have found any weakness or doubting, you must remember that faith, in
these principles, is the gift of God. There is indeed a common faith, which
others may have, and thou may have, but the strong faith arises from the
Spirit, God dispenses it where he pleases; this infused faith is not gotten
by strength of argument, or perspicuitie of the understanding; it is not
brought in by custom, but God does work it; it is not all the antecedent
preparation that will do it, but God must first work it, and then you are able
to believe these principles of faith, and able to believe them to the purpose.

When thou have such a habit lying in thy soul, 3 Means.
the more thou read the Word, and acquaintest thy self with it, Acquaint
thy self with the Word more and more.
day by day, the more stronger does thy faith grow, Romans 10. Romans 10.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of GOD, that is, it is a
means, by which God works it, both in the beginning and increase of it.
Therefore take that exhortation, which is in Coloss. 3.16. Colos. 3.16.
Let the Word dwell in you plenteously, etc. that is, let it not come as a
stranger, looking to it now and then, (as it is the fashion of most men) but
let it be familiar with you, let it dwell with you, and let it dwell with you
plentifully; that is, read not a Chapter or two, but all the Word; be not
content to know one part of it, but know it thorowout. Lastly, let it be in
wisdom; A man may read much, and understand little, because he knows not the
meaning of it; a child may be able to say much by heart, and yet not have it in
wisdom: therefore let the Word dwell plentifully in you, in all wisdom.

It is profitable to converse with faithful men: Converse with faithful men.
As it is said of Barnabas, 4 Means.
he was a man full of faith; therefore it is said, he converted many: It is
not in vain, that phrase of the Scripture; he was a man full of faith, and
therefore many were added to the Lord. And you shall find it by experience,
when you converse with worldly men; they will be ready, on every occasion, to
attribute the event of things to natural causes, but the godly, they ascribe
it to God. Now good words strengthen our faith, but the evil words of natural
men, they corrupt good manners. And not only the words of the godly work so,
but the very manner of the delivery of it, is emphaticall, for they do believe
it themselves: now if a man deliver an history that he believes, he will
deliver it in such a manner, that he will make others believe it also: Act.
14.1. Act. 14.1.
They so spoke, that a great multitude of the Jews believed; that is, in such
a manner, that many were turned to the faith. Iunius professes in his life,
that the very first thing that turned him from his Atheism, was the talking
with a countryman of his not far from Florence, and his manner of expressing
himself. The next was the majesty of the Scripture, which he observed in Ioh.
1. but the other was the beginning of it.

3 Effects of a firm assent to these principles.
So it will still be true, that walking with godly men will increase our faith,
but with worldly men, it will weaken it. Therefore use all these means to
strengthen these principles in you; for they will have many excellent effects
in your lives. As;

strong tower, now you think them to be but a staff of reed; so of sinful
lusts, that are so pleasant to us, the Scripture says of them, that they fight
against the soul, though they are sweet for the present, yet they are sour in
the latter end; so that thou take the judgment of the Scripture against thy
own reason. So for the praise of men, see what the Scripture says; he is
praiseworthy whom God praises; so thou judge vainglory to be but a
bubble; I say, if you could believe this thoroughly, you would set the judgment
of the Scripture against your own reasons, and the opinions of men.

Canaan, yea, though he has sometimes a contrary answer and effect to what he
asks; yet when he has laid hold on the promises, he will not let go, he
will never give over; he knows, He, who has promised, is faithful;
therefore he is not like a wave of the sea, tossed up and down with every wind.

But it is not only a ground of all this, but it brings forth the effect: it
does exceedingly strengthen our faith in matters of justification; for it is
certain, that the same faith, whereby we believe, and apply the promises of
salvation, through Christ, it is the same faith whereby we believe the
Scripture, and that there is a God, that made both Heaven and Earth. There is
no difference in the faith; yea, that justifying faith, by which thou art
saved, it arises from the belief of these principles; as it was the same eye,
whereby the Israelites did see the mountains and trees, and other objects, and
by which they saw the brazen Serpent; No man believes justification by Christ,
but his faith is mainly grounded upon this Word of God; for whereas in
Scripture we find that JESUS CHRIST is come in the flesh, and that he is a
Lamb slain, for forgiveness of sins; that he is offered to every creature,
that a man must thirst after him, and then take up his Cross and follow him.
Now come to a believer going out of the world, and ask him what hope he has
to be saved, and what ground for it? he will be ready to say, I know that
Christ is come into the world, and that he is offered, and I know that I am one
of them that have a part in him; I know that I have fulfilled the conditions,
as that I should not continue willingly in any known sin, that I should love
the LORD JESUS, and desire to serve him above all; I know that I have fulfilled
these conditions. I say, if the ground whereon our faith is builded be the
Word, then it is builded on a sure rock, and the gates of hell, Satan, and all
his temptations shall not prevail against it, but against a strong fancy it
may.

Therefore let us labor to strengthen our faith in these principles, that
there is a GOD that made Heaven and Earth; and that the Scripture is his Word,
whereby his mind is revealed to us, that so you may know what his will is, and
what to expect of him, upon all occasions.

that God which we worship is this GOD: for either it is that God, whom we
worship, or else there is no true God in the world; we are to propound it
negatively, to take away all other false religions: For, if there was ever a
God revealed in the world, he was the God of the Jews, and if he was the God
of the Jews, then of the Christians, and if of the Christians, then surely of
the Protestants, and not the Papists; (for they do in most points add to the
garment of Christ, and the Protestants do but cut off what thy have added
before) and if of the Protestants, then surely of those that do make
conscience of their ways, that do not live loosely, but do labor to please
him in all things.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
ISAI. 46.9. Remember the former things of old; for I am GOD, and there is none
else; I am GOD, and there is none like me.


THe third thing which remains, The third Argument to prove that God is.
is this, that there is no other GOD; and it is an argument which is often used
in Scripture, to prove that the Lord is God, because there is none besides him;
There is no other God besides him.
for so you are to understand it: I am GOD; because there is no other; this
particle is so used many times, Esaias 45.22. Esaias 45.22.
I am GOD, and there is none else, there is none beside me; and this shows the
falsenesse of all other gods, and all other religions; and the argument stands
thus; That if you look to all former times, you shall see that there was never
any other God, or any other religion but this, which we profess. There are
two arguments set down in the Text:

1 Remember the former times, and you shall always find it thus, that there
is none besides me.

2 There is none like me, says the Lord; take all other gods, and there is a
wonderful great difference between them and the God whom we profess; there
is none like him. So that the point to be delivered hence is this;

Doctr.
It is a great argument to prove the Deity, that there is none besides the Lord.

To open this to you; I will show you;

1 What reasons the Scripture uses to prove, that there is none besides him.

2 We will show you in some instances of it.

3 We will make some uses of it.

For the first, you shall find in the Scripture these five arguments, to show
that there is no other God, but that the LORD is GOD alone, and that there is
none besides him.

Gods Majesty, and the immensitie of his works, Proved by the greatness of
his Majesty and works.
and that is the reason of the words here annexed; there is none like him: Esaias
46.5.
as in verse 5. of this Chapter you shall see it more plainly. So, Among the
gods, Psalm. 86.8.
there is none like to thee, O Lord, neither are there any works like thy
works. Where you see that they are both put together; there is none like to him
for the greatness of his Majesty, nor for the immensity of his works. More
particularly, first, in regard of the greatness of his Majesty, there is none
like him; Behold the nations are as a drop of a bucket, Esaias 40.15, 16.
and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he takes up the
Isles as a very little thing; and Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the
beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering; All nations before him are as
nothing, and they are counted to him less than no thing, and vanity: that is,
let a man look on the greatness of God, and compare him with all the things
that are in the world, and you shall find a great disproportion between them;
they are but as the drop of the bucket. A bucket, of it self, holds but little
water, but yet that is for some use; but the drops that fall from the bucket,
when it comes out of the Well, they are so small, as we make no account of
them; and yet all the world is not so much to the Lord, as these small drops.
And if that similitude will not serve, there is another; They are as the dust
of the balance: if it were but as the dust of the earth, it were but small,
but as for the dust of the balance, it is so small, that it cannot weigh the
balance this way, or that way; and yet the whole world is not so much to the
Lord, as the dust of the balance.

Again, a third expression he uses, and that is taken from the manner of his
worship: for some might here object; If he be so great, how short then do we
come of worshipping him, and of giving him that honor which we owe unto him?
says he; it is true, for all the beasts of Lebanon are not sufficient for a
burnt offering: nay, all the wood of Lebanon is not enough to kindle the burnt
offering. And take all the gods of the Gentiles, they were but men, and their
Temples, and all the glory of them, they are nothing to the Lord: See another
description of this in verse. 25. Verse. 25.
And as, thus in regard of the greatness of him, there is none like him; so
likewise in regard of the greatness of his works; verse. 12. Verse. 12.
Who has measured out the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out
heaven with the spanne, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure,
and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? That is,
look upon the great building of Heaven and Earth, and consider what went to
these buildings, what might and power he must have to handle such things as
these; as the vast mountains, the huge earth, the wind, and the seas; and
consider, what an hand and arm he must have, that must do such things. And
also consider the wisdom of God, that went to this work, and he did it alone;
he had none to help him; take a man, let him set up a building, and he cannot
do it of himself, but he needs some body to help him; but the Lord did all
this alone: therefore he concludes, verse. 18. Verse. 18.
that there is none like to him; as if it were his scope and intention in that
place.

their newness, they had a beginning, and they have an end; but God is from
everlasting, All other gods are but new, He from everlasting.
I am the first and last, Esaias 41.4. and 44.6. and 43.10. Esaias 41.4. and 44.6.
and 43.10.
The meaning is, all the other gods had a beginning, we know when they began,
and their own Historians have related it; but I was before them all, says the
Lord, and they have all vanished away, even in your own sight.

He only knows things to come.
which you have used in Esaias 41.22, 23. and 44.7, 8. Esa. 41 22 23. and 44.7, 8.
Let them bring them forth, and show what will happen, let them show the former
things, what they be, etc. that we may know that you are gods. The meaning is
this; that there are none other gods, that do declare former things, that tell
of the beginning of the world, or of the creation, nor can declare things to
come; I only can do it, I have not spoken in secret, but my prophecies are
plain and open, I have spoken it, and I will bring it to pass. Therefore, I
say, his omniscience and showing future things, does testify, that there are
no other gods besides him, seeing no other has been able so to do.

By the greatness of his power and providence, working changes in the world.
and their want of power; which is another argument used in Isai. 41.23. Esaias.
41.23 24.
Behold, you are nothing, and your works are of naught; that is, you are not
able to do any thing, either good or hurt to the sons of men, and therefore
you are no gods, you are but vanity, and of no value: which argument you have
often repeated; as also the great changes, that God works on the sons of
men, which Idols cannot do, Isai 40.23, 24. Esaias 40.23, 24.
He brings the Princes to nothing, etc. that is, he is able to set up whom he
will, and pull them down again; and he gives instance in the greatest
Princes, that thought themselves best rooted, says he, when I do but blow
upon them, when I blast them, they are, as if they never had been planted, as
if they had been never sown, but they are, as if they had took no root in
all the earth. So Psalm. 107.33, 34. Psalm. 107.33, 34.
He turns a desert into a fruitful land; and a fruitful land he turns
into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein; making
changes of men, and things, which no Idols could do.

Paul uses, Act. 14.15. that they should turn to the living GOD; Psalm. 115.
He only the living God; other gods but dead Vanities. Act 14.15. Psalm. 115.
It is true of all other gods, they are dead vanities, they are Idols, and have
no life in them; only God is living, he only has life in himself, and gives
life to all other things in the world. Therefore, there is none other god
besides him.

2 More particularly.
Now we come to particulars. As, Take all the religions that ever have been in
the world, besides that which we profess; take all the gods, that have been
set up by others; they are divided into two times, 1 The gods of the Gentiles
and their religion was false.
either before, or since Christ; before, and they are either those gods, that
were worshipped by the Grecians and the Romans, the wisest of the Heathens, or
else those that were worshipped by the Barbarians. Now, they worshipped the
Sun, and Moon, and foure-footed beasts, Romans 1. Romans 1.
If there be question of any, it is of those among the Romans; such as were
Saturn, and Jupiter, and Inno, etc. which are now altogether exploded; and
there is enough said against them, even by their own Writers. As;

1 They were men, and therefore not gods; 1 Because their gods were men;
this was the argument that Tertullian and Justin Martyr used to convince
those, amongst whom they lived, that Juno, Jupiter, Neptune, etc. were Saturnes
offspring, and therefore they were men; and if men, then borne of men, and
their Genealogies are recorded by their own Writers.

2 And as they were men, 2 The worst of men.
so they were the worst of men, given to the grossest vices, as adultery,
theft, murder, etc.

Lactantius, that these are only fictions of Poets.

Poets were their Prophets, as the Apostle says, One of your Prophets says
so; and they did but give light to the picture; and all their own Writers
agree, as Cicero and Varro, that they were subject to those vices that we
named.

3 They did dye, and therefore were not gods; 3 They did die.
and therefore they would in one place show you a sepulcher, and in another
place a temple erected to the same god, which is an extreme contradiction; yet
this was acknowledged even by them that worshipped them: and as for Tully, we
cannot have more against him, than he himself confesses in his Tractate, De
natura deorum; as one says, Re tollit deos, sed oratione reliquit; He took
away their gods in deed, though not in word: and himself says, Vtinam tam
facile veram religionem invenire possim, quam falsam convincere: I would I
could as well find out the truth of true religion, as the falsenesse of the
other. All which are disputed at large by Tertullian, and Augustine De civitate
Dei, and Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived in those days; which we speak the
more of, because it was that, which did spread it self even over the whole
world for many ages together. And as for the gods that are worshipped by the
Chaldaeans, and the Syrians, as the Sun and Moon, they are not worth the
naming.

Christ, the religion of Mahomet, The religion of Mahomet is false.
which has spread over the most part of the world, for if that computation be
true, that is lately given, they have fourteen times as much as any other
has; and they arose about six hundred years after Christ, and therefore they
have continued a long time. I speak not this, because I think that any here
had need to be dissuaded from it, but to show that there was never any
veri-similitude of it, but that God was always God alone. Therefore against it,
I will use four arguments:

1 Mahomet did fully acknowledge the truth of the Old Testament, and of the
New; yet the things which he delivers, are contrary to both; 1 He gives
testimony to the Old and New Testament, and yet is contrary to both.
which confirms our religion, and shows the falsenesse of theirs; for he did
acknowledge, that Moses received the Old Testament from God, and so did the
Prophets, and he repeats most of the story; he acknowledges the creation of
Adam, and the eating of the forbidden fruit, and the whole story of Abraham,
and his calling, and the offering of his son Isaac; and also, he
acknowledges the whole History of Moses, how God appeared to him, and how he
went into Egypt, and of the ten Plagues that he sent upon the Egyptians, and
the wonders that he wrought going down into Canaan; and so of all the rest,
naming the book of Psalms, and quoting things out of it; and of Deuteronomy,
acknowledging many of the Prophets, as Eliah, Samuel, Job and Jonah; and he
confesses that there were many more, which he did not name: and so he
acknowledges the New Testament likewise; he acknowledges that Christ was
borne of a Virgin, and that by the mighty power of God, without man; that he
healed diseases; and that he received the Gospel from God himself; and that
God gave power to him more than to all the Prophets that were before him, and
that he was the word and power of God, and that all, that do believe in him,
shall be be saved; and they shall follow him in white garments, and that he,
which believes it not, shall be damned; and he acknowledges the New Testament
to bear witness to the Old; and he acknowledges the resurrection, the
coming of John Baptist; and he speaks very honorably of Christ, except only
in two things:

1 He took up the opinion of the Arrians, to deny his Divinity.

2 And also, he denied that he was crucified, but that some body was crucified
for him.

2 His new religion wanted miracles to confirm it.
or predictions of things to come, or holiness of life, it is a token that
there is no truth in it.

Alcoran; It is so barbarous, that there is no sense in it; 3 His Alcoran is
barbarous, and without sense.
and they say, that he could neither write nor read; and so the writing
shows, that it was by one, that was an ignorant man, that had no skill; and
those stories that are alleged out of the Scripture, have much falsehood mixed
with them; which is a sign that he never read them himself, but that he had
them by relation; but only he speaking to a very ignorant people, they
received it of him; and having enlarged themselves by the sword; and so they
continue to this day.

4 His doctrine is impure, and so his life.
and whatsoever was difficult to practice, and he propounded that to the
people, wherein there was no hardness, no difficulty, promising them a
paradise, wherein they should have all pleasures, and should enjoy women; and
also they should have meat, drink, apparel, and fruits of all sorts; as also,
they should have silken, and purple carpets to lie upon, etc. and also he
professes that he had a license given him from God, to know what women he
would, and to put them away when he would; which license was given to him and
to no other. All which arguments are enough to show the vanity and falsehood of
this their religion.

Lord, we should fix this principle in us, To believe that our God is God
alone, and to cleave to him.
and labor to strengthen it by this other medium also. When more candles are
brought into a place, the light is greater, and you may see the objects the
better. Therefore, add this to the other, that there is no other god; for this
expresses not only that the Lord is God, but that it is he whom we worship:
for if there be a God that made Heaven and Earth, he would have revealed
himself to the sons of men, but there has never been any other revealed.
Remember the former things, and you shall see that there was never any other.
Make this chain, and every link of it is exceeding strong: see if ever there
has been any god besides him: For, if there was ever any God revealed to the
sons of men, it was the God of the Jews, that was revealed by Moses, and the
Prophets. For all the dunghill gods of the Gentiles, they were but vanity, and
they appeared to be so; and if it was the God of the Jews, then of the
Christians, (because the New Testament is builded upon the Old;) and then
surely, he is that God, whom the Protestants worship, and not whom the Papists
worship. For, if you take all those things, wherein they differ from us; as in
their worshipping of Images, their Purgatory, their Indulgences, their Prayers
to, and for the dead; their Prayers in an unknown tongue, and so all other
points of difference, and you shall find that they were added, and taken in,
in continuance of time, now one, then another; and there are many that have
taken pains to show the pedigree of them, when they came in; and therefore
they that have not seduced hearts, whose eyes the god of this world has not
blinded, may see, that what our devices cut off, is nothing but that which they
have added before; the Papists agree in all with what we teach, only the
difference is between the additions which have come in from time to time.
Therefore you must learn from hence to confirm your faith, by that argument
which Peter uses, Ioh. 6.68. John. 6.68.
Whither shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life. There are two
things which make us cleave to any thing:

1 The firmness of the thing.

2 When we can go no whither else. So that look to any time or place, and
consider that all other gods they are but vanity. For, look upon the world,
and the creatures, and they have no bottom to stand on, they have no state to
hold by. Therefore, let this teach us to cleave to him without separation: look
upon every side, as David did, to the right hand, and to the left, and you
shall see that there was no other god. Only here the soul has sure footing;
therefore say, that if the dissolution of all things should come, as death and
martyrdom, (as we know not how soon they may) yet God shall be our God, we
will forsake all to follow him. Consider the present time of the Church,
consider how soon the times may come upon us, when we shall be put to it; for
now things are in praecipitio; hasting down to the bottom of the hill; and we
know not how near we are to that hour of temptation, spoken of in the
Revelations; when it shall be as it was in Esay's time, 2 Chronicles. 15.6. 2 Chronicles.
15.6.
Nation shall rise against Nation. These times are growing, and gathering
strength more and more; therefore let us strengthen our faith, and prepare for
a trial. Hitherto religion and peace have walked together in one path; but
when they shall go in different paths, it will appear then, whose servants we
are. So when the times of trial come, it will be a great matter to have this
principle laid. If you should come to suffer death, and to lose your lives, it
will be a great matter, to be rooted and grounded in the faith: for there is a
great difference between those that have much earth, and between those that
are not well rooted, that have not received this anointing, that teaches us
these things.

Only this I will say to you in the second place to comfort you, Use. 2.
though you see the Lord laying the Churches waste, For comfort; That he will
show himself to be the true God, in raising up his Churches.
so that they are wallowing in their blood, and yet that you might hold up your
heads; consider that he is God alone, and therefore will rouse up himself in
due time; for, He will not give his glory to another: therefore though you see
all the Churches in Christen dome laid waste, yet the Lord will raise them up
again, and the ground of it is in Esaias 48.11 For mine own sake, Esaias 48.11.
even for mine own sake will I do it: for, how should my name be polluted?
and I will not give my glory to another; speaking there to the Churches in that
time, says the LORD, I have refined them, Verse. 10.
but not with silver, I have chosen them in the furnace of affliction; that is,
I have thus and thus dealt with them, yet will I not cast them off, though they
be sinful, yet will I not put them away, for mine own sake; for my name
should be polluted, if I should suffer them to lie thus: It should be thought
that the other religion was true, and so I should lose my glory. And again,
will God now say, I will not do so; for, should Antichrist prevail, it would
be an argument that they had the truth, and not we. So Esaias 42.8. Esaias 42.8.
I am the LORD, that is my name; and my glory will not I give to another,
neither my praise to graven images. As the graven images there should have had
the praise, so should the Papists now, if God should suffer his Church to be
so, but for his own sake he will not suffer it. Let this encourage you then to
be earnest with him in prayer; for the time will come, when he will turn his
head, when the just period is come, he will be seen in the Mount.

God, then let us be careful to keep our hearts from all kind of idolatry,
not to set up any other in our heart or affections. To keep our hearts from
idolatry, and to set up no other god.
For there are two kinds of Idolatry: Two kinds of Idolatry.


1 One is gross, as the worshipping of Baal, Mahomet, etc. and that you are
free from, because there is light enough in the Church to see the vanity of
them.

2 There is another kind of Idolatry, which Saint James speaks of, James 4.
James 4.
Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, you make riches your god, and honor, and
your belly, your god; and when you sacrifice to your own nets, that is, to
outward and secondary means, or when we join any other thing with God; now
this is Idolatry, which is common amongst us. Our nature is as prone to
Idolatry as any, though not in that kind: for man is a weak creature, and
therefore he seeks something to repose himself upon; and because they find
not any one thing sufficient; therefore they put their confidence in many, Romans
1. Romans 1.
For all Idolatry is upon one of these three grounds:

1 They worship them for gods, Three grounds of Idolatry.
whom they saw excellent men, that had something in them above themselves; such
as were strong men, as Hercules; and those that were Lawgivers, and Princes,
as Saturn, and Jupiter; and they did worship Virtues likewise; and they did
build a Temple to Virtue it self; and to Justice, and Patience.

2 Those, that brought any special help, and comfort to the lives of men; as
they that did invent useful Arts, as Bacchus, Ceres, Vulcan, Aesculapius; and
also they worshipped the creatures themselves, as the Sun, and Moon, and
Oxen, and the like.

3 They worshipped for god, that which was stronger than themselves; therefore
Tully says, we build a Temple to Fevers, to Diseases, because they were
stronger than they, they could kill men when they did seize upon them: so they
did build a Temple to Fortune. Now to translate this to our selves, see if we
have not the same ground with us; see if the things that have any excellency
amongst men; if the things that are profitable to us, and things that exceed us
in strength, and overpower us, whether they are not ready to be set up as
gods; when men spend themselves upon their pleasure, and are afraid of men,
what is this, but to set up another god? We do the same, though not in the
same manner that the Heathens did. Now, for the worshipping the creatures; we
are not to do it: there is no creature in the world that can do either good or
hurt, as it was said of Idols. But when our affections are so inordinately
carried to them, we set them up for gods, though we observe it not. It is Gods
prerogative royal, and it belongs only to him, to do good or evil;
whatsoever is either good or evil, he is the Author of it; he makes men's lives
comfortable, or uncomfortable, at his pleasure; for he disposes of things,
giving them, and taking them from whom he will. Therefore, why is he forgotten?
and why do men join other things with him? so far, as men see not the
vanity of all things, and so far, as their affections are taken up with these
outward things, so much Idolatry there is in their hearts. Therefore you must
take heed that you give not Gods glory to another.

not the glory of God to riches; for that which a man's mind is set most upon,
and which he looks for comfort from, in time of need, this they count as God:
so that, whatsoever it be, riches, or the favor of men, if you set your mind
upon it, you make it as God, and it is to give the glory of God to another.

Psalm. 115.9. but trust in GOD; Psalm. 115.9.
O Israel trust thou in the LORD, he is their help and their shield. Now then,
we exalt him, when we trust only in him, when we trust not in any of these
outward things, when we think not our selves any whit the better, the more
riches or friends we have: for so far we trust in the creatures, so far we
commit idolatry with them: but he that thinks himself safe, because he has
the Lord for his God, and because he is his Shield, he does exalt the Lord, and
this is to put this in practice which is here spoken of; I am God, and there is
none like me.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
EXODUS. 3.13, 14, 15. 13 Moses said unto GOD; behold, when I come unto the
children of Israel, and shall say unto them; The GOD of your Fathers has sent
me unto you, and they shall say unto me, What is his Name? what shall I say
unto them?

14 And GOD said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shall thou say
unto the children of Israel; I AM has sent me unto you.

15 And GOD said moreover unto Moses, Thus shall thou say unto the children of
Israel; The LORD GOD of your Fathers, the GOD of Abraham, the GOD of Isaac, and
the GOD of Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my Name for ever, and this is
my memorial unto all generations.


NOw we come to this, What GOD is. The second thing to be known concerning
God. What God is.
God is JEHOVAH ELOHIM; an absolute Essence, in three Persons.

But we will first speak of the Deity, then of the Persons.

Now God is known to us two ways: 1 By his Essence; and 2 By his Attributes.


Now the great question is, what this Essence of God is. What the Essence of
God is.
Beloved, you need more than the tongue of man to declare this to you; yet we
will show it to you, as the Scripture reveals it.

Now, if we should define it, (though it is capable properly of no definition)
we would say, GOD is an incomprehensible, first, and absolute Being. These
words in this place, set out the Essence of God most clearly of any place in
Scripture, that I know. This is the first expression, whereby God did ever show
himself in his Essence. God has before made himself known by his
All-sufficiencie, Exodus 6.3.
Chap. 6.3. I appeared to Abraham; to Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of GOD
Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH, was I not known unto them. This name,
JEHOVAH, was known to Abraham, as appears in diverse places; but the meaning
is, it was not opened to them, they did not understand it: The Lord says, Genesis
17.1. Genesis 17.1.
I am the Almighty GOD, walk before me, and be thou perfect. You shall find
that Name used on every occasion, by Abraham, by Isaac, and by Jacob.
El-shaddai; GOD all-sufficient; but not JEHOVAH. The first time that ever God
made himself known by this name, was here to Moses, I am that I am. There are
two things to be observed in this expression:

Almighty GOD, as it is usually said by us; when we are asked a thing, that we
will not reveal any further, or that we would not have another to pry any
further into, we say, It is, what it is; so God says to Moses, I am, what I
am. What is meant by such aforme of expression I am what I am.


Pilat said, What I have written, I have written; I will not change it: so men
use to say; I have done what I have done, to show the constancy of a thing,
that it shall not be altered: therefore, when God would show the constancy of
his Nature, he adds further, I am, without any other word: as if he should
say; Moses, if they inquire of thee, what my name is, tell them only this; He
is, has sent me unto you; as the Septuagints translate it,(...); that is, if I
should deliver the most expressing name, whereby I would be known to all ages,
this is that which I will pitch upon; I am, or JEHOVAH; which comes from the
same root. And if Moses should yet further inquire of his Name, he leads him
into a further expression: The LORD GOD of your Fathers, the GOD of Abraham,
the GOD of Isaac, and the GOD of Jacob has sent me unto you; this is my Name
for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations. As if he should say;
If yet they cannot understand what this Name is, it is the same that I was
known by to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; what I was to them, the same will
I be to you. I was known to them by my Word, and by my works, and by my
miracles, and the same shall you find me, it is that God which has sent me
unto you. This is my Name; which words are to be referred, not only to the
latter words, but to the former, I am, that I am. The words in the original
are in the future tense; yet it is fitly translated, I am; for the future tense
in Hebrew is often put for the present tense; and the words are put in the
future tense, to show his immutabilitie; which translation Christ's words do
warrant; Before Abraham was, I am: therefore the Septuagints do well translate
it (...), signifying no more, but he which is; so that, that which we are to
learn from hence is this; That I am, or Jehovah, I am, that I am, is the
proper and essential name of God, (all Divines agree in this, I know none hat
differ) because it expresses him in his Essence, without any limitation, or
modification. Besides, you shall find, that this name is never attributed to
any other. The Altar, indeed, was called Jehovah; but the meaning was; to
Jehovah; his other names indeed are given to the creatures, but this is given
only to him: Whence I gather this point:

That to be, or to say this, He is, or I am, Doctr.
is proper to GOD alone. God only and properly has Being in him.


It is common to no creature with him; you cannot say of any creature, It is;
if it be the only property of God to be, then you must say of every creature,
It is not; and only the Lord is; which is a strange speech, but yet it is
true, or else it is not proper to God only.



What this Being is, explained in five things.


immense being, Immense.
such as has all the degrees, and kinds, and extents of being in it. The
creatures have not so; they have so little of this being, that it is nothing:
it is not so much, as the drop of a bucket, Isai. 40. that is, Isai. 40.
it is of so small a being, that it is no being: therefore that place is to be
marked, Isai. 40.17. Verse. 17.
All nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing, or vanity. Which place shows, that this place of being does not agree
to the creatures; for having said before, they were as the drop of a bucket,
he adds, nay, they are less than nothing. But you will say, how can they be
less than nothing? That is, if I should express it to you, as it is, they are
less than that which you reckon as nothing; as you do a dust of the balance;
so that in respect of the largeness of his being, they are nothing to him:
there are diverse degrees, and extents of being, and he has them all in him;
as, there is a being of Angels, another of men, and so of every creature; but
they are defined, and you know that definitions do but limit the being of a
thing. The Angels have a large and glorious being; men have a good and
excellent being, but they are nothing in respect of the being of God.

Of himself.
he is a spring of being, whereas all the creatures are but cisternes of being;
which they have but by participation from him, Romans 11.
Romans 11. In him we live, move, and have our being: In him, and for him, and
through him, are all things; he only is of himself

Everlasting.
I am the first and the last: that is, I am before any thing was, and I am the
last; every thing has dependence on me.

Without succession.
the creatures have not this; there is something to them, which was not before;
and something shall be, which is not for the present: this is true of every
creature; of men and Angels; but with God there is no succession: and therefore
it is that these words are used, I am has sent unto you: which shows that
there is no time past with him, there is no distinction of time with him, all
things are alike to him; but with the creature there is flux of time, the
creatures enjoy one thing one minute, which they do not another; but God
enjoyes all at once, and that is one part of his blessedness, which the
creature is not partaker of. And again, his acts are all done at once; but the
creatures do all theirs by succession.

Giving Being to all things.
And this is a great difference between him and the creatures: the Angels have
an excellent being, yet they cannot give the least being to any thing. So that
by these we may plainly see, that he only is, that is, he only is of an immense
being, that is, he is like a mighty sea of being, that has neither banks nor
bottom, he only is a spring of being, he only is everlasting, he only is
without succession, of time present, past, or to come. Lastly, he only gives a
being to every thing. Such a one he is, all this is employed, where he bids
Moses go, and tell the people; I am that I am, is he that has sent me unto
you. But we will stand no longer hereon, only we will labor to reduce these
speculations to use, as it is said of Socrates, he did Devocare philosophiam de
coelis, bring philosophy down to be practiced in private houses.

If we should inquire the reason, why God did reveal his Name to Moses, was
it, that only he, and the Israelites should find out argute speculations in
his name, as many of the Rabbis have done? and our Divines follow them too
far; no surely, the end of names is to make things known. But yet he sets
bounds to our apprehensions, in saying, I am that I am; as if there were more
in it, as if there were some greater immensitie in his nature: therefore the
use is this;

God, that may not be inquired into, There is something in Gods Essence not to
be inquired into
but to be content with that which is revealed. Romans 1.18. Romans 1.18.
For that which may be known of GOD, is manifest in them; for GOD has shown
it unto them: there is something that may be known, and something there is
that may not be known: therefore, Beloved, look not for a full knowledge of
him, but only for a small degree of it; as Exo. 33. Exodus 33.
My face (says God to Moses) thou can not see; which place compared with
that, To. 1.20. the meaning is this; that it is very little of God, that we can
know: even as when a great train, or glorious show, shall pass before us, and
all is gone, we only see the latter end of it. So God passed by Moses, and he
saw but a little of him: even as when you hear the latter end of a sentence,
only that which the echo resounds; the maine we cannot know. Therefore we
should learn from hence, not to be searching and prying into the counsels of
God; as, why so many are damned, and so few saved; to ask, how the
infallibility of Gods will, and the liberty of man's will can stand together;
to ask the reason, why he suffered the Gentiles to walk in the vanity of
their own minds so long a time; why he suffers the Church to lie, as it does
at this time: for we might say as Gideon did, If the LORD be with us, why are
we thus and thus? Why the Church of the Grecians, those famous Churches; why
the golden Candlestickes were removed from them? These, and all other such, we
must be content to be ignorant of; he does not reveal himself fully in this
life. Thou can not see me, and live, says God to Moses: the meaning is
this, the vale of mortality does hide us, it covers God from us: when that
shall be laid aside, we shall know all these things; and therefore we must be
content to stay the time; and till then, we are as narrow-mouthed vessels, we
are not able to receive much knowledge, but a great deal will fall beside; and
God will do nothing in vain; as Christ said to his Disciples, There are many
things that I should reveal unto you, but you are not able to bear them: and
therefore it should content us rather; as a weak eye is not able to behold the
Sun, as the Schoolmen well say, we cannot see it in rota; we cannot see the
circle wherein the Sun does run, but only the beams of it; no more can you
see God in his Essence; you may see him in his Word, in his effects: and
therefore let us be content to be ignorant of these things. Who should ask,
why deals GOD thus with his Church? why are so many damned? Remember that in
Isai. 45.9. Isai. 45.9.
Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker; let the potsheard strive with the
potsheards of the earth: Shall the clay say to him that makes it; What make
thou? The meaning of it is this; we should be content to let God alone, not to
inquire into all his actions, into the ground and reason of all his works; let
the potsheards strive with the potsheards of the earth: if thou had to do
with man, one like thy self, then thou might murmr with him, and ask him,
why do thou so? but what have thou to-doe with the Lord? Shall the clay say
to him that makes it, why do thou so? This similitude of clay does not, by
a thousand parts, express that distance that is between God and us; and
therefore we should do thus, stand upon the shore, as it were, and behold his
infinite Essence: I am that I am; and go no further; as a man that stands upon
the seashore, and sees the vastness of the sea, and dares go no further, if
he goes into the deep, he is drowned: You may look into Gods Essence, and see
and admire it; but to think that thou could comprehend God, is, as if a man
should think to hold the whole sea in the hollow of his hand; yea, there is a
greater disproportion between them: therefore you shall see, that the Apostle
does thus express it, To. 11. Romans 11.
Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom, and knowledge of GOD; how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Only remember
this, and make thus much use of it:

When you hear this name, I am that I am; that it is the Lords will to set
limits to us. When the Lord came down from the Mount, he set limits to the
people, and he gave this reason of it; I will not have them stand and gaze; so
is it in this case, it is a dangerous thing to go too far; you know what did
come to the Bethshemites, because they would be gazing: Remember that speech of
God to Manoah; Why do thou ask my name that is secret? There is something
that is secret in God.



God: And when thou see the vast works of God, when thou see him to span
the winds in his fist, and measure the waters in the hollow of his hand, and to
weigh the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance, etc. It is no
great thing if thou art ignorant of his counsels. It is made an argument why we
should not search into his secrets, Prove. 30.4. Prove. 30.4.
Who has ascended up to heaven, or descended? who has gathered the winds in
his fist? who has bounded the waters in a garment? who has established all
the ends of the earth? What is his name, or what is his Sons name, if thou
can tell? As if he should say; it is impossible that this mighty Workman,
he that did all this, that thou should know him, or know the ground of his
counsels; you can see but his back-parts, you can see no more and live, and you
need see no more, that you may live.

That which is the very scope and drift of the Lords revealing his name to
Moses; Use. 2.
To strengthen our faith, and encourage us in our wants and crosses.
Go and tell the people; I AM THAT I AM has sent me unto you; that is, it
should strengthen our faith, and encourage us, it should raise our minds, and
stir up hope in us, in all wants, and in all distresses, that we fall into,
upon any occasion: for this is the scope why the Lord reveals it here; he
reveals it in a very seasonable time. A man would have thought it impossible,
that they should be delivered from Pharaoh, he being so mighty, yet God bids
Moses go, and tell them, that he that IS, has sent him unto them. He that
IS, he that can make things to be, when they have no rudiments of being, he
has sent me.

Consider all the griefs and complaints that we have, they all arise from
hence; there is something we would have, which is not; as it was the complaint
of Rachel, she wept for her children, because they were not: now, consider
what the Lord says here, I am that I am: he is the Lord of being; he gives
being to whatsoever pleases him: As take your expressions of your ordinary
wants, you use to say; oh, if that such a thing were; if an house had such and
such a thing, it would be a goodly house; so in an instrument, as a Watch, if
it had such and such a being, it were a perfect Watch: so is it in the
complaints that we make for our souls, or the souls of others; if you see a
man that you would have reclaimed, you say if there were a stability of mind
in him, a consideration of death, a right knowledge of things, a sense of
sin, if there were grace in his heart to establish him, then he would be
thus, and thus. Consider that he who is the Lord of being, is able to make up
these wants: so if our complaints be for our selves, they all come from some
wants; but know that he who is the Almighty God, that makes all things to be,
he can give thee constancy, he can enable thee to do all things, and
strengthen the weak hands and feeble knees, Hebr. 22. He that is full of
being, as the Sun is of light, and the Sea of water, think with thy self
that he alone is able to give being to every grace, and to make up every
defect, and give that to thee which thou have not, and to all whom thou have to
do with, as thy wife, children, friends, etc. he can make things that were
bad, good and useful, and so make thy friend good also, as he did Onesimus for
Paul; think with thy self that the Lord of strength can do it, and he only
can do it: here every creature is at a stand to make a being; therefore go to
him, and give him the praise and glory of his Name.

And as it should move us to do this in our wants; so it should help thee in
all those great crosses that afflict thee: For every cross is in that which is
not; as Rachel wept of her children that were not: You shall see in Abraham, he
believed in GOD, even in GOD, who quickens the dead, and calls those things
which be not, as though they were Romans 4.17. Romans 4.17.
This was Abraham's case, he was to lose his son, for ought that he knew, yet
he comforted himself in this, that Jehovah, the mighty God, that is the Lord
of being, he that calls things that are not, as if they were, he could
either give him his own son again, or one that was as good as he. Thus he
did comfort himself; and so may we upon all occasions: God can make things to
be that are not. Take Job, when his houses, his children, estate, all were
gone, and all were not, yet Jehovah, he that makes things that are not, did not
he make all things to return again? So David, when things were not, when his
Kingdom was not, when his good name was gone, as we see by Shimei's cursing,
what a name he had, yet God did make all to come again. Naomi, when all was
gone, her husband and her sons gone, and they were not, yet he that was the
Lord of being gave her a son, and a daughter, that brought her in more
comfort that her own sons would. And this is the use that I would have you
to make of it.

When thou have lost any thing, when thy sons or thy goods are gone, he can
make up all: He who could make up the absence of Christ to the Disciples, as
he did by his Spirit, so that it was better with them than before, they had
more comfort and knowledge, and could do greater miracles, that God can surely
make good any other loss the most pinching. For you must remember that he is
JEHOVAH; you shall find that name often used on this occasion; still it is
added, I am JEHOVAH. But, to take the present Scripture, there you shall see,
what ground there is for this use we now make of it, Chap. 6.6. Wherefore,
Exodus 6.6.
say unto the children of Israel, I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from
under the burdens of the Egyptians, etc. The meaning of it is this: many
objections might be made by Moses, (and this is the reason, why God reveals
this Name to Moses.) Alas, says Moses, who am I: Shall I go unto Pharaoh, and
bid him let the children of Israel go? What am I to be sent on this errand?
Says the Lord, Go, tell him; I am, or Jehovah, has sent thee unto him: and
those answers are observable that Moses makes:

I am of a slow mouth, and of slow speech.

I made the mouth; go therefore, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee
what thou shall say.

I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?

I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet.

Where observe this, by the way. A man would wonder why Moses, that went to
such a one as Pharaoh, should complain, that he was a man of uncircumcised
lips. One would think that Pharaoh being a carnal man, that uncircumcised
words would please him better; but it is, as if he should say; Lord, when there
is any circumcisednesse in my lips, then there is no authority in my speech.
The less circumcision there is in any man's lip* the less authority there is
in his speech; as it is said of Christ, that he spoke with authority, for his
lips were circumcised. But to take this objection away; says the LORD, I am
Jehovah, I will be with thee, I will circumcise thy lips.

Pharaoh be moved with words?

I am Jehovah, says the LORD, I will make that to be, which is not: I will
send plagues among them, and then he will let them go.



I will give them favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, and not send them
empty, and I will provide food for them.

So Moses went. A strange kind of errand; as if one should go and tell the
great Turk, that the God of the Christians has sent to let them go: but yet
Moses goes; and all that comforted him, was (...) the revealing of this Name.

Now apply this to your selves; when you are in any distress, know that he
that made the heavens and the earth, can give a being to all these things: Esaias
50.10. Isai. 50.10.
Who is among you that fears the LORD, that obeys the voice of his
servants, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the
name of the LORD, and stay upon his GOD. He that walks in darkness, and has
no light; let that be thy case, that every thing is desperate, thou see not a
jot of light, nor spark of hope, yet trust in the Name of Jehovah, he can make
light, when there is none; a man that has no grace in his heart, let him trust
in Jehovah, that says in his heart, I would I could be rid of such a lust, and
that I could keep holy the Sabbath, but I have nothing in me, my heart is
empty of all; (this is the complaint often even of those that have grace:)
why, if there be no light, no grace, yet he can work it; and so Paul applies
that in Genesis 1. there was darkness and no light, Genesis 1.
to himself and them, in 2 Cor. 4.5. 2 Cor. 4.5.
He that commanded light to shine out of darkness, etc. I, says he, and we
Gentiles were in darkness, and had no light; yet God commanded light to shine
into our hearts, and into mine, the darkest of all the rest. So learn to apply
the same to thy self; he that is in darkness, and has no light, yet let him
trust in the Name of Jehovah; beloved, that is faith. If you should expect no
more of God, than a man can do, or a creature can do, it is not worthy the
name of faith: as this is proper only to God, to give being to things that are
not; so it is the property of faith, when things are not, to believe in the
name of Jehovah: therefore, there would thy faith be seen; and as for thy
self, so for the Churches also, you see now, (...) how low an ebb they are
brought, and yet, they cannot be lower than the estate of the Israelites was in
Egypt, and when they were in captivity; yet consider, that that Jehovah, who
is the Lord of being, is able to raise the Churches, and to give a new being to
them: Isai. 6.13. Isai. 6.13.
But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten; as a
Teile-tree, and as an Oak, whose substance is in them when they cast their
leaves; so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof: That is, when you see
the Churches go to wrack, when you see them cut down like a mighty wood
that is cut down, or that is spoiled of its glory in the Autumn: So when you
see the glory of the Churches thus taken away, yet there is a holy seed, which
shall be like a root or bulk of a tree. So should you see the Churches
overthrown, laid under feet, so that there is no hope of them, so far as we
could see; yet be assured, that there is a holy seed, that shall rise, and
spread it self again, even as a little root spreads it self into a great
tree; and how shall they do it? says the Lord, I am Jehovah, I can give a
being, I can enlarge their being.



Lords usual course to sit as a man in sleep, but says he in Isai 42 13, 14.
Isai. 42.13, 14
The LORD shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a
man of war; he shall cry, yea roar; he shall prevail against his enemies:
I have long time holden my peace, I have refrained my self, now will I cry
like a traveling woman, I will destroy and devour at once. He uses three
expressions there, to show what he will do for his Church in extremity; I
will raise my self like a Giant, etc. and when he comes, he will come
suddenly, as pains on a woman with child come suddenly, so says the LORD;
When you look not for me, them will I come, there shall go nothing before me,
I will come on a sudden; and not only so, but he will cry as a Giant, he will
do it strongly, and he will do it effectually; so as he will bring it to
pass as a man of war, and so he will do for his Church; again, he that
has raised it in former times, he will do it now; therefore let us not faint
and give over hoping, for he that is Almighty, he is able to do all these
things: He who could in Joel destroy the army of Catterpillars, and leave a
blessing behind him; can do the same as well to men, (though never so many)
who are the enemies of his Church.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
EXODUS. 3.13, 14, 15. 13 And Moses said unto GOD; behold, when I come unto the
children of Israel, and shall say unto them; The GOD of your Fathers has sent
me unto you, and they shall say unto me, What is his Name? what shall I say
unto them?

14 And GOD said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shall thou say
unto the children of Israel; I AM has sent me unto you.

15 And GOD said moreover unto Moses, Thus shall thou say unto the children of
Israel; The LORD GOD of your Fathers, the GOD of Abraham, the GOD of Isaac, and
the GOD of Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my Name for ever, and this is
my memorial unto all generations.


Use. 2.
IF God be the LORD of being, full of being in himself, To give him the praise
of his Being.
and giving being to every thing; learn then to give him his praise, Psalm.
60.4. Ye shall praise the LORD, and ye shall extol him by his Name IAH. For
he only brings enterprises to pass; as he gives being to every thing, so he
gives being to all the works that are wrought by the creatures. If our being
be from him; much more all our works are wrought by him, because they are but
dependants on our being. Now this God takes to himself, as most proper to
himself, and that from his Name, Jehovah; there be many places for this; I
will do it, for I am JEHOVAH, etc.

To say I will do such a thing, what a sin it is.
such a project in my heart, and I will do it, I will bring it to pass; what
is it but to arrogate to himself, that which is proper to Jehovah? which is a
greater sin, than we are aware of; for it is no less than Idolatry; It is
Idolatrit.
and the Lord so takes it; Isai. 42.8. Isai. 42.8.
I am the LORD, that is my Name, and my glory will not I give to another,
neither my praise to graven images; that is, I will take a special care, that
you shall not say, that your images do bring things to pass, for then they
should be called Jehovah, which is proper alone to me, to bring any thing to
pass.

So a man may apply it to any thing else; if a man shall say, that his own
wit, or worth, or industry, etc. does bring things to pass; he takes that
praise which peculiarly belongs to God, and gives it to the creature; whereas
the Lord says, Jehovah is my name, and there is not the least thing, but I
bring it to pass. Take heed therefore of that secret Idolatry which God hates;
it is a place which you know, Hab. 1.16. Hab. 1.16.
Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their Dragge;
because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. To offer
sacrifice, is, to do that which is proper to God: now to go about any thing,
and to say, that thy wealth brings it to pass, is to sacrifice to thine own
net, that is, to attribute that to thy self, which is proper only to him.

It is a vanity.
Psalm. 37.5. Psalm. 37.5.
He will bring it to pass; there the Lord takes it as peculiar to him only;
therefore in Isai. 26.12. (you may compare them both together) it is said
there, Isai. 26.12.
Lord thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works
in us. The scope of this place is this: Other men (says he) they forget God,
they carry themselves aloft, but it is he that will ordain us peace, though
none else shall put his hand to it; it is he that does all our works for us,
not our especial works only, but all; it is not any man, or any creature that
does them, it is he that works all our works for us. And if we did believe
this, we should look upon him with another eye, and serve him after another
manner; we should be more dependent on him, we should be more fervent in
prayer; and not when we would do any thing, turn every stone, and to knock
at every creatures door, to see what help they could give us; but our eye
would be toward him; for it is in vain to run to them; no creature can do
it, there is no enterprise but has many wheels, and the stopping of one
wheel hinders the whole enterprise; and it is he, that turns all those
wheels, commands all, must bring it to pass, or else the least thing will
hinder our greatest enterprises; therefore you see that the fairest blossoms
of our endeavors do often wither, and the unprobablest things do come to
pass. See it in David, to give you an example of it; when he would trust God,
he had a promise of the Kingdom, but not by himself; his own power should
not do it; and yet the wheels of Gods providence did bring it to pass. So
when he staid his hand from killing Nabal, did not the Lord bring it to pass
in a better manner than he could have done? And when he had the Kingdom,
Abner was his great enemy, but yet David did nothing, but that which was
right; and you see how God did bring it to pass, he took away his life
without any hand of his. So Ishbosheth was his enemy, yet when David sat
still, and did nothing, his head was brought to him; (though they that did it,
did it wickedly) yet it was an act of Gods providence to him. Thus things are
done for the best, when we commit them to him; but if we do them our selves,
we are as they that fished all the night long, and caught nothing, till Christ
came, and bade them to cast in the net, then they enclosed a great multitude of
fishes: So it is with us, when we go about any enterprise, it is in vain, we
are not able to do it. There is a double going about any enterprise; when we
go about an enterprise without God, and when we go about it with him. When
we go about it without God, I confess, that yet some things are brought to
pass; and that will serve to answer an objection which you have fully
expressed in Psalm. 37.7. Psalm. 37.7.
Rest in the LORD, and wait patiently for him; fret not thy self because of
him, who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings wicked devices
to pass, etc. There is the objection.

God, as David had before, verse. 5. The objection then is; there are many that
do not trust in God, and yet they bring their things to pass?



2 Or else, if they do it, it is to no purpose, they receive no comfort from
it. Therefore he adds; the evil doer shall be cut off, that is, though they
do go far in an enterprise, yet they never come to the end, they reap not
the fruit of it, he cuts them off; so that, if you look to the issue, it is
as good as nothing.

3 It tends to their own hurt, to their own ruin; if they get wealth, favor
with great men, credit, etc. the sword turns to their own bowels, their ease
slayes them, and it turns to their own destruction. Therefore take heed of
it; if thou do go about it with God, he will give thee the comfort of it.
One thing brought to pass by him, is better than a thousand by themselves
without him.

Use. 3.
Learn from hence the only remedy against the vanity that all creatures are
subject to, Learn the vanity of all creatures, and the remedy against it.
that we have to do withal; for what is the reason of that mutabilitie, we
find in all things? Is it not from hence, that they have no being of their
own? If you look to the rock, to the foundation; from whence they were
hewn, and to the hole of the pit, from whence they were dug, they were made
of nothing, and are ready to return to nothing. Take a glass, or an earthen
vessel, they are brittle; if you ask the reason, they are made of brittle
materials: plate is not so; so that this is the reason of all the vanity under
the Sun, because they are made of nothing. Therefore there is no way to
remedy this, but to look up to God, Act. 17.28. Act. 17.28.
For in him we live, move, and have our being. This is the meaning of it. They
have not only had their being from him at the first, but their being is in
him. We have our being in him, as the beams in the Sun, and an accident in
the subject.

Then, if thou would have constancy in any thing, thou must look up to
God. Every creature is mutable; it is so for unchangeable, as constancy is
communicated to it from the unchangeable God.

Consider this for matter of grace. When thou have got any good desires, or
good purposes, at any time, remember that the being of them comes from God.
Hence it comes to pass, that good purposes oft-times do come to nothing, and
like sparks go out again; because we remember not that they are from God;
we think that if we have good purposes to day, if we be spiritually minded
to day, we shall be so tomorrow; and thus you deceive your selves, you must
consider that the being of them comes from God: that place is remarkable, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. when David had rejoiced that the people had offered willingly, 1
Chro. 29.18.
he prays that GOD would keep it in the imagination of the thoughts of their
hearts: If we would thus hang upon him, and depend on him, when the Spirit has
breathed in us at any time, when we have any sparks of truth, and are warmed
with any holy affections, if we would give him the glory of this, that he gives
a being, if we would make this prayer that David does, you would find it a
means to make you more equal, and more even in grace. And what I say of this,
I say of all other things. It is the fault of us all, we are subject to the
which is said of wicked men, Isai. 56.12. Isai. 56.12.
Come ye (say they) I will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.

Now, whence comes this? let a man have health to day, he thinks he shall have
it to morrow; let him have peace and friends to day, he thinks it will be so
still. This is every man's thought; and it arises from hence, that we forget
Jehovah, he that continues the being of every thing. If we did remember this,
we should say; I do not know whether it be his pleasure that gives being to
them: I know, that if he withdraw his hand, they will come to nothing. It is a
great fault to boast of to morrow; hereby you detract from God, and dishonor
him exceedingly, you see how he complains of it, Iam. 4.13, 14. you enter upon
his royal prerogatives. James 4.13, 14.
It is, as if a man should challenge many 100. acres of ground, and has not
one foot; for future times are properly the Lords. Now, when we will anticipate
things in our thoughts, and rejoice in our projects beforehand, as if they
were come to pass; this is a sinful rejoicing. And thence it is, that pride
goes before a fall; because that when a man begins to lift himself upon a
creature, and to build upon that which is but vanity, then the Lord begins to
take away our foundation, and hinder our purposes, and then he falls and
perishes. Why do thou boast of to morrow? Know thou what is in the womb
of the day? thou know no more, than they know, what is in the womb of a
woman, till they see it.

Now, God has an overruling hand in all these, and therefore he does
disappoint us, because we are ready to give to the creature that which
belongs to himself; therefore, if thou would have any thing to continue,
depend upon him, because all things else are subject to vanity, and he only
gives being, and continuance to them all.

The Attributes of GOD in general.
NOw we come to declare to you, how this Essence of God is made known. It is
by his Attributes; and they are of two sorts: The Attributes of God, are of two
sorts.


1 Either such as describe God in himself.

2 Or else such as declare God as he is to us. Other divisions there are, but
this is the best that I can find; because it agrees with the scope of all the
Scripture.

For the first, those Attributes that show God in himself, as when the
Scripture says, that God is perfect; as, Be ye perfect, as I am perfect. So
when the Scripture says, that he is unchangeable, almighty, eternal; these
show what he is in himself: then his other Attributes show what he is to you,
as that he is merciful, patient, abundant in mercy and truth, and that he is
all-sufficient to you, etc.

The first Attribute of GOD.
has sent me unto you;

That God is perfect; God is perfect.
he has all the kinds, degrees, and extents of being in him. There be diverse
kinds of being in the world; some have more, some less; some have a more
excellent being, some have a less excellent; some have a larger being, some a
lesser, and yet all are in him; and this is his perfection. Imperfection is a
want of some being; Perfection is to have all the degrees of being, that belong
to a thing in his kind, but all this is in God.

Now God is said to be perfect:

Act. 17.25. Act. 17.25.
Neither is he worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing,
seeing he gives to all life and breath, and all things. He proves there, that
God is perfect; because he needs nothing, seeing he gives to all life, and
breath, and all things. That which is said of man, may be said of every thing
else; What have thou, that thou have not received? Therefore, he that gives
it, must needs be full of it. It is said that he made man after his own Image;
and so he makes every thing else, he is the life of them all. Now the sampler
and the life has more in it, than the image; and therefore the life, and first
original; the realty, and first beginning must needs be perfect in himself.

God, that can set land-markes or bounds to his entitie or being. Every
creature has his several bounds and limits, thus far shall they go, and no
further; but who has set bounds to him? When he had set forth his Essence in
Isai. 40. he adds, Isai. 40.
To whom will you liken GOD? or what likeness will you compare unto him?

There be these differences between the perfection that is in God, and that
which is in any creature: Five differences between the perfection that is in
God, and which is in the creatures.




Job says; he has charged you with folly.



creature, as, 1 Ioh. 1. 1 John 1.
That in it there is light, and there is no darkness at all: Of him only can
it be said, there is no creature so perfect, but it has some imperfection.

God is not in possibility to lose that perfection he has, neither can he be
capable of sin.

God is a perfect substance, wholly substance; there is nothing him, by reason
of which it may be said, there is something in him that is best, something that
is worse.

God has need of nothing. The creatures, though full of perfection in their
kind, yet still they have exceeding great need of something. As you say of a
river, you will say it has need, though it be full, it has need of the
fountain to maintain it; so may I say of the creatures, though they be full
of perfection in their kind, yet they have need of that fountain, from whence
their perfection comes, which if it be stopped, they will come to nothing.

Thus God is infinitely perfect and immense, having no limits: Reason.
For all limits are either from the matter or from the form; the form is
limited, because it wants matter to carry it to a further extent; and the
matter is limited, because it is bounded with such a form; but in God there is
neither matter nor form; as there is nothing without him, so there is nothing
within him to bound that largeness of being which he has.

But now to apply this:

God be thus full of being, as the sea is full of water, and a thousand times
fuller; then all that you can do, reaches not to him; Then all we can do,
reaches not to him, to merit any thing.
Psalm. 16.4. Psalm. 16.4
It extends not to him; the sins that you commit hurt him not; all the
righteousness you perform, does not pleasure or benefit him: and if it be so,
then consider what little cause you have to murmr against him at any time,
upon any occasion. For all coffeehouse among the creatures comes from the
hence, that their expectation is not satisfied; and what is the reason, why it
is not satisfied* but because they think that there is some reason why they
should be respected. Therefore examine your own hearts, whether there be not
a secret popery in your hearts, that you think, that you can do something that
reaches to God, that he should respect you for: but if God be thus full, thou
can do nothing, that can reach to him. But you shall see how prone men are
to this; are we not ready to say; Why am I not in so great a place as another?
Why have not I more gifts? Why have I not greater employments? Why have I such
imperfections? Why am I thus subject to diseases and crosses? Whence comes
this? Because we expect something; because we think we are not well dealt
with; and why do we think so? because men think, that there is something in
them, why they should be looked after, they think that they have carried
themselves so, that they think there is something in justice due to them. But
if thou can say with David, and Job, and Christ, when he says to his
disciples; When you have done all, that you can, say that you are unprofitable
servants. What if God will not have David to build a Temple, but his son must
do it? Or Moses to lead the children of Israel into the Land of Canaan, but
Joshua must have the glory of it? They must be content; yet they did more for
God, than ever thou can do; therefore thou must labor to be content also.
The creature does but take of him whatsoever it has, and therefore it can give
nothing to him; and shall the River be beholding to him that drinks of it,
because he comes and quenches his thirst? Or shall the Sun be beholding to
him that has the use of his light? When thou have done all that thou can,
say thou art an unprofitable servant, thou can do nothing that reaches to
God; therefore labor to be vile, and low in thine own eyes, and willing to be
disposed of, as it pleases him.

Use. 2.
Again, if this be so, then consider the freeness of his grace, This
perfection of his shows the freeness of his grace and goodness in all he
gives.
in all the goodness which he bestows: for to have done any thing for a man
beforehand, does lessen the benefit bestowed. Now consider, that thou have
done nothing to the Lord; therefore labor to magnify the Lord, that has
bestowed it upon thee. For this cause the Lord will have justification by
faith, and not by works, that he might be magnified: And so he will have
sanctification, not by the power of the free will, but by the infused grace of
his Spirit, that no flesh might boast. It is the Lord that is full, it is he
that gives it to thee, thou can do nothing to him; Romans 11.35, 36. Romans
11.35, 36.
Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed him again; for of
him, and through him, and to him, are all things, etc. As if he should say, the
Lord out of his free grace had showed mercy to the Jews, (for of them he there
speaks) they were wet, like Gideons fleece, when all the world was dry.
Afterward it pleased him to bedew the Gentiles, when the Israelites were dry;
well, he has done this, says Paul, and what have thou to say to him? Did he
any wrong? Is he not free? May not he do what he will? This is one use.
Another is, that you should be content with his disposing; he owes nothing to
any; for of him, and through him, and for him are all things; to him be glory
for ever; Amen.

If he be thus full, that the creature does nothing to promerit at his hand,
then thou may go to God. though thou have no worth in thee; To go to God
with faith, though we have no worth in us to move him.
though thou have done little service to God, yet go to him, and say; Lord, I
have done nothing; if I had done much, yet it would not reach to thee; thou art
full of perfection, and blessed for ever: therefore a man may go to him with
great faith, and ask great things of him, though he be little worth, and has
done little service for him. For, if thou did God any good, thou might go
to him, and say, I have done this and that for thee, therefore recompense me.
But seeing it is not so, therefore labor to go to God in faith, and when thou
go, think with thy self; why may I not have it as well as another? Do not
say, I am not so holy, and I cannot do as Paul and Moses, their works did
nothing to him. Think with thy self, that when he first chooses a man, he
does it freely; and think thou that he is not the same afterward?
Therefore, now thou may go to him on this ground with boldness, because
whatsoever thou do it is nothing to him.

Lord be thus full in himself, then he has need of nothing. God has no need
of any man or creature.
He therefore says to all the men in the world, and to all things; he says to
Princes, I have no need of you; to rich men, I have no need of you, or of your
wealth; he says to Scholars, that have excellent parts, I have no need of
you: therefore say not, I am undone, or the Churches are undone, because
Princes are not for you; because men help you not, for God can help them
alone; he does not need Princes: When there was none, says the LORD, I stirred
up my self like a mighty Giant, he needs no help, he is most perfect, full
of being, able to do whatsoever he pleases.

That many perish is nothing to him.
he cares no more for the destruction of the whole world, than thou do for
the throwing away of a little dust; he is full of excellency and perfection;
you see how often he sweepes away whole kingdoms with the besome of
destruction, nay, he swept away the whole world by the Flood, as you do sweep
a little dust out of your houses. Therefore do not thou dispute with God, and
ask, why are so many damned? why are so many swept away? think with thy
self, that he, that was before all things were, will be when they are gone:
therefore learn with Paul, to reverence his judgments, to fear and tremble
before him. He is full of being, and though thou perish, what is that to him?
Will thou dispute with God? thou art but a particle of dust. What art thou that
contendest with him? let the Potsheard strive with potsheards of the earth, but
not with God. Shall the clay say to him that fashions it, what make thou?

God be thus full, then consider why he has laid such a commandment on thee,
His Commandments are for thy good.
to do such and such things. It is for himself? no, for thy righteousness,
thy keeping of his Law reaches not to him. What is it for, then? Surely it is
for thy self, and for thy good. If for thee he has commanded, and every
commandment is for thy wealth; then consider what reason thou have to walk in
his ways; he says, as kind parents to their children, when they exhort them
to good courses, it will be for your own good; and if you do it not, it will
be for your hurt: as it is said of the Sabbath, It was made for man, and not
man for the Sabbath; that is, God appointed the Sabbath for man's advantage, he
would be undone else; he would grow wild, and forget God: and as it is said of
the Sabbath, so it is true of every Commandment; therefore that is put to
every Commandment; The Commandment, which I command you for your wealth,
Is^^^^. 36. 17. Isai. 36.17.
that is, when ever I command you any thing, it is not for mine own sake, not,
that I might be served and worshipped, (though that is joined with it) but it
is for your profit, whatsoever I command. This then should stir us up to go
about holy duties willingly, after another manner than we do. No man will
serve himself unwillingly, (though, it may be, he will other men.) Now, all
the Commandments of God do tend to our own advantage: for to that end has
he appointed them. Keep the Commandments and live in them: you live in them,
as fire does by wood, and the creatures by their food. If a man did consider
this, he would do this in another manner; we go about our own business
with intention, because it is our own; so if we were persuaded, that what God
did command, it were for our own good, you would do it in all diligence; you
would not only go, but run the ways of his Commandments; you would not
only take heaven, but you would take (...) with violence, and with all your
might and strength, you would do whatsoever he commands, for it is for your own
profit, and not for his.

God be thus full, then you should give him the praise of his perfection, To
praise God for himself, give him the honor of his perfection.
and stay your thoughts upon him. It is a thing that we come short of, for the
most part, for we are ready to ask, what is God to us? what profit, what good
is it to us? (for that is the base nature of ours;) but grace teaches us
otherwise, we must learn to know God, to honor and magnify him in our
thoughts for himself. Some men have a greater knowledge of God, some less;
he that has more, he is able to set him up higher in his apprehension, and to
give him the more praise, Psalm. 68.1. Psalm. 68.1
Exalt him in his name IAH, that is, consider that he alone is full of being,
and gives being to all things; therefore (says he) praise him, and extol him
for this, and let your thoughts be upon him.



God indeed:

Four signs of entitling Gods perfection.
thou will not regard the creatures at all; either in the good, or hurt that
they can do thee: if thou can see the fullness of being that is in him, and
the emptiness that is in every creature; then, if he be thy friend, he is all
in all to thee; and if he be thine enemy, thou will consider that he that is
full of all strength, and power, and being, that he is thine enemy, and that
his enmity is heavy, for he which is, is against thee. If the creature be set
against thee, it is but as a little clay or dust, they cannot hurt thee,
unless his arm go along with it; and then it is not that creature, but his
arm that does it: As when they came to take Christ, it is said, he passed
through the midst of them; they were to him as a little dust, and as the army
that came against David, Joshua, and Elisha, they were to them as a little
water; but when God comes against a man, then every little thing, if he
pleases to extend and join his power, he is able therewith to quell the
strongest man. Then, one man shall chase a thousand, and a thousand shall put
ten thousand to flight, Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28.
He is as a mighty river, that carries all before it, Nahum 1. Nahum 1.
Therefore regard the enmity of the creature, as small things, his enmity is
only to be respected.

that is, and thou want only the thing that is not; Sign.
and therefore thou must say, when thou have lost any thing, I have lost that
which is nothing; when thou have gained any thing, say, that thou have gotten
that which is nothing: it is a hard thing to say so, but yet it is so; as it is
said of riches in the Prove. 23.5. so it is true of honor, pleasure, profit,
etc. Indeed riches to men are their substance, so they call them, but to God
they are nothing; and so he calls them: riches, honor, etc. they have but a
little diminutive being, as if they were nothing. And they are nothing in two
respects: 1 In comparison of God, they are nothing. 2 Because they are able to
do nothing.


So other comparisons argue, as that they are flowers, and false treasures, and
shadows: now does any man grieve, if his shadow does disappeare; or that he
has lost a flower. Therefore learn to magnify God, for he is all; thou
want nothing, if thou have him; he is all in heaven, and why should he not
be so here? Because when Peter said they had left all; Christ tells them they
should have an hundred fold, and why? because they had a full communion with
God; and therefore, they had all the comfort that friends or lands could
afford; he was in stead of all to them, as Paul, when he was in prison, was
not God all to him? and what need had he of riches, or lands, or friends? for
friends are but to comfort a man; and money, it can do no more than man can
do; and praise, and honor do but knit men's hearts to us; now, if we have the
light of Gods countenance, we need not man's help; if God will put forth his
power for us, what need we any thing else? if he will heal us, what needs the
Physician? if he will cloth us, and give us meat and drink, then what needs
wealth? Therefore labor to be satisfied with him, to prize and esteem him,
and to think him to be all in all.

THE EIGHTH SERMON.
EXODUS. 3.13.14, 15. 13 And Moses said unto GOD; behold, when I come unto the
children of Israel, and shall say unto them; The GOD of your Fathers has sent
me unto you, and they shall say unto me, What is his Name? what shall I say
unto them?

14 And GOD said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shall thou say
unto the children of Israel; I AM has sent me unto you.

15 And GOD said moreover unto Moses, Thus shall thou say unto the children of
Israel; The LORD GOD of your Fathers, the GOD of Abraham, the GOD of Isaac, and
the GOD of Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my Name for ever, and this is
my memorial unto all generations.


Sign.
that you have the Lord for your God: for, if he be most perfect, if he has
the fullness of all things in him; then if you have him, the mind is ready to
grow to an holy kind of greatness; for it is the greatness of the object,
that makes the mind great: and the greatness of the mind appears in this,
that it does not esteem small things. Animo magno nihil est magnum; When a man
can, out of this consideration, that the LORD is my Sun, and shield, and
exceeding great reward, contemn and reckon all things else as matters of small
moment; it is an argument that he has, in truth, apprehended God, as he ought
to apprehend him. I say, this is true holy magnanimity: there is a false
magnanimity; whereas men's minds are great, because they grow great with men,
because of their great hopes, and riches, and great learning; this is a false
greatness, because it draws men from God; it is such a greatness as the arm
has, when it is swelled, which rises not from the strength and true
greatness of it, but from the weakness of it. This is of an ill kind; but
there is another kind of greatness, when the mind grows therefore to an
holy magnanimity, because it is set upon the great God: as David, he had such a
magnanimity, Psalm. 27.1.3. Psalm. 27.1.3.
The LORD is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The LORD is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though an host of men should
incampe against me, my heart should not fear, etc.

If there be any thing in this world to be regarded, it is an host of men;
because it is the powerfullest thing amongst men; but I will not regard it.
Why? not because he was stronger than they, but because God was his life and
strength; when his mind raised up it self to such a greatness, upon this
consideration, then he was able to contemn these things, that were to be
contemned. Such was the greatness of mind, which was found in Moses, Hebr.
11. he cared not for the favor, Hebr. 11.
or disfavour of the King, Because he saw, enjoyed, and bore himself upon
him, which was invisible.

God, you shall know it by this, Sign.
by seeking to him to fill up all those defects and imperfections, that we meet
with in our lives, from day to day. Beloved, there are many things that we
want; as if we lose a friend, we complain of a want; if we lose father or
mother, it is a want; yea, if we lose nothing, yet we find many defects which
we would have made up: now, what is the way to do it? If thou think to make
them up by the creature, thou will find it to be but a small bush that will
not stop the gap; but if thou go to him that is all in all, Coloss. 3. if
thou seek to make it up in him, Coloss. 3.
when any thing is lost: when the bucket is broken, if thou go to the
fountain; if a beam be cut off that was given and shined through the creature,
if thou go to the Sun, that can give the like beam through another
creature; if thou seek to have communion with him, then it is an argument
that thou esteemest him as thou ought to do.

Lord, I look for all my comfort from him.

Isai. 55.2. Isai. 55.2.
Wherefore do you spend money for that, which is not bread? and your labor
for that, which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which
is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Let a man consider in
this case, how he bestows his pains: if he think to have all in God, he
will save his pains, and not lay it out upon vanity, but he will bestow it to
some purpose; that is, he will take much pains to seek his favor in all
things, and look to him for a supply of all, and not to the creatures, because
they can do but little, they have no power, no strength to do any thing, they
are of no moment; but if God be pleased to make up the defect, then if he have
but little wealth, he will make it to serve his turn; if he have but one
friend, it shall be to him, as if he had many; if he has but a little credit,
it shall be to him, as if he had a great name, etc. all things else are but of
a little bulk without him.



To this we will give a threefold answer: That the creatures in themselves are
of no moment to us, are nothing in three respects.


Lord. A horse is able to do something, but to save a man, it is a vain
thing; the builder builds, but it is nothing, and the watchmen watch in vain
without the Lord; the efficacy that they have to do us hurt or good, Their
efficacy is from God.
is from him, and not from themselves: If God will say to the creature; Go,
and do such a man good, it will do it, because there goes a concourse of
efficacy from him to do it: So, if he say to a creature, Go to such a man,
and afflict him, it will do it, though it be never so small and mean a
creature; therefore of themselves they neither do good nor hurt, the efficacy
that they have is from him, and not from themselves: they are mere
instruments; and if God withdraw his blessing and cursing, they can do us
neither good nor hurt.

They are at his command.
if he would do us good, he never wants one to send of his errand; if he will
make a man rich, he wants not wealth, it is at his command; if he will give a
man friends, he can fetch them again; if all thy friends be present, yet they
stir not, unless he command. The rich and the poor, they meet together, but
the LORD makes them both. And in this regard, riches are said to be nothing,
Prove. 23. Prove. 23.
Riches take to themselves wings, and fly away; And, why do thou set thy
heart upon that which is nothing? That is, they go and come at his command;
and therefore they are to be accounted as nothing. If a man see a flock of the
best foul on his land, yet he looks upon them as nothing to him, because they
have wings and will fly away; and you should think so of all things else; that
they have wings, that they go and come at his command, that they are nothing,
because they are nothing to you.

They can do little good at best* and that which they do is of no continuance.
and therefore they are said to be vanity. So that put the case that they have
some efficacy in them, (when yet they are acted by the Lord;) yea, put the
case that they were at their own command (as they are not) yet they can do
but little good, and that is of so short continuance, that therefore they are
vanity, they are nothing; because they are little more than nothing; as Solomon
calls them; all things under the Sun are vanity; they are empty things;
and that which is under the Sun cannot reach above the Sun; and therefore
they are said to be vanity.



Lord be with us in the want of them, they are nothing; if the Lord send us
afflictions, and give us his favor and the light of his countenance, it is
nothing; if he send us into prison, if he be with us, it will be nothing: As,
on the contrary, if a man had a brave Palace, and God was not with him, if he
did withdraw his favor from him, all were nothing.

The second Attribute of GOD.
The next Attribute, The second attribute of God.
which likewise may be drawn from this place, is this:

That GOD is the first, without all causes, GOD is the first without all cause.
having his being, and beginning from himself. This I find set down in Rev.
1.8. Rev. 1.8.
I am ALPHA and OMEGA, the beginning and the ending, says the LORD, which is,
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty, that is, what Alpha and Omega
are in the letters, that I am to the creatures; I am the first, and the last;
that is, if I should suffer the creatures to fall, then I should be the last;
and I am He they would return unto, Rev. 3.14. Rev. 3.14.
Christ, according to his Godhead, is said to be the beginning of the creation
of GOD, Isai. 44.6. Isai. 44.6.
I am the first, and last: The meaning of it is, that he is without all causes,
that he is from himself, and by himself, and of himself, and for himself,
Romans 11.36. that is, Romans 11.36.
he is the first, he never had any efficient cause, as all the creatures have;
that which has no efficient cause, has no end; that which has no end, has
no form; (for the form does but serve to carry a thing to such an end) that
which has no form, has no matter, for the matter is dependent on the form;
and so consequently, he is without all cause. But we will show you the grounds
of this, they are these three:

Reason 1.
He is without all cause: for, if there were any cause of him, that cause must
needs be caused, either from some other, or from it self, not from any other;
for then there should be something that is before the Lord, that is better than
he, from whom he receives all things; but that cannot be: for, then it should
be God, and not the Lord; and it is not from it self, because nothing is the
cause of it self, for then it should be before it self, and it should be
better than it self; for the cause, though it give the same that is in it
self, to the effect, as the father to the son; yet the cause is better,
because that which gives, is better than that which receives.

Again, it should be different from it self, for the cause is different from
the effect: therefore it must needs be, that he is without all cause, and the
first, and the beginning of all the creatures of God.

Wheresoever you see any thing, Reason 2.
that has but a part of another, it must needs receive it from some whole; and
if it does receive it from that which is but a part; yet by degrees it must
come to some whole, as to the fountain; as for example, if iron or wood be on
fire, etc. they have but a part of that element, which argues that there is
some whole.

But it may be said, Object. it has that part of it self originally?


fountain, that has water originally, has not the part, but the whole,
though afterward it runs into many brooks; and if there were but one
fountain, as there is but one Sun, then all the water would be in that
fountain, as the light is in the Sun.

Now to apply this, look upon all the creatures, and you shall find that they
have all but part of being; the Angels have one part, men another, and other
creatures another part, etc. which is an argument that there is a whole, which
is GOD blessed for ever.

Besides, it argues that he has that wholenesse of being from himself; for he
that has but part of a thing, does borrow it, and therefore must come to the
original; for nothing is borrowed but it is from another, and not from it
self; therefore, seeing the creatures have but a part of being, it presupposes
that there is a whole, that there is an immense being, that is of himself, and
from himself, and has it not from any creature.

Reason 3.
Lastly, there is nothing that the eye has seen, or that the ear has heard,
but it is possible not to be; there is almost nothing but is subject to
corruption; but if it be not so, yet they have a possibility not to be; as the
heavens, though they are not corrupted, yet they may be: now whatsoever has a
possibility not to be, it is certain that it was not, and that which was not,
is brought to a being by him that is; so that you must come to something which
is, that is the cause, that is the beginning and ending, that is without cause,
that is a and o, he that was, and that is to come.

Now we come to application.

Lord be without all cause, this we may gather then, that he does not will any
thing, because it is just, God therefore wills not things because they are just;
but they are just because he wills them.
or desire it, because it is good, or love any thing, because it is pleasant;
for there is no cause without him, all perfection is in him originally.

The creatures indeed desire things, because they are good; and love them,
because they are pleasant; because they seek for perfection out of themselves,
because they are caused by that which is out of themselves: but this is not so
in God, who is the first cause, because, of the first cause there is no cause;
and of the first reason there is no reason to be given. Look whatsoever is in
the creature, what justice or excellency, it comes from God; and if he should
will any thing for this cause; because it is good, there should be a
reciprocation, which is impossible. I speak this for this end; that in our
judging of the ways of God, we should take heed of framing a model of our
own, as to think, because such a thing is just; therefore the Lord wills it:
the reason of this conceit is, because we think that God must go by our rule;
we forget this, that every thing is just because he wills it; it is not that God
wills it, because it is good or just. But we should proceed after another
manner, we should find out what the will of God is; for in that is the rule
of justice and equity; for otherwise it was possible that the Lord could err,
though he did never err: that which goes by a rule, though it does not swarve,
yet it may; but if it be the rule it self, it is impossible to err. As, if
the Carpenters hand be the rule, he strikes a right line. The Angels and
creatures have a rule, and therefore may err; but it is not so with God, and
therefore what God wills is just, because he is the rule it self; therefore in
the mysteries of predestination, we are to say thus with our selves; Thus I
find the Lord has set it down, thus he has expressed himself in his Word,
such is his pleasure; and therefore it is reason, and just such against which
there can be no exception.

God be without all cause, then he may do all things for himself, and for his
own glory; God may do all things for himself, and his own glory.
because he that has no cause above, or without himself, he needs not do any
thing but for himself. The Angels, they have a cause above, and without
themselves, therefore they must do nothing for themselves, but for another,
Romans 11. last, Of him are all things, therefore to him be glory: that place
shows us a ground of this, why we must not expect, that God should do any
thing for any other end, for any other creature in the world; for having no end
above himself, it is impossible that he should have any end but himself,
Prove. 16.4. The LORD has made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked
for the day of evil. Whereas this objection might be made; Will he cast men to
hell? will he damn them for his own glory? Yes (says he) all his actions
even that also is for his own sake; Romans 9.22. there it is more large: What if
GOD willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much
long suffering the vessels of wrath filled to destruction? etc. This is enough,
he has no end, no cause above himself; and therefore it is reason enough, he
does it because he will do it. And this is a thing to be observed out of the
19. and 20. verses, where the same reason is given that we now speak of, Who
has? etc. says the Apostle, if you look on God, and the creatures, you shall
find this difference between them; all the creatures are made, as pots are
made by the potters; and therefore, as they have an author of their being, so
they do serve for another end; so that the potter he may appoint what end he
will, and no man can say, why do thou it? So God, because he is the first
cause, he may have what end he will, and no man can say, why do thou so?
he may make some vessels of honor, and some of dishonor, and all for
himself, and his own glory: therefore, when you see that he did not spare the
Angels, but cast them down into hell, there to be reserved in chains of
darkness till the last day; when you see him not sparing the old world, when
you see him suffering the Gentiles to walk in their own ways; when you see
him to suffer a great part of the world to be damned, and to perish; when you
see him let the Churches to be made havocke of, you should be ready to say
thus, To him be glory for ever: that is, you should not murmr against him,
but glorify him, and reverence him for ever: for he may do all things for
himself. And this is the reason that is rendered, Matthew. 20.15, 16. Matthew.
20.15, 16.
May not I do what I will with mine own? He gives it there as the reason, why
many are called and few chosen, why the Jews were first, and the Gentiles
last: why he let goes many probable men, and chooses the worst; says he, May
not I do with mine own what I will? Beloved, this difference is to be
observed between the creatures and God; there is no creature can say of any
thing, that this is mine own, because he made it not, they are not the masters
of them; but God may do what he will, what he pleases, because they are his
own. If God will take a few out of a Nation, and destroy all the rest, who can
say any thing to him? they are his own; as he is without all cause, so he is
without all end. Now, as this is of use to justify God, in that it is his
property to be without all cause; so it may teach us;

We should do nothing for our own ends but for God.
but he is bound to do all for an higher end, as he that made us has
appointed, for the efficient can make a thing to what end he please. You see it
is so with men, as a knife is made to cut, a key to open, etc. and yet they are
all of one material: so the Lord looking down from heaven, he made of one
heap of clay several creatures, and appointed to every one his several end,
which end they must observe and aim at; and if they do not, they wrong him
that made them; and therefore it is he destroys them. And so it is with every
thing that is made for an end; as fire, that is made to warm a man, if it do
burn the house, we put it out; a vessel that is made to keep wine or bear,
if it do corrupt it, we lay it aside, and put it into one more wholesome: so
does God, he puts to every man his several end, and therefore he gives them
several gifts, and several callings: himself, indeed, is the general end,
but besides the general, he appoints to every calling a particular end; to a
Minister he says, Go, and feed my sheep; if he goes, and feeds himself, and
not the people; if he feed them with stubble, and not with hay, he does not
attain his end; and so may I say of every thing else; of a scholar, a
Magistrate, a husband; they have several places, and diverse gifts given them,
and all for their several end, and if they aim not at their end, but work
for themselves, they are worthy to be destroyed: as a man, if he has an
instrument that is crooked, and unfit for use, then he casts it away, and
takes another; but if it be fit, he will lay it up for use, and he will say,
let it not be lost: so does the Lord with men, if they be pliable to him, if
they will work for the end that he has appointed them, then he saves and
preserves them; but if they will do things for their own end, it is the next
way to destruction.

For observe this; for any man to do any thing for his own end, is to arrogate
that to himself, which is the Lords, who is without cause, which is an high
kind of idolatry. Let them consider this therefore, that labor that they may
be rich, that labor that they might have outward excellency, and to be
something in the flesh, that labor only for outward honor, for places of
employment, and credit in all things; so a scholar that is negligent, he
says, I shall make a shift to live; but have thou not another end? art thou
not made? art thou not a creature? is it enough for thee to live, and no more?
so they that have their estates provided for them, they care not for learning,
they say, they can live without it; but art not thou made? and is not this
thine end, to serve God and men? So he that shall choose a calling or course of
life, according to his own fancy, not that which shall be serviceable to men,
but that which pleases himself, let him ask himself this question; Am I not
made? Am I not a creature? have I no other end, but my self? Therefore let men
consider this, and look to it; have I not chosen this course of life, and have
I not an end appointed to me? That end is to be serviceable to God, and profit
men: But if a man shall think with himself, what is the best way to live and
provide for my self, and to get profit and wealth; these are idolatrous and
sinful thoughts. God may do all things for himself, because he has nothing
above himself;

Signs, whereby a man may know whether he makes God or himself his end.
But you will say, I do all for this end, to serve God and men?

Thou that do pretend this, that thou do things to be serviceable to God
and men, and not to thy self, thou shall know it by this:

above thee, it is a sign that thou do it not for his sake, that has
appointed thee, but for thine own.

2 If thou art fit for an higher place, if thou restest in things that are
beneath thee, for thy greater profit, thou seek thy self, and not the Lord.

3 If thou do resist the providence of God, that when thou have a calling,
and art put in it, and thou put thy self out again for thy advantage, then
thine end is thine own self. Paul when he went to Macedonia, he found but
bad entertainment there, yet he went, because he was sent. So John, he went to
Pathmos, where the people were but few, and barbarous, yet he obeyed God, and
went. Eliah, when he was sent to Ahab, and to prophecy to the Israelites,
among whom, for all that he knew, there was not one soul, that did not bow
his knee to Baal. Ezekiel and Isaiah, when they went to harden the people to
destruction, yet they went willingly, because the Lord sent them; it was an
argument that they did it not for themselves. A servant is not to do his own
work, he does it as his master will have him to do it; if he does the things
that his master bids him, and says, I am his servant; and if he bid me to go,
I will go, or if he bid me come, I will come; if he bid me to keep within
door, and to do the meanest works, I will do them; this is an argument that
he does not seek himself. When a man is thus dependent upon God, willing to
take employment, not above him, nor below him, nor resist his providence, but
willing to be guided by him, it is a sign that he seeks the Lord, and not
himself.

4 Besides, let a man consider what he does in these services that immediately
concern the Lord himself. If a man shall study much, and pray little; if a
man shall spend all his time in his calling about worldly business, and little
time for duties to build up himself in knowledge, as in prayer and reading,
etc. it is a sign that he does it, not for the Lord, but for himself; for he
that seeks not the Lord, in that which is done to his person, he does it not
in that which is done in outward works; he that will not be faithful in the
greater, and that which God does immediately command in his worship, he will
never be faithful in those things which are further off, that are of less
consequence, Act. 6.4. Acts 6.4.
It was an argument they gave themselves in integrity, to the ministry of the
Word, because they gave themselves to prayer as well as it; they did, as it
were, divide the time between both; if we were to preach only, say the
Apostles, we could then wait upon Tables, but one half of our time is to be
taken up in prayer, the other in preaching: and if you thus divide the time, it
is a sign you look to the Lord.

5 Besides, consider what it is that troubles thee? what a man aims at, if he
lose his end, that grieves him, when his work is done; if this be thy trouble
that thou have lost some credit, or profit, then thine end is thy self; but if
this be thy grief, that thou have not done it in such m^^sure, that others may
receive profit and advantage by it, it is a sign that thou did it not for
thy self, but for Gods glory.

6 Besides, if a man considers what it is that does make things pleasant, and
gives amabilitie to that, which is harsh in it self. Labor in it self is
sweet to no man, unless there be something in it that sweetens it: now
consider what that is, if in it thy eye is upon thy wealth, that comes by it;
if thou studiest hard, and if thou preachest much, and it is for the praise of
men, thou seek thy self, and thy reward is in it; but if thou look up to
the Lord, if thou do it, because he sees it, and knows it, and that he may
say; I know thy work and thy labor; it is a sign that thy end in it, was the
Lord, and not thy self.

7 From whence do thou look for wages? from God or from men? Whence come
those complaints of the unthankfulness of friends and pupils, and those we do
good to? but because we look to men, and not to God. For if we did look to
God for our reward, their thankfulness or unthankfulness would be of small
moment to us: for does the Nurse nurse the child for it own sake only? does
she look for reward from the child, or from the mother that puts it to
nurse; if you look for your reward from men; they are your end; but if you
look for it from the Lord, their encouragements or discouragements will not
much move you.

8 Again, consider wherein thy mind rests, for that which a man makes his
end, therein his mind rests, and in nothing besides: a husbandman, though
he does plow and sow, etc. yet he rests not til he comes to the harvest: he
that hews stone, and squares timber, does it, and stays not till the house be
built: therefore, do thou consider with thy self, in all thy works, what it
is that gives rest to thy thoughts; if thou do say, I have now wealth and
riches enough, and means enough, I have gotten what I aimed at, and now my
soul is at rest; if thou say, I have now honor and name enough, my
children be well provided for; and therefore your soul rest in this; then this
was your end, and not the Lord; whereas you ought to say, though I have provided
for my children, yet do they fear the Lord? are they brought home to him? My
trade has brought me home much, but how serviceable have I been with it? I
have much credit and estate, but what glory has it brought to JESUS CHRIST? So
he that is a Minister; it is true, I have enough, enough credit, enough for
estate; but what is this? have I brought any glory to the Lord? have I
converted any? if thy heart can have no rest, but in the Lord, and in the
things that belong to the Lord, it is an argument that thine eye was upon him.

Remember this, that seeing we are made, seeing we have an higher cause, and
that to be without cause belongs to God alone; therefore we must carry our
selves as creatures; as it is said of David, he served his time; he did
nothing for his own end, but he carried himself as a servant, he did not say;
I will have so much pleasure, and then serve God; he did not cut the Lord
short, but he served his time, he gave the Lord the whole day. It was the
comfort that JESUS CHRIST had, when he was to go out of the world, John 17.4.
Ioh. 17.4.
I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work that thou gave me
to do; that is, I was as a servant, and I chose not my work, but it is that
which thou gave me, and I have not done it by halfes, but I have finished it;
therefore glorify thou me. So, if thou can say it, when thou go out of
the world, that will be thy comfort at that day; but if not, remember that it
is the Lords manner of dealing, when men will seek themselves, and their own
end; he lays them aside, as we do broken vessels, fit for no more use, and he
takes another. If there be any here, that can say so, that the Lord has laid
thee aside, and taken thy gifts from thee; remember, consider with thy self,
that had thou used them to his glory, and made him thy end, be sure that he
would not have laid thee aside, but that he would have used thee. Beloved, we
see it by experience, that men of small parts, yet if they had humble hearts,
and did use them in the simplicity of their spirits to Gods glory, then he
has enlarged them, and used them in greatest employments. Again, on the
contrary side; men of excellent parts, they have withered, because they did not
use them to Gods glory, therefore he has laid them aside as broken vessels.

THE NINTH SERMON.
EXODUS. 3.13, 14, 15. 13 And Moses said unto GOD; behold, when I come unto the
children of Israel, and shall say unto them; The GOD of your Fathers has sent
me unto you, and they shall say unto me, What is his Name? what shall I say
unto them?

14 And GOD said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shall thou say
unto the children of Israel; I AM has sent unto you.

15 And GOD said moreover unto Moses, Thus shall thou say unto the children of
Israel; The LORD GOD of your Fathers, the GOD of Abraham, the GOD of Isaac, and
the GOD of Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my Name for ever, and this is
my memorial unto all generations.


The third Attribute of GOD.
WE come now to a third Attribute, and that is the Eternity of GOD; A third
Attribute of God. His Eternity.
for God does not say, He that was, but He that is, has sent me unto you. He
that is without all cause, the efficient and final, he must needs be eternal;
he that has no beginning nor end, must needs be eternal: and besides, in that
he says, I am that I am, not, I am that I was, it must needs be that he is
without succession.

Therefore from hence we may gather, that

GOD is Eternal.

Doctr.
In handling of this point, we will show you,









Five things required in eternity.


Isai. 57.15. Isai. 57.15.
Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, etc. As if he should say; there is no
house fit for him to dwell in, that is high and excellent, but only the house
of eternity. Where eternity is compared to an house or habitation, to which
none can enter, but God himself, because he only is high and excellent; all
the creatures are excluded out of this habitation.

Psalm. 90.2. Psalm 90.2.
LORD, thou have been our dwelling place in all generations; before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth, or the
world; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art GOD.



of his life to the end, could be found in him in one instant; such is
eternity. God possesses all things altogether, he has all at once, Ioh. 8.58.
John 8.58.
Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am: As if he should say,
there is no time past, present, or to come with me; he does not say, before
Abraham was, I was, but I am, and therefore he is eternal.

Lord of all time, al times do but issue out of him, as rivers from the sea; he
dispenses them as it pleases him, Psalm. 90. compare verse 2. and 3. together,
Psalm. 90.2, 3.
Before the Mountains were brought forth, etc. even from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art GOD. Thou turnest man to destruction, and say; return
ye children of men. He sets time to the sons of men; where we shall see that
this is the property of him, that is eternal, to set times and seasons to men,
etc.

God must be eternal, The reasons why God must be eternal.
is this, because he is what he is of himself, he is without all cause, and
therefore can have no beginning or ending; and therefore he must of necessity
be without all motion, and without all succession, for all succession
presupposes motion, and all motion presupposes a cause and effect; for
whatsoever is moved, is either moved from no being to a being, or from an
imperfect, to a more perfect being; that is, to be moved to an higher degree:
now God that has nothing in him to be perfected, is not capable of a further
and higher degree.

God, and the duration of all creatures, Four differences between the eternity
of God, and the duration of all creatures.
which consists in these particulars:





God only can do this.

God it is not so; he is as a rock in the water that stands fast though the
waves move about it; so is it with God: and though the creatures admit of a
continual flux and succession about him, as the waves do; yet there is none
in him. And these are the differences between the eternity of God, and the
duration of all the creatures. Now follows the fourth thing.



If this be the eternity of God, Consect. 1.
then to him all time, that is to come, is, as it were, past, Psalm. 90.4. He
possesses all things together; and all time is present and as it were past
with him. Psalm 90.4.
A thousand years in his sight are but as yesterday, when it is past: that is,
a thousand years that are to come, they are to him as past; they are nothing
to him. And again, a thousand years that are past, are as it were, present to
him, as we heard before: Before Abraham was, I am: For he possesses all things
together; by reason of the vastness of his being, to him all things are
present. As he that stands upon an high mountain, and looks down (it is a
simile that the Schoolmen often use;) though to the passenger that goes by,
some are before, some behind, yet to him they are all present. So though one
generation passes, and another comes; yet to God, that inhabits and stands
upon eternity, they are the same, they are all present, there is no difference.
And then this follows from hence, that to God no time is either long or short,
To God no time is either long or short.
but all times are alike to him; therefore he is not subject to any delays or
expectances; he is not subject to any fears, for they are of things to come;
nor to the translation of grief, or pleasure, or the loss of any excellency,
that before he had not, as all creatures are; therefore we should consider of
the excellency of God, to give him the praise of it: this use is made of it,
in 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, and the only wise GOD, be
honor, and glory for ever and ever, Amen: As if he should say; this very
consideration, that God is eternal, should cause us to give him praise: and so
is that in Isai. 57.15. Isai. 57.15.


Consect. 2.
Eternity makes that which is good, to be infinitely more good than it is, and
that which is evil, Eternity makes good things infinitely good, evil things
infinitely evil.
to be much more evil; and that not only in respect of duration (that which
is good for a week, is better for a year; and an evil, when it continues an
infinite time, it is infinitely more evil,) but also in regard of that
collection into one, which is found in those things that continue to eternity:
as when all joys are collected into one heap, and all grief into one center;
so that you shall joy as much in one instant, as ever hereafter; so that though
the thing be still but the same, yet the continuance makes it infinitely more
good.

God; we should learn hence, to mind most the things that are eternal, To
mind more those things which are eternal.
for they are, of all other things, of the greatest moment, because they do
most participate of this transcendent property of the almighty. God is
eternal, the soul is eternal, heaven and hell are eternal; therefore they
are more to be regarded of us. You shall see this in 1 Ioh. 2.17. as a reason
why we should not mind the things of the world; 1 Ioh. 2.17.
because the world vanishes, it passes away, and the lusts thereof (says the
Apostle;) that is, look upon all the things below, and both the things pass,
and your affections and desires pass, that which you love to day, to morrow
you will not love; therefore love them not, regard them not, for they are of a
flitting and passing nature, but he that does the will of the LORD abides for
ever; and therefore we are to mind such things most: such as the King is, such
are his subjects, and such are the rewards and punishments that he gives. Now
God, he is eternal, 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 Timothy 1.17.
To the King eternal, immortal, invisible, and only wise GOD, be honor and
glory for ever. And as he is an eternal King, so he has given to us, his
subjects, to be eternal, as the soul is; and he has given punishments, and
rewards eternal; hell is an everlasting prison, and heaven is an eternal
Palace; therefore these are the things most to be regarded of us. And if we
would but thoroughly consider that these things are eternal, it would
effectually draw our minds to the things that are above. A man that comes to
an Inn, if he can get a better room, he will; if not, he can be content with
it, for he says, it is but for a night; so your habitation here is but for a
night: if you can have a better condition, use it rather, but if not, be not
much moved, for it is but for a night. In worldly things the shortness of them
makes us to undergo them cheerfully. An apprentiship that is hard, a man will
endure it, for he says it is but for a time; so things that are pleasant, if
they be but of short continuance, we regard them the less. Now our time that
we have here, in respect of eternity, is shorter than an apprentiship, nay,
than a night, nay, shorter than an hour. Now put the case, that a man should
have an hour given him; and it should be said to him; as thou spendest this
hour, so thou shall live all thy days; what would not a man do, or what
would he not suffer? how careful would he be to spend this hour well? Now
this life is not so much as an hour to eternity; and therefore why should we
not be careful how we spend this hour, seeing it shall be with us for ever
according as we spend it? 1 Cor. 9.25. 1 Cor. 9.25.
Every one that striveth for the mastery is temperate; now they do it to
obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible. Thus he reasons, If
men that use these Olympian gains, if they will endure so much hardship and
abstinence, accustom their bodies to heat and cold for the race beforehand,
and do all but for a crown, that will last but this life at the most; and
shall not we (says he) for an incorruptible crown? Beloved; If we would sit
down but one half hour, and consider seriously what eternity is, it would
make us to neglect all temporary things, which now we are so affected with. It
is eternity, my brethren, and the consideration of it, that does set an high
price upon grace, and gives the just weight to sin, but it makes all other
things exceeding light; for this is a true rule; that until we come to
apprehend sin, as the greatest evil in the world, we are not truly humbled,
and it is eternity that makes it to be so; for (as was said before) eternity
makes an evil infinitely the greater. Now if you look upon all other things,
as honor, and disgrace, and the favor of men, they reach but a little way,
but to the end of this life, at the utmost; but if you look to the reach of
grace and sin, they reach (as it were) a thousand thousand miles beyond it.
Grace reaches to eternity, and sin reaches to eternity, and therefore
these are the things that a man should be busied about. What a shame is it for
a man to grieve for some outward crosses, and to rejoice much for some
preferment here; and not to regard or be affected with eternity: It is the
phrase that the Apostle Paul uses, he calls it man's day; I care not to be
judged by man's day; and indeed it is but a short day; and what is it to that
eternity I look for? What is it to that God, with whom I must live for ever?
therefore I care not what men say of me, but I rather think what the eternal
God thinks of me, and what will be thought of me in that Kingdom where I
must live for ever. If a man were in Turkey, or in some other remote place, to
traffic there a while, he would not care what the men of that place thought
of him, for he says, this is not the place where I must live: so do you but
consider, that this is not the place where you must live, and then of what
moment will it appear to you, what men say of you? Beloved, if the soul were
mortal, there were some reason that you should make provision for it here; but
seeing it is immortal, you ought to make a proportionable provision for it,
even for ever: for the body you are apt to make provision, a viaticum beyond
the journey; but consider, that you have an immortal soul, which must live
for ever, and you must make some provision for it, to carry it so long a
journey. It is our Saviors exhortation, Ioh. 6.27. Ioh. 6.27.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to
everlasting life, etc. As if he should say; if you had no other life to live
but this, then you might seek the things of this life, as glory, honor,
pleasure, etc, but these things perish, and the taste of them perishes, as the
sweetness of meat in the eating; but (says our Savior) seek those things
that will abide for ever: you have an everlasting life to live, therefore you
must make some provision answerable thereunto: As for the body, the soul
wears it but as a garment, and when it is worn out, the soul must have a new
suit of apparel one day.

Well, seeing God has brought this point to our hands this day, let me but
prevail with you so far, as to set some time apart the following week,
where you may enter into a serious consideration of eternity, the very
thinking of it, will be of great moment to you; for look what the object is,
such is the soul, about which it is conversant; high objects lift up the soul
to the Lord, and make the mind answerable to them, and low objects make the
mind like to them. Now eternity is an high object, and it will work in men
high minds; and hence it is, for the want of this consideration, that when a
man comes to die, and sees eternity before him, how it does then so amaze the
soul of man? I have seen it by experience: I knew one who said, If it were
but for a thousand years, I could bear it, but seeing it is to eternity,
this amazeth me. Behold, if you would consider, that after many thousands of
years are past, yet you are to begin as at the first; if men did consider this
seriously, would they let their eternal estate depend so upon uncertainties.
And let them consider this, that are yet strangers to the life of God, that if
death should come, they should not escape eternal death: it is good to keep
our thoughts upon this, and it would make us not to hasten after the things of
the world, as we do; and for thy sin thou dotest on so, there are three
things to be considered in it: First, the pleasure of it; is as the speckled
skin of the Serpent: Secondly, the sting of sin: and thirdly, the eternity of
that sting. Now look not thou upon the pleasure of sin, that endures but for
a season, but consider the hurt that comes from sin, and then consider the
eternity of it: a candle in a dark night makes a great show, but when the
Sun comes, it vanishes, and is nothing; so would all these things that we
do so affect now, if they come before eternity in our thoughts: it is great
wisdom in this kind to husband our thoughts well, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. 1 Cor.
7.29, 30, 31.
Use this world, as not using it, for the fashion of this world passes away:
that is, mind them not much, be not much affected with them, one way or other,
either in joy or grief, let them be such as if they were not; for why? they
are temporal things, passing things, things that continue not: for that is the
thing I gather out of that place, that the Lord would not have our thoughts to
be bestowed upon them, but so remissely, as if not at all, because there are
eternal things, and set your mind upon them, for the time is short: As if he
should say, thou have not so much time to spare; the time is short, and you
have business enough another way; there is water little enough to run in the
right channel, therefore let none run beside; and the things that should take
up your minds, are sin, and grace, things that are eternal. It is a pitiful
thing that the noble intentions of eternal minds should be bestowed so ill
upon these flitting things, which are nothing to eternity? A man that has not
much money in his purse, but only for to provide necessaries; when one comes
and asks him to borrow any, he will say; I have no more than to buy me food
and raiment, or if he has his rent to pay, and no more; if one should come to
borrow any of him, he says, no, I have no more than to pay my rents. So says
the Apostle there; you have no such spare time, no such spare affections, that
you can bestow them elsewhere, but bestow them upon things that endure to
eternal life.

Motives hereunto.
how all mankind are hurried and rapt with a sudden motion to the west of
their days. Our fathers went before us, we follow them, and our children
follow us at the heels, as one wave follows another, and at last we are all
dashed on the shore of death: and withal, consider the vanity that al
conditions are subject unto; whether they be mountains or valleys; if
mountains, they are subject to blasts, to be envied; or if valleys, to be
over-drowned, oppressed, and contemned; yea, the things that we prize most,
honor and pleasure; what do they but weary us, and then whet our appetite to
a new edge? Consider the men that have been before us; many men that have
been like a green tree, but now the flood of their wealth is dried up, they
and their goods have perished together.





God be eternal, then be not you offended, because you see that he stays
long, God then has time enough to fulfill his promises, and his threatenings;
therefore not to be offended though he stay long.
either in giving reward, or in executing judgment on men for their sins;
for with him no time is long, there is no succession with him; therefore say
not, because you feel nothing for the present, there are great promises made,
but you find no performance; and there be many judgments threatened, but none
executed; do not you therefore say, that your rewards are neglected, or
judgment passed over, and that God has forgotten. For here you see, that with
God no time is long or short, there is no succession with him: you have the
same use made of it, Isai. 40.27, 28. Isai. 40.27, 28.
Why say thou O Jacob, and speak O Israel; My way is hid from the LORD,
and my judgment is passed over from my GOD? There is the objection, that which
is in the hearts of men: Now you shall see what answer is made to it in the
following verse, Have thou not known? have thou not heard that the everlasting
GOD the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is
weary? there is no searching of his understanding. The meaning is this; To us
indeed the time is long, either when reward is deferred, or when the
punishment, or the execution of sentence against evil works is deferred; but
with God it is not so. Now that which makes it seem long to us, is,

1 Partly the passions, and restlesnesse of the mind, (for that is motion) but
God, he is without al motion or passion, and therefore nothing is long.

2 Again, not only we are subject to motion, but the things that we have to
do with, they are subject to motion, and pass away, and therefore they seem
long to us: for time, you know is nothing else but the measure of motion; and
therefore where there is motion, there is time, and no while else. Now to us
that are in motion, and to the things that we have to do with, a thousand
years are a thousand years; but in God there is no motion, nor flux; and
therefore a thousand years with him, are but as one day: God is neither in
motion himself, nor are other things as in motion to him; but we are moved,
and the things we have to do with, are moved; and if either, there must be
motion, for if the ship moves: though the waters stand still; or if the waters
move, though the ship stand still, there is motion; but God stands still, and
all things stand still to him likewise. Do not wonder therefore that the
Churches lie so long in misery, that the injuries of the Saints are so long
unrevenged, do not accuse God, do not mistake him, do not think amiss of
him, do not think that he is forgetful, and does not remember, that he is
slack, and does not regard, that he cannot, or will not help. Beloved, it is
not so; you shall see the very same use made of it, 2 Pet. 3. if you compare
verse. 4, and 8, 9. together: 2 Pet. 3.4. with 8, 9.
In the latter days there shall come scoffers, etc. saying, where is the
promise of his coming? for since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue
as they were from the creation, verse. 8, 9. But be not ignorant of this one
thing, that one day is with the LORD as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day. The LORD is not slack concerning his promise (as some men
count slacknesse) but is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. It is not slacknesse in God:
For (says the Apostle) a thousand years with him are as one day. We think it
a great matter, that the Church should lie so long, and cry, How long LORD! and
yet no remedy, says the Apostle, think not much at it; For a thousand years
with him are but as one day.

God be eternal, then consider with whom you have to do, even with him whose
love and enmity are eternal; Consider you have to do with a God, whose love
and enmity are eternal.
with him, whose sovereignty and power is eternal: if a man be angry, we
regard it the less, if we know it is but for a fit; but consider what it is to
have to do with him whose love and enmity are eternal. Therefore learn, not
to regard men as we do, but to regard the Lord only, and that in these three
respects:

1 Learn to trust the Lord, and not man, And therefore, first, to trust in
God, and not man.
for God is an everlasting refuge, Psalm. 146.3, 4. Psalm. 146.3, 4.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help, etc. that which they can do for you, is but for this life at most;
trust in him that is able to defend you for all eternity; for he that made
heaven and earth, he continues for ever. This use you have made of it in Psa.
90.1. Psalm. 90.1.
LORD, thou have been our habitation for ever and ever: as if he should say,
Lord, thou wast an habitation (that is, a refuge, as our house is) to the
Churches, thou wast so in Abraham's time, in Pharaohs time. Consider, that God
is not only an habitation to his Church from generation to generation, but
also from everlasting to everlasting.

2 Learn from hence likewise to fear him; Secondly, to fear him.
fear him that can cast body and soul into hell for ever; his eternity should
make us to fear him. Fear not man, Isai. 5.13, 14. Isai 5.13, 14.
Why? because he is of short continuance: and if he can do you any hurt, it is
but for a short time, for he shall be made as the grass; but fear the
Almighty GOD, who laid the heavens, and stretched the foundations of the earth.
Use the Lords arguments, they are the arguments that can work on the soul; it
is the holy Ghosts argument why we should fear him, because he is eternal, as
the opposition in that place shows.

3 Labor to serve him, 1 Ioh. 2.17. 1 Ioh 2.17.
The world passes away, To serve God, and to do his will.
and the lusts thereof, but he that does the will of the LORD abides for ever;
that is, the world cannot make you to abide for ever, it passes away; if you
fulfill the lusts thereof, if you fulfill your own will, you are not able to
continue your selves, but you will pass away: what should we do then? why,
fulfill the will of the Lord, consider what he would have you do, and so you
shall abide for ever.

God be eternal, then we should learn hence to comfort our selves, To comfort
our selves against the mutabilitie of things here below.
when we look upon the mutabilitie that we and all creatures are subject unto
in this vale of misery, it is a thing that may comfort us exceeding much; if
we serve him who is constant, without change, who is eternal, that can make
up the changes that we are subject unto; it is the use that is made of it, in
Psalm. 102.11, 12. Psa. 102.11, 12.
My days are like a shadow that declineth, and I am withered like grass; but
thou, O LORD, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance unto all generations.
Why does he put these two together thus? my shadow, and Gods enduring for ever,
etc. as if he should say, this is my comfort, that though I am of short
continuance, yet God with whom I shall live for ever, he is eternal, and
abides for ever. It is as if the beam should reason thus; though I am brickle
and fading, yet the Sun that maintains me, abides for ever: or, if the stream
should reason thus; though I may be dried up in Summer, yet the fountain that
maintains me continues for ever: So, though men be subject to change, yet the
Lord, that maintains them, is immutable, and abides for ever. You that have the
life of Christ in you, have the beginning of this eternity; and though the old
building be pulled down, yet you have a building not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens; even as when one skin falls off, another comes on: and what
though the outward man perish? yet the inward man grows daily more and more,
till it come to perfection. This is not only a comfort to us, but also it is a
great motive, and we should use it as a great argument to God; that because we
are subject to change, yet because he is immutable, therefore he should help
us, Psalm. 102.26, 27. Psa. 102.26, 27.
The heavens shall wax old, as does a garment, but thou endurest for ever and
ever; therefore cast me not off in the midst of my days: as if he should say,
Lord,thou have Time enough to bestow, thou art full of eternity; the heavens
that seem to be of long continuance, yet are nothing to thee; therefore I pray
thee to fill up my wants, and make me eternal with thee; so because thou
inhabitest eternity, therefore comfort me, Isai. 57.15. Isai. 57.15.
Seeing God is eternal; learn hence to know that he is the Lord of all Time.

to thee, God is the Lord of all time, appoints seasons, and we are not to
look on time to come as ours.
but to him, he overflowes all; it is the phrase used in Psalm. 90.5. Psalm. 90.5.
Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they are as sheep, etc. that is, all
times are subject to him, he over-reaches them, and makes them long or short,
as it pleases him; he is not only in himself eternal, but he is the lord of
all, and he disposes all times, and appoints the seasons to every thing: if
he be thus, then take heed of looking upon future times, as thine own; thou
breakest in now upon the Lords prerogative, if thou look upon future times as
thine, and says with the rich man in the Gospel, now soul take thy rest;
this is sacrilege against God. It is, as if a man should say, I have three
thousand acres of land, when he has not three foot, or if a man should say, I
have three thousand pound, and has not three pence. It is the use made of it
in James 4.13, 14. James 4.13, 14.
Go to now ye that say, to day, or to morrow, we will go into such a City,
etc. Whereas ye ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that, if he will give us leave to come in upon his ground. This phrase is out
of use with many men, as clothes that are out of use, we are unwilling to wear
them; but Christians should bring them into use again, and say, if the Lord
please; let them labor to do this in fear and trembling. Thou should thus
think of time, thou should look upon it, as on a large field, given by God,
and nothing of it belonging otherwise unto thee; and look what ground the Lord
God gives thee, thou art to sow seed in it, and apply it to seek him, that
thou may receive an harvest in future time; and let men not say, I will
repent and turn to God hereafter; but do it presently in fear and trembling.
Boast not of time; why do thou defer the time? thou breakest into the
Lords right, and oftentimes he cuts thee off for it, because thou breakest into
that, which does nothing belong unto thee.

THE TENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM: And he said; thus thou shall say
unto the children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you.


WE come now to the next Attribute; and that is the Simplicity of God: The
fourth Attribute of God, His Simplicity.
he is without all composition, without any parts, not having soul and body,
as we have, not being compounded of substance and accident, as we are, but he
is simple, without all composition. Which I gather out of these words; I AM,
WHAT I AM: that is, whatsoever is in me, it is my self. I am a pure act, all
being, a whole, entire, simple, and uniforme being, without parts, not like to
the creature: for the best of them is compounded of actions, and qualities, but
whatsoever is in me, it is my self.

Now in this simplicity, and immixture of God, we will first fall upon that
which the Scripture sets down in plain words, John 4.24. John 4.24.
God is a Spirit: GOD a Spirit.
that is, he is not mixed, he is not compounded of body and soul, as men are,
but he is a Spirit. The word Spirit, both in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
tongue, does signify, breath. A breath is indeed a body, but because it is
the finest body, the most subtle, and most invisible, therefore immateriall
substances, which we are not able to conceive, are represented to us under the
name of a spirit, or breath.

What kind of spirit.
Besides, this is to be added; though God be said to be a spirit, yet he is not
properly a spirit as Angels are; for an Angel is a creature, and though it
want a body, and be a spirit, yet it is a created substance: but yet because
that is nearest to the pure, and incomprehensible nature of God, therefore he
calls himself a spirit, as Angels are, and our souls are.

4 Properties of a spirit.
To show you what a spirit is, these four things are to be considered.

not to be discerned by any sense. Therefore Christ bids his Disciples to feel
him: Behold my hands, and my feet (says he) that it is I my self, handle,
and see; Luke 24.39.
for a Spirit has not flesh and bones as I have. A Spirit is that which is
drawn from the sight of any corporeal sense whatsoever, and in this sense God
is called a Spirit, because he is invisible: and therefore Moses is said to see
him that is invisible, not by any bodily eye, but by the eye of faith.

Ioh 3.8. the Holy Ghost is compared to the wind, John 3.8.
that blows where it lists.

Isa: 31.3. speaking of the strength of the Egyptians, Isay 31.3.
he says, that they are flesh, and not spirit: as if he should say; all flesh
is weak, but the spirit is strong. Therefore you see, the Devils, that are
spirits, what strength they have; and the man in the Gospel, that was
possessed, it is said that he could break the strongest bonds, and you see it
commonly in those that are possessed, and you read, how he threw down the
house over Jobs children. This is the strength of the spirit exceeding the
strength of any body.

4 It insinuates it self, and enters into any bodily substance, without all
penetration of dimension; that is, it is not held out of any place, by reason
of a body, that is in it; it may be in it, though the place be otherwise full:
as, you see, the soul is in the body, you shall find no where an empty place,
the body is every where whole; yet the Spirit insinuates it self in every
part, and no body can keep it out. And so is God; he is invisible, not seen
by any eye, he moves himself, and all things in the world, as he lists; and
he does what he does with exceeding great strength; and then, he fills every
place, both heaven and earth; what bodies soever be there, yet he may be there
notwithstanding. And thus you see in what sense this is to be understood, God
is a Spirit

Now we will come to apply this.

God be a Spirit, first then this we may gather from it:

1 That his eye is cheifely upon the spirits of men. Gods eye is chiefly upon
the spirits of men: and our care therefore is to keep our spirits fit for
communion with GOD.
There are many things in the world, which his hand has made: but that which
he chiefly looks to, is the mind, and spirit of man. Whereas a man consists
of two parts, a body and a spirit, it is the spirit that is like to God: and in
regard of the spiritual substance of the soul, it is said to be made after
his Image, and therefore in Heb: 12, God is called, the Father of Spirits: Why?
He is the Father of the body also, he made that, but the meaning is, that he is
(...), Father over them, because he guides and nurtures them, being most like
to himself: as the son is like the father, so they are like to him, and
therefore he most regards the spirits of men. As you may see when Samuel went
to anoint David King, and all the sons of Iesse came before him, those that
were much more proper than David, God tells him, that he did not look upon the
persons of men, nor upon their outward appearance, he heedes them not; what
does he then? he sees the soul and spirit of man; the Lord looks upon the
heart, and according to that he judges of them, 1 Samuel 16.7. 1 Samuel 16.7.


Now, if his eye be chiefly upon the spirit, thou should labor to let thine
eye be chiefly still upon thy spirit, and so thou shall most please him. Let
thy eye be upon thy soul, to keep it clean, that it may be fit for communion
with him, who is a spirit. This should teach you to look to the fashion of
your souls within, because they are likest to him, and carry his image in
them; he is a father of them in a special manner, and they are that whereby
you may have communion with him, in that which is most proper unto him, in
spiritual exercises and performances.

How that is to be done.
to have them fit for the Lord, that he may regard them, and that they may be
like to him?

cleanse them from all filthiness. 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these promises, (dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthinisse of the flesh, and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God. There is a pollution, which the Apostle speaks of, which
pollution he divides into two kinds, of the flesh, of the spirit: both of
these, thou must labor to be cleansed from, but specially that of the spirit,
if t^^n would have it fit to have the Lord to delight in: for he being a
Spirit, does most regard those actions which are done by the Spirit, and
therefore that is the thing that mainely thou should look to.



Lust defiles the spirit.
2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Pet. 1.4.
Having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust: that is, the
world, and all things in the world, and all the parts of it, they do then
corrupt the spirit, defile, and soil it, when the soul of man has a lust
after them. You might meddle with all things in the world, and not be defiled by
them, if you had pure affections, but when you have a lust after any thing,
then it defiles your spirit; therefore in Titus 1.15. the Apostle speaks of a
conscience defiled Tit 1.15.
. And in Matt. 15. Mat. 15 19.
19. says our Savior: out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulterers, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies; these are the
th^^gs wh^^h defile a man. He does not speak only of actual adultery, or
murder, but even of the si^^ull dispositions of the soul: even these are
things that defile the spirit in Gods sight, who looks upon them as you do
upon outward filthiness with the eyes of your body: So that every inordinate
lusting of the soul, does defile the soul.

God then the outward actions?

Thou shall not lust, and so it is translated: Romans 7: so that these lustings
of the spirit, Rom 7.
are those that defile the soul. You see that God has spent a whole
commandment against them. And indeed, all the actual sins committed by us
simply considered in themselves, as committed by the body, are not so hated of
God, as the pollution of the spirit is. Actual sins co^^itted by (...) of
the spi^^t.
Nay, I dare be bol^^ to say, that the act of adultery, and murder, is not so
abominable in Gods eyes, as the filthiness of the spirit; this is more
abominable in the sight of God, who is a spirit, than the act of the body; for
it is the spirit that he mainly looks to. Indeed the act contracts the guilt;
because the lust is then grown up to an height, so that it is come to an
absolute will and execution. Therefore, if these lustings do press into the
soul, we should put them out again, and reject them with shame and grief:
for GOD is a Spirit, and beholdes the continual behavior of thy spirit.

Again, the injury which you offer to others, though in it self it be a great
sin, yet that inward brooding of it in thy heart, plotting mischief, that
boiles within thee, while it hatches rancour and revenge, this is that which he
hates, though thou should never commit any actual sin this way. Iam. 4.5.
you have this phrase used, James 4.
The lust of the spirit to envy: that is, the bent of the spirit, and
inclination of the mind, which looks upon the gifts of others, whereby it
overshines them, so that they lust to have that light put out, that their
candle might appear above it; though they act nothing, yet this is abominable
to him.

3 Reasons or considerations proving it.
And that I might not deliver this without ground, consider:

God as a broken heart, Isa. 57. Isay 57.
Now the breaking of the heart is nothing else, but the severing between the
heart and sin. As when you see an artificers work, wherein many parts are
glued together; if it should fall down, or the glue be dissolved, then they
all break to pieces: and when the lusts that are in our souls are thus
severed, this pleases the Lord; not that the affliction of a man's spirit is
pleasing to the Lord, but the separation of sin from his soul, when the
soder that joins a sinful action and the heart together, when this is
dissolved, this does please the Lord. And by the rule of contraries, if this be
true, then it is true, on the other side, that when the spirit is glued by any
lust to any inordinate thing, it is most hateful to God: for the stronger the
lust is, the stronger is the glue; and therefore a man the more he is tied to
this world, and has such strong lusts, the more he has this uncleanness and
pollution of spirit. And therefore as a broken heart is most acceptable to God:
so a spirit that is knit to any inordinate object, by the thing, that it
cleaves to, it becomes most hateful and abominable to him.

Consider, that although a lust left at liberty, when God has taken off the
chain, and suffers it to do what it will, does contract more guilt, and does
indeed more hurt to mankind; yet he that has a heart as full of lust, and
filthiness, is no less abominable, and odious in Gods sight. Take a wolf,
that runs up and down, and kills the sheep, that wolf is abominable, and
every one cries out against him; but a wise man that sees a wolf tied up in a
chain, hates that as much as he did the other: for he knows that he has the
same nature, and would do as much hurt if he were let loose: So we may say of
men, whose hearts are full of lusts, God it may be, has tied them up, so that
they break not forth; yet these lusts are abominable and hateful in his
sight, though they do not so much hurt, nor break so many commandments.
Therefore let them consider this, that live under good families, good Tutours,
or in good company, commonly they are as wolves tied up, they cannot break
forth so into outward acts, it may be, they are restrained by reason of some
bodies favor that they would not lose, or the like, but yet they give way to
the spirit within, that rangeth and lusts up and down; and this is therefore
defiled in Gods sight.

Iam. 4.1. James 4.1.
From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of
your lusts that war in your members? Concupiscence is but as the lust of the
Spirit, which concupiscence is full of actual sins, and brings them forth
when occasion is given; Iam. 1.15. James 1.15.
And therefore it is more hated than an act is, which is but one, which has not
so much spawne in it: and therefore you ought to cleanse your spirit from this
pollution.



Directions for cleansing the spirit.
For the spirit of a man is a deep thing, and hidden, full of corners and
cranne, a lust and pollution will easily hide it self in (...); therefore thou
must find it out and confess it. Do as David ^^d, go to God, and say, Lord
search, and try me, see if there be any wickedness in me* as if he should say,
if I could, I would search my own heart, but I cannot do it enough, therefore
do thou come and do it; I will open the doors, as a man uses to say to the
officers that come to look for a traitor, Do you come in, and search if
there be any here, I will set open my doors; so faith David here. So, when a
man would cleanse his heart from the pollutions of his spirit, let him do on
that manner; remember, that to hide a traitor is to be a traitor himself;
therefore labor to find it; and, when it is found, confess it to the Lord,
and lay a just weight upon it. What though it never breaks forth into outward
actions? say to the Lord, O Lord, I know that thou look to the spirit, and
art conversant about it: to have a polluted spirit, is an abomination to thee.
This is a thing that we would do, and we are oftentimes to blame in this, in
our prayers: for we confess our actual sins, and do not confess the
pollution of our spirits to the Lord.



similitude used in Ezekiel. 24.11, 12. Ezekiel. 24.11, 12.
I say, observe what arises in thy spirit, at any time, when there is some
commotion, when thy spirit is stirred more than ordinary, now every temptation
is, as it were, a fire to make the pot boil, any injury that is offered to
us, this makes the scumme to arise, now see what arises out there, and when
any object comes to allure thee to sin, see what thoughts arise in thy heart,
as the thoughts of profit or preferment, so that when such an opportunity
comes, it stirs the spirit, and sets it on boiling; consider what then
arises in thy heart, and thou shall see what thy spirit is. And that which
thou art to do, when thou find it, is to confess it to the Lord, and
suffer it not to come into outward act; cast it out, suffer it not to boil in:
Ezekiel. 24.13. Ezekiel: 24.13.


Ezekiel. 36.21. that is, Ezekiel. 36.21.
when a man begins to look upon his sin, and see the pollution of the spirit
in it, he begins to grow to an indignation against it, (as that is the fruit
of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 2 Cor. 7.
7.) he finds his heart so disposed, that he begins to quarrel with his
heart, and to fall out with it; and to say; What? have I such a heart that will
carry me to sin? that will not only carry me to sin, but to hell? He
begins to loathe himself, he would not own his own self, if he could; he
would go out of himself, he is weary of his own heart: such a hatred and
loathing thou must have of this pollution of spirit that is in thee. And this
thou shall do, if thou will but consider, what evil this pollution does bring
thee, and what hurt filthiness has done to thee: a man can hate the disease
of the body, and cry out of it; and why should not men do so of the soul? It
is our sin that is the cause of all evil; it is not poverty, or disgrace, or
sickness, but it is sin in thy poverty, sin in thy disgrace, sin in thy
sickness: so that if a man could look upon sin as the greatest evil, and
that does him the greatest mischief, he would hate that above all things. And
here remember not only to do it in general, but to pitch thy hatred chiefly
upon thy beloved sin. Be ready to say in this case, as Haman of Mordecai;
what avails it me, if Mordecai yet live? If we could do so with our beloved
lusts, and come to such a hatred of them as Haman had of Mordecai, to hate that
beloved pollution, which cleaves so fast to thy spirit, this were a blessed
thing.

Thou must yet go a step further, that is, to get it mortified, to get it
utterly cast out, slain and killed, not to suffer it to live with thee: thou
must do with such a pollution of thy spirit, as thou do with thine utter
enemy, whom thou followest to death, and wilt have the law upon him, and wilt
be content with nothing but his life: So when thou have found out thy sin,
then go this step further, to have it out before the Lord, and cry against it,
and say, that it is his enemy, and thy enemy, and an enemy to his grace; it
has sought thy life, and thou will have the life of it before thou have done:
this thou should do, to get it utterly cast out, to get an utter separation
betwixt thy soul and it; so that if there should come a temptation to he
again, if there should be pleasure on the one hand, and threatenings on the
other, then thou should say, rather any thing than this sin, than this
lust, it is my greatest enemy, that has done me thus much mischief; so that
thy soul does not only loath it, but thou will not suffer it to live in thee;
this is that which we ought to do, if we would cleanse our spirits.

God, and beseech him that he would melt that soder, as it were, that he would
make a dissolution, that he would sever thy soul, and the lust that cleaves so
fast to it. That which made the soul, and the object to cleave so fast
together is lust, that is the soder: which like unto soder must be melted with
fire: Isay 4.4. Isay 4.4.
When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Sion, and
shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the spirit
of wisdom, and by the spirit of burning: that is, the holy Ghost, who is as
fire, that melts the soder, and loosens it; and also the word, Ier. 23.24. and
so also in Mal. 3. Ierem. 23.24.
Mal. 3.
Christ there is compared to fire, and to Fullers soap, and all to express the
diverse ways that the Lord has to cleanse our spirits from sin. Sin
cleaves to the soul as dross to the gold: now the spirit of burning cleanses
and purifies it; yea it does it violently; and therefore it is said to be a
hammer also in Jeremy. Again, sin sinkes in as a deep stain, therefore
Christ is as soap to cleanse it. And therefore go, and say to God, Rather than
I should not be cleansed, Lord cleanse me with the fire of affliction, as it is
also called, Zach. 13.9. Zach 13.9.
And I will bring the third part, says the Lord, through the fire, and will
refine the^, as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried. It were
best (my beloved) if you would yield to the Spirit, and the Word, that they may
cleanse you before his sight: For if that will not do, he will come with the
fire of affliction, and it is better that you should be dealt so with, than
that your souls, being still unclean, should perish for ever.

men, but seek such an excellency as is suitable to the spirit: seek not other
things; for they are such things that God regards not. So that, as every man
seeks some excellency or other, that which thou art to seek is, to get
spiritual excellency, such as may beautify thy heart, for that which is
outward, God regards not. You shall see an excellent place for this, Isay
66.2. Isay 66.2.
All these things has my hand made, says the Lord, but to this man will I
look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
word. When the Lord looks upon all things here below, they are all at his
command, (my hand has made them, says he, and I can dispose of them as I
will) but what is it, of all them, that I do esteem? a spirit that is
fashioned, and beautified with inward ornaments, so that it trembles at my
word, that is the thing which I regard. So 1 Pet. 3.3. you have a comparison
there of outward excellencies, 1 Pet. 3.3.
and of the spiritual decking of the inward man, which the Apostle prefers,
because that is a thing that is esteemed of by God. Whose adorning, says the
Apostle, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair, and of
wearing gold, or of putting on of apparel: But let it be the hidden man of
the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and
quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. So it is said of
wisdom, Prove. 3.22. Prove. 3.22.
It shall be life to thy soul, and grace to thy neck: that is, wisdom
adornes the soul in the sight of God, therefore that is the excellency that is
chiefly to be sought by us, even thus to adorn the soul. And there is good
reason for it: for, if thou consider what thy body is, and what thy spirit is,
thou shall see, that all these things that do adorn the outward man, are not
the excellencies to be sought after. Indeed there are diverse kinds of those
excellencies; they are of three sorts. First, excellency of clothes, and
building, and such gaudy things, which children and vain men and women are
sensible of. Secondly, great titles, and honors, and great rewards, which a
higher sort of men are capable of. Thirdly, the excellency of learning, and
knowledge, and skill in arts and sciences; and this also is but an outward
excellency: for though it be seated in the spirit, yet it inables only to
outward things. These are not the excellencies that thou should seek for:
but it is an excellency of the spirit, thou art to regard: look to thy spirit
what that is: for as the spirit is, such is the man. Spiritus est perfectio
hominis, this is the proper excellency: the body is but, as it were, the sheath
for the soul; a man is said to be more excellent, as his soul is excellent.
Other excellency is but an outward excellency, this excellency is that which is
intrinsecall to a man; the other are but adventitious, they are not proper, it
is not that which makes the difference. The righteous is more excellent than
his neighbor: There is a difference of honor, but all these are but
accidental differences: the essential difference is the spirit, and that is it
which God regards and by this thou excellest thy neighbor. All other
excellencies are but as when a mule or an ass having goodly trappings, should
boast it self against the horse, which is a goodly creature, because it has
goodly trappings; or as if a mud-wall, that the Sun shines upon, should boast
it self against a wall of marble that stands in the shadow. Therefore consider
of this, that so thou may labor to beautify thy spirit; if there were no
other reason, but that he is a Spirit, and that he beholdes the excellency of
the spirit, this were sufficient. Take all other excellencies in the world,
they make thee only excellent in the sight of man; but this makes thee
excellent before God, this is a solid thing, all the glory of the world is but
(...), empty glory; but that which makes thee excellent before God, is this. As
it is, Iam: 2.5. Iam. 2.5.
Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom which he has promised to them that love him? As if he should say,
that which makes men glorious, is their faith and holiness within, that is the
thing that makes us excellent in Gods sight, and inables us to do higher
works: all other things habilitate us but to the things of this life, but
grace makes thee strong, and makes thee to serve the Lord with fear and
reverence, Heb. 12.28. Heb. 12.28.
And therefore this is to be sought of us. Phil. 4.8. Phil. 4.8.
The world seeks other things after their own fancy, but seek you these
things, this is the excellency that we should seek; for this adornes thy
spirit. And now if I should ask any man, whether is it not better to have Gods
image renewed in him, and to be like to him, than to have the excellency of
humane knowledge? every one would say, that to have Gods image renewed in them,
were the best: but then why do thou not busy thy self about it? why do
thou not labor for it? why do you study much, and pray so little? So if I
should ask another, whether grace, or outward excellency were better? he would
say, grace: but then why do you not bestow some time about it, to get it? It
is a great sign that the heart is right, when we can judge aright of the
excellency, that is to be sought by us. 2 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 5.
It is made a sign of a new creature, that he does judge aright of spiritual
things. Iam 1..10. James 1 10.
It is made a sign of a man converted to God, when he is brought low, that is,
he is drawn from that high esteem of outward excellency, which before he had;
when he sees that they are but fading flowers, things of no worth: and thus the
soul gets strength to it self.

cleansed thy spirit, when thou have adorned it with such spiritual beauty, so
that God is delighted in thee: then thou must go yet further: thou must let it
have rule, and dominion; thou must let it have the upper hand of the body in
all things. Let thy spirit be still advanced, that is, let it not be drowned
with the body, but be emergent still above it, kept from all base affections,
let it be clear from all corporeal dross, that is, from those bodily
affections of meat, drink, uncleanness, sports, pastime etc. wherewith the
body is delighted: for this spirit is the most excellent thing in thee,
therefore it is meet that it should have dominion, that it should not be
brought into subjection, no not by any spiritual lust, that arises from the
spirit, that the body is not capable of; much more then a shame is it to be
brought into subjection by any bodily lust, that wrongs the Father of spirits.
1 Cor. 6.12, 13. 1 Cor. 6.12, 13.
All things are lawful to me, says the Apostle, but I will not be brought
under the power of any thing. Meat is for the belly, and the belly for meat,
but God shall destroy both it and them. His meaning is this, I see that it is
not convenient for me to eat flesh; I do not deny but that I have a desire to
eat flesh as well as others, but because it is not convenient, therefore I
will bridle that appetite: for, Meat is for the belly, and the belly for meat,
but God shall destroy both it and them. If that appetite should prevail, the
body would rule over the soul: but that I will not suffer, that my spirit
should be brought into subjection by any bodily appetite. And consider, what an
unreasonable thing it is, that the spirit should be brought under the body.
There are but two parts of a man, and they draw us two ways: the spirit draws
us upward to the Father of spirits, (as it is a spirit:) and the body draws us
downward. Now consider which should have the upper hand, they will not go
both together Now know this; that if the spirit be under the body, it will
breed confusion. It is so in other things; look into the Common wealth, if
you should see servants riding and Princes going on foot, look into nature, if
the fire and air should be below, and the water and earth above, what
confusion would there be? So is it in this case. The Apostle compares them to
brute beasts, 2. Pet. 2.12. 2 Pet. 2.12.
(and the wise man compares them to a city, whose walls are broken down, so
that there is an utter ruin.) Says the Apostle Peter, in the place forenamed,
that they as natural brute beasts made to be taken and to be destroyed, who
speak evil of the things they understand not, and shall utterly perish in
their own corruption: that is, if a man will come to this, to suffer such a
confusion as this, they shall even be served as brute beasts are: Nay
beloved, if it were with us as it is with beast, we might give liberty for
these corporal appetites to rule over the soul: as, take a horse, if he has
no rider, then you blame him not, though he run, and kick up, and down, for
he is a beast, and has no rider to sit him; but when he is under the bridle,
then, if he does not do that which he should do, then you blame him. But a
man has reason to guide him, and he has grace to guide reason: now to cast
off both these is more than brutish. Consider, that all things, the more
refined they are, the better they are; for they come nearer to the spirit: So
then do thou look upon thy self; and say with thy self; the more that
spirit within me is advanced, the more it is suffered to rule, without
impediment, it is the better for me. To give you an instance or two, that you
may see the practice of the Saints in this case: Job he says, I esteemed thy
word as my appointed meals, etc. I will rather restrain my body in this, then
I will suffer my soul to want that which belongs to it; as he says for eating
and drinking, so says David for sleep; rather then my soul should not do
its duty, I will deprive my body of sleep, says he: So Jesus Christ: Ioh:
4.34. John 4.34.
Jesus says unto them, my meat is to do the will of my Father, and to finish
his work: that is, I will be content to neglect my body, to do that which is
the work of my spirit, the work of my Father. And such is his own advice:
seek not the loaves, says he, nourish not your bodies, labor not for the
meat that perishes: but look that thy soul get the better in all things.



spirit within shall set down, then the spirit rules over the body.



Paul did, who kept under his body by violence, as men use to tame horses; we
should keep it down, we must take heed of carnal lusts, they will keep the
body too high, as a Horse may be too lusty for his rider: yet so, as on the
other side it must not be kept too low, for the body is the instrument of the
soul: but only the soul must have dominion over it, it should always be
subject to the principal agent, as it is said of a servant, that he should not
be Supra negotium, nor infra negotium, but par negotio, not above, nor below,
but fit for his business: so ought the body to be the souls servant. Beloved,
consider this, do but think what your souls are, that you should suffer them
to be thus in subjection, Think what a shame it is, that these bodily
affections should so overrule the spirit that is made like to God, the soul,
that shall live for ever, the soul for which Christ dyed, that is better then
all the world beside; think I say, with your selves, what a senseless and
unreasonable thing it is, that this soul should be kept under by the body, and
that the body should rule over it? Are not men in this kind, like to beasts,
subject to sensuality, that eat that they may play, and play that they may
eat? and the soul is not considered all this while, how it is a spirit, that
is like to God himself, who is a spirit. Alas, what is the body to it? It is
in it as in a prison: such is the body to the soul, not to be regarded in
comparison of it. Therefore add this to the other, that the soul may still be
advanced, and that it suffer not bodily actions to bring it into subjection,
lest you be as brute beasts, subject to sensuality, made to be taken, and to
be destroyed.

FINIS.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.


God be a spirit, then his dominion, government, and providence is chiefly
exercised on the spirits of men. His government chiefly exercised on the
spirits of men.
It is true, his providence is over all things that belong to us: but, as he is
in himself a Spirit, so he puts forth, and exercises this power of his
principally in guiding the spirits of men, and in that you are chiefly to
observe his providence toward you. And that you shall see in Romans 14.17. Romans
14.17.
The kingdom of God, that is, his rule, and power, is not in meat and drink,
for they are outward things, and he that is a spirit regards them not; but it
is in righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost: that is, in the
things that belong to the spirit, therein is his kingdom, and dominion chiefly
exercised. So also, Psalm. 33.14, 15. Psalm. 13.14, 15.
From the place of his habitation he looks down upon all the inhabitants of
the earth: he fashioneth their hearts alike, he considers all their works.
Mark it, when God looks down from heaven, and beholdes the children of men,
the chiefest thing that he does, wherein his government is exercised, is, in
that he fashions their hearts and spirits: and therefore those eternal
subjects of his that live with him for ever, and spirits, as the Angels, and
the souls of men. Therefore if thou would observe the will of the Lord
toward thee, and would see, wherein his providence is chiefly exercised,
look upon thy spirit upon all occasions; that is, what bents, what
inclinations, what hopes, and desires he has put into thy soul. If you look
upon men in the world, you shall see them diverse in their spirits; one man
lusts after riches, honor and preferment; another after gaming, sporting and
drinking: now look upon this temper of spirit as the greatest judgment of all
others. Again, look upon the spirits of other men, they are fashioned a
contrary way, to deny themselves, to seek grace, and avoid sin; to be
content to have God alone, to do his work, and to leave their wages to God,
to live a painful life, serving God, and men with their sweetness: this is a
quite contrary spirit, and this is the greatest blessing. Therefore you shall
see, that when the Lord is angry with a man, so that his anger is wound up to
the highest pegge, then he gives him over to this judgment: as it is, Psalm.
81.12. Psalm. 81.12.
So I gave them over to their own hearts lust, and they walked in their own
counsels: that is, my judgment shall be executed upon their spirits, to leave
them to an unjudicious mind. Again, on the other side, when the Lord would
do a man the greatest kindness, then he fashions his spirit another way.
Deuteronomy. 30.6. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed,
to love the Lord with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may
live: as if he should say, when I mind to do you a kindness, then I will
thus fashion your hearts aright. So Ezekiel. 36.26. Ezekiel. 36.26.
A new heart also will I give unto you, and a new spirit will I put within you,
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you an
heart of flesh. The Scripture is plentiful in this. Therefore if thou would
observe what the LORD is to thee, look how he fashions thy spirit: if thou
find that he leaves thee to unruly affections and lusts, and leaves thee to
be glued to that from which thou should be divorced; or that he has left
thee in bondage to the fear of men, as a snare to thee, there is no greater
judgment in the world than this, as it is the greatest mercy on the contrary.
Therefore in 2 Timothy 4.22. 2 Timothy 4.22.
Paul prays, The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit: as if he should say,
this is the greatest mercy that I can wish thee, and the greatest good that God
can do thee, and therefore he wishes God to be with his spirit.

Proved by 3 Demonstrations.
Now to set on this point a little further, and to make this plain to you: you
shall see it in these three things.

Eccles. 9.1. Eccles. 9.1.
His love, or hatred, cannot be known by these things. Whence I reason thus;
That wherein the love and hatred of God is most seen, therein his providence
chiefly exercises it self: but in the fashioning of the spirits of men,
there, and there chiefly, is his providence seen; for other things come alike
to men, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not.

God alone; a man is no more able to do it, than to rule the raging sea. For
as it is proper to God alone, to compose the wind, and to rule the waves: so
it is proper to him alone to rule the turbulent affections, to compose, and
guide them. If there be any disordered affection in the heart, as an immoderate
love of any thing, or an impatient desire to any thing, who, is able to remove
it, but the Lord who is a Spirit? So, who can implant holy affections in thee,
but he alone? as, for example, to think a good thought, a man cannot do it
without him, who is the Father of spirits; so to persuade a man, no man can do
it, it must be the Lord, as Noah says; God shall persuade Laphet to dwell in
the Tents of Sem. So to see the heinousness of sin, and the evil of it, no
man can do it but by the spirit of God, as it is said. John 16.9. John 16.9.
The Spirit convinces men of Sin. So to will this, or that, which is good, it
is he that works both the will and the deed. A man cannot choose but be
swallowed up with worldly grief, except God keep him, he cannot chose but
fear the face of man, except God assist him: for this is one of Gods
prerogatives royal, to rule in the affections, and apprehension of men.

God is a wise commander, and therefore he will not exert, and put forth his
power, but in things of greatest moment: but the guiding of our affections is
all in all to us. For, in a man's outward estate, what things soever befall him,
all are nothing; but what his apprehension is of them, and how he is affected
to them, makes them crosses or comforts: if a man's spirit be whole, the
greatest cross is nothing, and the least is intolerable, if his spirit be
broken. As, again, what are all pleasant things, if a man has not a heart to
apprehend them? As to Paul, what was all his persecution? as long as his spirit
was whole within him, he carried it out well: and what was Paradise to Adam,
and a kingdom to Ahab, when their spirit was broken? It is the apprehension
that makes every thing to a man heavy, or unheavy, pleasant or unpleasant,
sweet or sower: and therefore this is the use to be made of it, to behold Gods
providence cheifely on our spirits, and not only in our own spirits, but what
he does upon the spirits of others also. It is a thing we stumble at, when we
see a wicked man prosper, and carry all things in the world before him, we
should not say, where is Gods providence, and the truth of his promise? but see
what he does upon the spirit of that man. If thou see such a man more
malicious to the Church, and children of God, growing more carnal, and
abominable in his courses, therein is Gods curse seen more, than in all the
dispensation of outward curses: for that treasure of sin which he lays up
for himself, will draw on a treasure of wrath, which will be executed in due
season. Therefore behold your spirits always, and Gods providence upon them.
Lament. 3.65. Lam. 3 65.
Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse upon them: the words signify, which is
thy curse upon them. Therefore if you see an obstinate heart in a man, that is
the greatest curse of all. As in receiving the Sacrament, there we do
pronounce a curse to him that receives it unworthily, and prophanes the Lords
body: but, it may be, he goes on and sees it not; but now look upon his
spirit, and see how GOD deals with that, whether his heart does not grow
harder, and more obdurate, which is the greatest curse? You may observe this
every where. If thou see one that has a vain and idle spirit, that cannot
study, that cannot pray, that cannot choose but be carried away by an unruly
lust to this or that thing, believe it, this is a greater judgment than all
the diseases in the world, than all shame and disgrace, that we account so
much of, than poverty and crosses: as it is the greatest mercy, on the other
side, when a man is able to serve GOD with an upright heart, and to be sincere
in all his carriage. Thus it is with men, and this thou should observe in
thy self also from day to day. Let us not observe so much, what accidents
befall us, what good is done to us, or what crosses we have, (it is true
indeed GOD is seen in all these things) but chiefly look what GOD has done
to our spirit, what composing of mind, or what turbulency of affections, or
what quietness, what patience, or what impatience; and for this be chiefly
humbled, or be chiefly thankful: for to take away from Christ the praise of
sanctification, is as much as to take away the praise of his redemption. Herein
thou shall see his love or hatred manifested to thee; his greatest judgment
showed to thee, or his greatest mercies.

(...) 3.
The Third Use is that which the Scripture makes of it. John 4, 24. (...) 4.24.
If God be a Spirit, then worship him in Spirit and truth. ^orship him (...)
spirit.
What it is to worship God in spirit and truth, you shall see, if you compare
this place with that in Romans 1.9 Romans 1.9.
For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his
Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers. What
it is to serve God in the spirit.
The meaning of it is this. When Paul had taken a solemn asseveration, GOD is
my witness, etc. do not think, says he, that I have done this feignedly, I
am no such man; in preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I do it in my
spirit: that is, I do it not for by-ends, for fear of men, or the like, but I
do it in my spirit, that is, plainly, heartily, and sincerely.

So that to worship GOD in spirit, is, to have a plainness, and sincerity in
our worshipping him, that is, to do it heartily what we do to him; in our
praying, and worshipping him, when it is not formally, and customarily done,
but our spirit seconds it within, this it is to worship him in spirit. So that
the scope of our exhortation is, that you would worship GOD chiefly in your
spirits. As it is said of singing Psalms, Col. 3.16. Col. 3.16.
Admonish one another in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to the Lord. And the ground of it is, because GOD is
a spirit, and therefore he beholdes at any such time, when you come before him,
the inward behavior of your spirits: that is, he observes when you come to
preach, or pray, what squint-eyed ends, what vain glory, what respect to men
you have. Yea, he observes how far natural conscience leads you, so that you
do it as a task, out of custom, etc. he observes what worldly-mindednes, and
carnal affections creep into the soul, at that time, that makes you either to
post off the duty, or else to do it in a customary manner. All this does he
behold, he looks to the inward carriage of the spirit: and therefore do you
look chiefly to the inward carriage, to the inward frame of your mind.
Particularly in three things.






Isay 29.13. Isay 29.13.
He complains of a sort of people, that draw nigh unto God with their mouth,
and with their lips do honor him, but have removed their heart far from
him, and their fear toward him is taught by the precepts of men. So Ier.
12.2. Ier. 12.2.
Thou oh Lord art near in their mouth, and far from their reins. Now if
thou would worship him in spirit, see that thy spirit be as near him as thy
words are. As, for example, in prayer thou confessest thy sins, and
professest that thou do hate them, thou prayest for mortification, and
grace, and for weanednes from the world; herein thy words and Gods will do
agree, they are consonant, and when yet, it may be, the inward inclination of
thy heart is far enough off from this expression: therefore bring thy spirit
near to God as thy lips are, and then thou worshippest him in spirit. To
show you more plainly what this farrenesse off of the spirit is; take a
covetous man, and put him upon the rack of any exigent, where he must part
with all to save his life, he will say as much as need to be in this case: but
his heart is set as close to his wealth, as ever it was before, so that he is
loath to part with any thing. And take a thief that comes before the Judge,
he confesses his fault, and begges pardon, and says that he will do so no
more: but yet his heart sits as near to his theft, he is as far from honesty
as ever he was before. So take a man, when he comes into some exigent, (for
that usually is the time) as at the receiving of the Sacrament, or at his day
of death, he comes and professes to the Lord, that he will follow no more his
wicked courses; but he will become a new man, here his words draw near, but
look to the bent and inclination of his heart, to the radical constitution of
it, and that is far from holiness, there he sits as close to his sin as
he did before. Therefore, if thou would worship God in spirit, take care
that thy spirit draw near to him upon all such occasions, as thy words do. A
man in his ordinary course, it may be, prays, and his prayers are good: but
how far his heart is from it, that his life shows. It is a strange thing,
that at the Sacrament, men come and make confession of their sins: and yet
their spirits are far from it, and that their practice shows. Consider this;
you are the men that the Prophet does speak too, you draw nigh to GOD with
your lips, but your heart is far from him. And this is the first particular.

worship God in spirit. 2 Samuel 6.14. 2 Samuel 6.14.
It is said of David, that he danced before the Lord with all his might: it
was a worship of God, a spiritual worship of God, wherein David, by his
outward act of dancing, did express his exultation, and rejoicing in the Lord.
Now the text says, that he did this with all his might, with all the might of
his spirit; (for so you must understand it.) It is a Metaphore taken from the
body, when a man uses all his strength, and might to do any thing, he unites
all the forces of his body to it: so a man worshippeth God in spirit, when all
the faculties of the soul, are concentred and united together in the
performance of such a duty. And therefore it is called a wrestling with the
Lord, as Jacob did: and it is called a striving with God, as Paul says, that
you strive together with me in prayer: Romans 15.30. Romans 15, 30.
that is, when the soul, and the mind are joined all together, when he bends
the whole soul to the work, this is to worship God in spirit. Such an
expression you have, Act. 20. Acts 20.
where Paul went bound in the spirit to Jerusalem; that is, his spirit did not
hang loose, but it was girt up in a resolution to go through with the work,
whatsoever came of it, his spirit was bound. Now, when thy spirit hangs loose
upon the duty, half on, and half off, when a man cares not whether he does
it or no, this is not to worship God with the spirit; but when thy mind is
girt up, and thou do it with all the intention of thy soul, then thou do
it heartily, as it is Col. 3.22. Col 3.22.
Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh; not with
eye-service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart fearing GOD: where
eye-service, and heartily are opposed. Eye-service is, when a man does it in
the outward show, and appearance only, and what is the other, to do a thing
heartily? That is, when a man's strength and his soul does go with the duty:
and the contrary to this is, the looseness of the mind, and the wandering of
it about other things, when the body, and the words are well employed, but the
mind does not go with them; this is not to worship God in spirit, when the
spirit sits thus loose to God. And this is the second thing, wherein this
worshipping of God in spirit, does consist.

him, and upon nothing besides. If a man will have an eye to men, to the
praise, or dispraise that shall follow the performance of the duty, he does so
far worship men. But he serves God and worships him in spirit, when his
heart is left naked, and stripped of all other respects in the world, and so
filled, and overawed with the presence of God, that all other respects do
vanish. This it is to worship God in singleness of heart; and this is opposed
to outward performance Col. 3.22. Col. 3.22.
for eye-service is but only a bodily and outward worship: but when a man does
it with singleness of heart, then it is not eye-service as there; that is, it
is not outward only. Now, singleness of heart is this; when the mind has
but one single object to look upon; so that to look, not upon any creature,
but upon God, and none besides. This is to worship God in singleness of heart,
which is the same with holiness of spirit. As the holiness of the vessel in
the old law was when it was set apart from all other services to God alone, so
the holiness of a man's spirit is, when it is separated from all by-respects
and aims, and is wholly devoted to him (whence our word, Devotion does spring)
and when a man worships God with this nakedness, with this singlenes and
holiness of spirit, then he worships God in spirit. But when thou come to
perform any duty, as to preach a Sermon, or to pray, and thou look what men
will think of thee, and what praise and credit thou shall get by it, this
pollutes your spirit; so far as you do this, there is not singleness, but
doubleness of spirit, and here is eye-service in GODS account.

Therefore look always to worship him in spirit, remember the argument here
used, GOD is a Spirit: that is, look how the corporeal eye of man beholds the
body, when thou come to Church, and can see the negligence of thy behavior,
and uncomely gesture; so GOD, that is a spirit, he beholds the vanity and
looseness of thy spirit within, the turning and rouling of it this way, or
that way; therefore take diligent heed to thy spirit; labor to approve thy
self to him, care not what any creature says or thinks of thee; and this is
to worship him in thy spirit.

Now here are two Questions to be answered.

What necessity there is of fit gestures of the body in Gods worship.


God is never well performed, but when it is signified by the comely gesture of
the body, as far as we may. I say, they must concur, the body must go
with the spirit, (though indeed he chiefly looks to the spirit) for they are
both his, 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Cor. 6, 20.
Besides, the body does exceedingly help the spirit, and it does testify,
when you come before others, that holiness and reverence, which you have of
Gods glory and majesty. Therefore to persuade you to this, you must know, that
when ever you come to worship God, there ought to be a great solemnity in every
part of his worship, which cannot be without the concurrence of the body and
spirit of man, they cannot be disjoined: And you shall see the necessity of
this, in these 3 things.

Eliah, when he prayed earnestly, the disposition of the body went with it, he
put his face down between his legs. So Jesus Christ, when he prayed for
Lazarus, he groaned in his spirit, and wept. Now if he did so, (who might be
exempted, if any might) then do not thou think that thou can have a holy,
reverent disposition of the mind, and it not appear in the body, it cannot
be. Therefore you shall find, that this is called the heart every where,
because the affections are seated there; and now the body is accordingly
affected as the heart is affected; for what affections a man has, such is his
heart.

God is a Spirit, that so it may give way to an outward laziness of the body.
Therefore look narrowly to it, thou should stir up the outward man, that
thou thereby may stir up the inward man, when thou come before God in
any worship.

God will not reckon as the obedience of an ordinance. For this truth must be
remembered; That an ordinance of God performed as it ought to be, does usually
carry a blessing with it. A prayer, a Sacrament received as it ought, a fast
kept as it should, moves the Lord to give a blessing, if thou do not Ponere
obicem, thou shall not go away empty; for it is always accompanied with a
blessing: as it is said to Ananias, Acts 9. Acts 9.
Go to Paul, for behold he prays: when it is a prayer indeed, God can hold
no longer. Do you think, that Paul never prayed before, when he was a
Pharise? Yes; but it was not as he ought, he never prayed indeed till now; now
consider, when thou come before the Lord to perform any duty to him, thou will say, it may be, that my spirit is well disposed, though the gesture of my
body be not according? but I say, deceive not thy self with this, but look
that it be a through performance. For as it was in the old law, a lame sacrifice
was accepted as none: so a lame prayer, a lame hearing the word, a lame
performance of any exercise God reckons as none. Therefore in these things God
sends them away empty as they came. What better are they? do their hearts get
any thing? Beloved, God is a fountain, and if he meet with a fit pipe, (as is
an ordinance rightly performed there he usually conveyes his grace: but if he
meet with a foul pipe, and obstructed, there he does not confer any
blessing.

Now, if thou say, I have thus behaved my self, and have not been answered?
Do not deceive thy self; for if it be truly performed, you shall be answered:
so that look, if it be truly done, expect a blessing, GOD will not suffer his
ordinance, at that time, to be a pen without ink, or a pipe without water. I
hope there be none of us here that neglect prayer to GOD morning, and evening,
that live as if there no GOD in the world, as if they were not his subjects: if
there be, GOD will wound the hoary scalpe of such. But these are not the men I
speak to; but they are those that do it from day to day, they pray from time
to time, and omit it not; these are the men, whom we are to advertise in this
case. Take heed, though you pray every day, yet it may be thou have not made a
prayer all thy life yet, and this is the case of many. For, if thou considerest
what an ordinance is indeed, thou shall know that the Lord does not reckon all
petitioning as a prayer, nor set it down for the ordinance. And it may be the
case of the Saints sometimes, (though we speak not now to them) they may pray
often, and yet the Lord not register, nor set it down for a prayer, and
therefore it may never come into remembrance before him. And this I take to be
David's case in the time of his adultery; the ground of which you shall see,
Psalm. 51.16, 17. Psalm. 51.16, 17
Open thou my lips (O LORD) and my mouth shall set forth thy praise: David had,
as it were, mistaken himself, he thought that he had prayed, and offered a
sacrifice, but, says he, I was deceived all this while, I was not able to open
my mouth to any purpose; therefore, Lord, open thou my mouth; I brought
sacrifice in, but thou regardest it not, till my heart was humbled; Therefore,
a broken and a contrite heart, O GOD, thou will not despise. Therefore you
deceive your selves, that go on in a customary performance of holy duties, and
think that you pray for all this; that think this worship to be in the spirit
only, when your outward man carries it self negligently; this is but a lame
performance, they must go both together. Therefore look that it be an
ordinance, which then it is, when not only the spirit of a man is well set,
but the whole man is applied to the duty, that is, when all the strength of a
man goes to it.



Lord accepts the will for the deed: GOD requires not this upon all occasions;
yet when you may, you ought to do it, in a reverent manner, not only of
spirit, but of the body also. You may gather it from Christ, he fell on his
face and prayed, Luke 22.42. and Daniel, Luke 22, 42.
and Abraham, it is said that they bowed themselves to the ground: And it is
said of Christ, that he lifted up his eyes to heaven, when he blessed the
loaves. Why are these set down? If any man might be freed, Jesus Christ might;
but it pleases the holy Ghost to set down that circumstance of him, that he
fell on his face, and that he lift up his eyes to heaven.

Indeed, in this case when it is hurtful to the body, there it may be omitted;
the Lord will have mercy rather than sacrifice, even mercy upon your bodies.
So also, when you find that it hurts the inward man, and hinders it, when the
heart does it out of a conceit, that it may perform it the better, then there
is a liberty left unto you to dispense with it.

As I say for prayer, so for other duties: when a man comes to hear the word,
he says, my mind is intent enough, though I make not such a show; yet
notwithstanding know this, that thou must behave thy self reverently when thou
come before God. You shall see in Luke 4. when Christ preached, Luke 4.
it is said, that the eyes of all the people were fastened upon him. Why is
such a corporal gesture noted in the text? is it in vain? No, because it is a
comely gesture, therefore it is to be regarded.



of Christ disjoined, are deceived: we are not to worship it as separated from
his Deity; for we are to worship the Trinity in the Unity, and the Unity in
Trinity, which we cannot do, if we worship his humanity as separated from his
Deity. Therefore when you come to pray before GOD, you must remember How God
describes himself to Moses: Exodus 34.6.
that he is a Spirit, filling heaven and earth, strong, gracious, merciful,
full of goodness and truth, etc. concerning which three things are to be
considered.





Lord, that he is a Spirit. Compare Ier. 23.24. with this: Ier. 23.24.
Can any man hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says
the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord?

Lord fills heaven and earth, as the soul fills the body: so that thou must
think that he sees all things, and hears all things. Indeed the Lord is not
in the world, as the soul is in the body, but in an incomprehensible manner,
which we cannot express to you; yet this is an expression which we may help
our selves by, and is used every where in Scripture.

Deuteronomy. 24. Deuteronomy. 24.
So Exodus 34.6. Exodus 34.6.
As Moses could not see him, but his Attributes, his back parts; so thou must
conceive of him, that he is exceeding strong, potent, and fearful, one that
will not hold the wicked innocent, but shows mercy to thousands of them that
fear him; and to sinners, if they will come in unto him: And thus you must
conceive of him, when you come before him.

FINIS.
THE TWELFTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.


HAVING finished that point, that GOD is a Spirit, which is a particular
expression of the Simplicity of GOD, we come to speak of the Simplicity it
self: which is that Attribute, by which he is one most pure and entire
essence, one most simple, being without all composition; so that there is no
substance, and accident, matter, and form, body, and soul; but he is every
way most simple, nothing in him, but what is God, what is himself. The rise
that it has from hence, we shall see hereafter. All those phrases of
Scripture, where God is said to be love, truth, light, and wisdom it self,
all these show the Simplicity of God: for of no creature can you say so. The
creature is wise, and just, and holy, and true: but to say, it is truth it
self, love it self, light it self, or wisdom it self, that cannot be
attributed to any creature. So that this you must know, that God is one most
pure, entire and uniforme being or essence: I AM, shows that he is a being;
and if we should ask, what kind of being he is; he is a most simple and
uncompounded being. And that he is so, we will make it clear by these
reasons. The Simplicity of GOD, proved by 6 Reasons.


Reas. 1.
Because, if there be many things in him, they must not be the same, but
different; if different, one has one perfection which another wants; if so,
there must be something imperfect in God: for if the defect of that were made
up, it would be more perfect.

Reas. 2.
If there be two things in God, then there is multiplication; now all
multiplication arises from some imperfection, from some want and defect: for
if one would serve, two would not be required. As if one could draw a ship or
boat up the stream, two were needless; if one medicine would cure, two would
be unnecessary; so in all things else: so that the reason of multiplication is,
because one will not serve the turn. Therefore GOD being all-sufficient, it is
not needful, yea it cannot be, that a breaking into two should be admitted in
him, and consequently, he must be most simple, without all composition, a pure
and entire essence, full of himself, and nothing besides.

If GOD should have love in him, or justice, Reas. 3.
or wisdom, or life, or any other quality different from his essence, as the
creatures have them, he should be what he is, not originally of himself, but
derivatively, and by participation, and so imperfectly; as to be fiery is more
imperfect than to be fire it self, to be gilded is more imperfect than to be
gold it self: So to be wise, loving, holy, that is, to be indewed with the
qualities of wisdom, love, holiness, is more imperfect, than to be wisdom,
and love, and holiness it self. Therefore there is not a substance and a
quality in GOD, as in the creature: but he is love, and light, and wisdom,
and truth, and so the Scripture expresses him.

Wheresoever there is any composition, Reas. 4.
there must be two or three things, so that there may be a division; they are
seperable, though not separated; but where division may be, there may be a
dissolution and destruction, though it never be: But of GOD, we cannot say,
that this may be, and consequently, there cannot be two things in him, but what
he is, he is; one most simple, most pure, and most entire being, without all
composition and multiplication.

Reas. 5.
If GOD be not simple, there must be parts of which he is compounded: But in GOD
blessed for ever, there are no parts, because then there should be
imperfection, for every part is imperfect.

Again, Parts are in order of nature before the whole, but in God there is
nothing first or second, because he is simply first.

Again, Parts cannot be united and knit, and compounded together, without
causes to do it; but here is no cause to knit and unite any part together,
because he is without all cause, as has been showed before.

Reas. 6.
I will conclude this with a reason out of the text, He is a being, I AM has
sent me unto you. If he be a being, then either the first or second being. A
second being he cannot be, for then there should be some before him, and above
him, upon which he should be dependent: but this cannot be; therefore he is
absolutely the first being. Adam was the first man, but God only is the first
absolute being. Now the first being was never in possibility to be: and
therefore he is a pure act in regard of his essence. Again, there are no
qualities springing from him; for if there were, they should have had sometimes
no being; and so in possibility to be, and consequently have a beginning, and
be a creature: Therefore there is neither Potentia substantialis, nor
accidentalis in him, and so he must be purus actus, as the Schoolmen say; and
therefore he is most simple, without all composition. This I speak to
scholars; for it is a mixed auditory: and therefore you must give me a little
liberty.

Now I come to those Consectaries which flow from hence; and they are these
three.

If God be such a simple, first, pure, Consect. 1.
and absolute being, then hence you may see, what a stable foundation our faith
has to rest upon; See what a stable foundation faith has to rest upon.
we are built upon the lowest foundation in all the world, that is, upon the
first, most absolute, and simple, and pure, and entire being; which I say is
the lowest foundation, that depends upon no other, but all upon it: and this is
the happy condition of all Christians, and of them alone. Angels, men, heaven
and earth are foundations to some things which are built upon them: but they
are all built upon this, and therefore dependent. For if this foundation shake
it self, (for so he has power to do) they all fall to ruin: But God is the
first, simple, and lowest foundation, being the first absolute and simple
being; therefore he that is built upon him, has the greatest stability, which
is the transcendent happiness of Christians, above all men in the world. And
this is a great privilege of theirs, which you shall find upon this ground
magnified and set forth in Psalm. 46.1, 2. Psalm. 46.1, 2.
God is our hope and strength; therefore will we not fear, though the earth be
removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea, etc.
As if he should say, Though there were a subversion of Kingdoms, and an
overthrow of all the Churches, yea a confusion of heaven and earth, (as there
shall be at the last day) though the mountains were rent from their
foundations, and cast into the middle of the sea, yet Christians should be sure
all the while, because God, who is the first, absolute, and simple being, and
so the lowest foundation, is their hope and strength; that is, he is a
foundation lower than all these, that when all these things shall come to
ruin, yet GOD on whom we trust, shall be a sure help, and comfort.

Beloved, this is to be considered, that you may know what your comfort is, and
upon what foundation you are built.

Consect. 2.
If GOD be most simple, without all composition, then this will follow, that he
cannot be hindered in any thing that he goes about to do, God cannot be hindered
in any work he goes about.
but is most independent as in being, so in working, by reason of his
simplicity. There is no creature but may be hindered: for in the best of the
creatures, to wit, in the Angels, there is an essence, and an executive power
by which they work: Even as you see it in the fire, there is the substance of
fire, and the quality of heat by which it works: now where there are two
things, an essence and a faculty by which it works, something may come
between, and hinder the working and operation. As in the Babylonish furnace,
GOD separated between the fire, and the heat, that it could not burn the men
that were cast into it, Dan. 3. So he does with the Angels, he comes between
the substance, and the executive power, and often hinders them from doing what
they would: But in GOD, seeing he is most simple, and entire, there is not an
essence, and executive power, (as the Schoolmen call it:) therefore there can
nothing come between to be an impediment; there is not any action that he
intends, but he works it absolutely and of himself. Therefore we are to
consider, that that GOD which we have to worship and serve, that nothing can
come between, and hinder him in working, but what he will do, he does: and
therefore we should learn to fear before him, and to trust in him, and to
acknowledge the greatness of his power, and to know the ground of it, seeing
he is so absolute and wonderful in all his works.

Hence likewise it follows, Consect. 3.
that all the Attributes of GOD are equal among themselves, That the
Attributes of GOD are equal in his justice and his mercy, etc.
not one higher than another, or larger than another; for if he be simple, and
there are not two things in him, then his Attributes, or his essence, and
himself are the same; and if so, one cannot exceed another; his mercy is not
beyond his justice, nor his justice beyond his wisdom. Therefore though he
does put forth one Attribute now, another then, yet we must not think that
his mercy is greater than all his Attributes: therefore that place in the
Psalmist, His mercy is above all his works, is commonly misunderstood. The
meaning is not, that his mercy exceedes all his other Attributes, but that his
mercy is over, and upon all his works. As the warmth of the hen is over all
the eggs, to warm, and cherish, and hatch them: so Gods mercy is over all his
works, to cherish, and nourish, and perfect them; that is, it is showed forth
upon them all. For it is not a comparative speech, as if his mercy did exceed
all his other Attributes: for if all his Attributes are himself, they must be
equal, there is no difference in regard of height or largeness between them.
And thus the place is to be understood: for so the word signifies in the
original, and not according to the common acception. So much for the
Consectaries, now we will come to uses of practice.

simplicity be one of GODS excellencies; then let us labor to come as near to
it as we can, by bringing our hearts to be content with a simplicity of
condition: To labor for contentedness with the simplicity of our condition.
for this is a sure rule, The more composition, the more weakness, the more
impediment, and withal the more exposednesse to dissolution and decay.
Therefore GOD is not subject to weakness and impediment in working, because he
is most simple, not having essence, and faculty, so that any thing should come
between and hinder him; and therefore also is he not capable of dissolution:
and therefore the nearer any come to this simplicity, they are (as I say) less
weak, less subject to impediment and destruction; and the safer, and
stronger, and happier they be. As for example, the Angels, so far as they
fall short of the simplicity of the eternal GOD, who is blessed for ever, so
far they are subject to all this: they have faculties different from their
essences, and one from another, as understanding, will, and their executive
power; hence they are subject to weakness. For they may fall into sin, as
you know the first Angels did, and their faculties jarred one with another, and
fell out of tune: and having an executive power, they are also subject to
impediment; whence neither the good Angels, nor the bad, can do what they
would, but they are and may be hindered.

In the next place consider man, and as he is much more compounded than the
Angels, so he is more weak, more subject to impediment, more liable to decay
and ruin, as sickness, distemper, crosses, death: for he has not only a
rational faculty, as the Angels have, but sensitive; a sensitive memory, a
sensitive fancy, and a sensitive appetite; he has also a body consisting of
diverse members, needing many external helps, as air, diet, houses,
exercises, and so he is subject to many weaknesses, many hurts, many
impediments, and losses of all sorts.



affections of the mind do not lie scattered, hanging or lying upon this or
that thing, so that you cannot live without it; but when the mind is
recollected and gathered up, so that you can be content with a simplicity of
condition, with GOD alone for your portion; so that you can live with exceeding
little, not requiring a multitude of things, upon which the contentment. and
satisfaction of the mind does depend. As for example; some men cannot live
without sports and pleasure, and a great living to maintain them: another must
have great learning and gifts, and eminency, and praise that follows it:
Another has his heart so wedded to a convenient house, wife, children,
companions, etc. that if any of these be taken away, he is dead in the nest:
Not to speak of their vain, base, distempered affections, they must have a
hundred things, their fancy is infinite, and all must be to their mind, or
else they are still complaining. Now the more things a man needs, the more
compound, and less simple he is, (as I may so say) and consequently, the
weaker he is, and more apt to be hindered, more apt to be hurt and disquieted;
because if you touch any of that multitude of things, upon which his heart is
set, he is presently troubled; which is more easily done, as the things are
more, upon which his affections are placed: but he is best, who is come to that
selfe-sufficiency of mind, and to be content with that simplicity of
condition, that he can say of any of these things; I can live by them and
without them, I can live without liberty, I can live without friends, I can
live without sports and pleasure, without worldly credit, and esteem, without
wife, and children, without riches, without convenience of air, garden,
orchards. This is the condition that we should labor to grow up to: and the
nearer we grow up to it, the better we are, and the safer is our condition.



Paul and Silas, have his heart filled with joy and peace through believing.
This is the safety and strength of a man. For even as the body, the more sick
it is, the more helps it needs; and the lamer it is, the more props it must
have, one for his arm, another for his legs, another for his back: whereas a
strong man can walk upon his own legs, he needs noe other help: even so
the soul, the more sick and lame it is, the more it needs; but he which has
a strong inward man which is in health, let him have GOD, and shift him from
vessel to vessel, from condition to condition, let him be stripped of all,
yet he can go upon his legs and can live without all. So says the Apostle
Paul, Phil. 4. Phil. 4.
I have learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be content: that is,
riches or not riches, honor or not honor, yet his mind had a bottom that he
could stand alone, and be happy without them. Thus I say, the more a man's
affection is enlarged to a multitude of things, the weaker he is, and more
subject to be disquieted, by any thing: but the more his mind is contracted,
and gathered into a narrow compass, and content with a greater simplicity of
condition, the safer, and stronger he is, and less subject to be disquieted
by any creature; because let come what will come, whatsoever condition he is
put into, he has a bottom to stand upon, he has some thing to comfort his
heart.



Tim 6.6. Godliness with content is great gain: that is, godliness is
always joined with contentment, it is always the cause of contentment, and
therefore great gain. So then, be a godly man, that is, make thy heart perfect
with GOD, serve and fear him alone, be content with him alone for your
portion; he is All-sufficient, his communion will breed contentment and
satisfaction enough to thy heart, so that thou shall be able to live with a
very slender outward condition. And this is the only means to have the mind
drawn from these things that other men are so glued to; and that is, to labor
to be content with GOD alone, to serve, and fear him, to grow up to him more
and more: for he is All-sufficient, there is no such way in the world to
contract the mind, as to have GOD to be knit to him, to serve and fear him,
and to be assured of his favor and love in all conditions. Beloved, what a
miserable thing is it, to have such changeable happiness, for a man to be so
dependent upon many things which are so exceeding mutable? Therefore it should
be our wisdom to bring our minds to be content with a narrowness or
scantnesse, or simplicity of condition, to let the mind be drawn into as
narrow a compass as may be; and so to come as near to this excellency of GOD,
as our present humane condition will well permit us.

Be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, holy as he is holy, Labor for
simplicity and singleness of heart.
and good or kind to the evil, as he is, causing the rain to fall upon them,
and his Sun to shine upon them: So upon the same ground we may say, Be simple
as he is simple: that is, you must labor to grow up to a simplicity of mind;
and such a simplicity as is in almighty God you cannot reach too: but to have a
heart immixed, to be cleansed from dross, as the gold is, you should labor
to get this simplicity of mind, a thing often commended in scripture. What
this Simplicity is, we have briefly touched heretofore, and we will now open
it to you more fully.

There are two things required to simplicity or singleness of heart.





Iam: 1.8. Iam. 1.8.
A double minded man is unstable in all his ways: (...), By a double minded
man there is meant, one whose mind hangs between a double object, so that he
knows not which of the two is more eligible; his mind is in an even balance,
where neither scale does praeponderate: On the contrary, he is a simple or a
single hearted man, who is not thus divided between two objects, but he so
resolves and pitcheth upon one, that he subordinates all the other to it. As
for example, a double minded man, has an eye to GOD and his credit, to GOD and
his pleasure, to GOD and his friends, he would feign graspe both, and is
willing to part with neither: such a man goes not straight on, but he walks
unevenly in his courses; (...) that is, while he is quiet and no temptation
does assail him, then he walks with GOD in a strait rule, but let a
temptation come, and put him to it, then he steps out of the way, he will not
let his credit or his profit go. As a weather-cocke, let there be no wind at
all, and it stands still like a fixed thing: but as soon as the wind comes it
turns about. So is it with such a man, while he is quiet, while religion costs
him nothing, he walks on in an even way, but let a temptation come and assault
him, and because he has not a single object, upon which he is resolved,
therefore he goes out, and walks unevenly. Contrary to this is he that has
pitched upon one object, upon GOD alone; he says, let me have the Lord alone,
and and heaven alone, though I have noe more, thus I have pitched, thus I have
resolved, that let what will come, I will part with all, when it comes into
composition with this. Beloved, you never have a single heart till now. This
singleness of heart David expresses in himself, Psa. 27.4. One thing have I
desired, that I will require, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all my
days and behold thy beauty: that is, this one thing have I chosen, I have
pitched upon it, I care for nothing besides; if other things come, so it is,
but this I require, that I may walk with the Lord, that I may be in his house
all my days, that is, that I may enjoy the use of GODS ordinances, and walk
with him; and behold his beauty in them. And such a speech was that of Christ
to Martha; One thing is necessary; that is, if you look to any thing else, it
is in vain: you ought to take him alone, as a wife takes a husband, that must
have none besides, (for so it must be.) And this is the first thing required to
simplicity and singleness of spirit. The second is this.

God alone. And this I take out of Matthew. 6.22. The light of the body is the
eye, if then the eye be single, the whole body shall be light, etc. even as the
eye guides all the members of the body, the hands, feet, etc. so does the heart
or mind guide all the actions of a man. Now as the eye, if it be vitiated or
distempered with drunkenness, or surfeit, or the like, it does not represent
things single, but double, and treble, and so makes a man to walk unevenly: so
sinful affections, which are contrary to the simplicity of the mind, do so
distemper it that it cannot look upon God alone, as upon one single object,
but it has an eye to other objects with him, and he is distempered between
them, and so he walks unevenly. As for example, fear will make a man to walk
in a double way; all miscarriage and double-dealing carriage comes from fear;
were it not for fear, men would be plain, and simple: therefore fear of men,
or any creature, loss of credit, life or liberty, this is a snare, and
distempers the eye; and till the heart be cleansed of these, you will never
walk evenly. And so does covetousness distemper us, and voluptuousness, or
any (...) in any kind, any over-eager desire, or too much haste to accomplish
the end which a man propounds to himself. So Jacobs too much hasting after the
blessing made him not to look single upon God; but to go a double and uneven
way in using unlawful means to obtain it. And Ieroboams too greedy desire of
the Kingdom, made him to join God and the Calves together: for two several
principles cause two several motions. And so is it when there is any
inordinate affection, be it what it will be, there is not a simplicity of
heart; and if there be not, you will never look upon God alone, but upon some
creature, upon some object or other. Therefore, James 4.8. James 4.8.
Cleanse your hearts you wavering-minded. As if when the heart was cleansed
from corruption, the mind would be freed from wavering, and brought to
simplicity: were the heart purged, there would be a constancy and evennesse in
our mouth, and in all our ways.

This expression of simplicity you shall find in Matthew. 10.16. Matthew. 10.16.
Behold I send you as sheep among wolves: be wise therefore as serpents, and
innocent as doves. The meaning is this: I send you (says our Savior) among
men as cruel as wolves, that will persecute, and hurt, and devour you;
wherefore be wise as serpents, that is, as serpents have many wiles, do wind
and turn to shelter off a stroke, and defend their head, so do you: but on
the other side, take heed of being too fearful of this persecution, so that
when to endure it comes to be a duty, you do not shrink back and withdraw
your selves, but in such a case let your hearts be simple, cleansed from such
an inordinate affection, as that fear is; and even take that blow, as the
doves do, which have no wiles as the serpents have to defend themselves. So
that in any such case when a duty is to be done, as the professing of my name,
or the like, here you must take the blow as willingly as the dove does, there
is no avoiding in such a case; therefore take heed that your hearts be simple,
that there be no fear there, so that you must be haled to the duty. And this
is the very meaning and scope of the words. Innocent as doves, that is, let no
sinful inordinate temptation admixe it self, and so deprive you of this
simplicity of heart, because you do not like my service.

This you shall see lively exemplified in Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you wards. Saint Paul
was a very prudent man, and therefore hated above all the Apostles, as Saul was
angry with David, because he walked wisely, he was so subtle to escape out of
his hands, which is as if the hounds should complain of the hare, that she
has so many tricks to escape from them: but, as I say, he was a very prudent
man, and he used the serpents wisdom to save himself, as he did when the
assembly consisted of Sadduces and Pharisees, he put a division between them,
and so escaped himself, as it were through the midst of them. So the first
part was true in him, he was as wise as a serpent, to keep the blow off from
himself. But now (says the Apostle) if carnal wisdom shall come in, that
is, if my understanding shall suggest a thing inordinate, and shall say, Go,
and give a bribe to Faelix, and thou shall escape imprisonment, go and take a
gift of these Corinthians, and thou shall have something of thine own, and
shall not be so dependent on the alms of others; now, says he, when carnal
wisdom shall suggest any such thing to me, I would not admit of it, but I
walked in simplicity and godly pureness toward all men, but especially toward
you, Corinthians; here was in him the simplicity of the Doves.

That we might draw it to a little more particulars, you shall see an other
expression of this, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient to them that are your
masters in the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart as
unto Christ: that is, servants, take heed even with fear and trembling, that
you admit not by and sinful respects in performing your duty, as there are
many motives, as fear, hope, reward, and a necessity to do it, but keep your
hearts single that you may look only upon Christ and his commandment, and
then you shall be faithful in your service; but if other respects mingle
themselves with this simplicity, you will do but eye-service, you will do it
in a double and dissembling manner, not plainly, and heartily, and simply.
Therefore let us put in practice this simplicity upon all occasions, in all
other things whatsoever. Romans 12.8. Romans 12.8.
He that distributeth let him do it in simplicity: that is, men are subject to
by ends in their good works; as in giving alms, or showing a kindness to
men, there may be many by-respects, as that they may make use of them
heareafter or the like, but, says he, keep you your hearts simple, to look
upon GOD alone in them. So in conversing with men, when you profess love and
kindness, you are subject to by ends in doing it, but they are commended,
Act. 2.46. that they did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart: that is, what love they professed one to another, it was simple and
plain, not double. Compare this place with that in 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing you have
purified your selves in obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned
love of the brethren; see that ye love one another with a pure love fervently:
that is, when there is nothing else, when the heart is simple and plain, when
there is nothing but love, noe mixture, noe by ends in it. So likewise when you
come to preach the Gospel, do it in simplicity of heart, that is, let there
be nothing besides: as the Apostle says of himself, he preached Christ and
not himself, so we should do every thing in simplicity of heart. And so you
should behave your selves in your elections, to look with a single eye to the
oath by which you ought to be guided: do nothing for fear or favor of men,
or for any sinister respect. I wish I could speak and give this rule to all
the kingdom at Parliament times. For it is an error among men to think that
in election of Burgesses or any others, they may pleasure their friends, or
themselves, by having this or that eye to their own advantage or disadvantage
that may arise from it: whereas they ought to keep their minds single and free
from all respects; so that when they come, they may choose him, whom in their
own consciences, and in the sight of God, they think fittest for the place,
and that you may do so, you are to get a single and a simple heart to do it.

simplicity that we have declared to you, Go to God rather than the creatures,
he being mercy, wisdom it self, etc. by reason of the simplicity that is in
him.
then go to him upon all occasions; go not to the stream, go not to the
creatures, which have what they have, but by derivation and participation: but
go to him, that has all that he has naturally, and abundantly, not
sparingly, as they have, that have it by participation. As when a man is in any
miserable condition, wherein he desires pity, and would be respected and
relieved, what will thou do in this case? Will thou go to weak man, and have
him to pity thee? No, go to the great GOD, in whom there is mercy it self.
Amongst men, he that is the fullest of pity, he has but a stream of it, a
drop of it, therefore seek not so much to him; no not to parents, their pity
falls infinitely short of what is in GOD; remember that he is mercy it self,
that is, thou shall find infinitely more mercy in him, then can be said to be
in man; the most that can be said of man, is, that he is merciful, but that
which can be said of GOD is, that the very thing it self is there. If you
have a firebrand, and light it by the fire, it is something, but fire it self
is another thing: man he has a little mercy, but if you go to GOD, he has a
sea of mercy, and he is never dry; Therefore whatsoever thy misery or distress
be, whether of conscience or estate, be sure, that thou go to God and say to
him, If evil parents can be so merciful to their children when they ask it
of them, what then shall I have of him that is mercy it self? Matthew. 7.11. So
likewise for wisdom; if thou have a doubtful case, and know not what to
do, thou go to thy friends (which in deed is a good means, and ought not
to be neglected, for in the multitude of council there is peace:) but
remember this, that there is but a little wisdom in them, and therefore they
will council thee but a little; but go to God, that is wisdom it self,
Pro. 8. Go to him, for he will give thee wisdom liberally, and without
reproach. Iam. 1.5. think of him, that he is the fountain of wisdom, and
fulness it self. So if thou need grace, thou would feign have more,
thou would have thy faith strengthened, and thy love and zeal more fervent,
go to CHRIST then, from whom we receive grace for grace, and that is made to
us wisdom, sanctification, and redemption; go to God that is grace it self.
Go not to men, for what they have, they have it from him; therefore look upon
all occasions, that thou go to the Lord: when thou want comfort, go not
to thy pleasure, and sports, and friends, and acquaintance, but go to God that
is the great God of heaven and earth, that has it in him abundantly; and in
him thou shall find more abundance, then in any man of the world.

FINIS.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.


IN these words, as you know, God describes himself to Moses by his eternal
being; I AM has sent me unto you. Now our business is to make this essence
and being of GOD more fully known to you: This is done by declaring to you the
several Attributes, which are given to him in Scripture, we have passed
through diverse: The last Attribute was his Simplicity.

That which follows next in order is his Immutability or Unchangeableness.
The fifth Attribute of God; His Immutability.
Now that he takes this proper to himself, you shall see in Numb. 23.19. GOD
is not as man that he should lie, neither the son of man that he should
repent. Repenting, you know, is a sign of change; he will not repent, that is,
he will not be subject to any change: whatsoever purpose or decree, or counsel
he takes to him, he is immutable in it. Shall he say, and not do it? shall he
speak, and not make it good? So James 1.17. Every good and perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the father of lights, with whom there is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning. When the question was, whence temptations
should arise; says the Apostle, GOD tempts no man, for he is in himself just,
good, and full of goodness, and he can never be otherwise, and therefore no
temptation to evil can arise from him: and seeing he is so, he must always be
so, for he is not changed, nay there is no shadow of change in him. So Mal.
3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. So that in this body of Divinity we do but
sum up diverse heads, and so open them to you. This is an Attribute that he
takes to himself, and therefore we will explain it to you. First, I will show
you the reasons why; secondly, an objection or two against it; and thirdly, I
will show you the consequences or uses that arise from it.

Now to convince us fully of this point, consider these reasons.

Because wheresoever there is any change, Reas. 1.
there must be some vanity and imperfection; that all the creatures are subject
to change, it arises from hence, that they are subject to some imperfection.
Now that which is most perfect, cannot be subject to change; because in every
change, either there is some perfection added that before was wanting, or else
something is taken away which before was enjoyed. Now neither of these can
befall our GOD, who is most perfect, nothing can be added or taken away from
him; for if any thing could, he were not perfect: whence it must needs follow,
that he is unchangeable.

Whatsoever is changeable must be in a possibility either to receive some new
being, Reas. 2.
or some other being that it had not before, either in substance or in
circumstance, or else it cannot be changeable: now that which is capable of no
new being in any respect, nor other being in no circumstance, or accident,
cannot be changed. Now GOD is exceeding full of being, as the sea is of water,
and the Sun of light, that is, he has all the degrees and extensions of
being in him: therefore he is not in possibility of receiving any other being,
than he has; he is not subject to receive any other being, for substance, and
no other being for quantity, and therefore nothing can be added to his time or
place where he is; neither can he receive any other being for quality, no new
habits, no new powers can be added to him; for if there could be, he should not
be full of being, but there should be some defect in him; if there were any
possibility in him of having any more: but seeing he is full of being, and
constantly full, it cannot be that he should be subject to any change; some
other being must be added to him, or else taken from him; but seeing that
cannot be, therefore he must needs be unchangeable.

Reas. 3.
In regard of his simplicity; because, if there be nothing in him but what is
himself, but what is his essence, unless his essence should be annihilated,
(which is impossible) he is not subject to change. Now all the creatures,
besides their essence, have quantity in them, and that may be greater or less
in the creature; and besides, they have quality, and therefore they may be
better or worse: but God is great without quantity, and good without quality;
and therefore in regard of his simplicity, seeing there is nothing in him, but
what is himself, he cannot admit of any shadow of turning.

Reas. 4.
Because he is infinite; you know, an infinite thing is that which extends it
self, which fills all things, to which nothing can be added: and therefore
seeing he is infinite at the utmost extent, he cannot extend himself any
further. Again, nothing can be taken from him, whereby he should be changed;
for, Infinitum est, cui nec addi, nec adimi potest: and therefore seeing he is
most infinite, he is also unchangeable. For whatsoever is infinite, cannot be
greater or lesser, nothing can be added or taken from it: and therefore
unchangeable.

If you observe it among the creatures, Reas. 5.
you shall find, that all change arises from one of these two things; either
from something without, or else from some disposition within the creature: But
in God there can be no change in either of these respects. Not from any thing
without him, because he is the first and supreme being, therefore there is no
being before him, that he should borrow any thing of; neither is there any
being above him, or stronger than he, that should make any impression upon him.
Again, not from any thing within him; for when there is in any creature any
change that arises from a principle within, there must needs be something to
move, and to be moved; something to act and to suffer in the creature, else
there can be no change: as man's body is subject to change, because there be
diverse principles within, of which something does act, and something does
suffer, and so the body is subject to change, and moulders away: but in God
there are not two things, there is not in him something to act, and something
to suffer, and therefore he is not made up of such principles, as can admit any
change within him. So then the conclusion stands sure, that he can admit of no
change or variation within or without him: and so needs must be unchangeable.

God is said to repent, as, that He repented that he made Saul King, 1 Samuel
15.11. and Genesis 6.6. It greived him at the heart, that he made man: now those
that repent, seem to change their mind.

God, as many other speeches are, only after the manner of men: as man, when
he alters any thing that he did before, seems to repent: so that it is but a
figurative speech, and a Metaphor, used, when he does make any change in the
world: as he made Saul King, and put him down again: he puts men in high
estates, and pulls them down again, this is only in regard of the actions
done; as when he shows favor to any man, and takes it away again. So that it
is but a figurative kind of speech: not that there is any change in himself,
but because what he did before, he undoes it now: in regard of his actions he
changes, not in regard of himself.

Holy Ghost come into one man's heart, and sanctify him, when before he was an
unregenerate man; what is the reason that Christ which was in heaven, came
down and took our nature upon him, and lived amongst us, I say, what is the
reason of all this, if there be no change in the Lord.

in darkness and in the shadow of death; he is said to be changed by reason
of those operations that now are there, which before were not. So is it in
Christ's coming; there was a change in the humane nature that was assumed,
which before was not: there was a work done on the earth, which was not
before: he put forth his power in his humiliation and exaltation, which before
he did not: but yet he was the same, the change was in the creature, and not in
him.

Now we come to the consequences; which are two.

Hence we may learn then how to understand all those places which we meet
with in Consect. 1.
Scripture, wherein the Lord expresses such a solicitude for the death of
sinners: as, Why will you die, O house of Israel? why will you not hearken, and
obey? And, As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner. And,
how am I pressed under your abominations, even as a cart is pressed with sheaves?
And it is said, Genesis 6.6. That the Lord was grieved at the heart, or it pained
him at the heart, that he had made man. All these kind of expressions (as it
is evident from hence) are but attributed to GOD after the manner of men: not
that he is moved, for it cannot be, seeing he is unchangeable: whatsoever new
accidents fall out in the world, he is not stirred with them, he is not moved
with any new affection: for if he were, he should be, as man is, changeable.
But the meaning of those places is, to show the infinite goodness of his
nature, and the greatness of our sins: so that as men grieve much, when
their wills are crossed, and when their work is brought to nothing, how weary
are they, when they strive long, and do no good? So the LORD would express it
to us thus, that we might take notice, what the great provocations are, what
the sins and faults are, wherewith we offend him from day to day, that we may
know what they be, and what price to set upon those sins whereby we weary him
from time to time.

Consect. 2.
That all the love and hatred, That all his love, hatred, joy, etc. were in him
from eternity.
that he has now since the world was made, all the complacency and
displicency, all the happiness and joy which he has from any thing, done
either by the Angels or men, that he had it from all eternity; for if any thing
were new in him, there should be a change: but now there being none, you must
needs grant this, that they were in him from all eternity. So that all the
works of men and Angels be nothing to him, all the joy that he has from them,
he had it from eternity.

Again, all the sins whereby evil men provoke him, and all the punishments
that they suffer for sin, it moves not him; but as when a glass falls
against the wall, the wall is not hurt, but the glass is broken: so wicked
men, they hurt themselves, but he is not moved.

Therefore hence observe, that GOD must needs be most holy, and righteous, and
just in all his ways, Whence 1. He must needs be righteous in all his ways.
because there is neither love, nor hatred, nor grief in him, nor joy, which
should make crooked, or bend the rule of his will, or alter it in any action.
Men are therefore unjust, because in all that they do, there is something that
bends their wills this way, or that way, they are capable of love, joy, grief:
but GOD, seeing he is capable of none of these, therefore he must needs be
most just and righteous in all his works. Therefore whatsoever he does, though
thou see no reason for it, yet justify thou him in all; when thou see him
overthrowing the Churches, denying his grace to many thousands, and the like,
yet do thou justify him in all his ways: because there is no grief or
trouble can come to him, as to the creature, therefore he must needs be holy
in all ways, and righteous in all his works.

If this be so, then this will also follow, that all the decrees, all the
counsels, and all the acts of his will, that ever were in him, they were in
him from all eternity: that is, there is not a vicissitude of counsels,
thoughts and desires upon the passages of things in the world, as there is in
men; for then he should be subject to change: For this is a sure rule,
Whatsoever is under different terms, there is a change in it; he is now, that
which he was not before: and if there were any instant, in which GOD should
will one thing which he did not another time, he should be subject to change.
Therefore look back to all eternity, in your imaginations and thoughts, as in
the making of the world; all those acts, those counsels that he executed upon
men, they were in him from everlasting.

Now I come to uses for practice: and we will make such uses as the Scripture
does make of this point. The first is this.

Sam. 15.28, 29. And Samuel said unto Saul, Take heed of provoking him to cast
thee off
The Lord has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given
it to a neighbor of thine, that is better than thee: and also the strength of
Israel will not lie, nor repent: for he is not as man that he should repent.
If GOD be unchangeable, take heed then, lest he come to this, that he cast
thee off, as he did Saul: for if ever he do it, he will never repent, never
alter, never retract his decree. Saul lived, you know, many years after, for
it was in the beginning of his reign; and yet because the will of GOD was
revealed clearly to him, he was bid by a clear command, Go and kill all the
Amalekites, and leave not any of them alive: Saul now had a heart contemning
GOD in this commandment, therefore also GOD came to a resolution and decree,
to cast him off: though Saul lived many years after, yet you could see no
change in him, there was no alteration in his outward condition: But, says he,
and it is most fearful, God does not repent: it is not with him as it is with
man, for he may be entreated, and may repent; but the Lord is not as man that
he should repent. Consider this, you that have clear commandments from GOD,
you that have been told that you ought to be conscionable in your calling,
that you ought to pray in your families, if you will be still breaking the
Lords will, and live idly in your calling, and rebelliously sin against GOD,
living as if there were no GOD in the world; take heed lest the Lord reject
you; and when he has done it, consider that he is an unchangeable God, and
that all his decrees are immutable. Consider that place, He swore in his wrath
that they should not enter into his rest. It was not long after the children of
Israel came out of Egypt, yet ten times they provoked him, before he declared
this resolution, and many of them lived forty years after: but because many of
them did see clearly that it was the will of GOD, they did see his miracles
and his works that he had done amongst them, and yet because they still
rebelled, he swore in his wrath, that they should never enter into his rest. It
is a fearful case, when GOD shall do this, (as he does it:) Even all you
that hear me this day, there is a time, I am persuaded, when the Lord
pronounces such a decree upon such a man, saying, I have rejected him: yet no
man sees it, no not he himself, but he comes to Church, and hears the word
from day to day. But yet remember that GOD is unchangeable; for, you see, the
Jews in Ieremies time, they lived under Ieremies Ministry almost twenty
years, but yet at the last he rejected them, and he would not be entreated,
though Jeremy and the people did pray to him. There are three places for it:
Ier. 7.16. Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift thou up cry
nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear
thee. But what if the Jews were moved with the calamity when it came, should
cry, and be importunate with the Lord, would not their tears move him? No,
says he: Ierem. 11.14. Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift
up a cry or prayer for them: for I will not hear them in the time that they
cry unto me for their trouble.

But what if they fast and pray? No; if they do that, I will not hear them.
Ier. 14.11, 12. Then GOD said unto me, pray not for this people for their good:
when they fast, I will not hear their cry; when they offer burnt offering and
an oblation, I will not accept them, but I will consume them by the sword, and
by the famine, and by the pestilence. When the day of death comes, when the
time of sickness and extremity comes, then you will cry, and cry earnestly:
but God shall say to you then, the time was, when I cried to you by the
Ministers, and you would not hear: nay, you slighted and mocked them, and you
would not hear them, I will also mock and laugh at your destruction. Prove:
1.26. Do not think this is a case that seldom comes, it is done every day,
continually upon some. There is a double time: a time of preparing and trying
before this unchangeable decree come forth. Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather your selves
together, yea gather together, O nation not desired, before the decree come
forth, before the day pass, as the chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord
come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come upon you. And there is a
time, when the decree is past; and when this is not past, there is a door of
hope opened: but when the decree is come forth, then you are past hope.



Saul at the beginning of the kingdom, when he was young and strong; he
took the Jews at the beginning of Ieremies preaching; only the use that you
are to make of it is this: Take heed of neglecting God, or good admonitions,
take heed of contemning the word from day to day, and saying, that I will
repent hereafter; for the Lord perhaps will not give thee a heart to repent, he
will not hear you, as he said before, though you cry never so much to him, as
in time of extremity you are likest to do.

Romans 11.28, 29. As concerning the Gospel, they are enemies for your sake: but
as touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake. For the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance. Gods gifts and calling are without
repentance to his Elect.
The meaning of it is this: says the Lord, I have cast away the Jews, and
they are now enemies for the Gospels sake, that is, that the Gospel might come
sooner to you; they have rejected it, that upon their refusal, it might come
to you Gentiles; they are enemies and cast off, yet they are beloved for their
fathers sake; that is, in regard of the promise that I made to their father
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and in regard of that covenant, I will not alter;
not, says he, to all the Jews, but those whom I have elected, so far as my
covenant reaches, with whom I have made it. Do not think that there is any
change of the Lord toward them, For the gifts and calling of the Lord, that is,
the calling of them by the work of the Spirit, and the gifts of saving grace,
that he has bestowed upon the elect Jews, they are without all repentance,
there is no change in them. Then if ever thou art in covenant with God, and
have this seal in thy soul, that there is a change wrought in thee by the
covenant, then thy election is sure: and be sure God will never alter it, for
he is unchangeable. This thou must consider, that thou may have strong
consolation. Beloved, our consolation, if it be upon any thing, but upon GOD
that is unchangeable, it is weak, and twenty things may batter it, and
overthrow it: but when it is grounded upon the immutability of his council, it
is called in Heb. 6.18. strong consolation, Heb. 6.18.
so that all the Devils in hell, all temptations of the world, and all the
objections that our own hearts can make cannot batter it; for it is built upon
the lowest foundation, even upon the unchangeable God. So that this doctrine is
for comfort to all the Saints of God. Therefore consider thou, whether thou art
in the state of grace, whether thou have made the match with Jesus Christ, if
ever there was a covenant between Christ, and thy soul.

But how shall I know it, you will say? Did you ever come to this, as to say, I
am content to be divorced from, and to part with all things, with every lust,
and to be content to follow him through all his ways, and to bear every
cross? yet this is not enough; Did there follow hereupon a general change
within thy heart, and a new heart, and a new spirit given thee? otherwise it is
but lip-labor, a thought only that passes through the mind, and therefore
was never any such actual agreement between Christ and thee. But if there
were any such change, then thou may comfort thy self; for God is
unchangeable, and this covenant, it is an everlasting covenant. Consider that
it is every where called so: Isay 55.3. it is said to be an everlasting
covenant, Isay. 55.3.
because it is founded upon the sure mercies of David: God gave Saul mercies as
well as David, God tells him that he shall have the kingdom, if he will walk
in his ways; but Saul started out of the ways of God, and so God performed
his part, but yet the covenant was broke, because Saul performed not his part.
And as it was with Saul, so it was with the people of Israel; because they
broke the covenant on their parts, God also broke his. David started out of the
way, as well as Saul: but they were sure mercies that were promised him, for it
was an everlasting covenant of mercy. Therefore you must know this, that there
is a twofold covenant: First, a single covenant, such as GOD makes with
children when they are baptized, which is this; If you will believe and repent,
and walk in my ways, you shall be saved: now if they break the condition,
GOD is freed, he is not bound any further. Secondly, a double covenant, to
perform both parts; which is this; If you will believe, and repent, you shall
be saved, and, I will give you an heart, and you shall repent, and believe, and
be saved; I began the work, and I will finish it: here is not only a covenant
on Gods part, to be our Father, but on our parts also, as in the other; but GOD
does not only promise for his part, but makes a covenant to to enable us to
perform the conditions on our part: and therefore it is called a double
covenant. And it is impossible that this covenant should be broken, for then
GOD should break it himself, (for he is engaged for both parts); and so be
changeable, if he should not give thee a new heart, and keep thee from the
first day of thy regeneration till death. Therefore it is an everlasting
covenant, and the fruits of it are sure mercies; it is a double covenant, and
therefore cannot be changed. And it is called, Compassions that fail not: why
are they called so? to show the unchangeablenesse of this covenant.

But you will say, what if I fall into sin? I will forgive them, says the
Lord. Oh, but lusts do rebel, old lusts, and new: but, says the Lord, I will
mortify them, and give you grace to overcome them. Oh, but grace is subject to
decay: but I will renew it, says GOD. If thy sins and lusts should exceed
his mercies, then they should fail; but they cannot: and therefore they are
called compassions that fail not.

Besides, consider this, that the covenant is made in Jesus Christ. There are
two Adams, he made a covenant with both: with the first Adam, he made a
covenant, as with the common root of all mankind; but Adam brake the
covenant, and so did all his members. But there is a second Adam, and all that
are saved, are members of him as truly as we are of the first Adam: and he
kept the covenant, and therefore if he stand, they shall stand also.

Besides, consider that he makes this Covenant as to sons, and not as to
servants. To the servant the Master says; Do my work faithfully, and thou
shall have thy wages, if not, I will turn thee out of my doors: but with his
Son it is not so, he abides in the house for ever; if he fall into sin,
he corrects and nurtures him, but yet he keeps him in his house for ever.



God with a sincere and perfect love: For I ask thee this question, can thou
love him with a perfect love, whom thou think may sometime become thine
enemy? It is a saying, Amare tanquam aliquando osurus, is the very poison of
true friendship. But now, when thou know that God is knit to thee by an
unchangeable bond, that he is a friend whom thou may build upon for ever,
whom thou may trust: this makes thy heart to cleave to him, as Paul says, I
know whom I have trusted, this makes thy heart to fasten upon him, and there is
no scruple of love, which would be, if there were a possibility of change.

Besides, what makes a man to depart from his profession? Because he thinks to
get a better portion: but when thou have this portion sure; Christ, and heaven
sure, why should thou let it go. Heb. 10.23. Heb. 10.23.


Besides, endeavors never fail, till hope fails: And therefore when thou art
sure that thy work is not in vain in the Lord, it is that which makes thee
constant, and immovable in well-doing. And therefore the use is, to make us
have strong consolation in the Lord, and to do his work abundantly, 1 Cor.
15.58.
to do that which we are exhorted to do; to cleave to the Lord without
separation. And this we cannot do, except we were sure of him: and that you
may know by this, that he is an unchangeable God, and the gifts of his calling
are without repentance.

FJNJS.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and they shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.


unchangeable, that when he has rejected any, he never retracts his decree;
this objectio^ may be made. For what end is it then to pray, to endeavor a
change of life, or to repent, for if there be such an unresistable decree past
against me, what hope is there?

Before I come to a particular answer to this, I will premise these two things
in general.

unchangeable Decree, That the unchangeablenes of Gods Decrees takes not away
endeavors.
as there is an unalterable Decree concerning the time of men's death, and yet
no man for this does cease to eat, or to take Physic: so there is an
unchangeable Decree concerning the success of every business under the Sun,
yet we do not forbear to take counsel, and to use the best means to bring
our enterprises to pass: And so there is an unchangeable Decree concerning the
salvation of men, concerning giving grace, or denying grace to them; and you
can no more take an argument from hence, to give over endeavors, than you can
in the former.

unchangeable Decree past upon men, when GOD has rejected them, and GOD will
not alter it; yet this Decree is kept secret, and no man knows it: therefore
there is a door of hope opened, to stir up men to endeavor. Indeed if the
Decree were made known, and revealed to us, then it were in vain, then there
were no place for endeavors: but seeing it is not so, therefore there is place
for hope, and for endeavors which arise from hope.

These things being premised, we will now come to a particular answer of this
objection.

Saul was, and as the Jews were, and as those in Romans 1. who were given up to
a reprobate mind; if he be so rejected, he is not able to pray, or repent, or
to seek to GOD or to desire to go about in good earnest to seek any change of
life: for if he were able to do it, he was sure to speed. Therefore if thou
do pray in truth, thou shall prevail, thou art sure to have mercy at his
hand; for it is a great sign that he has not given thee over, that no such
unchangeable decree is past against thee: therefore it is no doctrine of
discouragement. Indeed it is a doctrine of great terror to those, whose hearts
do not tremble at it, that let such a doctrine slide a way as water does off a
stone, and not sink into threir hearts at all: but to a man that says, I
would repent, and pray, and change the course of my life, if there were any
hope; I can say this to thee, that if thou do pray thou shall be accepted;
for GOD has styled himself, that he is a GOD hearing prayers; and except he
were changeable, he must needs be ready to hear thee, if thou seek to him:
For the Lord is unchangeable in his promises, and thou shall find him
unchangeable toward thee: but to a man that will not pray, that is set upon
evil, and will not be wrought upon, to such a man this is a fearful and a
terrible doctrine.

unchangable, yet if thou can find a change in thy self, it shall go well
with thee: as if a father should take up an unchangeable resolution to
disinherit a stubborn and ungracious child, because he is so; if the child
should change now and alter his courses, and grow sober, the father may now
receive him to mercy, and yet no change in his resolution, but the change is in
the son. Or, if a Prince should set down in a law, (as a law of the Medes
and Persians, that alters not) saying, I will not receive to favor such a
rebellious subject, because he is so: yet if his subject be changed, he may
receive him, and yet his Decree may be unchangeable, because the change was in
the subject, and the decree was grounded upon this, if he did remain so
rebellious and stubborn: So I say to thee, if GOD has therefore threatened to
reject thee, because thou art a stubborn and rebellious wretch, if now thou
shall find a change in thy self, that thy stubborn heart is broken, standing
in awe of him, fearing to offend him, or to commit any sin that thou know
to be a sin, I say, notwithstanding that unchangeablenesse of his, he cannot
but receive thee to mercy. As if a Physician should take up an unchangeable
resolution, not to give his patient such restorative physic, because his
stomach is foul, so that it will not work, and because he will not receive
such purgations whereby he should be prepared for it: But if there be a change
in him, if his stomach be clean and fit for it, so that it will work, and he
become willing to receive it, if he give it him, the change is not in the
Physician, but in the patient. Therefore when you hear this, sit not down
discouraged, but rather go and sit alone, and consider of thy sins, and give
not over till thy heart be broken for them: and when this is done, be sure that
he will receive thee to mercy, for he may be unchangeable in his decree, if the
change be in thee. And therefore this Doctrine does not discourage, but rather
stir up, and incite men to change their courses, yea it is the very scope of
it.

unchangeable decree of GOD, but of the stubbornness of thy heart, that thou will not buckle, and come in unto him.

The best way in this Doctrine of the unchangeablenesse of Gods decree of
election, is this: It is good to consider in what manner it is delivered in the
Scripture, and to what purpose, and to make that use of it, and then thou shall
be sure not to abuse it. As for example; to what end, and for what occasion is
this Doctrine of election delivered? You shall find that it is on this
occasion. Romans 9.18, 19. When many of the Jews did not come in, to whom did
belong the covenant, and the laws, and the testimonies, this was an objection
that was made against the Doctrine of the Gospel; what was the reason that the
Jews did not come in, and that his own people were not wrought upon? To
answer this objection, the Apostle tells them, that it was not against Gods
good will, he was able to do it, if it was his pleasure, but, says he, some
has he chosen, and some not; some he loves, and some he hates; some he
has mercy upon, and some he hardens. So that the scope of the Doctrine is,
that God might be magnified, that no objection might be made against the
almighty power of GOD, that he was not able to bring them in, that men might
not say that they have resisted his will: and the Apostle reveals it for that
purpose, that men might be answered. So that such Doctrines as this, you must
consider for what end they are revealed. As for this Doctrine of Gods
unchangeablenesse, what is the end, why it is revealed? You shall see in Numb.
23.19. He is not as man that he should repent: Therefore I have blessed Israel,
and he shall be blessed. The end is, to show that his favor is an unchangeable
favor: So he has cursed Saul, and he shall be cursed, 1 Samuel 15.29. his
decrees are unalterable. As it is Iam. 1.17. GOD is good, and cannot be
otherwise, therefore he can tempt no man. Out of all these places it is
apparent, that the use of this Doctrine is, that we might tremble at his
judgments, and that we might rejoice in his favor with joy unspeakable and
glorious: In a word, that men might know the excellency of the Almighty, and
might know and magnify GOD, because constancy and unchangeablenesse is a
property of wisdom. This being the end why it is revealed, it ought to be
applied only to this use: as to come to particulars, which before we did not
mention. When we hear that GOD rejected Saul, and will not repent of it, and
the Jews, etc. the use that we should make of it is this; If GOD should pass
such a decree of rejection upon me, it cannot be changed; therefore I would
fear before him, and take heed of that stubbornness and course of
disobedience, that may bring that curse upon me, and such a stroke upon my
soul; and for this purpose is this doctrine revealed to us. And this use the
Apostle makes of it, Heb. 3. when he had delivered Gods unchangeable decree,
declared by his swearing in his wrath, that they should never enter into his
rest: therefore defer not, says he, while it is called to day, lest that you
continuing in a course of rebellion, the door of mercy be shut upon you, and
GOD do swear in his wrath, as he did to them, that you shall never enter into
his rest. Beloved, there is a double time: a time of the coming forth of this
decree, and a time of preparing and trying, while the door stands open.
Therefore take heed that that acceptable time do not pass away, lest thou be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

unchangeable, then look whatsoever he has done in former times, We shall
find God the same in dispensing judgments and mercies in these times to us
that he has been in former times to them.
what judgments he has inflicted, and for what, what mercies he has
shown, and upon what ground; and thou may expect the same, because there is
no change in him: therefore go over all the Scripture, and behold what he
has done there, look through all thine own experience, and see what he has
done to thee, and to others, and know that he will do the same to thee, for he
is unchangable. As for example, look what he did to Ioab, Shimei, and the house
of Saul. You know the sins that they committed; Ioab had committed murder,
and Shimei reviled David, and Saul slew the Gibeonites against his oath: though
they went on a long time in peace and prosperity, yet because their pardon was
not sued out, therefore after many years God called them to an account. As
Ioab went not to the grave in peace, and Shimei deserved death, and therefore
it was brought upon him; and Saul was punished in the blood of his sons, and
he was slain himself, as he had slain others in battle. So be thou
assured, if there be any sin which thou have formerly committed, unrepented
of, though it be long since, GOD will waken it in due time. So, look what he
did to David; he had committed a sin in secret, but the Lord says, that he
will make his punishment to be open, he will do it before the Sun: So if
thou have committed a sin in secret, take heed lest he bring it to light,
he will do to thee, as he did to David; and I say unto thee, that though thou
be regenerate, and art one of his elect, yet if thy case be the same with
David's, he will do so to thee, for he is unchangeable. There be two cases
wherein the Lord will not spare, but bring judgment upon his own children.
Two cases wherein God will punish his own.


First, in the case of scandal, as David's was: for though his first sin was
secret, yet his second was public, and made the first so too. Therefore though
his sin was forgiven him, God tells him that his punishment should be open, and
that the sword should not depart from his house.

Joseph, whose uprightness was in secret, for none did see it but himself; as
for his Mistress, she accused him, and was believed: yet the Lord brought it
to light in due season. So he will do thine. Let men keep their credit with
GOD, and he will keep their credit with men, let them raise slanders, or what
they will: look how he did with Joseph, so he will deal with thee, for he
changes not.

So look how the Lord has dealt with wicked men; look how the Lord did deal
with them that did meddle with holy things, as Nadab, and Abihu, and Vzzah, and
the Bethshemites; you know that he destroyed them all, and that with a present
destruction: so if thou will abuse his name, abuse his holy things, and come
unto the Sacraments with an uncircumcised heart, he is the same God still, he
is as much offended now, and he is as ready to execute his wrath upon thee, as
he was then.

So look how he dealt with Saul, with the Jews that came out of Egypt, he
swore in his wrath, that they should not enter his rest: if thou will do the
same that they did, rebel against him as they did, he will swear in his
wrath, that thou shall never enter into his rest. As he passed his sentence
upon Saul, and as he passes his sentence upon any: so he will bring it to
pass, if thy case be the same, for he is unchangeable.

So look how he did deal in John Baptists time, and as it was with them, Now
the axe is laid to the root of the tree, when the Gospel, and the means of
grace, and the springtime of the word began; because they did not regard it
the^, they were cast off: the time of their ignorance God regards not so much;
but then he called upon every one to repent, and because they did not come in
then, he deferred not his judgment. That upon which I ground this, you shall
find in two places of Scripture. 2 Pet. 2.4. If the LORD did so with the
Angels, spared not them, says he, he is the same GOD, and therefore he knows
how to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment, and especially those that
are unclean: the ground of it is his unchangeablenesse. The other place is in
1 Cor. 10. You know what he did to the Israelites, says he, he will do the
same to you: therefore do you take heed, that you do not commit fornication,
as some of them committed, and died in the wilderness, etc.

Only here is this caution diligently to be remembered, which we must add to
all this that has been spoken. A caution added.
It is sure, that whenever it is the same case, he will do the same thing:
though his judgments are different, the time different, the ways and means
are different.

As for example, he stroke Vzzah presently, and so he did Gebazi, and Nadab,
and Abibu; yet to others there may be difference in time: to these he did it
presently, to others it may be he will do it many years after. Again, he
stroke them with death, but it may be there is another kind of judgment
reserved for thee* as it may be he will give thee up to hardness of heart, or
the like.

Again, so it is in showing mercy, for the rule is as true therein also: For
he shows mercy to some this way, and to others that way, and he humbles men
after diverse manners; and so some men he punishes for their sins in this
life, some he reserves for another world: Again, some he strikes presently,
and some he forbeares with much patience.

And this you must remember in both these, that though he does the same
things, yet he does them in a different manner, time, and way: he has diverse
judgments, and afflictions; and as there are diverse means to attain to the
same end, as some may ride, some go on foot, and yet all come to one journeys
end: So the judgments and afflictions may be different, yet the end the same;
and that this caution being taken in, thou may be sure, that the same
judgments that he did execute in former time, he is ready to execute them
still. As he has given them up to open sins, that did neglect him in secret,
so he will do to thee; as he has stricken some men in their sins, so the
same wrath is gone out against and remains for thee, if thou do not repent
and turn to him: for the kinds, as whether by sickness, or death, etc. these
we cannot determine of; the ways of GOD are infinite, and exceeding diverse,
unsearchable, and past finding out: but though in regard of his particular
ways it does not follow, he did thus to this man, therefore he will do the
very same to thee; yet because he did this to them, he will do the same thing
to thee in the same or in a different manner.

So look what he has done to all his Saints, he has blessed them, and heard
them. But thou will say, I have prayed, and I am not heard. I say to thee, if
thy case be the same, thou shall be heard. To this end are those places: The
Lords hand is not shortened, Esaias 59.1.
that he cannot save, nor his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: This is the
scope of the Prophet; as if he should say, you wonder why you are not heard,
that you have not the same success in prayer that they had, but the case is
not the same, says he: they repented, but you do not; you are mistaken, for
you are yet in your sins; I am as strong to help you, and as ready, and if I
do it not, it is because the case is different: your sins have made a
separation between me and you. Which implies, that GOD will hear if the case
be the same. Only remember this, that GOD may defer it something long before
he hears you, yet he will do it in the end.

unchangeablenesse be proper to GOD (for so you must understand it, proper to
him, and common to no other) then learn to know the difference between him
and the creatures.

There be diverse branches of this use: Contains two branches.
As,

Look on the creatures as mutable, and expect not much from them.
then is in it, for this will raise our affections to the creature, and so
cause grief and vexation in the end: and indeed the forgetfulness of this
changeableness in the creature, and unchangablenesse in GOD is the cause of
all our crosses and sorrow in outward things we meet with. There be these
degrees to it.

For, first, The forgetfulness of the mutabilitie of the creature causes us
to expect more from it then is in it. Secondly, This expectation raises our
affections unto the creature: hence it is, that we set our affections too much
upon them, and delight too much in them. Thirdly, Strong affections, when they
are set upon the creature, do always bring forth strong afflictions: for what
is the reason of all the grief, that we undergo from day to day? Is it not,
because our affections are set upon changeable objects, upon the creatures? And
therefore when they are changed, then there is a change in the mind: whereas if
thou did look alone upon the unchangeable GOD, this would keep thee from
worldly care and sorrow, this would preserve in thee evenesse and aequability
of mind. Therefore take heed of forgetting this, that to be unchangeable, is
proper to God alone; Therefore set thy affections upon none but him: and if thou will do so, thou shall always enjoy a constant security of mind, as if a man
were in the uppper region, where there is no change of weather, when as below
here, there is one day foul, another fair; so that if a man could live with
GOD, and walk with him, and have his conversation in heaven, he should not be
subject to such change: whereas if a man set his mind upon earthly things, he
shall be still subject to perturbations and unevenesse. All grief of mind
comes from hence, that thou look for unchangeablenesse from the creature,
where it is not to be had. If thou would look up to God, thou shall find
all things a like there, there is no change with him. When an earthen pot is
broken, it does not much trouble you, for you remember it to be but an earthen
pot: now every thing here below, all your friends, wife, children, they are but
earthen vessels, and the consideration of this would exceedingly help you, if
you would settle it on your heart. Therefore say, what a fool was I? I did not
remember, they were but a flower, a vapor, and a shadow: for so the Scripture
calls them. And shall a man take on, because a vapor is scattered, and a
flower withered, and a shadow vanished? Therefore remember, that to be
unchangeable is proper to God alone: and to be changeable is as proper to the
creature, as to him to be immutable.

Go to God to put a stability into the things thou enioyest.
for if unchangeablenesse be the property of God, thou must not seek a
stabilitie from the creature, but consider that it has no further in it, then
God is pleased to communicate the same to it. Therefore to go to him to whom
unchangeablenesse belongs: for as mutable as they be, yet if he will make thy
friends to be stable, or thy wealth, it shall be so. Therefore the only way is,
to go to him, to make those things firm, which otherwise are unconstant. The
love of a friend is unconstant, for he may dye, the breath is in his nostrils,
and if he do live, yet his thoughts may perish, and his affections alter: So
that they shall fail thee as a land flood does in summer, as Job says. It
dries up in summer time, and yet that is the time of thirst; and so will they
fail thee in time of need: and the like may be said of all things else, so
that he whose comfort does depend upon them, has but a dependent felicity,
which is like the motion of mills, and ships, which cease when the water or
wind fails them. But yet as mutable as they are, God can put a constancy unto
them. Apply this therefore to thy self. Thou live now, and art in health and
wealth, in such and such a place, and such circumstances as may continue it:
the only way to establish thee in all this is, to go to God, and to beseech
him to put a stabilitie into thy condition. For the creature, as it is made of
nothing, and is built upon a foundation of nothing: So it is apt to return to
nothing. And remember this, that the more retired, and weaned, and fearful
thy affections are about any thing, so that thou can say in good earnest; If
God will, I shall enjoy them to day, and next day, but his will I know not, I
know not how long I shall enjoy them; if thou can say thus, thou shall hold
them the longer, and the faster: for that is a sign that thou dependest upon
God, and not not on the creature, that thou trustest him, and art not fastened
to it.

unchangeablenesse is an excellency in him: Learn to prize things by their
unchangeablenesse, as Grace etc.
for all his Attributes are exceeding excellent. Then if thou would judge of
any thing in the world, thou must take this as a measure by which thou may
prize and esteem it: look how changeable it is, so much the worse it is; if
it be good, the more immutable, the better it is, for all changeableness
comes from weakness. Therefore learn to value it so: and you shall find
this of much use. As we may see in the heavens: it is said that they are vain,
because they wax old as does a garment, but thou art the same, Psalm. 102.26,
27. Go through every thing glorious in the world, glorious Churches, they are
subject to change; as Jerusalem, the glory of all the earth, it is ruinated,
and brought nothing. Take men that are most eminent, yet because they are
subject to change, by death or by passions, there is an unevenness in them:
though they live here like Gods in their glory. Therefore magnify no man, but
labor to be persuaded of thy self, as a man. I need not speak to you of
riches, they take to themselves wings and fly away; nor of credit and honor,
they are in the power of them that give them: whatsoever is changeable,
according to the mutability of it, so value it. But I press the contrary.
Look upon the things that are not changeable, and labor to prize them. Thou
shall find saving grace to be unchangeable, though it may be impared in degree,
and may recoyle to the root, and may not bud forth as at other times, yet it is
unchangeable, it shall never be taken away: So spir^^uall life is unchangeable,
when that begins, then the other shakes off, even as old nails do; when new
grow under them: therefore this should teach us to value it much.

So the word of GOD is an unchangeable thing, Isay 40.8. The grass withers,
the flower fades: but the word of the Lord shall stand for ever. So Matthew. 5.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass. Now what use
should we make of this? Then study the word more than any thing in the world
besides. There is much learning in the world, and there are many creatures: now
all other knowledge is of the creature, and that vanishes away with them, but
the word of God shall not pass, the word indures for ever. Therefore look
what truths thou can get out of the word, which may build up the inward man,
look what profit thou can get from it, that shall remain for ever:
therefore thou should prize it much, get it plenteously in thy heart, in the
wisdom and power of it. We have many employments in this life: but that which
is bestowed upon unchangeable things, which shall shall never alter, that is
the best time spent.

Lastly, all the good works thou do, and all the evil works of
unregenerate men unrepented of, shall remain for ever. Look what good works
thou do in the world, they shall remain with thee for ever, they shall be
had in continual remembrance. Therefore thou should labor to be abundant
in good works, that is, to be sure to serve GOD whatsoever thou do. If thou
be servant or a laboring man; when thou do thy works out of obedience to
him, even those works shall remain. So look in any thing that thou have done
for Christ, all these things shall remain for ever: what faithful prayers
soever thou have made, or whatsoever thou have suffered for Christ, what pains
thou have taken in preaching, or in repenting, or in advancing the cause of
CHRIST, these shall be had in everlasting remembrance. So look what sins
unrepented of thou have committed. The sins of unregenerate men shall also
remain. All the praise that comes from any action, and the pleasure of it,
that passes away, and comes to nothing: but look what sinfulness there is in
any work, that remains, and if thou repent not of it, that sin shall be
reckoned upon thy score; and what uprightness soever there is in any work,
that shall remain. Therefore learn from hence to prize and value only those
good things that are immutable, and proportionably to fear and shun the
evil.

FINIS.
THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.


AS we are to judge of other things by the mutability of them: so learn to
judge of thy self, of thine own spirit, by that constancy that thou find
in well-doing, or that mutability and unconstancy that thou art subject to. If
a man would make a censure of himself, let him consider, that the nearer he
comes to unchangeablenesse in well-doing, the better he is, and the stronger he
is: again, the more mutable, the weaker. Thou art to judge of thy self, as we
use to esteem of one another. Now let a man be unconstant, one that we can
have no hold of, that is as fickle as the weather, that will resolve upon such
a thing to day, and change his mind to morrow: what ever learning or
excellency, or what kindness soever there is in this man, we regard him not,
because he is an unconstant man. Now learn thou to do so with thy self, to
ask thy self that question: Have thou not had many resolutions, that never
came to any endeavors? Have thou not begun many good works, and never
finished them? Have thou not found that property of folly in thee, To begin
still to live? Stultitia semper incipit vivere? If this be thy case, learn to
abhor thy self for it, and to be ashamed: for all is nothing, till we come
to a constant and unchangeble resolution: So that we come to set it down with
our selves as an inviolable law: this is a duty, and I will do it, whatsoever
it cost me; this is a sin, and I will avoid it, whatsoever come of it. This
is a resolution that Daniel takes up, Dan. 1.8. He determined in his heart,
that he would not be defiled with the Kings meat: and such a resolution they
were exhorted to in Acts 11.23. With full purpose of heart, to cleave unto God.
It is translated, full purpose: but the words are, with a decree and full
resolution of heart; (...): That is, when a man does not lightly put himself
upon an holy course; but takes up a strong resolution to go through with it;
such a resolution as Paul's was, Acts 20.22. he knew what bands did wait for
him, as for thieves it was no matter, he was bound in the spirit, All is
nothng: I care not, says he, so that I may fulfill the Ministry committed to
me. Such a resolution we should have. And according as thou find thy self
able to do this, so thou should judge of thy self. A man that is on and
off in his ways, Solomon compares him to a City whose walls are broken down,
that is, if a temptation come, and set upon him, it has free entrance, and the
temptation comes in, because his soul was without guard and ward. But on the
other side, a man that does not stand trifling with the Lord, to say, I wish I
could, and I am sorry that I cannot, but he will go through a good course,
such a man is like to a City which has walls round about it; that if a
temptation come, there is something to keep it out. I say, as thou art to
judge of other things by the mutability of them: so of thy self. There is
nothing better than to have a peremptory resolution in well-doing, to be
constant therein, and there is nothing worse than to be peremptory in evil.

If God be immutable, then thou know whither to go to get this constancy,
To go to God to get constancy in well-doing.
to make thy self unchangeable, and immutable and constant in well-doing. For,
for what end has he revealed to us that he is unchangeable? is it not for our
use? Sure it is, even to teach us, that when we find our selves subject to
mutability, we should go to God, and beseech him to establish our hearts. No
creature is able to do it. Every creature is mutable, only so far
unchangeable, as he makes it to be so; he only is originally unchangeable;
all friends and all other things in the world are no further unchangeable than
he communicates it to them, (as was said before:) and the same is true of thine
own heart, and of thy purposes. Therefore thou must think with thy self, and
make this use of the unchangeablenesse of God, that he only can make thee
unchangeable. Therefore when a man wants direction, he must go to GOD: Iam.
1.5. he is only wise, and can show a man what to do, when he is in a strait.
And upon the same ground when thou see that thou art unconstant, go to him
that is unchangeable, that can make thee constant; and desire him to fix thy
quicke-silver, to balance thy lightness, and that he would settle and fill
that vain and empty heart of thine with something that may stay and establish
it. There is no other way: all the means that can be used, all the motives
that can be put upon a man, all the reasons that can be brought, are not able
to make us constant, till GOD work it in us, and for us. Therefore the only
way is to give GOD the glory of his immutability, to go to him in a sense of
thine own unconstancy, and say so; Lord, thou have revealed thy self to be
unchangeable, that we may seek it of thee, and find it in thee, thou alone
art originally and essentially so: no creature is any further than thou do
communicate it to it. Therefore do thou, LORD, make me stable and constant in
well-doing. Grace it self of it self is not immutable, for it is subject to
ebbing and flowing: and the reason why we do not quite lose it, is not from
the nature of grace, as if it were immutable, but because it comes from and
sticks close to Christ. Therefore go to him; he is the root that
communicates sap and life to thee, because thou abidest ingrafted in him.

Lord does this by means: it is not enough to pray, and to seek to him, to
make me unchangeable, (so much as humane infirmity can reach) but I must use
the means also.



You shall find that there two causes of unconstancy, Two causes of
inconstancy, and two means to procure constancy.
or mutability, or fickleness: and if you find out what the causes are, you
will easily see the way to help it.

James 4.8. Lusts get them mortified.
Iam: 4.8.
Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purge your heart you wavering-minded: what
is the reason, that the Apostle bids them to purge their hearts, that were
wavering-minded, but because that corruption, and those unruly affections that
are within, cause us to be unconstant, to waver, even as an arrow shot with a
strong hand, that the wind makes to fly unconstantly: so a man that resolves
upon a good course, and takes to himself good purposes and desires, he having
some lust in him, these thrust in, and make him unstable; therefore purge your
hearts you wavering-minded. As if he should say, the reason why you are not
stable, is, because you are not cleansed from these corruptions, which are the
cause of this unconstancy. So Psalm. 5.9. There is no faithfulness in their
mouth, their inward part is very filthiness, etc. The reason why there is no
constancy in their speech, life, and actions is, because within they are very
corruption: that is, the sin that is within, is the cause of all the wavering
that is in the life of man; were it not for it, there would be no such
unevenness in our lives. Therefore if this be the cause of it, there is no way
to help it, but to get this corruption mortified, to be cleansed from all
pollution of flesh and spirit, as much as may be.

Take a man that says he will amend his course, that intends to be diligent
in his calling, and thinks not to turn to such evil courses, but to serve
God with a perfect heart: observe now what is the reason that this man breaks
his purposes, and falls off again; it is, because there is some strong lust,
that comes like a gust of a contrary wind, and breaks him off from his
course. Therefore the first way is, to cleanse thy heart, if thou will be
constant.

Inconstancy comes from weakness.
if a man were free from that inward corruption, yet weakness would make a
man to be unconstant: so much weakness, so much unconstancy; and so much
strength as a man has, so much constancy he has. For what is the reason that
man is so fickle? Because the banks of his resolution are so weak to hold out
against temptations when they assault him, and he gives over because he is not
able to resist them. And this ground I take out of 1 Samuel 15.29. The strength
of Israel will not repent, for he is not as man that he should repent. By
repenting is meant a change: now you see the reason given why the Lord is not
subject to change, he is the strength of Israel. For you shall always find
in the Scripture, that such attributes are given to GOD, according to the
nature of the work that he has in hand: Now the reason why the Lord will not
repent is, because he is strong.

To make this appear to you, Three helps to strengthen purposes.
you must know, that three things must concur to make a resolution strong.





therefore he must have an inclination of the will to it; both these, when
they concur, they make the resolution up: when the understanding is
convinced, and the will inclined, the understanding says there is reason for
it, and the will says, it is good, then this makes up the resolution. As
first, when a man has any reason to move him to any action, and it is a strong
reason, so that he answers all objections that he meets with, now the
resolution continues firm: but if his reasons be not sufficient, but he meet
with objections that are stronger, then the first principle being taken away,
the resolution grows flaggy and weak. And so is it in the other also, when a
man has a desire to any thing, if it be so strong, that nothing is stronger
then it, that can overtop, and overrule it, then he goes on without any
impediment: but if it be weak, so that a stronger desire can come, and
overballance it, then the second principle is demolished, and there is an end
of this resolution. So that let the reason on which we fix it be strong, and
let the inclination (which must concur,) be fixed and strong, and then the
resolution will be accordidg.

But I add the third, that there must be a renewing of this: for though the
resolution be well built, yet to make it constant, it must still be renewed.
For there are some works, which must have a third and fourth hand to go over
them, or else they will fall, and moulder away: And this is the nature of our
resolution also, it is not the resolution of a day or two, that will serve the
turn, for the nature of man is subject to such weakness, that except our
resolutions be gone over and over again, they shrink and come to nothing.
Therefore the thing that caseth unconstancy, is one of these three: either
weakness of reason that sets thee on work, or weakness of the inclination
and desire, or else, not renewing of this. Now when you have found out the
causes of weakness, you may easily find out the means to make you resolute
in well doing. As

It wanted depth of earth: that is, the seed was good, and the earth was good,
but it was not deep enough, and the strength of the Sun caused it to wither
away. So when we shall have good purposes and resolutions, and they have not
root enough, that is, when he has not well examined the thing, so as to be
fully convinced of the thing that he undertakes, he is apt to be inconstant in
it. And this was the reason of Eves inconstancy, because she considered not
the bottom that she was built upon. On the other side, the Woman of Canaan
when she had fixed her faith upon a good ground, she would not be beaten off:
though she could not answer the objection, yet she would not be plucked off.
Thou art the Messiah, and therefore thou will show mercy: and then she had
need of mercy, for her daughter was sick, and weak, and therefore she would
not be driven off, she would take no denial. So is it with all our
resolutions when they have this depth of earth. Therefore the best way is, to
consider, and forecast the worst. So our Savior counsels to suspect the
worst: How can thou that have but two hundred, go against him that has a
thousand, so is it in this case. When you shall undertake a good course, and
you go out but with weak reasons: if Satan or a lust come and object
stronger reasons, this will make thee give out. Therefore the best way is to
forecast the worst, and to outbid the Devil in every temptation. Therefore
when he shall come and say, that thou shall have favor with men, say to him
that the favor of GOD is better; if he shall tell thee of riches, and wealth,
say that thou shall have a treasure in heaven: if he say to thee that thou
shall have rest and pleasure in sin, say to him, that the peace of
conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, is far beyond that rest, and pleasure,
whatsoever it be: So in all the temptations one the other hand, it is good to
ponder them well, that we may be able to outbid him therein. Whatsoever he
does object, it is one of these two: either some good that thou shall have, or
some evil. Now consider, that as the love and favor of GOD, is a greater good
then all the world can give thee: So his wrath is a greater evil, than any the
world can do to thee.





When thou feel thy sins to lie heavy upon thee, then all the things in
the world will appear light: therefore labor to know the bitterness of
sin; it is that which sets an edge upon all our spiritual desires: without
this a man does but cheapen the kingdom of heaven, he does as the people did
with Rehoboam, they expostulated with him about their serving him: so we do
capitulate with the Lord, as it were, and stand upon terms with him, until we
are humbled; and then we are ready to take heaven upon any condition. Till a
man be thus humbled, his desires are remiss, and weak, and flaggy desires;
they raise up great buildings upon no foundation; the foundation is weak and
crazie, and so the building comes down. And hence is it, that men put their
hand to the plough, and look back again. A scholar will serve the Lord, if
he may have eminency in gifts, and outward excellency, or some honor in the
flesh; but all this while his desires are remiss: but when he is once humbled,
then he will say with Saint Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to do? and I
will do it, whatsoever it is, and whatsoever thou would have me to suffer,
I will suffer it. He will take the kingdom of heaven by violence: and then his
resolutions continue constant that way. For what can Satan do to him? will he
take away his pleasure from him, his wealth, or his credit? they are things
that he has despised before: he can take nothing from him, but what he cares
not for. It is the bitterness of sin, that makes him now to prize Gods love
and favor above all thing.

Dutch men use to do with their banks, that keep them with little cost,
because they look narrowly to them; if there be but the least breach, they
make it up presently, otherwise the water makes a breach upon them. So thou
should do with thy heart: observe it from day to day, mark what objections
come, that thou can not answer, what lusts and desires do overballance thee,
and learn still to renew thy reasons and resolutions against them: and this
will make thee constant, and firm, and peremptory in well-doing.

NOw I come to the next Attribute, and that is, The Greatness of God, or his
Infiniteness: The sixth Attribute of God; His Greatness and Infiniteness.
We follow in this rather the rule of the Scripture, than the tract of the
Schoolmen, and we insist upon those that God does especially take to him in
Scripture.

Now that God takes this Attribute to himself, you shall see in 2 Chronicles. 2.5.
For great is our God above all Gods. Psalm. 135.5. For I know that the Lord is
great, and that our Lord is above all Gods. But the place that I would chiefly
commend to you is this: Psalm. 145.3. Great is the Lord, and most worthy to be
praised: and his greatness is unsearchable. Where you see, that it is an
infinite, and incomprehensible greatness that the Lord takes to himself. So
Psalm. 147.5. Great is our God, and of great power: and his understanding is
infinite.

In handling of this, I will show you these two things.

God is gathered from the Scriptures.



The greatness of God is declared to us in the Scripture by these six things.
The Greatness of GOD declared in 6 things.


By the works of Creation.
The greatness of the works do show the greatness the maker. Isay 40.12.
Who has measured the heavens in the hollow of his hand, and meted out the
heavens with a spanne, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and
weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? that is, If you
would look upon any work, you may judge of the workman by it; if you see a
great building, you conceive it to be made by a man of some power: now when you
look upon the great building of heaven and earth, you may think that he that
handles the materials, as an Architect does handle the stones, and lay them in
their place is great: now the Lord does put the waters together, as if he held
them in his hand; and he measures out the heavens, as a workman measures out
the roof: Again, every workman must work by plummet and by weight, now
consider the great mountains, says he, he weighes them in scales, and the
hills in a balance: as this building does go beyond man's, so does the
greatness of God exceed the greatness of man: and by this you may take a
glimpse of the greatness of the Lord.

greatness: By the Ensigns of his Greatness.
The greatness of Princes is set out by those outward signs, which are the
declaration of it. Now when the Lord would show his greatness, you shall see
how he expresses it. Deuteronomy. 4.36. When he came out of the Mount, they heard a
great voice, and on the earth there was a great fire: by that you may know the
greatness of God. For why does he come out with those ensigns, clothed with
them, as it were, but that by this you might have a crevice opened to show you
the greatness of God? So when he appeared to Elias, and in his apparitions to
Moses, to the Prophets, Isaiah, and Ezekiel. It is said also, that his voice
was as the sound of many waters; and he was so terrible, that is was a usual
saying among the Jews; Who can see God and live? why so? Because when he
appeared, when he showed any shadow of his greatness, weak flesh could not
behold him, but was swallowed up as it were, with the greatness of his Majesty.

By the works of his providence.
Ezekiel. 36.23. And I will sanctify my great Name which was profaned among the
heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them, and the heathen shall
know that I am the LORD, says the Lord GOD, when I shall be sanctified in you
before their eyes. As if he should say; They make no account of me now, but
when they shall see me to bring down great Babel, then they shall know and
believe, that I am a great GOD. So else where in Ezechiel he compares Ashur,
and Tire, to a Lion and Eagle, and a Cedar: and he says, that he will put a
hook into the Lion, and deplume the Eagle, and overtop the Cedar: that is, he
will show forth his greatness, at that time, when he shall bring down those
great nations. So the greatness of GOD is seen in his providence over every
thing: when he shall overthrow a whole kingdom, and a great battle by a little
accident, as great ships are turned about by a little rudder, then his might
appears. So in his ruling the winds and seaes, and weather, all this shows
the greatness of his excellency. Therefore look upon his judgments, and
likewise upon his mercyes, when you see, how he raises men out of the dust
etc. All this shows the greatness of God.

By comparing him with the greatest things.
Kings, what are they unto him, who is the King of Kings? Nay, take Nations
which are greater, nay take all Nations, you shall see what they are to him.
Isa. 40.15. Behold the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as
the small dust of the balance: Behold he takes up the Isles as a very little
thing, and Lebanon is not sufficient to burn for a burnt offering. All Nations
before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then nothing and
vanity. The very scope of this place is, to show the greatness of God by
comparison. A bucket of water is but a small thing, but the dropps that fall
from it, they are of no use: Again, the dust of the earth is but a small
thing, but the dust of the scales, that will not so much as turn them, that
must needs be exceeding little: but all the world is not so much to him, as a
little dust. Another comparison you shall find in Isa 55. My thoughts are above
your thoughts, as the heaven is above the earth. Beyond al things are the
thoughts of man; for though Nations be great, yet a man's thoughts go beyond
them: notwithstanding the Lord is as much beyond the scantling, and model that
we draw of him in our thoughts, as the heavens are above the earth: When you
have thought upon me as much as you can think; when you have thought me
merciful, (for that is the thing which he speaks of) yet I am as much more
merciful, then you can think of me, as the heavens are above the earth.

Immensenesse or extent of his being. By the Immensity of his being.
Ier. 23.24. Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? When we consider,
that the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, that largeness presented to
our minds, will show his greatness to us.

holiness shows his greatness. Look as men keep a greater distance from
others, By his holiness.
(as Princes do) so we esteem them greater: Now his holiness is nothing
else, but his separation and distance from every creature. Every thing is holy,
because it is separated; it is common, because it is not sequestered from other
uses: now GOD is separated, none may come near him; as the Cherubims cover
their faces before him; and when he was in the Mount, none might approach near
to him; if they did, they were to be thrust through with a dart: He dwells in
light inaccessible; and therefore the great holiness of GOD shows the
greatness of Majesty.

Infiniteness are these.

Proved by 4 Reasons.
I AM has sent me unto you; I AM, shows that he has a being from himself,
if so, then he had no cause. Now from hence, as in that he had no efficient nor
final cause, he is eternal: so in that he has neither matter nor form, he
is infinite and incomprehensible. And that is the reason that he has an
unlimited essence, because all limitation proceeds either from the matter or
from the form: the form is contracted by the matter: again, the matter would
be indefinite, but it is contracted and bounded by the form. Now GOD has
neither matter nor form, nor nothing like it: therefore he is infinite. All
the creatures they have their several kinds: the Angels they have no matter,
yet they have something in them answerable to matter and form, wherein they
agree, and disagree with other creatures: and therefore they are one kind of
creatures, and man another; which shows that they have forms to bound and
limit them, and that the essence of the Angels goes so far, and no farther;
and so the essence of man, etc. But in GOD there is no similitude of any such
thing, there is no Esse receptum, there is no limits in him, nothing to bind
his essence: whereas they are Entia in a certain kind, he is simpliciter Ens,
and therefore without all limitation, and so must be immense.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, He is omnipotent and almighty, he can do whatsoever he will: Whence
I reason. If he have an infinite power, it must needs proceed from an infinite
cause; for as a thing is in working, so it is in being: therefore when his
power is infinite, that must needs be infinite in which it is rooted, and from
whence it proceeds.

Reas. 3.
Thirdly, That which is beyond all that we can conceive is infinite: but GOD is
so, for if any thing could be imagined more perfect than he is, that should be
GOD and not he: and therefore in Scripture, whatsoever we can conceive of him,
yet he is beyond it. Romans 11. His ways are past finding out; and it is said,
that he dwells in light inaccessible.

Fourthly, Consider it from his works: you see that he has made the world of
nothing. Reas. 4.
Whence I reason: If you would heat the air, it is more easily heated than
water, because the passive power is nearer the active; and if you would heat
water, you may more easily heat it than the earth: Now according to the
resistance, according to the passive power, such is the active: if the passive
power lie open, the active power is less, that works upon it: now when the
passive power is infinitely low, then the active power must be infinitely high,
and answerable to it. Therefore when GOD comes to make something of nothing,
the active power must be exceeding high, because the passive power is so low:
and therefore requires an infinite active power to make something of nothing,
and consequently, he must be infinite, in whom this power is seated.

great a GOD, he that is our God, the GOD, To know our interest in this Great
God, and to take up a greatness of mind answerable.
who is our Father, if he be thus great and incomprehensible, learn you to
know what you are then: that you have an infinite God to maintain, defend and
uphold you, in all all that you have to do, or suffer for his will. This will
cause you to take great minds to your selves to have a holy magnanimity in
you: And the consideration of this Attribute is of great use, to make
Christians come to have great minds. For what is it that makes the mind
great? It is the greatness of the object: whence it is, that Kings have great
minds, because of their great Kingdoms; and great men have great thoughts,
because of the great objects that they have to look upon. Now therefore, if
thou would look upon the great God, if thou would consider that he is
thy Father, and that all that he has is thine, this would likewise make thy
mind exceeding great: it would take from us that pusillanimity and narrowness
of mind, which we are subject to; and it is of great moment it should do so. A
little mind though it be good, yet because it is a little vessel, it can be and
receive but a little good; whereas when the mind is great it is capable of
great grace, great actions, and great endeavors: therefore we should get our
minds to be enlarged, by considering the greatness of GOD, and our interest in
it. For want of this it is, that Christians are so apt to be led aside into
bywayes by the power of great men; because they think that they are greatly
graced when they are looked after by great men; when as if they did know their
own greatness, that they are Sons of GOD, and heirs of heaven, this goes
beyond it. Hence likewise it is, that men are so easily wrought upon by
pleasure, profit, and the like, that they are ready to transgress: why is it?
It is, because they do not know what they are borne to, that the great GOD of
heaven is theirs.

So what is the reason, that the praise, and credit of men, do so much affect
you? but because we have so little minds? whereas, if God were known in his
greatness, what would the praise of great men be to the praise of the great
GOD? This would give us much strength against these temptations. And hence it
is that young students that are provided for, have their minds lift up to
vanities: whereas if their minds were great, they would despise them, and
labor to serve the great GOD with their strength and parts.

And so men that are grown up, if they have estate enough, they leave the high
and honorable calling of the Ministry; the reason is, because they overvalue
these outward things: whereas, if a man had, a great mind, nothing would be
great to him.

Hence also it is, that men are so stirred with variety of conditions; when
prosperity comes, it shakes them one way; when crosses and adversity comes, it
troubles them on the otherside: and what is the reason, but because they seem
great to them: which appears from hence, because they stir up great
affections. Therefore the way, to walk even in both conditions, is, to get
this greatness of mind: for it is the weakness of mind, which causes a man
to be over affected with these things, to rejoice too much in the one, and to
be too much affected with the other. Even as, we see, a weak eye, as the
eyes of Owls and Bats, cannot endure a great light; and a weak brain cannot
bear strong drink: but a strong eye, as the eye of an Eagle, can endure the
greatest light; so a strong mind, it will endure great grace and disgrace,
with the same temper, it will bear all well enough, it knows how to want and
how to abound; because he has a great and a strong mind: whereas others have
their eyes dazeled, and their brains made giddy as it were with the favor or
loss of great men.

Hence also it is that we are so busy about worldly things, dignity, and
riches, etc. It is true we should seek after these things, but why do we do
it tanto conatu? It was Paul's greatness of mind, that made him ambitious to
preach the Gospel; to serve tables, and such like, were small matters, he
would not look after them: So if we had great minds, we should seek for
grace, and how to increase in it, how to live an useful, and painful and
profitable life. Worldly things are too little for the mind to bestow it self
upon; which would be so to us, if we could see GOD in his greatness, and our
interest in it. Men of little minds and pusillanimous, do as the Bramble,
which reckoned it as a great matter to reign over the trees: whereas the Vine
and the Figgetree esteemed it not so, but chose rather to serve GOD and man
with their sweetness and fatness.

Hence it is that men are so much affected with the injuries of men on the one
side, and the fears of men on the other side: all this arises from the
littleness of the mind. Saint Paul, Gal. 5.12. the Galathians had done him
great injury, yet says he, Brethren, be as I am, for I am as you are: you have
done me great injury, but I esteem it not, you have not hurt me at all. For,
a man enlarged to a holy greatness of mind, all the injuries put upon him by
men, seem small to him: when men are full of complaints, and say, they cannot
bear such disgrace and slander, and reproach; this does not proceed from the
greatness, but from the weakness of their minds. Men think it indeed
greatness of mind, not to pass over these things, not to put up an injury:
but surely it is a note of a great mind, to overlooke them all. So it is true
on the other side, not to regard the praise of men: The Philosopher could say,
that the magnanimous man did not regard the praise of common men, because he
was above them; and he is but a weak man, that would regard the praise of
children, because they are not able to judge: so he has but a weak mind,
that regards the praise of worldly men; for they are too little for him to
regard, if he did see GOD in his greatness. This made Paul to say, that he
did not care for man's day, let them say what they will by me, better or worse,
I regard it not. (There is indeed a meet regard to be had of of them; but if
they come into competition with God, then they must bear no weight at all:)
and thus because disgrace and disparagement, etc. seemed but little to him, he
despised them all.

So from this weakness of mind arises that cowardlinesse which we see often
in men. Whence is it that men are so fearful to hold out the light of a holy
profession? is it not from hence, that they are pusillanimous, that they do
too much esteem the face of men? A Lion, because he knows himself to be a
Lion, if the dogs bark, he walks in the street and regards them not; he
turns not his head aside for them: So a magnanimous man, that knows himself
in GODS favor, will pass by the obloquies of m^n. You shall see David did so:
he went on in his course like a Lion, when Shimei railed against him, so that
the two sons of Zerviah would have cut off his head; No, let him alone, says
he, the Lord then raised him up to a great mind. So was it with Paul, he passed
through evil report, and good report, and never turned aside for any. So
Moses, and Jeremy, They shall smite thee with the tongue of men, etc. says
GOD, but I am with thee. And so, if we could see GOD in his greatness, all
these outward things would seem nothing to us. As a hundred torches appear to
be nothing, when we look upon the Sun* so, if we could consider aright of
the greatness of God, all the fair speeches of men would be as nothing. Now
the way to get this magnanimity, is to believe this greatness of God, and to
consider that we are the sons of God, and heirs of heaven: the cause of
this pusillanimity is the want of faith. If we did believe that we were the
sons of God, and did believe that GOD would be with us, that he was so great
a GOD, and that he did stand by, and second us, we should not be so fearful
as we are. Therefore strengthen your faith, that you may have your minds
enlarged, that so you may walk without impediments, and be perfect with him;
as it is said of Abraham, that he was perfect with God in all his ways.

FINIS.
THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and they shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.


greatness of mind, what rise it has from the greatness of God? How a man
shall come by this greatness of mind, and what rise it has from Gods greatne^
I answer.

First, it arises thus from it. When a man considers that GOD is so exceeding
great, and that he has interest in him, that will make him to despise all
other things, as small things in comparison of him. Indeed, if GOD was great,
and we had no interest in him, then there was no cause why we should take to
our selves this magnanimity upon any such ground: but seeing that he is so
great, and that his greatness shall be improved to our advantage, what addition
can any thing else make unto us? You shall see that Paul raised his heart upon
this ground: Phil. 3.8. considering the privileges that he had in Christ,
this makes him to account other things as nothing. Hence in James 1.10. Let him
that is of a high degree, rejoice in that he is made low: that is, let him
rejoice that he is enabled to look upon his riches which he did so highly
magnify before, to think them as nothing, but as fading flowers; let him
rejoice in it, because now he is made a greater man, because he seems too
big for them; they are no such things, as before he thought them to be: not
that they are made less, but because he is exalted and lifted above them.

great, because they have got great men or Princes to bear themselves upon.
But when men consider that they have the great God on their side, to bear
themselves upon, why should not they have great minds? Thus Moses, Hebr. 11.
regarded not the wrath of the King, because he did see that GOD that was
invisible: that is, when he considered GOD in his greatness, the King and his
wrath were nothing to him. So that the way to get this magnanimity, is, to
believe that GOD is our GOD: and according to the greatness of a man's faith,
such will be this greatness and magnanimity of mind that we commend to you.
Saul, when he was a King, had a new heart, and a new spirit, because when he
believed in earnest that he was a King, he looked upon things after another
manner; he had other thoughts and other affections than he had before: and so
would any man else, if he were advanced from a mean estate to a kingdom. And,
if we did believe that we were the sons of the great God of heaven and
earth, we would have great minds; therefore the stronger our faith is, the
greater our mind is. Only this is to be added; that this faith must not be in
the habit only in thee, but it must be exercised and renewed continually:
there must not be only (...), but (...), the actual use of it. And were that
which GOD said to Abraham, (I am thy exceeding great reward,) were this beheld
of any of us, that GOD is so great, and that this greatness is our exceeding
great reward, then all other rewards would seem but small things. You shall
see what David did upon this ground, in Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is my light, and
my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? See, here are two things: First, he considers that GOD is
his; He is my salvation. Secondly, he considers the greatness, and strength
and power of God; and from thence he draws this conclusion, whom shall I
fear? For in thee do I trust; that is, in this power and greatness of GOD,
and the interest that I have in him. Psalm. 46.1.2.3. GOD is our refuge and
strength: a very present help in trouble, Therefore will we not fear though
the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of
the Sea: though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, and though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof: that is, when GOD is seen in his
greatness, when we look upon him, and believe him to be such a God, and that
we have interest in him, in the greatest trouble and confusion that can befall
us: though the earth be shaken, and the mountains cast into the midst of the
Sea, yet the mind will not be shaken, but still remains the same. They bear
out all, because they have a great God, to bear themselves upon, who will
protect and defend them upon all occasions.

great and infinite, (as he is) hence we should learn to fear him, Learn to
fear for his greatness.
and to tremble at his word. A great and potent enemy, men will fear:
therefore this is one use that we are to make of the greatness of GOD, that
his wrath is exceeding great, and so is his goodness; and both are to be
feared. We ought to fear his wrath, lest it come upon us, and his goodness
least we loose it: for he is a great God, and his wrath is able to crush in
pieces, and to consume us, as he expressed it, when he put forth but some part
of his strength, as when he consumed them with their Censers, even the company
of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. Who can dwell with everlasting burnings? as if he
should say; he is a great God, who can come near him? who can converse with
him? how shall men deal with him? Some of them there made an evil use of it:
but we must learn to make use of it for our own advantage; to take heed, how
we provoke him: for is it a small thing to have the great God of heaven and
earth our enemy? Let them consider this, that live without GOD in the world,
that sin, and will sin, they are told of their particular faults, of their
idleness etc. and they are so and will be so still: but let them consider that
which is spoken in 1 Cor: 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we
stronger than he? He speaks it to them that receive the Sacrament unworthily:
as if he should say; Both in this, and in all other sins that you do
commit, you do, as it were, contend with the great God, which is a vain
thing, if you consider his greatness: for are you stronger then he? So Psalm.
90. Who knows the power of his wrath?

And so should we do in regard of his goodness, Hos: 3. vlt: Men shall fear
his goodness: that is, if his goodness be so great and infinite, as himself,
then the loss of it, is a loss above all things in the world. Whatsoever is
precious to us, that we fear the loss of, as our liberties and lives: and as
things are more precious to us, the more we fear the loss of them. Now the
goodness of God is greater than all other things, it is beyond all these, as
having all these in it: therefore we are to fear the loss of it as the
greatest evil in the world.

Therefore if we could see the extension of his wrath and goodness, the loss
of the one would be the greatest loss, and the other the greatest cross; the
enjoying of the one the greatest good, and the (...) of the other the greatest
evil in the world: and the consideration of this would help us to guide our
hopes and fears aright: for a great cause of misleading us in our ways, are
the vain hopes and fears that we are subject to: we fear the loss of
friends, and loss of lives and liberties; but these in comparison are not to
be feared. This use Christ makes of it: Fear not those that can kill the body,
but fear the great God, that can destroy both body and soul. The greatness of
his wrath we should fear as the greatest evil: and his goodness as the
chiefest good: and our thoughts and intentions being taken up about these two,
it would set our hopes and fears aright; and worldly things, as credit, and
profit, etc. would seem nothing to us, and prevail nothing with us.

That no affection or obedience in us is great enough for him, and therefore
not to (...) our selves in either.
If GOD be so exceeding great, then there is no love enough, no affection, no
desire answerable to him. If our love were perfect, yet it could not reach to
him, whose greatness does far exceed it: but being imperfect, as it is, it
falls exceeding short of him. Therefore let no man fear that he can go too
far, that there can be too much holiness and strictness in our ways: but
let him remember the great GOD of heaven and earth, and what is due to him, and
then think how far thou fallest short of that which thou should do to
him. It is an expression of CHRIST, Luke 14.26. Mat. 10.37. He that loves
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me. That which I would have
observed out of these places is, He is not worthy of me: that is, if men
considered my greatness, and excellency, they would easily see me worthy of
more love, than this of friends; and except you can do so, except you can
prize my love above these things, yea even hate them all, if they come into
competition with me, you are not worthy of me. Consider therefore, how much
love he is worthy of, and see if there be not reason for the commandment,
where we are commanded to love the Lord with all our strength: that is, if you
would love God with that love that he is worthy of, you would love God with all
your strength: that is, whatsoever strength a man has, his love should put it
forth to do service to God. If a man be rich, he is able to do more for God
than a poor man; if he be a Magistrate, he can do more than a private man; if
he has learning and knowledge, he has much more strength than another: now
the improvement of these to the glory of God, this is to love him with all our
strength. And if you consider how great a God he is, you will see great reason
why you should love him thus with all your strength. Therefore we should check
our selves when we see the dullness of our hearts, how ready and how apt we
are to bestow our love upon any besides him: we should observe all those
riverets wherein our love goes out, and runs to other things, and bring them
back again into the right channel. For if you consider the greatness of
God, you will see, that there is no love to spare.



ordinate, but with a subordinate love you may: that is, you cannot love him,
and the world, for they are opposed. 1 John 2.15. 1 John 2.15.
Love not the world, neither the things of the world: if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. So Iam. 4.4. James 4.4.
Know ye not, that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world, is an enemy to God. All our love must
be bestowed upon him, as most worthy of it: there is not one particle to be
bestowed upon any other thing.

But then he gives us our love again, and then we may disperse it here and
there. As for example: he has commanded he to love father and mother, and
friends: and the ground that thou have to do it, is, because he has commanded
thee, and gives thee leave to it.

So he has given thee leave to love recreations and other things that are
suitable to our desires, but you must remember, that the end is, that you may be
made more serviceable to him, to quicken and strengthen you to do his service,
and thus it may be bestowed upon other things.

But that which we have in hand, and commend to your consideration is this:
that if he be so exceeding great in goodness, that therefore he deserves thy
whole love. 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maranatha. Paul comes with indignation, considering the great good
that Jesus Christ had done for us: if any man love not him, he is worthy to
perish, let him be accursed even to death. I say, if we consider the greatness
that is in him, you shall see some reason for that curse, that indignation of
the Apostle, whereby he expresses it: and so far as we fall short, we
should go to Christ, and beseech him to make it up, that our defects may be
supplied, and that we may be accepted in him.

great, then we should learn to reverence to him, to come before him with
much fear when we perform any duty to him. To reverence him when we come
before him; and to fear him.
According as a man is great, so we fear him. This use is made of it in Mal.
1.14. Cursed be the deceiver, that has in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, says the Lord
of hosts; and my name is dreadful among all Nations: that is the reason, that
the Lord there uses to stir them up, I am a great King. So that the
consideration of his greatness should cause us to fear before him.

When he appeared to Jacob, when he fled from his fathers house to his uncle
Laban, Genesis 28.17. Jacob says of the place wherein God appeared to him, Surely
this place is exceeding fearful: the reason was, because God appeared there,
because he was present there, his presence struck him with an awefull
reverence, that he said, the place was exceeding fearful. So we should
think of his dreadful presence when we come before him. Eccles. 5.2. Be not
rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God: for God is in heaven, and thou on earth, therefore let thy words be few:
that is, he is exceeding great, and he is in heaven, therefore learn to fear
him, when you draw nigh unto him. That which may help us in this, is to
consider how glorious his apparitions were, when he appeared to Moses, to the
Prophets, as Eliah, and Ezekiel: and you must remember, that though you see not
these apparitions, yet consider that you have the same GOD to deal withal:
and though he does not show it so now, yet he is as great now as then; and so
fear before him. And this is to sanctify GOD in our hearts: that is, when we
conceive of him as he is, and do accordingly fear, when we come before him.
And thus much in general of this Attribute.

Now this greatness of God is seen in four particulars.

Infiniteness of his presence.

Infiniteness of his power, which is his Omnipotence.

Infiniteness of his wisdom.

Absoluteness of his will, that it is without all bounds and limits.

THE SEVENTH ATTRIBVTE OF GOD;
The Jnfinitenesse of his presence, Or, His Jmmensity.
FOr the first. The Infiniteness his presence, The seventh Attribute of God:
The Infiniteness of his Presence, Or, His Immensity
that is another Attribute which he takes to himself in Scripture. As Ier.
23.24. Can any man hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him,
says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? That is, he is
present every where, in all the parts of heaven and earth, even as water when
it fills every place, and as the light when it shines throughout the whole
world: So, Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? So, Ephesians. 4.6. One
God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. GOD
fills all in all.



Chron 2.6. But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven of heavens
cannot contain him? But this is but a curious question: therefore I will leave
it, and will come to show the reason of his omnipresence, why he is immense,
why he is every where, as I have done in the rest.

Reas. 1.
1. This property or Attribute of immensity must needs be given to God, because
his essence is infinite, which has been before proved. Now as the argument
holds good, that according to the substance of every thing, such must the
quality be in things that have quantity; if the body be great, so must the
quantity be: So, if God be an infinite essence, (as he is) there is as good
reason that he should have an infinite presence accompanying it, as that a
great body has a quantity answerable to it. So that he is of an infinite
being, and therefore also of an infinite presence.

Reas. 2.
2. You see see it by experience, and cannot deny it, that his power is every
where, he guides all things, he puts forth his power every where: Now in the
Lord seeing there is no faculty as is in man, but whatsoever is in him, is
himself; it cannot be, but that he himself must be in every place where he
does any thing. The fire may heat afar off, and so may the Sun, give light
to the whole world, and yet abide in the firmament, because it has a quality
of heat, and light: but Almighty God is most simple, there is no composition in
him, no quality, no executive power, but he is himself what he is, and
therefore what he does is done by himself immediately, immediatione suppositi,
as the Schoolmen express it.

Lastly, I add, Reas. 3.
that GOD must be every where present, not only within the world, but as
Solomon expresses it, The heaven of heavens cannot contain him: that is, he
is without the world as well as within it, because we cannot deny but that he
is able to make other worlds as well as this; and then if he should not be
without the world, he should move himself, and change his place: and there
should be a world where he is not present: but he is not capable of any
change, of any motion or alteration of place.

Only one caution must be taken in: You see that the light is in many places
throughout the world, but the presence of GOD is not like to that presence, nor
the presence of any creature, because he is totally present: the creatures are
not so, but according to the parts of them, one part here, another there: but
GOD being without all parts, whereso ever he is, he must be totally there.
Therefore you must not conceive, God is commensurable by the place, as if he
were partly here, and partly in another place, but he is every where all
present. The heavens you see have a large place, but they have one part here,
another there: but the Lord is totally present, wheresoever he is present.

God be every where present, so that he does not do any thing by a mediate
virtue or power, He governes the world immediately; which is a remedy against
the complaint of evil Governors.
but he does it by the presence of his essence, hence we gather: first, that he
governes the world immediately. For though there be means used, yet he is
present with those means. Other Kings must needs govern by Deputies and
Viceroyes; and inferior Magistrates of justice, because they cannot be every
where: whence it comes to pass, that Kings may be good, and yet the people may
be oppressed by their wicked instruments. But with the Lord it is not so: but
he guides immediately, and being every where present, he needs no Deputies,
for he is not capable of information, as Kings are, but sees all with his own
eyes, and hears all with his own ears. And again, he uses no Deputies: for
the use of Deputies argues a defect, as the using of spectacles or crutches
does, if the eyes or legs were well and sound enough, a man would not use
them; so a man would not write letters, or use other means to do his
business, but from a defect; he is not large enough to do his business
immediately: But almighty God, he is every where present, and in his governing
al things are done by his own Almighty power. Good Governors, may have wicked
instruments, contrary to their minds, which they know not of, as Ely, and
Samuel had: but in GODS Government it is not so; therefore learn from hence,
not to complain of the iniquity of the times, or the injustice of men. It is
true, that a kind mother may ignorantly put her child to a wicked Nurse, that
will abuse it: but GOD never puts any of his children to Nurse, but he is
present with them, his government is immediate. So that that which is said of
David, he is a man after Gods own heart, it may be said of every King and
Governor; they do, what God would have them to do, though it be for evil,
as his was for good, they are men after Gods own heart. As it was in the
killing of Jesus Christ, even that is said to be done by the determinate
Counsel of God. And therefore let no man complain of his Governors: for God
governes not by Deputies, but by himself. Therefore let no man say, that he
has an evil Master or Governor, but let him acknowledge, that whatsoever he
has from man, it is the work of the Almighty God, that is every where
present: it is he that disposes of men, and puts them into such a condition;
for he is the King of heaven and earth. Therefore complain to him, and be
patient, because he has done it: do not complain of men, and fret against
them, because the Lord is not absent in his kingdom, but is present to guide
and dispose them according to his own pleasure.

Therefore to choose him and rejoice in him as a friend in all places.
we can go no whither, but he is present with us; we have nothing to do a
thousand miles hence, but he is there, and does our business for us. We seek
a multitude of friends, because one cannot do it, because one does one thing,
and another another; one friend may be a comfort to us in one place, but if you
come to another place, there you may be destitute; friends cannot be every
where, hence we need many friends: but if you look upon the Lord, and his
omnipresence, all this is supplied in him; he is in every place, and he can
do your businesses for you, though you be distant from the place, where they
are to be done; and GOD is with you every where, as it was his promise to
Jacob, when he went to Padan Aram, I will be with thee, says the Lord. So he
said to David; and when Joseph went into prison, the Lord went with him. When
Abraham was called out of his Country, the Lord bid him to go, I will be with
thee. Beloved, when you consider this, that GOD is every where present, and can
do every thing for you, whereby he has the sweetness of a thousand friends
in him, and the ability of as many; I say, when we consider this, it should
teach us not only to be content, but to say that we desire no more.

Learn therefore to study this Attribute. The more we know him by it, the
more comfort we gather from it. As, is it not matter of great comfort, that in
all places we should have a GOD to do all our businesses? To which purpose is
that expression in Ier. 23.23, 24. He is a God nigh at hand: that is, though
your business lie in other Countries, yet I am there to do them for you. And
again, is it not comfort to consider that he is with your enemies (it may be)
in a distance place? For you think, that if you were there, you would have
something to prevent them. Consider that he is there, and after another
manner, than any man is: he is present with their minds, and knows their
counsels, and moves their hearts, and disposes of all their counsels. As
Elisha told the King of Arams counsel to the King of Israel, (which showed
that GOD was there.) So also he is present with thy friends when they are
absent: it may be that they forget us, yet he can stir them up, as he did
stir up Cyrus to do what he did for the people of Israel. So likewise he is
present with our children, when we are with GOD, when we are gone out of this
world, to provide for them, and to bring them up. He is present with all our
affairs, and businesses; when we are absent, and know not how things go, we
are apt to be sollicitous: but if we would consider, that he is a great God,
and that he is every where, this should comfort us, and stay our hearts. And
therefore think with thy self, that thou have a large portion, because thou
have the LORD. And this is the second use.

God be every where present, hence you may see a ground for his particular
providence. It seems something strange to men, that every small thing should
be disposed of by him; See a ground of his particular providence in the
smallest things.
we think indeed that great things are: but for the least things, therein we
are apt to make a doubt, and can hardly believe it. But this point in hand is a
great confirmation of this truth. If an horse stumble by the way, we think it
a common accident; if a fly fall into a man's eye, or if a tile fall off from
the house, or an axe head, we look upon them as common accidents; but if we
consider that he is present there, it is then an easy matter for us to
believe, that God does disposed all these: when the axe head falls off, it is
in his hand, as before it was in the hand of the workman. If he be present
with every small creature, with every fly, with every sparrow and stone, with
every motion of the creature, then all the actions that befall us, they are all
his works. In him we live, move, and have our being: that is, he is present
with every creature. Therefore it is no difficulty to believe, that he guides
the smallest thing. If an enemy hurt us, we are to think, that he is but as a
staff in Gods hand, as it is said of Nebuchadnezzar. Every accident is but as
a cup, as Christ says of the cup that was brought to him by others, Shall not
I drink of the cup, which my Father gives me? So we may say of every
affliction. The tongues of men are but scourges in his hand, he can rule them
as he pleases: and so we should think of every action. And indeed the more
we think of his particular providence, the more we conceive of his
infiniteness. For why do we think men to be present, but because they see
and hear? Because they do something? If the body be there, and the soul
gone, we say, that the man is absent: it is the action that makes them
present. Therefore the Schoolmen say, that the Angels are said to be present
here or there, because they work there. Therefore, I say, the more that we
can see Gods hand in every action, the more we acknowledge his presence.
Therefore we should labor to be abundant in considering the Omnipresence of
God upon all occasions: as if a man be out of the way, and one come and tells
him that he is so, we should be ready to say, that GOD sent him. If we are in
a strait, and know not what to do, and there come one, and helps us; we
should say that it comes from God. So did David when Abigail came and met him;
he says that the Lord sent her. 1 Samuel: 25.32. And this would easily be
believed, if we would think that he is present every where. There is no man
that speaks for us or against us, that does us either hurt or good, but GOD is
present with him, and stirs him up to it, whatsoever it be. 1 Chro. 5.26. And
the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pull King of Assyria, etc. that is,
he himself was present with his Spirit, he stirred him up: (for the thoughts
of men have their rising up, from their spirit stirring them to good or evil.)
So also for their speeches: when Shimei cursed David, David says, that it was
the Lord that sent him. So the Lord is present with the creatures: it is he
that acts them, and sets them on work to do us any good. And this is the next
use that we are to make of it.

It teaches us patience and meekness, when injuries are offered.
This use you shall see made of it. Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation be known
unto all men, The Lord is at hand. Iam. 5.8. Be ye also patient, stablish
your hearts; for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Therefore when any
injury is done you, when you are oppressed by men that have power over you, yet
be quiet: for GOD sees it, and knows it; and he takes care for you. A man
will be ready to say, shall I take this? shall I be trampled under foot? as I
shall be, if I resist them not: says the Apostle, you need not to fear, for
the Lord is present. We use to say, if the Magistrate be not present, we may
offend another, to defend our selves; but if the Magistrate be present, there
is no excuse: so here the Judge stands at the door. Servants, James 5, 9
if their Masters be absent, will defend themselves against their
fellow servants; but if the Master be there, and look on, they will let them
alone, because he has power to punish, and knows better how to revenge them:
So is it in this case; when we consider that GOD is present, and that he sees
what we suffer, we should be quiet, and patient, and not only be patient
within, but let our patient minds be known unto all men, that is, carry our
selves so, that men may see it, and take notice of it. And if you say, that
nothing is done, but he abuses me more and more: I answer. Consider, it is
not because the Lord is weak, and cannot help us; or because he is negligent,
and will not do it; no, he is present, and sees it all the while: but you must
consider, that the due time is not come, therefore you must be quiet, and not
tumultuous in your thoughts, and revengefull in your spirits, because the LORD
looks on, and will avenge you in due time. Therefore this is the thing added
in Phil. 4. Because, when a man suffers any thing from another man, then he
will be ready to be sollicitous, how to defend himself, and what he shall do
hereafter; says the Apostle, Be you in nothing careful, etc. for the LORD is
at hand: that is, he does not stand by as a looker on, or a bare spectator, who
means to do nothing but see the injuries done and suffered, but he looks on,
as one that takes care for you. Therefore be you in nothing careful: but in
every thing by prayer, and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto GOD.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and they shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.


To walk with God.
to be present with him. Shall he be present with us, wheresover we are; when
we go by the way, or lie in our beds, or sit in our houses? and shall not we
take notice of his presence, and direct our thoughts to him, and apply our
selves to him? It is an exceeding great dishonor to him. You know, a great
man, when he is with you, if you neglect him, and apply your selves to
inferior men, he will take it as a great wrong done unto him, to let him sit
alone, and not to regard him. And when the Lord is with us from day to day,
will you not take notice of him? Let them consider this, that suffer days to
pass without any calling upon the Lord, that never think of him, nor consider
that he beholds all that they do: You know, it was the only commendation of
Enoch, that he walked with God.

Lord?



The presence of any man is seen in three things. A man's presence is seen in
three things






And so is Gods with us, and ours with him.


Lord, as beholding him, as knowing all that he does, he that observes all
these passages of his providence toward him, and about him, he makes himself
present with the Lord.

Lord, and makes known his secrets to him, and opeens to him all his desires,
and all his greifes upon all occasions, he makes himself present with him.

Lord. For this last, you shall see, if you compare that in Genesis, of Enochs
walking with GOD, with that in Heb. 11.5. To make our actions agreeable to the
rule of his will, this is to walk with the Lord: for Enoch is said to walk
with God, in Genesi; and in the Hebrews he is said to please of the Lord.

And, as we must be thus present with the Lord, So Lord looks upon him in all
that he speaks, and does, he makes the Lord present with him; Lord speaking
to him, which a man does in meditating in the word. But this is not enough: but
you must observe what the Lord says to you upon every occasion, and in every
passage of his providence also.

But you will say, that the Lord does not speak to us now as he did to the
Prophets.

Yes, he does in a manner speak to us.

How does the Lord speak to us now?

He speaks to our consciences: that is the immediate deputy by which he
speaks to every man. And also he speaks to us by the suggestions of the
Spirit, and the good motions of it: he speaks to us by the good counsel of
our friends, and of the Ministers, and others; he speaks to us by the
passages of his providence (for a man may make known his will by his actions,
as well as by his word.) I say, to observe what the Lord says to us in all
these, this is a part of our walking with him.

God would have us to take special notice of it, as in Dan. 5.22. So observe
what is brought to your knowledge; for as the word of God, so also his workers
ought to be sought out by them that belong to him.

After this manner we should walk with the Lord from day to day. And it is
one thing required, whereof you are put in mind, when you here that he is
every where present, you should be present with him upon all occasions, and
observe his dealing toward you, and your carriage to him. Every man walks
with something continually: now look what a man's mind is busied about most,
that he walks with. And indeed, to walk with any thing, is to give it the
honor that is due only to GOD. When a man is busy about what men think of
him; about his riches and estate, how they ebb and flow, about his credit with
men; these are the things that a man walks with. Beloved, you are not to go a
step with any thing, except he send you on such an errand, as a Master does
his servant; but you are to walk with him from day to day. It is possible that
a man may be in company, and his mind be in another place, and busied about
other things: and where his mind is, there he walks. A man may be in the
world, and yet his mind and conversation in heaven; as Enoch did the things of
this life, and yet he is said to walk with God: if thou do so, this is a
sign that thou love GOD; for to walk with a thing, it is the best argument
that thou love it. Let a man profess never so much love to a friend, if he
will not walk with him, it is but in show, and not in truth. If thou would
show thy love to God, why do thou not walk with him? If there be a friend
that thou love, do thou not desire to be with him? And when thou art in
company with him, is it not a sign also of respect. As when many are together,
all go to the chief man: so thou must walk with GOD. You know what GOD says
to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. I am God All-sufficient: walk with me, and he thou
perfect. Mark here the connection: as if he should say, Abraham, when I desire
this, thou should withdraw thy self from all other creatures, and things,
to walk with me: know that there is great reason for it, for I am
All-sufficient, thou need no other. If thou have a friend all-sufficient,
have thou not need to walk with him? But as we showed you, God is in stead of
ten thousand friends. A man needs many friends, a friend at Court, a friend at
home, a friend abroad, to be there where he himself cannot be: but
wheresoever thou go, the Lord is with thee: if into banishment, banishment
is nothing you will say, if I might have all my companions with me; now
remember, that GOD is with thee: if thou go into imprisonment, he is there.
A man will say, that no friend in the world can do so, but yet the Lord does.
When Jacob went to Padax Aram, GOD promised him, that he would go with him,
Joseph, when he went into prison, GOD went with him: and with Paul when he was
in bonds. And Abraham was banished into a strange Country, and the Lord tells
him, that he would be with him there: and that makes a man's home and country,
and liberty to be every where, he is at home, when he is a broad; and at
liberty, when he is in prison. Now therefore let a man consider this, that
wheresoever he is, yet GOD is with him; who is able to direct us in all our
doubts, to defend us in all danger, and to provide for us in all our
necessities. And then consider also what benefit comes by this; thou shall grow
acquainted with him, and then thou can find the way to him upon all
occasions whatsoever, when other men cannot. Another man would feign go to
GOD, but he knows not the way. Job. 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with him,
and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee: that is, serve GOD, and
thou shall prosper. The meaning is this, one that is acquainted with GOD, when
he has any thing to do, he may go to GOD, and get help from him, and so
bring his enterprises to pass: he knows the way to put up a prayer to him,
and he shall find a present help upon all occasions.

So consider in the time of death; if thou have accustomed thy self to walk
with God, if in thy life time thou have been acquainted with him, death will
be no death to thee. Death indeed is bitter, because it draws a man from his
home, from his friends and acquaintance, and into a strange place: and
therefore you use to say, we know not what we shall have hereafter, we know
what we have here, and therefore the soul trembles at it. Whence comes this,
but because we have not been wonted to walk with the LORD? Is it a great
thing for him to die, when he has the same company, and the same friends with
him still? It is but chancing the place, not his company: one of the speeches
repeated by the Author at his death: for he is present every where. Therefore
our duty thence is, no maintain such a constant communion with him, that we
may be able to fetch help, and comfort, and direction from him, so that we
need not turn aside to the creatures, and be dependent upon them. And indeed
one that is acquainted with the LORD, and has full communion with him, may be
satisfied with that alone: for what is it that makes a man to desire company?
It arises from these two things.



Lord more than in any creature? Is not he then the worthiest and the highest
object, on whom they should bestow their thoughts?

Again, cannot he fill thy heart with joy and comfort? is not he only wise to
give thee direction upon all occasions? and is there any then that thou
should choose to walk with more than with him? Every man, the more faith he
has, and the more wisdom he has, the more able he is to walk with GOD,
and with himself: the more unbeleeving, and weak, and unconstant, the more
unable he is to be alone. And the ground of it is: By faith a man walks with
God, and by reflection he walks with himself. There are two companions which
a man needs never to be destitute of, GOD and himself.





Seeing therefore God is every where present, labor to strengthen thy faith in
that his presence, and so thou may still be with him, and walk with him.

And then secondly, labor to speak to thy self, to reproove and admonish thy
self, to consider thine own ways and actions, to cheer and comfort thy
self, (for these are all the actions of one that makes himself a companion:)
and he that does these things, shall never complain of want of company, and
solitariness.

Use. 6
Sixthly, If God be every where present, then he is present to observe all the
sins that thou committest, and to observe all the good that thou do. Then
make this use of it: that the presence of the Lord should be a restraint to
keep thee from sinning, on the one hand, and it should encourage thee on the
other hand to abound in every good work. He observes all the sins thou
committest and all the good thou do: for encoragement and restrainte.
Therefore a man should say thus with himself: I dare not do this, because
God is present, he stands by and looks on. It was Joseph's reason to his
Mistres. Though we be alone, yet God is present, and beholdes it: And how can I
do this great wickedness, and sin against God, As if he should say; though
we see him not, yet he is present, and sees it, and knows it. And not only
say, I dare not do it, but thou should say, I dare not so much as think
it: for he beholdes the thoughts. You shall see an excellent place for this, if
you compare Job. 31. verse: 1. and 4. together, it is one continued speech. I
have made a covenant with mine eyes: why then should I think upon a maid? Does
not he see my ways and count all my steps? As if he should say; I durst not
give so much as give liberty to my thoughts, because he beheld all my ways.
it is a question which those that fear God have been wont to ask; How shall
I do to be rid of such and such thoughts, that haunt me continually? I would
very feign be rid of them. This is an excellent way: to consider that GOD
himself stands by annd knows all thy thoughts, and takes notice of them. As
put this case; Suppose a wise and godly man should stand by and take notice of
all thy base thoughts, that pass through thy heart, would thou not be
ashamed of thy self? If thy body were made a glass, and men should see all
thy thoughts through it, would thou not be ashamed of them, and careful in
them, as we are of our actions now before men? Now to consider that the Lord
beholds them, to consider that he sees every thought, (the least whereof is no
light matter,) this would be a means to restrain thee. Nay consider, that the
Lord does not only behold them, but he ponders all thy actions, to give thee
the fruit of them: so that God does not stand by as a mere looker on, but he
takes such notice of all thy thoughts, that pass through thy heart, and all
thy vain words, that he weighes them, as it were. And therefore he is said in
Scripture so often, to ponder our ways. He puts thy sins, and those lusts in
one balance, and his censure in the other; and gives thee according: he puts
weight for weight; he gives thee correction, if thou art his child, and
judgment if thou be wicked. Therefore thou must consider who it is that
knows them; what a one he is: as it is in Rev. 2. when he tells his Churches
that he knows them all, then he describes himself, what a one he is: as his
eyes to be of flaming fire, and his feet like brass. This, if considered,
would make a man to look about him. If there was a company set together, and
there was an informer standing by, and did note down in his table book what
they did, and did declare it to their enemies, or to the King and Counsel, men
would be exceeding wary, they would ponder every word before they spoke: so
when GOD is present, and beholds all that thou do; have thou not reason
much more to consider thy ways? Men say indeed, that the Lord is present every
where, but our lives show that we think like the Atheists in Job, that God is
shut up in the thick clouds, and cannot see through them. Yea there is noe
man, but needs an increase of faith in this point. For if it were fully
believed, it could not be, but that we should take more heed to our ways and
thoughts than we do. Therefore to convince you of and persuade you to this, I
will name two places. One you shall find in Ephe. 4.6. One God, one Lord, who
is above you all, and in you all, and through all. First he is above all. As a
man that stands above can see all that is done below: so the Lord looks down,
and beholds all that is done on earth, as a man in an high place, sees all that
is done below.

But it may be objected, though a man be above, yet there may be some corners,
some rocks and dens, so that he may hide himself from the eyes of him that is
above him: therefore it is added, who is in you all; that is, he beholds every
thought, every secret place, every corner of our hearts: he is in you all, and
through all. This you shall find more at large in Psa. 139.1. O Lord thou have
searched me and known me, thou know my down sitting and mine up rising,
thou understandest my thoughts afar off etc. The meaning of it is this. David
labors to persuade his own heart, that God is present with him; and he does
it by the argument: If I go forward the Lord is there; if on this side or that
side, yet still he is present, he compasses me round about, he is behind and
before: therefore it must needs be, that there is not a word that I speak or a
thought that I think, but he sees and hears all. Yea, he knows my thoughts
afar off, that is, as a man that knows what roots he has in his garden,
though there be not a flower appears, yet he can say, when the spring comes,
this and this will come up, because he knows the garden, and knows what roots
are there: So the Lord knows a man's thoughts afar off, because he knows the
principles that are within, and he knows what they would do, when occasion is
offered; and therefore says David, I have cause to fear exceedingly before
him. Nay, he does not only see men's thoughts afar off, but he will judge you
afar off for them. We use to destroy hemlocke even in the midst of winter,
because we know what it will do, if it be suffered to grow: so the Lord does
cut off men long before, because, he knows that they will do this and this.
Such passages of his providence there may be, as to cut off children and young
men out of the foresight of the evil, that they would do to his Church,
because he knows their thoughts afar off.

So he knows thy thoughts for good afar off: therefore though a child of
God may be cut off in some undiscovered sin, when he has not actually
repented, yet GOD forgives it him, because he knows what he would do, if he
had time to repent, and should come to discover it: and therefore GOD judges
him accordingly: and likewise if we have begun any good work, if we be cut
off before we have finished it, yet remember, that GOD knows what we would
do. And seeing he does this, we should learn, exceedingly to fear before
him, to ponder our own thoughts and speeches, seeing GOD himself takes notice
fo them.

So it should be a continual encouragement to consider that GOD takes notice
of all the good that we do, as well as of the evil: Rev. 2. and 3. I know thy
works, thy labor and thy patience, I know thy sufferings; that is, when a man
is miscalled, slandered, and evil spoken of, because he serves and fears God,
because he is none of the worlds own, and therefore it shows forth its hatred
in word, when it cannot in deed; (for malice must have some vent) yet I know
thy sufferings, and let it be enough that I know them and register them: there
is not the least suffering but I take notice of it, and it shall be rewarded.
Again, men take much pains, and no man regardes it; yet God takes notice of
their labor, and their pains, and not of their works only, but their labor
in doing them, and sees what ends they put upon all. Again, men put up
injuries, and suffer much wrong, yet says the Lord, I know thy patience etc.
What is said of this may be said of all other good actions. And it is a great
honor to the Lord, that we are content with this, that he alone knows it. And
so we may be well enough; for his knowledge will bring in a sure fruit with it,
as he says to Jacob. Genesis 31. I know all the labor thou have done unto me.
And what followed that? Why, God taught Jacob how to enlarge his wages, and so
translated Labans substance to him. So Psa. 1. last. The meaning is, the Lord
knows the way of the righteous, and therefore it does prosper, and shall. And
he knows the way of the wicked, and therefore they shall perish, Therefore it
is enough to us, that he is present, and sees it, and knows it.

Again this should stire us up to good duties, seeing he is always present;
you dnow soldiers though they are some what cowardly otherwise, yet in the
presence of the General, if he look on they will adventure much: so servants
that are otherwise idle, yet they will do eye-service, they will work while
the Master looks on: so when we consider that the Lord stands by, and looks
on, and takes notice what pains we take, how we do fight his battles, and
what we do for him, it should encourage us and makes us abundant in the work
of the Lord, seeing we know, that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. Nay
it is an encouragement against the discouragement of men; thou may have
discouragement from friends, from neighbors, and the place where thou live:
yet let this be thy comfort, the Lord is present; he knows thy dwelling, thy
neighbors, who is for thee, and who against thee, he knows the difficulties
thou meetest with any performance, he knows what hindra^ce thou have, as it is
there in the verse: 13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where
Satan's seat is, and thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith,
even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr, who was slain
among you, where Satan dwells.

Lord is their enemy, and they have such an enemy from whom they cannot fly or
escape, Terror to wicked men, who have such an enemy from whom they cannot fly.
which is a miserable thing. On earth if man have an enemy in one place, if he
go to another he is free; if he have an enemy in one land, yet he may fly to
another, and there be free; and how ever, yet when he dies, he shall be free
from the voice of the oppressors, and the wearied shall be at rest, as Job
says; his enemy can follow him no further: But consider what an enemy God is,
who is every where present; fly whither thou can, he follows thee, if thou
go into another Country, he will be with thee there; or if thou die and
go into another world, yet still he follows thee. I press it the rather,
because, when some great man makes request to a man, and God commands the
contrary; when the commands of God and men differ, they will rather make God
their enemy than a powerful man. Thus men wrench their consciences, because
they choose rather GODS enmity than men's. Do but consider what it is, to have
the Lord your enemy, he will meet thee in every place: Though man be thy enemy,
yet he meets not with thee every where; if thou be in thy chamber, he cannot
come at thee, but God will meet with thee there. And how will he meet thee?
He will meet thee as a Lion, and as a Bear robbed of her whelps. You shall
see how the Lord expresses it: Amos 9.2.3.4. Amos 9.2, 3, 4.
Though they dig into Hell, thence shall my hand take them: though they
climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down. etc. It is a common
opinion, that if men have strong friends, strong Towers, and a strong Land,
that is well beset the Sea, and clifts, or great estates that will defend them;
then they are safe: but if the Lord be thine enemy, none of these will do thee
any good, verse 2.4. and yet if a man has made peace with his enemies, he
thinks himself safe, as if there were no other enemy but mortal men. So the
Jews not being killed, but going into captivity only, thought their lives
safe, their peace made: but, says the Lord, If you go into captivity, yet
there I will command the sword to slay you: verse 4. The meaning is this: no
condition that a man can be in, no greatness, though he be compassed about
with friends and safety on every side, can avail, if God be his enemy; he will
pull thee from the midst of the sea: verse 3. and which yet is an hard thing,
to find a man in the midst of the sea: and all this is but to describe that no
condition is safe, when God is a man's enemy.

And thus much for this Attribute.

THE EIGHTH ATTRIBVTE OF GOD;
His Omnipotence.
THE next Attribute is the Omnipotence of GOD: The eighth Attribute of God, His
Omnipotence.
for we told you, that this Infiniteness of GOD consisted in four things.

First, In the Infiniteness of his presence.

Secondly, In the Infiniteness of his power.

Thirdly, In the Infiniteness of his wisdom.

Fourthly, In the Absoluteness of his will. The first of these we have spoken
of his Omnipresence: now we come to speak of his Omnipotence.

I will not stand to prove it. It is observed by some Divines, that God is
almighty, is expressed seventy times in the Scripture. Mat. 19.26. Luke 1.39.
To God nothing is impossible. He does whatsoever he will: and in Genesis, it is
said, The God almighty be with thee, etc. Genes. 28.3.

In handling this Attribute, I will show you what it is, and the reasons of it,
and the objections against it, as I have done in the rest.

The Omnipotence of God lies in this, that he is able to do whatsoever is
absolutely, simply, and generally possible to be done. Other things can do
what is possible to do in their own kind; as fire can do what belongs to
fire to do; and a Lion can do what is possible for him to do: so men, and
Angels: but no creature can do what is simply and absolutely possible to be
done. Now whatsoever can be done, when the nature of the thing is not repugnant
to it, without any limitation, that the Lord is able to do: and herein is his
Omnipotence seen. And the ground of it is this.

Because all creatures are put into their several kinds; a man is one kind
of creature, he is not an Angel; Angels are another kind, they are not men;
and as they are put in several kinds, and hedged in, and limited with bounds
and definitions, so is their power limited; they can do what is in their own
sphaere, and according to their essence and being, such is their power: But the
Lord is a being without all limits and restraint, an absolute being, and an
unlimited essence; and therefore he can be said not only to do things within
such a compass, within this or that kind, but whatsoever is simply, and
absolutely possible to be done; even that his power reaches unto, and this is
properly his Omnipotence.

There is no Attribute of GOD, that does need a greater degree of faith than
this: therefore reasons are not unnecessary. The first reason therefore is this.

Reas. 1.
First, consider, that he that made these great things, he that made the highest
heavens, and those heavens that thou see, he that made the earth, and the
deep sea, he that made the wind, and the treasures of snow, and hail, he
that made the Angels, he that wrought so many miracles, thou must think that
he that does these things can do the like: as he that has made a fair
picture or statue, he can make another; he that makes a fair house, you are
ready to say, that he is able to build another. Look then upon his great
works, and you will think that he is able to do the like. This is an
argument very frequent in Scripture, when there is any occasion of expressing
Gods great power to bring any thing to pass: as he that made heaven and
earth, he that brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, he that divided
the red sea, he that wrought the wonders in Egypt before Pharoh and all his
host; and such like.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
consider the manner how the Lord did all these things. You know he did no
more, but say, Let there be light, and there was light: Let the trees bring
forth, let the fishes multiply, and the air be filled with foul, and it was
so. Now to do such things with a word, with such facility, is a sign of an
infinite power: for when one can do great things, with his breath, or little
finger, we are apt to say, what could he do if he put his whole strength to
it? So the manner of his working does show the infiniteness of his power.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
the further any thing is off from being, the more power it requires to bring
it to Being. As take base materials, and there is greater power required, to
make a fair building of them; to make a goodly statue of a crooked piece of
wood, is harder, than that which comes nearer in propinquity to it. Now no
being at all is in a thousand times greater distance, than the basest
materials are from such or such a being, and therefore the power must be
infinitely greater that brings it to being. Now the Lord has done this,
therefore his power must be infinite great. To make this more plain to you;
Consider what it is that restraines man's power, so that he can go no further:
it is because the matter will not permit him. If you give him clay, and straw,
he can make brick; but if you give him nothing, he can do nothing: so if
you give him timber, he can make an house; but if you give him none of these,
he can do nothing. But suppose now, there was such an architectour, such a
builder, that if he did but imagine the model or frame of an house in his
mind, he could set it up of nothing, or make materials at his pleasure, he
could make it as big as he could conceive it, then also he could make as many
houses as he could think of, and in as great and large a manner, as he could
conceive, if there were such a one, there would be no restraint to him. Now
the Lord is such a builder, whatsoever he conceives, he can make it without any
thing, as he did the heavens and the earth: and therefore there is no restraint
in his power, as there is in the creature.

Reas. 4.
Fourthly, consider that the Attributes of God are equal, and needs must be
so, because every Attribute is his essence, and we do but distinguish then in
our understanding: his omnipotency is but the active power, his wll, the
commanding; and his understanding, the directing: we distinguish them thus. But
in him they are all one. Hence I reason thus: the wisdom of GOD, the
largeness and infiniteness of his understanding and knowledge, what is it not
able to conceive? You know men are able to think much, and Angels more than
men, but GOD is able to conceive infinitely beyond them: For his thoughts are
above ours, as the heavens are above the earth. Now whatsoever he can
conceive, his power is able to act it. In man it is not so; he imagines and
wills many things, but his power falls short, because his faculties are not as
large as the object: but God can imagine infinitely, and his power is as large
and infinite as his wisdom: therefore he must be able to do things that are
infinite. So Psa: 135. He does whatsoever he will, to show that his power is as
large as his will: which cannot be said of any creature. Consider these
things; for when you are in distress, and put to it, you shall find need of
them to persuade you that God is Allmighty.

Now I come to answer the objections which are made against this, which are
these.

omnipotent.

univocall causes, (but I will not trouble you with that distinction) there the
cause goes not beyond the effect: as fire begets fire, and it cannot but beget
it, and it cannot go beyond it, for it is a natural cause, and produces
effects like to it self; So a Lion begets a Lion, because it is a natural
cause.

But there are causes wherein it is not so; wherein you must not say, that
there is no such effect, and therefore the cause does not go beyond it: that
is, in voluntary causes, wherein the cause not work necessarily, but by the
liberty of his will, and he may be able to do much more than he does.



omnipotence: as when it is not contrary to the nature of the thing, as when
the praedicate is not repugnant to the nature and essence of the subject; as a
Lion being a Lion cannot be a man, this is a thing that cannot be done:
therefore it is no impeachment to his omnipotence not to do it.

God cannot sin, GOD cannot deny himself, he cannot lie, etc.

omnipotent, because he cannot do these things. As if I should say, the Sun
is full of light, it cannot be dark. These are the expressions which the
Scripture uses: as Tit. 1.2. God cannot lie: and 2 Timothy 2.13. God cannot deny
himself.

FINIS.
THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON.
EXODUS 3.13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, the God of your fathers has sent me unto
you, and they shall say unto me, what is his name; what shall I say unto them?

And God said unto Moses, I AM, THAT I AM, etc.




far in vain, as it does not attain to that end and act: as bread is
appointed to nourish; if it does not, it is not fit for the end to which it is
made, and so in vain: I may say the same of every thing else. But that is not
the end of Gods power, to bring forth any effect answerable to it self: for
his power (to speak properly) has no end, but all things are made for it. In
other things, the cause is proportionable for its end: but he himself is the
cause of all other things; all that he does, is for himself; and therefore
though he does not produce any such effect, yet his power is infinite.

Lord can do what may be done: but to make a creature infinite, is a
contradiction. And therefore if he do not do it, it is not because he
cannot but because the thing it self cannot be done.

We now come to the application of this point.

Almighty, then let all those that are in covenant with God, and that have
interest in him, that can say, they are the Lords, and the Lord is theirs, let
them excedingly rejoice in this, that they have an Almighty God for their God.
Let all in Covenant with God rejoice that they have an Almighty God for their
God.
To have a friend that is able to do all things, (as we told you before, he
is every where present,) it is a great benefit: to have a friend in Court, in
Country, a friend beyond the seas, if you shall have occasion to be banished
thither: but if you add this, he is able to do whatsoever he will, it will
add much to our comfort. A friend many times is willing, but he is not able;
if able and willing, yet not present: but seeing he is every where, if thou
have any business to do, thou need not to send a letter, do but put up a
prayer to him, to be thy factour, to do it for thee, to work thy works for
thee, he is every where present, and he is Allmighty also, able to do it,
therefore be content to have him alone for your portion. That is the cause,
that men's ways are so unlike one to another: because they would graspe GOD and
the creature. And why do they do so? Because they will not be content to
have GOD alone. And what is the ground of that? Because they do not think him
indeed All-sufficient and Allmighty: for if they did, they need not to join
any other with him.

All-sufficient, it is true, it is good to have him: but, do we not need many
hundred things besides? Must we not have friends, house, wife, etc.? Can we
live without them? Can we live without friends, estate convenient? What is
your meaning then to have GOD alone for our portion?

Allmighty and All-sufficient, then look about, and consider the multitude of
the things thou need, and the variety of comforts thou desire, and thou
shall find all in him. That argument which you are not strangers to. He has
made them all; and there is nothing in the effect, but what is in the cause,
because it gave it to the effect first, and it gives nothing, but what it self
had before: if he has put in beams of comfort, and this beauty in the
several creatures, must they not needs be in him?



Mar. 10.28.29.30. Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo we have left all, and
have followed thee. And Jesus answered and said; verily I say unto you, there
is no man that has left house, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother,
or Wife, or Children, or lands for my sake and the Gospels; but he shall
receive an hundredfold now in this time, Houses, and Brethren, and Sisters,
and Mothers, and Children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to
come eternal life. When it is said here, he shall receive the very same; why
does the Holy Ghost repeat them in particular; He shall receive houses and
Brethren etc. with persecution? that is, you shall be stripped of all these
things by persecution, yet at the same time, you shall have them all. At that
time when he is in a close prison, and driven from all these, he shall receive
them for this present. The meaning is this: let a man have communion with GOD,
let the Lord reveal himself to a man; if he be once pleased to come to a
man, and sup with him, if he will but communicate to a man the consolations of
the spirit, and fill him with joy and peace through beleiving: I say, though
he be in a close prison, yet he shall have the comfort of houses, Brethren,
Sisters; Mothers etc. That is, that comfort which they would yield him, he
shall find them altogether in GOD. So that if one should come and say to him,
what if you should have Father, Mother, and friends restored to you, that you
may enjoy them; I say, a man that has a near communion with GOD, to whom GOD
says, that he will come and sup with him, at such a time; he will say, I do
not care one jot for them, for I have that which is better than them all. For
example: you see this in the Apostles, that rejoiced in prison. What do you
think they would have said to men that offered them riches? Would they not
have slighted them? They did slight imprisonment: and in that they did slight
shame, and prison etc. they would have slighted the other by the rule of
contraries. Therefore labor to be content with GOD alone.

To make this argument without doubt, consider what heaven is. Do you think,
that there you shall have a worse condition than here? Here you have need of
many comforts and conveniences, it is a variegate appetite, that is, an
appetite that is full of multiplicity: why, when you come to heaven, you do
not lay aside your nature, but you desire still; and there you shall have none
but GOD alone: so that there you shall be in a worse estate then here, if all
these things were not to be found in the Lord: if there were not this variety
in the Lord, it could not be, that in heaven you should be so happy. Here you
need Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and a thousand other things, but there you
shall have none, but I, says he, will be Sun, and Moon, and all to you:
and therefore he says, that he will be all in all, which is the plural
number, and signifies, all things, I will be (...).

Now this Allmighty GOD, that will be All-sufficient in heaven, if he will
but communicate to a man, and draw him near to his presence, shall not that be
enough? Beloved, it is certain, that he will be enough for your portion. As
for instance; let a man be stripe of all his friends, and brethren and sisters,
and country, as Abraham was: he was stripped of all, and had GOD alone left for
his portion, yet you see that he was exceeding rich, and made a great Prince,
and he had a great posterity. Therefore let us make this use of it: to care for
none but the Lord alone, we know not what shall become of us, we may be led
into banishment, as others now are, and have bin: now if you have the Lord with
you, it is enough. So if any condition befall you, if you can be content with
GOD alone, you are well, what if your friends deceive you? What if you should
be shut up in a close prison? It is nothing, he is All-sufficient and
Allmighty, and there is no estate or condition, but he is with you in it,
there is no streit, but he can help you out. Therefore study these things, and
examine them, and labor to beat them upon your souls: never rest, till you
have brought your hearts to such a condition: to say, I know that no man can
separate between GOD and me, and I am content with GOD alone.

Make use of his power in all wants and in all straits, etc.
Why is this Attribute revealed to you? is it not for this, that men might make
use of this power of his? Then let every man consider with himself, what he
has need of, what strait he is in, what business he would have done:
remember that GOD is Allmighty, and is able to bring it to pass; be it poverty
in your estates, or debts, which a man is not able to overwrastle, if there be
a blemish in your names, and you cannot tell how to have it healed, or any
weakness in your body; and which is more than all this, if there be a lust
that ye cannot overcome, a temptation which ye cannot be rid of, if there be a
deadness of spirit in you, and indisposednesse to holy duties, and ye cannot
tell how to get life and quickening; remember that there is an Allmighty power
revealed for that end, and it is our parts to make use of it: though it be an
hereditary disease in thee, (now you know an hereditary disease is that which
we have from our parents,) though thou have such a disease, such a strong lust,
yet think with thy self, the Lord is able to heal this. Iam. 4.6. A place
named before, But he gives more grace, etc. As if he should say: when he had
told them of the lusts that fight in their members, this objection comes in;
Alas, we are not able to master these lusts. It is true, says the Apostle,
the lusts that are in us, do lust against the spirit, as naturally as the
stone descends downward: but how should we heal them, say you? How? The
Scripture gives more grace, that is, there is an omnipotent power which can
heal all this.

So Matthew. 19.26. With men this is impossible, but with God all things are
possible. It is a place worthy consideration. Says our Savior, It is
impossible for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: why, say the
Disciples, Who then can be saved? Indeed, says Christ, it is impossible with
men, but with God all things are possible. The meaning is this; when a man has
riches, that is, when the object is present and before him, a man cannot of
himself but set his heart upon them; and when a man's heart is set upon them,
no man in the world can weane his heart from those riches: what shall we do
then? Why, says he, the LORD has an Allmighty power, he is able to mortify
these lusts. We can no more do it, than a cable rope can go through the eye
of a needle. Now that which is said of riches, may be said of any lust. Let an
ambitious man have honor, or such an object suitable to a carnal mind, he
cannot choose but set his heart upon it: now when that lust is set upon an
object, a Camel may as well go through a needle, as he can loose his heart
from these lusts: but yet the Lord can do it, With him all things are
possible. And what the Apostle says of the Jews, Romans 11.23. The Lord can
ingraft them in again, as bad as they be, though the wrath of GOD be gone over
them to the utmost, yet GOD can do it: so is it true of thy self, and any one
else, the Lord can, if he will; to him nothing is impossible. Think with your
selves, that he that can draw such beautiful flowers out of so dry an earth,
as you look upon in winter; though thou have an heart as far from grace, as
the flowers seem to be from coming forth in the midst of winter, yet he that
can do so in nature, is able to do the like in grace also, as he did to Paul,
and Mary Magdalen. Now consider what they would have been without his power:
and by his power we may be as excellent as they. To confirm this, consider
what a change grace has wrought even among us: how many amongst us, that of
proud have become humble, of fierce and cruel have become gentle; of loose,
sober; of weak, strong, etc. Go therefore to him, believe this, and apply it:
and it is sure it shall be according to thy faith. If a man would go to the
Lord, and say to him, Lord, I have such a lust, and cannot overcome it, and I
want grief and sorrow for sin, thou that have an allmighty power, thou that
did draw light out of darkness, thou art able to make such a change in my
heart, thou have an allmighty power, and to thee nothing is impossible. I say,
let a man do so, and the Lord will put forth his power, to effect the thing
that thou desire. Surely he which establishes the earth upon nothing, and
keeps the wind in his fists, and bounds the water as in a garment, can fix
the most unsettled mind, and the wildest disposition, and set bounds to the
most loose and intemperate.

God be allmighty, you must believe this allmightinesse of his: To believe this
great power of God.
and whereas you say, we doubt not of his power, but of his will; I will show
to you, that all our doubts, and discouragements and dejections do arise from
hence, not because you think the LORD will not, but because you think he
cannot. Therefore you know not your own hearts in this, in saying that you
doubt not of the power of GOD. That men doubt as much of the power of God, as
of his will, by 3 instances.
I will make this good to you by these arguments.

your knees feeble in the duty? You pray because the duty must not be omitted,
but you do not pray with a heart. And so for endeavors: are not your minds
dejected, do you not sit still as men discouraged, with your arms folded up,
if you see every door shut up, and there be no probability of help from the
creature? And all this is for want of this faith, would this be, if you did
believe this Allmighty power of GOD? For cannot GOD do it, when things are not
probable, as well as when there are the fairest blossoms of hope?

Allmighty power of GOD? If we thought that he could make such a change in a
night, as he does in the weather, as he did with Job, we should not be so
dejected in case of adversity, and so lift up in case of prosperity.

Israelites had which were GODS own people: yet consider, that these very men,
that had seen all those great plagues, that the Lord brought upon the
Egyptians, I therein mean, all his Allmighty power; that saw his power in
bringing them through the red sea, and giving them bread and water in the
wilderness; yet called his power into question, and said, that GOD could not
bring them into the land of Canaan. Ye will find they did so, Psa: 78.41.
They turned back, and limited the holy one of Israel. And said, he cannot do
this and this: and why? because they have Cities walled up to heaven. That is
the thing laid to their charge, They limited the holy one of Israel: that is,
they remembered not that he had an unlimited power, but they thought, if the
Cities had bin low, and the men had bin but ordinary men, he could have done
it: but because they were so mighty men, and the Cities had such high walls;
therefore they could not believe, that he could bring them in. Now if they did
so, do you not think it is hard for you to do otherwise? Yea take him, that
thinks he does not doubt of the power of God, bring that man to a particular
distress, and ye shall see him fail: (for it is one thing to have a thing in
the notion, as for a man to think what he would do, if he were a Pilot, or
a Captain; and an other thing to have it in the real managing, as when he is
brought to fight:) so is it here. It is one thing to believe GODS Allmighty
power, and who doubts of it? But I ask you, if you have had a trial of your
heart; if you have bin brought to an exigent. Do you find it so easy a
thing, to believe in difficulties, as in facility?

Israel were a stubborn and stiffenecked rebellious people: and I hope our
faith is greater then theirs.

Mary or Martha. Ioh. 11.21. Lord, if thou had bin here my Brother had not
died. So verse 32. If you observe their reasoning, you shall see, all this
doubt was of his power. If thou had bin here, when he was sick, and when it
was time, thou might have raised him: but now it is too late, he has bin
dead four days, and his body is putrified. Here is no doubt of his good will:
but all the question was of his power. And so it is with us: do not we do the
same, and say with our selves, if this had been taken in time, it might have
been done, but now the case is desperate? Why? is not the Lord as well able to
help in desperate cases, if he be Allmighty?



You shall see there that Moses did doubt of Gods power. When God had promised
to send them flesh, and that not for a day or two, or five, or twenty* but for
a month together, and for so many people: Moses says, Lord, will thou send
them flesh for a month together? There are six hundred thousand men of them,
and it is in the wilderness. As if he should say, if it had been for a day or
two, or in a plentiful Country, or for a few persons: but there are six
hundred thousand, and it is in the wilderness, and that for a month together.
Here Moses was at a stand, and could not believe it. The Lord answers him; Is
the Lords hand shortened, that he cannot help? thou shall see, that I am able
to do it, Numb. 11.21. It is therefore not an easy thing to believe Gods
power. Therefore set your selves with all your might, to believe this Allmighty
power, and know, that all your strength will be needful for it. It is apt to
man to measure things according to their own modells, as to think him to be
as powerful, as man's understanding can reach, and merciful, as far as man
can be merciful; but for a finite creature to believe the infinite attributes
of God, he is not able to do it thoroughly without supernatural grace. You
cannot believe that he forgives so much as he does, or that his power is so
great, as his power is, but (though you observe it not) you do frame modells
of him according to your selves, and you do not think that his thoughts are
above yours, as the heavens are above the earth. Therefore labor to get faith
in his power. And will you have it to lie dead, when you have it? No. Therefore
add this for a fourth use.

Seek and pray to him in all straits with confidence.
that is the ground of your prayers. You know the Lords prayer is concluded
with this: For thine is thy kingdom, power and glory, for ever and ever. As if
that were the ground of all the petitions that went before. So if the Lord be
Allmighty, and has an Allmighty power, then in the most desperate case, when
there is no hope or help in the creature, that you can discern, yet then
pray, and pray strongly an confidently as men full of hope, to obtain what
they desire.

And remember this for your comfort: At that time, when you are in affliction,
and in so great a strait, that you are hedged about, and no hope, no
possibility to evade, that is the time that the Lord will show forth his power;
for a man is never discouraged but in this case; I have seen it by many
particular experiments: when the case has been desperate, when there has
been no hope, yet when God has been sought to by fasting and prayer, there
has been alteration above all thought, according to that expression used,
Ephesians. 3.20: He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us: that is, when they could not
enlarge their thoughts far, nor were able to see there could be any way
devised, yet enlarging their prayers, the LORD has devised a way oftentimes; I
will give you some instances that the Scripture gives in this case. When Esau
came against Jacob, was he not in a fearful strait; there was no hope, and
no possibility, Esau was too strong for him; what should he do now? he
exposes himself to the enemy, there was no other remedy; and it was an enmity
of twenty years continuance, and the Text says, that Jacob feared, and yet
the LORD delivered him, when he had prayed to him. So when Laban came against
him, GOD bid him that he should do him no hurt. So Daniel, when he was cast
into the Lions den, when all the Lions were present with their mouths opened
ready to devour, yet the Lord stopped their mouths, they could do him no
hurt. So is it in many cases amongst us; when our enemies are ready to devour
us, then GOD comes in in the nicke, between the cup, and the lip, and works a
way for our delivery. Therefore never be discouraged whatsoever thy case be: it
is a very great matter to say, that the Lord can do such a thing, though you
think it but a small thing. As when the Leper could go to Christ, and say,
Lord, thou can make me clean if thou will, then the Lord did so. It was a
great matter for those three children in Dan. 3. to be able to say, when the
fire was ready prepared, and the King was wroth, and there was no resistance,
yet they said, The Lord is able to save us out of thy hand O King! The LORD did
take this so well at their hands, that the LORD did help them, and save them.
On the contrary side, when a man does doubt of his power, you shall see how
much moment it is of. As that Prince said to Eliah, Though God should make
windows in heaven, yet there could not be such a plenty, as he spoke of: now
the LORD was so displeased with it, that he destroyed him for it. So the
Israelites did not believe that the LORD could bring them into the land of
Canaan, therefore the Lords anger was kindled against them for this: Psalm. 78.

But to draw this use to a conclusion. Learn to bring your hearts to this,
whatsoever your case is, still to believe his power, and to be able to say
still, the Lord can do it; and it is not a small matter to be able to say so.
When the Churches are very low, and there is no hope, and you see little help,
a man should go and pray with such cheerfulness and such hope, and
confidence, as if it was the easiest thing in the world to help them; which
you would do, if you did believe that GOD is Allmighty. You know what the case
of the Church was in Ahasuerus time, yet fasting and praying made a great
change in the sudden. Nay when the Church is down, yet pray with as great
hope, as if it had the best props to hold it up, for the Lord is able to raise
it up again.

I will give you two instances, that you may consider the Lords power on both
sides; his power to raise it up from a low condition; (as now, if you consider
the miserable estate of the Church in Christendom at this time:) as it
appears by the vision of the dry bones in Ezekiel: the meaning whereof is,
that when the people are as low as low may be, like dead men, buried men, men
scattered to the four winds, yet says the Lord, I will put life into them; I
will raise them and make them a great army, and I will put grace into them, and
make them living men; that is, though the Church be never so low, yet the Lord
can put life into it, and make a wonderful change.

Again, there is no Church so safe, (as we do think our selves now, and as
the Palatinate did think themselves) but that yet the Lord can make a sudden
change, and bring them down, as well as he could raise these dry bones; and
as he has done to others already. This you shall see. Lam. 4.12. The Kings and
all the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed, that the adversary
and the enemy could have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. Jerusalem was so
strong, there was such probability of safety, that no man would ever have
believed that the enemy and the adversary should ever have entered into the
gates thereof. Yet the Allmighty power of GOD brought them down on a sudden,
and laid them flat to the ground. Therefore let the case be what it will be,
suppose a nation be never so strong, yet GOD can bring them down; and let it
be never so weak and low, yet the Lord is able to raise them up. And it is
true of every particular thing also; then believe this Allmighty power of GOD,
and apply it, whatsoever thy case be; consider that thou have to do with an
Allmighty God.

Lord has declared his will by an event; and the case is such as never was
helped, and will you have us to believe it now, because there is an Allmighty
power?

Christ did: Lord if thou will, let this cup pass from me; yet not my will
but thine be done. Just after this manner you ought to do in every one of
these cases, where there is no hope: you must say thus, Lord, it is possible to
thee to do it, be the case as desperate as it will be. As suppose a man has a
stone in the bladder, which we think an incurable disease, because the stone
is so hard, and cannot be softened, yet it is possible to him; he can so lodge
it, and bed it, that it shall do you no hurt; and if he do take away this
life, yet he gives you a better; if it do pain you here, yet he will give you
joy and peace, which is far better than to endure a little pain in the
flesh. I say, you ought to do as Christ did in this case; and remember this,
that in such a case, your business is not with the power, but with the will of
GOD: that is, you must say, Lord I know it is possible that this cup may pass,
but Lord, here is all the matter; it is my desire that it should pass, and it
may be it is thy will that it shall not, Lord, if this be the case, it is meet
my will should yield, and that thy will should be done: As if Christ should
have said, Lord, I will give thee this honor, that thou can remove this cup
from me, but if thou do not, it is not thy will to do so; and I am
content. So do thou give the Lord this glory of his power in every case, that
he can do it, if it be his will.

Be it that thy desire is to be delivered from such or such an affliction;
consider this: Is it meet Gods will should yield to thine, or thine to his?
Then bring thy heart down, and be content that it should be so.



Gods will; and therefore if it were not best for thee, yet thou should
honor him so far, as to prefer his will before thine own: but it being his
will, thou shall be assured if thou art one that belongs to him, that it shall
be best for thee. Christ was no loser when he yielded to his Fathers will, for
God heard him in what he prayed for: as it is Heb. 5. though the Lords will
passed on him, and he drank of the cup. So thou must yield to his will
whatsoever it is, be content with what is done, and believe that thou shall be
no loser by it in the end, but thou shall have what thou desire, though not
in that manner that thou would have it to be done.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
Absolute. THe perfection of God absolute. Part. 1, Page 121
Adorn. The spirit of man how it should be adorned. Part. 2, Page 15 Adorning
of the spirit commends us to God. Part. 2, Page 18
Adversaries. The truth of the Scriptures proved by the testimony of the
adversaries. Part. 1, Page 53
Advantage. He that puts himself from Gods work for his own advantage,
makes himself his end. Part. 1, Page 149
Affections. Affections inordinately set on a thing, make it a god. Part. 1,
Page 90 Affections sinful must be purged out. Part. 2, Page 62 Affections to
the creatures, what raises them. Part. 2, Page 204 Affections strong breed
strong afflictions. Ibid.
Agreement. Agreement of the prophecies in Scripture. Part. 1, Page 52
Alcoran. Alcoran of Mahomet barbarous. Part. 1, Page 84
Almighty. God is almighty. Part. 2, Page 128 That God is almighty, 70 times
repeated in Scripture. Part. 2, Page 177 We should rejoice that our God is
almighty. Part. 2, Page 186
Alone. To believe that God is God alone. Part. 1, Page 85 To behold God alone
in serving him. Part. 2, Page 36 Why men are not content with God alone. Part.
2, Page 187
Angels. Angels used in guiding the course of things. Part. 1, Page 35
Antiquity. Antiquity of Scripture proves them true. Part. 1, Page 57
Apprehension. Apprehension of things makes them heavy or easy. Part. 2, Page 30
Arts. Arts why invented. Part. 1, Page 3
Assent. Assent double. Part. 1, Page 46 Assent bred differently in the Saints
and others. Part. 1, Page 62
Atheism. Atheism of two kinds. Part. 1, Page 24 Atheism, the effects of
it. Part. 1, Page 25 Iunius converted from atheism Part. 1, Page 56
Attributes. Attributes of God of two sorts Part. 1, Page 119

B.
Beast, see Man. Before. God before all things. Part. 1, Page 120 If God had
any cause, somewhat was before him. Part. 1, Page 140
Being. Being properly only in God. Part. 1, Page 97 Being of God explained in
five things. Ibid. Being given to all things by God. Part. 1, Page 99 We
should give God the praise of his being. 1.112 All things but God are capable
of not being. 1.142 What being he must have that is eternal. Part. 1, Page
157 God the first being. Part. 2, Page 50 God not capable of any new being.
Part. 2, Page 73
Beginning. He that is eternal must be without beginning. Part. 1, Page 157
Body. Body must be kept down. Part. 2, Page 23 Body, gestures of it used in
Gods worship. Part. 2, Page 38
Busy. Why men are so busy in worldly things. Part. 2, Page 132

C.
Cast off. We should take heed God cast us not off. Part. 2, Page 80 The time
of Gods casting off unknown. Part. 2, Page 83
Cause. The creatures should be without cause, if they were not made. Part. 1,
Page 8 God the first cause. Part. 1, Page 39 God without all cause. Part. 1,
Page 140 God a voluntary cause. Part. 2, Page 181
Change. Change in the creature whence it is. Part. 2, Page 75 Change in us a
token of good. Part. 2, Page 94 When we think our condition cannot change, we
doubt of Gods power. Part. 2, Page 195 See Imperfect.
Chronology. Chronology of Scripture exact. Part. 1, Page 55
Church. Churches testimony proves the truth of Scripture. Part. 1, Page 58
Scriptures of greater authority than the Church. Part. 1, Page 59 God will show
himself God in raising the Churches. Part. 1, Page 87 Not to faint in the
misery of the Churches. Part. 1, Page 109
Christ. Christ his humanity alone not to be worshipped. Part. 2, Page 45 See
Mahomet.
Cleave. What makes us cleave to a thing. Part. 1, Page 86
Conceive. God is beyond all that we can conceive. Part. 2, Page 129
Complaint. Complaint and grief whence it arises. Part. 1, Page 104
Command. The creature at Gods command. Part. 1, Page 138
Confusion. Confusion, when the body rules the spirit. Part. 2, Page 21
Comfort, see God, see Heaven.
Composition. God without composition. Part. 2, Page 49
Counsel, see Eternity. Covenant. How to know we are in covenant with God.
Part. 2, Page 85 Covenant twofold. Part. 2, Page 86 Covenant not frustrate by
our sins. Part. 2, Page 87
Constancy. To judge of our spirits by constancy in well-doing. 2; 111
Constancy in ill nothing worse. Part. 2, Page 113 Constancy, to beg it of God.
Ibid. Constancy, two means to get it. Part. 2, Page 115
Company. Company, why it is desired. Part. 2, Page 166 Companions that a man
may always have Part. 2, Page 167 Company, the more grief in want of it, the
less wisdom. Ibid.
Contradiction, see Infinite. Content. To be content with GOD, though with
crosses, Part. 1, Page 130 To be content with a simple condition. Part. 2, Page
54 Content bred by godliness: Part. 2, Page 58
Creature. Creatures, to learn the vanity of them. Part. 1, Page 116 Creatures
of themselves can do nothing for us. Part. 1, Page 137 Creatures, difference
between God and them. Part. 1, Page 146 Creatures, not to go to them but God.
Part. 2, Page 67 Creatures, difference between God and them in respect of his
unchangeablenes: Part. 2, Page 103 Creatures, not to expect much from them:
Ibid:
Creation. Works of creation show the greatness of God: Part. 2, Page 123
Gods omnipotence in the creation. Part. 2, Page 178
Crosses. Crosses, God does his good by them: Part. 1, Page 41 Crosses, faith
strengthens in them, how: Part. 1, Page 105 See Content.

D.
Dead, Death. He that believes not Christ, would not believe one rising from
the dead: Part. 1, Page 42 We cannot see reason for many things till death:
Part. 1, Page 103 Death sweetened by walking with God: Part. 1, Page 165
Decree. Decree of God unchangeable, yet unknown: Part. 2, Page 92
Defend. GOD is able to defend us: Part. 2, Page 166
Delay. Delay of GOD should not offend us, why. Part. 1, Page 168 Delay seems
long, why: Part. 1, Page 169
Depend, Dependent. Not to depend on many things: Part. 2, Page 56 Dependent
felicity to trust in the creature: Part. 2, Page 106
Desires. Desires must be strong that help resolution: Part. 2, Page 121 How
to get strong desires: Ibid:
Despise. What makes a man despise outward things: Part. 2, Page 138
Destroy. A man destroys himself, how Part. 1, Page 10
Die, Dying. Mortifying of lusts a dying daily: Part. 1, Page 66 Heathen gods
die, therefore false Part. 1, Page 81
Direction. Men desire company for direction: Part. 2, Page 166
Discontent. Discontent, whence it is: Part. 1, Page 123
Dispose. Affliction and prosperity disposed by GOD: Part. 1, Page 40 To be
content with GODS disposing of us: Part. 1, Page 124
Do, Doing. We are present with GOD by doing his will: Part. 2, Page 161 To
consider what GOD does to us: Part. 2, Page 162 Some things that GOD cannot
do, why: Part. 2, Page 182
Double. Double-minded man who: Part. 2, Page 60 Sinful affections make the
heart double: Part. 2, Page 62

E.
Effects. Three effects of a firm assent that there is a GOD: Part. 1, Page 70
Efficacy. Efficacy of the creature from GOD: Part. 1, Page 137
Enemy. What an enemy GOD is to wicked men: Part. 2, Page 175
End. All creatures have an end: Part. 1, Page 9 We should do nothing for our
own ends: Part. 1, Page 146 End of men's callings appointed by GOD: Part. 1,
Page 147 When a man makes himself his end: Part. 1, Page 148
Ending. He that is eternal must be without ending: Part. 1, Page 157 See
Advantage.
Ensigns. Ensigns of GODS greatness: Part. 2, Page 124
Equal. Attributes of GOD equal: Part. 2, Page 53 Equality of GODS Attributes
prove him omnipotent: Part. 2, Page 180
Err, see Rule. Essence. Essence of GOD what: Part. 1, Page 94 Essence of GOD
infinite, 2:148
Eternal, Eternity. Eternity of GOD: Part. 1, Page 156 Eternity 5 things in
it: Part. 1, Page 157 Why God must be eternal: Part. 1, Page 158 Four
differences between the eternity of GOD, and duration of the creatures: Part.
1, Page 159 Eternal things to be minded more: Part. 1, Page 161 Eternity, an
exhortation to consider of it: Part. 1, Page 165 Eternity, motives to consider
it: Part. 1, Page 167 Eternity what: Part. 1, Page 168 Love and enmity of GOD
eternal: Part. 1, Page 171 Hatred and joy in GOD from eternity: Part. 2, Page
78 Counsels of God from eternity: Part. 1, Page 81
Evil. Things are not always evil that we think are: Part. 1, Page 42
Everlasting. GOD from everlasting: other gods new: Part. 1, Page 79 GODS being
everlasting. Part. 1, Page 98
Events. Events contrary to man's preparations. Part. 1, Page 39
Exalt. To exalt GOD as GOD: Part. 1, Page 135
Excellency. Excellency outward not to be sought after: Part. 2, Page 17
Excellency outward of 3 sorts: Ibid:

F.
Faculties. Men desire company to exercise their faculties: Part. 2, Page 166
Faint, see Church.
Faith. That there is a GOD, proved by faith: 1, 19, 45 Faith what. Part. 1,
Page 20 Faith in this that there is a GOD should be confirmed: Part. 1, Page 61
Faith of elect and others differ: Part. 1, Page 62 Faith though the same has
several acts: Part. 1, Page 72 Faith strengthened by revealing GODS name:
Part. 1, Page 103
False. The gods, and religion of the Gentiles false: Part. 1, Page 80 The
religion of Mahomet false. Part. 1, Page 82
Fear. Why we should fear God: Part. 1, Page 171 See Goodness.
Fire. The Spirit as Fire: Part. 2, Page 15
Fill. The Lord fills heaven and earth Part. 2, Page 45
Flee. God such an enemy as the wicked cannot flee from: Part. 2, Page 174
Force. Force in the motion of a spirit: Part. 2, Page 3
Foundation. Foundation of faith stable: Part. 2, Page 51
Friendship. Friendship of God to be esteemed: Part. 1, Page 129
Future. Future things known only to God. Part. 1, Page 79

G.
GOD. God, that he is: Part. 1, Page 3 That there is a God: Part. 1, Page 5
Creatures should be God, if they were not made: Part. 1, Page 8 A God sought
naturally by all: Part. 1, Page 14 That there is a God, consequents of it:
Part. 1, Page 28 Means to confirm our faith, that there is a God: Part. 1,
Page 68 That God is God, and none besides him: Part. 1, Page 75 5 Arguments,
that there is no other God: Part. 1, Page 76 God, what he is: Part. 1, Page 94
God, how to conceive of him in prayer: Part. 2, Page 44 GOD, how said to come
and go: Part. 2, Page 77 GOD, the comfort of all things in him: Part. 2, Page
188 See Affections.
Good, Goodness. The commands of GOD for our good: Part. 1, Page 127 Eternity
makes things infinitely good: Part. 1, Page 160 To fear GOD for his goodness:
Part. 2, Page 14 See Observe.
Government. Government of the world by GOD Part. 2, Page 150 See Spirit.
Grace, Gracious. Grace of GOD free: Part. 1, Page 125 The Lord is gracious:
Part. 2, Page 46 To go to GOD for grace: Part. 2, Page 69 See Light, Sin,
Unchangeable.
Grieve, see Himself. Greatness. Greatness of GOD: Part. 2, Page 123
Greatness of GOD declared in six things; Ibid: Greatness of GOD compared:
Part. 2, Page 126 Greatness of mind to be sought Part. 2, Page 129 What makes
the mind great: Part. 2, Page 130 Greatness outward why men are led away with
it: Ibid: Greatness of mind how gotten: Part. 2, Page 137 To fear GOD for
his greatness: Part. 2, Page 140

H.
Hate. Pollution of spirit to hate it: Part. 2, Page 12 How to come to hate it.
Part. 2, Page 13
Heathen. Passages of Scripture acknowledged by Heathen. Part. 1, Page 53
Heaven. No want of outward comforts in heaven. Part. 2, Page 19 See Humble.
Help. No case so desperate but GOD can help: Part. 2, Page 203
Hindered. GOD cannot be hindered: Part. 2, Page 52
High. Not to put our selves to things too high: Part. 1, Page 149
Himself. Being of God of himself. Part. 1, Page 98 GOD may do things for
himself. Part. 1, Page 144 what he does that greiues most for things that
concern himself. Part. 1, Page 150
Hope. Hope of the Saints whereon built: Part. 1, Page 63
Holiness. Holiness of Scripture: Part. 1, Page 52 Holiness what: Part. 2,
Page 37 Holiness expressed outwardly: Part. 2, Page 39 Holiness of God shows
his greatness Part. 2, Page 127
Holy ghost. Holy ghost guided penmen of Scripture: Part. 1, Page 48
Humble. An Humble man takes heaven how Part. 1, Page 121 Humanity, see CHRIST.

I.
I am. I am, what meant by it: Part. 1, Page 95
Idolatry. To keep our hearts from Idolatry: Part. 1, Page 88 Idolatry of two
kinds: Ibid: Idolatry 3 grounds of it: Part. 1, Page 82 Idolatry to resolve on
things by our own strength: Part. 1, Page 112
Image. Image of God: Part. 1, Page 15 Image of God in the soul double: Part.
1, Page 16 Immediate, see Government.
Impure. The life and doctrine of Mahomet impure Part. 1, Page 84
Immense. The Immensity of Gods being: Part. 1, Page 97 Immensity of Gods being
shows his greatness: Part. 2, Page 127 Immensity of God: Part. 2, Page 147
Immensity of God we should rejoice in it: Part. 2, Page 152 Immensity of God we
should study it. Part. 2, Page 153
Imperfection. Imperfection negative in the Saints: Part. 1, Page 121
Imperfection where there is change: Part. 2, Page 73 See perfect.
Impenitence. Impenitence punnished in Gods children: Part. 2, Page 99
Immutable. Immutability of God Part. 2, Page 72 5: reasons of Gods
Immutability: 2, 73 Grace in it self not immutable: Part. 2, Page 115
Inconstancy. Inconstancy, to be humbled for it. Part. 2, Page 112 Inconstancy,
two causes of it: Part. 2, Page 115 Inconstancy from weakness: Part. 2, Page
117
Endeavor. Endeavors help not when God has cast off a man: Part. 2, Page 83
Endeavor, not taken away by Gods decree: Part. 2, Page 92
Infinite. God is infinite: Part. 2, Page 74 To make a creature infinite, were
a contradiction: Part. 2, Page 186 See Essence, Presence.
Invisible. To be invisible, a property of a spirit: Part. 2, Page 2
Inquire. Somewhat in God we must not inquire into. Part. 1, Page 100
Injuries. Injuries of men, why we are so affected with them: Part. 2, Page 133
How to be patient in injuries: Part. 2, Page 156
Influence. To believe there is a God has influence into the whole life: Part.
1, Page 64
Justification. Faith strengthened in matters of justification, whence. Part.
1, Page 71
Just, see Will. Judgments. Judgments spiritual the greatest: Part. 2, Page
27 Judgments dispensed by God now as in former time: 2:98 Judgments of God
different in time, and means. 2:101

K.
Kill. Lusts must be killed: 2:13
Knowledge. Knowledge experimental that there is a God: 1:63

L.
Labor. Labor, how it is sweetened: 1:151
Lame. Performances lame when the body is not exercised: 2:40
Law. Law written in men's hearts proves that there is a God: Part. 1, Page 13
Liberty. Gods presence gives liberty: Part. 2, Page 164
Life. God only the living God: Part. 1, Page 80 Life, the shortness of it
should make us think of eternity: Part. 1, Page 167
Light. What makes all outward things light: Part. 1, Page 163 Prophecies of
Scripture limited to a set time: Part. 1, Page 50 God without limits: Part. 1,
Page 121 Our obedience to God should not be limited: Part. 2, Page 142 When
we limit God, we doubt of his power: Part. 2, Page 195
Lips. Our spirits must be near God, as our lips: Part. 2, Page 33
Long, see Short. Low. We should not rest in things too low: Part. 1, Page 149
GODS power can raise from a low condition: Part. 2, Page 201
Love. GODS immutability makes us love him: Part. 2, Page 88 Love of other
things must be subordinate to the love of GOD: 2.144 To walk with GOD a sign
of love: Part. 2, Page 163
Lusts. Lusts defile the spirit of man: Part. 2, Page 6 The tenth commandment
against lust: Part. 2, Page 7 Lusts restrained hateful to GOD: Part. 2, Page 9
Lusts mortified make us constant in well-doing: Part. 2, Page 115 See Doing.

M.
Magnanimity. An holy magnanimity in enjoying of GOD: Part. 1, Page 134
Magnanimity false: Ibid
Mahomet. Mahomet denied two things in Christ: Part. 1, Page 84 See false.
Majesty. Majesty of Scripture prove the truth of them: Part. 1, Page 56
Majesty of GOD 1, 76.77
Man. That there is a GOD proved by the making of man: Part. 1, Page 6
Difference between the actions of man and beast: Part. 1, Page 17 Heathen Gods
men: Part. 1, Page 81
Matter. GOD without matter: Part. 2, Page 127 GOD can work without matter:
Part. 2, Page 180
Merit. All that we can do cannot merit of GOD: Part. 1, Page 123
Mercy. Mercy of GOD how it is over all his works: Part. 2, Page 54 Mercy
we should go to God for it: Part. 2, Page 68 See Judgment.
Mind. To worship GOD with all the mind. Part. 2, Page 35 See Great.
Miracles. Miracles prove the truth of the Scriptures: Part. 1, Page 48
Mahomets religion wanted miracles: Part. 1, Page 84
Monuments. Monuments, none more ancient than those in Scripture: Part. 1, Page
11
Morrow. Morrow, not to boast of it: Part. 1, Page 118
Move, Motion. GOD not subject to motion. Part. 1, Page 170 A spirit moves it
self and other things: Part. 2, Page 3
Multiplication. No multiplication in GOD: Part. 2, Page 48
Mutability. How to comfort our selves in the mutability of things: Part. 1,
Page 172 Mutability of the creature forgotten: Part. 2, Page 203

N.
Nature. Nature, the course of it altered since the creation. Part. 1, Page 32
Faith strengthened from Gods works in Nature: Part. 2, Page 193
Need. God has no need of any creature. Part. 2, Page 193
Nothing. Outward things nothing in two respects: Part. 1, Page 131

O.
Object, Objection. Single heart looks but upon one object. Part. 2, Page 60
Objections against this principle, that there is a God: Part. 1, Page 30
Observe. GOD observes all we do: Part. 2, Page 168 See Sin.
Omnipotent. Omnipotency of GOD: Part. 2, Page 176 Omnipotency of GOD wherein;
Part. 2, Page 177
Omnipresence. A caution concerning the omnipresence of GOD Part. 2, Page 14
Original. Original of all creatures Part. 1, Page 6 Love, wisdom etc.
originally in GOD: Part. 2, Page 49
Own. Two cases when God punnisheth his own children: Part. 2, Page 99
Outward. Outward man stirrs up the inward: Part. 2, Page 40

P.
Parts. GOD: what parts: Part. 2, Page 50
Perish. Why it is nothing to GOD, that many perish: Part. 1, Page 127
Particular. Prophecies of Scripture particular: Part. 1, Page 50
Perspicuouse. Prophecies of Scripture perspicuouse: Part. 1, Page 50
Perfect, GOD is perfect: Part. 1, Page 120 Perfection what Ibid 5 differences
between perfection in God, and in the creatures: Part. 1, Page 121 To praise
GOD for his perfection: Part. 1, Page 129 4 Signs of praising Gods perfection.
Ibid:
Place. A spirit not held in any place: Part. 2, Page 4
Pleasure. Pleasures, why men are carried away with them: Part. 2, Page 131
Power. Power of GOD every where: Part. 2, Page 149 Power of GOD the end of it:
Part. 2, Page 185 Power of GOD, we should believe it; Part. 2, Page 194 Power
of GOD doubted of: Part. 2, Page 197 Power of GOD manifested: Part. 2, Page 199
Pollution. Pollution of spirit to find it out. Part. 2, Page 10 Pollution,
directions to find it out. Part. 2, Page 11 See Prayer.
Prayer. Fervency in prayer one ground of it: Part. 1, Page 71 Pray against
pollution of spirit. Part. 2, Page 14 Men may pray much, yet not aright. Part.
2, Page 42 Prayer, two times of it: Part. 2, Page 43 He that is rejected of GOD
cannot pray: Part. 2, Page 93 Prayer heard of God now as in former time. Part.
2, Page 103 Power of God should make us pray. Part. 2, Page 198
Praise. Praise of men why men are led away with it Part. 2, Page 131 See
weakness.
Presence, Presently Presence of God infinite: Part. 2, Page 148 How men are
present: Part. 2, Page 155 Why God auengeth not presently: Part. 2, Page 157
Presence seen in 3. things: Part. 2, Page 160 How we are present with God.
Ibid. How we make God present with us: Part. 2, Page 161
Prophets, Prophecies. Prophecies in Scripture prove the truth of it. Part. 1,
Page 50 Poets the Gentiles Prophets: Part. 1, Page 81
Providence. Providence of God, the greatness of it proves that there is no
other God. Part. 1, Page 79 Greatness of God seen in his providence. Part. 2,
Page 125 The ground of Gods particular providence. Part. 2, Page 154
Provoke, See Casting off. Prosper. Those that trust not in God may prosper:
Part. 1, Page 115
Profession. why men leave their profession: Part. 2, Page 88 Fearfulnes in
profession whence: Part. 2, Page 134
Promiscuously. Outward things dispensed promiscuously Part. 2, Page 28
Probabilities. When we are encouraged by probabilities we doubt of Gods
power: Part. 2, Page 194
Punish, see own. Purity. Purity of Scriptures prove them true: Part. 1, Page
56
Purposes. Purposes of GOD brought to pass by ways unknown to us: Part. 1,
Page 36 Strong lusts break strong purposes: Part. 2, Page 116 Purposes 3.
helps to strengthen them: Part. 2, Page 117 Purposes must be renewed: Part. 2,
Page 118

Q.
Quantity. God simple without quantity. 2, 74.

R.
Real. Miracles in Scripture real. Part. 1, Page 49
Reason. Difference between faith and reason: Part. 1, Page 46 Reason for that
faith believes: Ibid. Reason raised by faith. Part. 1, Page 47 Purposes
grounded on reason. Part. 2, Page 118 We must get strong reasons for our
resolution. Part. 2, Page 119
Regard. We should regard the Lord in three things. Part. 1, Page 171
Rejoice, see Immensity. See Almighty. Religion, see False. Repentance.
Repentance, how attributed to God. Part. 2, Page 76 Gods gifts and calling
without Repentance. Part. 2, Page 84
Resolution. Resolution, means to help it. Part. 2, Page 119 Resolution must
be renewed: Part. 2, Page 122 See Desire.
Reject, see Pray. Rest. Of resting in things concerning a man's self. Part. 1,
Page 151
Reward. He that looks for reward from men, makes himself his end Part. 1,
Page 15
Reverence. We should reverence God why Part. 2, Page 145
Righteous. GOD righteous in his ways: Part. 2, Page 79
Root. The root of all sin what: Part. 1, Page 66
Rule. That which goes by a rule may err: Part. 1, Page 144 We should let the
Spirit rule: Part. 2, Page 19 How to know when the Spirit bears rule: Part.
2, Page 22 See confusion.

S.
Scandal. GOD punnisheth his own children in case of Scandal: Part. 2, Page
99
Scriptures. Scriptures proved true by faith 3. ways: Part. 1, Page 48
Scriptures proved by themselves: Part. 1, Page 56 Difference between penmen of
scripture and other writers: Part. 1, Page 80 Whence it is that men take the
judgment of scripture rather then men's fancies: Part. 1, Page 70 How to
understand scriptures: Part. 2, Page 78
Seek. How to know we seek to God Part. 1, Page 130
Serve, service. He that neglects GODS service makes him not his end: Part. 1,
Page 150 Why we should labor to serve GOD: Part. 1, Page 172
Secure. GODS power in bringing down those that are secure: Part. 2, Page 202
Seeing. We are present with GOD by seeing of him: Part. 2, Page 160 GOD
present with us by seeing us: Part. 2, Page 161
Short. The good the creatures do us is short: Part. 1, Page 138 To GOD no time
long or short: Part. 1, Page 160
Sin. The perfection of GOD to be incapable of sin: Part. 1, Page 122
Sin 3. things in it: Part. 1, Page 166 Sin and grace to be thought on
chiefly: Part. 1, Page 167 Sin observed by GOD: Part. 2, Page 168 GOD
therefore Omnipotent because he cannot sin: Part. 2, Page 182 See Light.
Simplicity. Simplicity of God what. 2, 1. Simplicity of God proved by 6
reasons. Part. 2, Page 49 Simplicity, two things in it: Part. 2, Page 60 See
Quantity.
Singleness. Singleness of heart what. Part. 2, Page 37 Singleness to be
labored for. Part. 2, Page 59
Sickness. Sickness in the body of the world. 1.33
Soul. A God proved by the soul of man. Part. 1, Page 15 Soul, the acts of
it depend not on the body: Part. 1, Page 18 God in the world as the soul in
the body. Part. 1, Page 23
Spawne. Spawne of sin in the lusts of the spirit 2; 10
Speak. Speaking to GOD makes us present with him. 2; 161 GOD present with us
by speaking to us; Ibid. How GOD speaks to us now; Part. 2, Page 162
Spirit: GOD a spirit: Part. 2, Page 2 What kind of spirit God is; Ibid 4
Properties of a spirit. Ibid Gods eye especially on the spirit of man. Part. 2,
Page 4 How to fit our spirits for communion with God: Part. 2, Page 6 Pollution
of spirit, how hateful to God, Part. 2, Page 7 Spirit broken pleases God.
Part. 2, Page 8 Directions for cleansing the spirit: Part. 2, Page 10 Gods
government chiefly on men's spirits: Part. 2, Page 25 Spirit GOD guides only:
Part. 2, Page 28 Spirit, the guiding of it of great consequence: Part. 2, Page
29 GOD must be worshipped in spirit. Part. 2, Page 32 To serve GOD in spirit
what: Part. 2, Page 33 How to conceive of a spirit: Part. 2, Page 45 See
Adorn, Judgment.
Stability. Stability in that we enjoy to be begged of GOD: 2 10,
Stronger. The assent in the elect stronger that there is a God, than in
others. Part. 1, Page 62
Substantial. Perfection in God substantial. Part. 1, Page 122
Succession. God without succession. Part. 1, Page 98 He that is eternal,
must be without succession. Part. 1, Page 157
Suffer. Why men rather sin than suffer: Part. 1, Page 25

T.
Temptations. Temptations, we must outbid them. Part. 2, Page 120
Testament. Testament both old and new acknowledged by Mahomet. Part. 1, Page
82 Testimony, see Adversaries, Church.
Theology. Theology what. Part. 1, Page 1 Theology, wherein it differs
from other sciences. Part. 1, Page 2 Theology, the parts of it. Part. 1, Page
3 Difference in points of Theology. Part. 1, Page 5
Time. Time dispensed by God. Part. 1, Page 158 All time present with God.
1.159 Time of outward things short. Part. 1, Page 162 God the Lord of time.
Part. 1, Page 174 Time as a field to be sown. Ibid. Time double. Part. 2, Page
83 See Judgment.
Thoughts. How to be rid of ill thoughts. Part. 2, Page 169
Together. God possesses all things together. Part. 1, Page 159
Trust. To trust in God. Part. 1, Page 171

V.
Vanity. Vanity (...) our own stre^^^^ 1 1^3 See (...)
Vessels. All outward things earthen vessels. Part. 2, Page 105
Visible. Miracles of Scripture visible: Part. 1, Page 48
Understanding. Objects of the understanding of two sorts. Part. 1, Page 21
Unchangeable. Men make excuses from this, that Gods decree is unchangeable.
Part. 2, Page 95 Upon what occasion the doctrine of Gods unchangeablenesse is
revealed. Part. 2, Page 96 The end, and use of the doctrine of Gods
unchangeablenesse: Part. 2, Page 97 To prize things by their unchangeablenesse.
Part. 2, Page 106 Grace unchangeable. Part. 2, Page 107 See Decree.
Unmixed. The perfection of God unmixed. Part. 1, Page 121 Voluntary, see Cause.

VV
Walk. To walk with God. Part. 2, Page 159 To walk with God what: Part. 2,
Page 160 See Love.
Want. How faith is strengthened in our wants. Part. 1, Page 103 Perfection of
GOD without want: Part. 1, Page 122 To make use of Gods power in our wants;
Part. 2, Page 19^
Weakness. Weakness, to regard praise of men; Part. ^, Page 133 See
Inconstancy.
Weaned. To use outward things with weaned hearts; Part. 2, Page 57
Weary. The soul not weary in its action; Part. 1, Page 19
Wheels. Observations from the wheels in Ezekiel: 1. Part. 1, Page 35
Will. God wills not things because they are just, but they are just because he
wills them: Part. 1, Page 143 Gods power large as his will: Part. 2, Page 181
Men doubt more of Gods power than his will Part. 2, Page 194 No loss by
yielding to Gods will: Part. 2, Page 204
Wisdom. Wisdom carnal opposite to sincerity. 2.65 See Company:
Word. Word of God unchangeable, Part. 2, Page 108
Works. Works of God, the greatness of them: 1, 78: Good works
unchangeable: Part. 2, Page 108 Gods greatness seen in his works: Part. 2,
Page 129
World: World, the dissolution of it proved: Part. 1, Page 31 World, why we are
sent into it, Part. 1, Page 168 World, God without it as well as in it: Part.
2, Page 148 God able to make other worlds 1.149
Worship, see Spirit, Christ. Worth: Want of worth in us must not discourage
us from coming to God. Part. 1, Page 125

FJNJS.
ERRATA.
Part. 1. Page 50, line 2, blot out all. p: 53, l: 17, for nicurus read
Nisurus. p: 56, l: 15, r: in such a manner. p: 59, l: 27, for this argument r:
themselves. p: 62, l: 21, blot out ^ven p: 6^, l. 18, for where r: when* p. 71,
l: 28, for the r: this. p: 80, l: 10, blot out but p: 86, l: 9, for device; r:
Divines. p: 87, l: 8, for Esay's r: Asa's. p: 88, l: ^4, for head r: hand. p:
97, l: 28, for place r: phras^ p: 108, l: 5, blot out upon. p: 109, l: 9; for
at r: ^o p: 121, l. 25, for you r: them; p: 128, l. 12, for Isay 56, 17; r.
Deuteronomy. 6, 24; p. 129, l: 1 for in r: ^t, l: 10, for, for that r* such in the
margent, for entitling r: exalting; p 143, l. 15 for and r, as; p. 145, l: 3,
for filled r: fitted; p: 149, l. 17, for all r. ought; p. 150. l. ult. for
measure r, manner: p: 164, l 16 for, dlace, rplace p: 165, l: 26, for behold r.
beloved; p. 167 l. 10, blot out and no more p 173, l 30, begin Use 5, at Seeing
God, etc.

Part. 2. Page 21. line ult read, to the nature of a spirit. p 42, l ^, r. were
no God p 44 l 11, for out of a conceit, r. without deceit; p. 50, l. 19 for
some r something; p* 53, l. 22, for or r and; p 62, l: 29, for miscarriage r.
dissembling; p. 65, l 12, for thing r. means; p 72, l. 12, for will not be, r.
is not; p 76, l 13, for seems r is said; p 80, l. 18, for eternity r times; p
105, l 22, r, it has it; p, 118, l, 116, for nothing r, no other desire; p,
119, l, 6, for caseth r, causes; p, 120, l, 8, for suspect r, expect, p, 122,
l, 1, for all this while r, otherwise; p, 12^, l, 29, r, of the maker; p, 123,
l, 7, for handles r, did handle; p, 133, l, 3, for fears r, favors, p, 138,
l, 3, for if God was great r, though God were great, p, 142, l, ^2, for loss,
r, enduring; p, 144, l, 15, for an ordinate r, coordinate; p, 147, l, 14 r,
infiniteness of, etc, p, 148, l, 24, for quality r, quantity; p, 149, l, 24,
for and r, or; p, 151, l, 24, for governors r, go^^^nment, p, 1^4, l, 10 for
need r, reason p, 169, l, 7, for a glass r, of glase p, 170. l, 14, r no man;
p, 1^0, l, 22, for then, r, them, p, 181, l, 5, for as large as the object r,
of equal largenes, p. 182, l, ^, for not work, r, does not work. p, 186, l,
9, for proportionable for its end r, ap^o^^t^d for the effect as its end; p,
195, l, 14, for man r, many, p, 1^8, l, 17, for his power is r, it is, p, 201,
l 18 for as it r, as if it. p. 203, l. 14, for is far better than to endure,
r. will far exceed the enduring.


