THE GOLDEN SCEPTER. with - The Churches Marriage, And THE CHURCHES CARRIAGE In
three Treatissis. BY The late Learned Divine, JOHN PRESTON. Dr. in D. and Chap:
in Ordinary to his Matie. Mr. of Emmanuell College in Cambridge. And sometime
Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

London. Printed by R. Badger, for N. Bourne A. Boler. and R. Harford. sold at
ye Royal Exchange. and at ye Marigold in Paul's Chu: yard. and at ye Bible in
Queens head Alley, in Pater Noster Row. 1639

THE GOLDEN SCEPTER held forth to the humble. WITH THE CHVRCHES DIGNITY by
her Marriage. AND THE CHVRCHES DVTIE in her Carriage. In three Treatises. The
former delivered in sundry Sermons in Cambridge, for the weekly Fasts, 1625.
The two latter in Lincolnes Inn. By the late learned and reverend Divine, JOHN
PRESTON, Dr. in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, Mr. of Emanuel
College in Cambridge, and sometime Preacher at Lincolnes Inn.

PSALM. 45 6. Thy throne O GOD is for ever and ever: the scepter of thy
kingdom is a right scepter IER. 3. 14. Return O backsliding children, for I
am married unto you. HOS. 2. 7. I will go and return unto my first husband
for then it was better with me than now. LON^ON, Printed by R. Badger for N
Bourne at the Royal Exchange, and R. Harford at the gilt BIBLE in Queenes-head
Alley in Paternoster Row, and by F. Eglesfield at the MARIGOLD in PAUL'S
Churchyard. 1638.

TO THE TRVLY VIRTUOUS AND RELIGIOUS Gentleman, RICHARD KNIGHTLEY, Esquire.
SIR,
IT has been our custom hitherto, who were deputed by the Author to this
service, to inscribe or dedicate the several tractates we have put forth, to
some or other of his special friends, as proofs of our fidelity, in
discharging of the trust reposed in us, and special emblemes of the Authors
great abilities. For if in every trivial and small Epistle, a man do exarare
animam, imprint upon the paper some pieces of his soul, he does it much more
doubtless in his studied exercises, wherein he cannot but conceive his memory
may live, and some part of himself be kept alive, and sweet to all posterity.

If he could say, non omnis moriar, because Horat.
he was a Poet, and think his Poem perennius aere, a monument that time it
self would not be able to divoure: how much more may he say it that draws
himself unto the life in an immortal Dye, and writes such characters as are
not subject to decay and perish? For all flesh is grass, and all the glory of
man as the flower of grass: the grass withers, and the flower falls away,
but the word of the Lord endures for ever: and this is the word, which by the
Gospel is preached unto you, 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25.

Seeing therefore it has pleased God to preserve these pieces yet alive, and
after long deferring and desiring, to produce and bring them forth to public
view; we have thought good, in a prime and special manner to entitle you unto
them, and to send them out unto the world under the covert and shadow of your
name.

For seeing it pleased the Author to choose your habitation, wherein to put
off and lay up his (then) decaying and declining body, why should it not be
proper and convenient, to send these living and surviving pieces of his soul,
for to attend it? considering especially, how much his body heretofore had
waited on his soul, which otherwise, in humane probability, might still have
been alive.

Neither is there any doubt, but these vigorous and useful breathings of his
spirit, will find access and entertainment, where his languid, and at last, his
breathless body did. Especially these which may more properly be counted his,
than any thing that hitherto has seen the light, and this we dare be bold to
say for these, that none of them did more express the Author to the life.

Those that did either know him in his life time, or since have much and
frequently perused his writings, shall find these three things every where
occurring.

The foulness of sin, the freeness of grace, and the fullness of duty,
which in other pieces only scattered, and sparkling here and there, are here
collected under proper heads, and handled so professedly and clearly, as
nothing more concerning them can be desired.

In the first are the danger and deformity of sin, driving the spouse to sad
and low expressions of her self, as those virgins were commanded, Deuteronomy. 21.
11, 12, 13. Even to shave her head, and pare her nails, and bewail her father
and her mother, that is, her natural and inbred evils and corruptions.

In the second, is the glorious freeness of the grace of Christ, receiving
this dejected and humbled captive unto favor, and, with that great King, Hest.
5. 2. reaching forth the Golden Scepter of his love and mercy to her, not only
to the pardon and forgiveness of all her sin, but intitling also of her unto
all things, for all things are hers, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
the world, or life, or death, or things prosent, or things to come, all are
hers, because she is Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.

In the third, the fullness of her duty is pressed upon her, for, the grace of
God, that brings salvation, does no sooner appear to any man, but it
teaches to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11, 12. that as before
Ahasuerus had the virgins purified that were to approach his bed, with various
and costly powders and perfumes, Hest. 2. 12, etc. so Christ, when once the
soul is faithfully espoused unto him, perfumes and washes her in his most
precious blood, and beautifies her with variety of graces, that he may present
her to himself a glorious Spouse, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, but that she should be holy, and without blame, Ephesians. 5. 27.

And now what rests, but that these Treatises crave shadow and protection from
you, nay own you for their Patron? Does not the low and humble posture of your
mind entitle you unto the first? your high opinion of free grace, unto the
second? and your holy and spotless carriage, to the third? Having so just a
title (besides other engagements) by this threefold claim, it is but justice to
call your name upon it; and, by your acceptance of it, you shall show
friendship to this Posthume, and especially oblige

Your already much obliged, and engaged, THOMAS GOODWIN. THOMAS BALL.


The Contents of the first Treatise.
Doct. 1. GOd afflicts his own people. 3 Reas. 1. Because he loves them. 4 2.
That his name be not blasphemed. Ibid. 3. He will be sanctified in those that
draw near him. Ibid. 4. He walks among them. 5 Use 1. To fear the Lord. 6 2.
Want of fear provokes God. 13 3. Gods severity to wicked men. 18 4. Not to
think strange that God afflicts his. 19 Doct. 2. God pities his people in
affliction. 20 Reas. 1. He is slow to affl^ct. 21 2. He sustaines them in
affliction. Ibid. 3. He brings them through affliction. 25 Use 1. Not to be
discouraged in affliction. 32 2. To come to God when we have offended him. 35
3. To lead us to repentance. 37 4 To choose the Lord for our God. 41 5. To
confirm us in that choice. 45 Doct 3. The Lords name is called upon his
people. 47 Reas. God has chosen them. 48 Use 1. To learn obedience. 49 2. To
humble our selves. 53 3. Not to pollute Gods name. 59 4. Not to be ashamed to
profess Gods name. Ibid. Comfort, concerning our selves, and the Church. 63
Doct 4. Without humiliation no mercy. 66 Reas. 1. The necessity of humiliation.
69 2. Else there will be no returning from sin. 71 3. Else there will be no
constancy. 73 4. Else God should not have the praise of his mercy. 74 Use 1.
Exhortation to the humble. 101 2. To those that are not humbled. 103 Doct. 5.
The Lord is merciful to the humble. 112 Reas. 1. To give God the glory. 113 2.
Humility keeps a man in compass. Ibid. 3. It makes him useful to others. 114
4. It makes him obedient. 114 Use 1. Consolation to the humble. 115 2. To
strengthen faith. 118 3. To be humble in afflictions. 123 4. Exhortation to be
more humble. 124 5. Not to apply the promises without humiliation. 131 Doct. 6.
All performances nothing without seeking Gods face. 132 Reas. God is holy. 150
Use. 1. To examine if we seek Gods face. 153 2. To seek the Lord, and not our
selves. 168 3. Not to forget the Lord in the midst of his mercies. 172 Doct.
7. No interest in promises without turning from evil ways. 186 Use 1.
Examination. 197 2. No duties serve without turning. 219 3. Good purposes alone
insufficient. 222 Doct. 8. Turning from our evil ways difficult. 224 Reas. 1.
They are pleasant. Ibid. 2. Agreeable to nature. 225 3. They are backed by the
law of the members. Ibid. Use. To make our labor answerable to the work. 229
Doct. 9. All sins forgiven to the humble that forsake sin. 254 Reas. 1.
From the truth of God. 256 2. From his goodness. 257 Use 1. To exclude wicked
men from mercy. 263 2. To trust perfectly in Gods mercy. 267 3. Exhortation to
be humbled. 272 Doct. 10. All calamities from sin. 279 Use 1. To look to the
root of calamities. 281 2. To see sin in its own colors. 283 3. How to remove
crosses. 284 Doct. 11. If sin be not removed as well as the cross, it is
never removed in mercy. 287 Reas. 1. Because sin is worse than any cross. 288
The Lord does nothing in vain. Ibid. Use. By the issue of our afflictions to
judge of our estate, and Gods love to us. Ibid. Doct. 12. Take away sin, and
the cross will depart. 290 Reas. 1. Because crosses come from sin. 290 2. God
never afflicts, but for our profit. 291 Use. To comfort us against our fears,
that the cross will always continue. Ibid.
The Contents of the second Treatise.
Doct. THere is a match between Christ and his Church. 1 Use 1. To apply
Christ himself. 6 2. To persuade men to take Christ. 23 Motives to it. Ibid.
Impediments. 38
The Contents of the third Treatise.
Doct. EVery one that takes Christ ought to be subject to him, and it is best
for him. 76 Reas. 1. He is the head. 78 He is a Savior. 80 Use. Exhortation to
come to Christ. 82 Doct. Christ is the Head and Savior of his Church, and
every member of it. 90 Use 1. To be obedient to Christ. 91 2. To choose Christ
for our Head. 93 3. To draw influence from him. 95 4. How to know we are in
Christ. 99 Trials of our subjection to Christ. 104 5. To be the glory of
Christ. 133 6. To try our condition. 137
THE GOLDEN SCEPTER.
^ CHRON. 7. 14. If my people which are called by my name, shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways:
then will I hear in heaven, and will be merciful to their sin, and will
heal their land.
THese words contain the answer GOD gave to Salomons Prayer, which he made
when he dedicated the Temple: His Prayer was, that when they prayed on earth,
he should hear in heaven: And God promises in the words I have read to do
all that Solomon asks: which promise contains three parts.

First, That he would hear in heaven, which 1.
phrase notes out either his power, that he is able to bring to pass what he
assents to do; men are said to hear on earth, because they can do little;
but God in heaven; or else it implies, that though he seems to be far off
from his people, yea though in heaven, yet he will hear at last.

The Second part is, that he will pardon their sins, 2
and it is of all other mercies the greatest, for sin hinders all good things,
and opens a gap to all evils, and therefore David says, Blessed is the man,
whose sin is forgiven: of all requests it is the greatest that we can make,
and of all grants the greatest that God vouchsafes.

Thirdly, He will heal their land, and remove their affliction: Now observe
the order of this, in that 3
before he does it, he pardons their sin.

Now this promise is farther set forth by two things.

First, the persons to whom it is made; the people of Israel and Judah,
notified by two attributes; 1
First they are his people; Secondly, called by his name, or on whom his name
is called, as the name of the husband is called upon the wife, or of the fa
there upon the sons; and as they in Antioch, and we are called Christians from
CHRIST.

Secondly, the conditions this promise is made upon for it is the Lords manner
to put promises upon 2
conditions.

First, if they be humbled, and humble themselves. 1


Secondly, if that humiliation, be not contained within the compass of their
breasts only, but expressed 2
by prayer and confession of sins.

Thirdly, if they seek my face, seek to be reconciled, 3
seek his presence as separated from all things else, not seeking Corn, Wine,
Oil, but GOD himself.

Fourthly, if they part with their sins in seeking, 4
for they cannot maintain Communion with him else, for God dwells in light, and
he who walks in darkness, can have no fellowship with him. And thus you have
the Analysis of the words; we in handling them will not use this method, but
begin with the words as they lie, and will observe first these three Doctrines
from these words.

If my people called by my Name FIrst, God sends sharp afflictions on his own
1 Doct.
people: this appears by the Coherence, for in the words before the text, If I
send plague, etc. then if my people, etc.

Secondly, that yet in them the Lord is very tender 2 Doct.
and full of compassion to his people; this loving compellation [my people]
argues as much, it is as if he should say, I cannot forget you, for you are
called by my Name, you are mine, though I thus punish you.

Thirdly, that the Lords Name is called upon his 3 Doct.
people. For the first, the Scripture is frequent in examples of this kind, so
as I shall not need to stand to name any places to you, they are so well known
already.

I come to reasons of it, why it is so.

First, he sends sharp afflictions on them because he loves them, they are
such as belong to him, and Reas. 1.
the ground of this reason is, because, Ira est tam ex amore quam ex odio;
Anger is as much out of love as hatred; it is a true rule though it may seem a
paradox, because when one loves another, he desires much from the party
beloved and expects much from him, and therefore a cross and stubborn action
from such a one provokes more to anger, than from any other man; as from a Son,
from a Friend, from a Wife, it wounds more; and therefore God says of
himself, that he is a jealous God: Jealousy is a mixed affection of love and
anger, the meaning is, if I find my peoples affection stealing out from me, I
am presently affected, as a jealous husband uses to be in such a case, and
there is no anger to that, nor none sooner stirred: God will endure ten times
as much from another, but when one that he has taken into covenant with him,
offends him, he is angry, and will therefore be sure to send some sharp
affliction on him, which is the fruit of his anger, for his anger is not in
vain.

Secondly, he does it that his Name might not be blasphemed, that was the
reason he gives, why he 2.
punished David when he committed adultery, for the Lord must of necessity do
it for their sakes that stand by and look on, to show to them that he cannot
endure such things, no not in his own people.

Thirdly, because he has said, that he will be sanctified of all that draw
near to him, he will have them 3.
know that he is an holy God, hating iniquity; and that none should draw nigh
to him, but such as have holy hearts, and pure hands: and this was the reason
why he did send fire upon Corah, Dathan and Abiram; Number. 16. 9
The Lord has separated you, and you draw near to himself, says Moses to
them, and that in the nearest manner to do service as Priests to offer
Sacrifice, and you are among the heads of the people, and therefore he will not
forbear you, others that are afar off (it may be) God will long and far
forbear, but others that are sanctified to the Lord, and draw near to him in
profession and in the opinion of others, and also so indeed, of those God will
either be sanctified by their bringing holy hearts before him, or else he will
vindicate his holiness by punishing them, and will not suffer them to go on
with profane hearts.

Fourthly, because they are his people among whom 4
he walks, and with whom he dwells, 2 Cor. 6. and the three last verses, and
the beginning of the seventh Chapter, he is conversant among them; But you will
say, is he not every where else? yes, but he is there as a man is in his own
house, among his sons and daughters, observing every thing, looking narrowly to
them, and because he is still with them, therefore he will endure no
uncleanness among them: thence it was that in the Camp he commanded every man
to carry his paddle with him, when he went aside to bury it, that no outward
filthiness might appear, for I walk among you, he did it, to show by that
which is odious to us, that we should hide what is odious to him, namely sin,
and filthiness, which caused him to loath his house, to loath Israel: when
Israel was so unswept and so filthy, God loathed it and so departed from it,
and so Asahel came upon them. God will be sure to plow his own ground,
whatsoever becomes of the wast, to weed his own Garden, though the rest of
the world should be let alone, to grow wild.

But you will object and say, that the Saints we see, often sin, and
afflictions do not follow.

I answer, it may be and does fall out often, and the reason is because God
finds his work done to his hand. If they plow themselves up, God will not,
but if we do it by halves (as that is our fault we leave many balkes behind
us) then God always comes with afflictions, yet then the less that you leave
behind unplowed, the less will God afflict you: if you humble your selves
thoroughly, you shall escape, except only in the case of scandal, and then God
must needs do it for their sakes that look on, as in David, God would have all
the world see his punishment on him, as well as they knew of his sin, but
this comfort you may have though you have greatly sinned, (if not scandalously)
that humble your selves thoroughly, and you shall escape.

Learn from hence to fear the Lord, to tremble at his words, and seeing he
will endure no uncleanness Use 1.
in his own people, stand in aw and sin not: labor to bring your hearts to
such a constitution, to such an awful respect as to fear to omit any good
duty, or commit the least sin, and this had need to be urged upon you, for it
is the cause of all that laxiture and looseness in our profession, that we do
not fear the Lord as we should. If we had the fear of the Lord before our
eyes (as the Apostles speaks Romans 3.) that is, if we saw the Lord so as to
fear him, we should walk warily and look how, and where we set every step,
and the reason why you are so uneven and not like your selves, is from want of
the fear of the Lord: Now the reason of that phrase of the Apostle that the
fear of God is said to be before your eyes is from the nature of fear, Timor
figit oculum, as if a man be busy about any thing, if there be any thing that
he fears, he will still have an eye to that, and he watches least it should
come with some by blow, when he thinks not of it, and so does the fear of the
Lord work where it is, it fastneth our eyes on him: And if the Lord were thus
before our eyes to fear him, it would make us walk more evenly and more
constantly with him. And therefore when the holy Ghost in Scripture would choose
to commend a man, he singles out this property, especially of fearing God, as
that Job was an upright man fearing God, and so speaking of Cornelius, it is
said that he was, a just man fearing God, and so Abraham when he would
express the wickedness of the Court of Abimelech, he says, the fear of the
Lord is not in this place, that is, there is no religion nor good men, God is
not regarded there, and the more fear, the less sin, stand in awe Psalm. 4.
and sin not. If a man stand in awe of the Lord he would be afraid of every
sin, he would be afraid of vain thoughts, to be vain in his speeches and to
give way to the least wickedness, afraid of every inordinate affection, he
would be afraid how he spent the time from morning till night, and how to give
an account thereof, afraid of recreations, least he should sleep too much, or
sleep too little, eat too much, or eat too little, as knowing all is but to
whet the sith to make him the fitter for his harvest work, and therefore
would be afraid to forbear refreshments too-much or to use them too little. I
beseech you therefore that are in Covenant with the Lord, and nearest to him,
that know your selves to be within the Covenant, to consider this and learn
to fear. And to help you in this, take two places of Scripture, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
If you call on the Father who judges without respect of persons, according to
every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear; that is,
seeing you have such a Father that judges every person, all his children, he
will certainly afflict you if you offend him: Therefore fear to do it. The
other is, Heb. 12. 28, 29: Let us serve him with all reverence and godly fear,
for even our God is a consuming fire, [our God] whom we worship is not made all
of mercy, he has other Attributes joined with them, to you he is a consuming
fire; If you will not serve him with fear, though not immediately to consume
you utterly, yet to afflict you, and thereby to consume your lusts; so as it is
a dangerous thing to be negligent of him, to meddle with him who is a consuming
fire.

How sharply did God deal with David, who was yet nearer him than any of us;
first he took away the child from him, which to him was a sharp affliction,
he being a tender Father, and had a strong affection to his life, as appears
by his fastings, and the like he had to Absolon, who yet was a Rebel against
him; and then to have almost all the people to fall from him, when he was an
old King, to have Concubines abused so openly, and the sword never to depart
from his house; all these sat close to him, went near his soul; besides his
shame, to have his sin discovered to all the world, as appears by Psalm. 51.
Have not we cause then to spend o^r time in fear, if he dealt thus with
David? and do not say, that though he dealt thus with David offending of him,
that yet he will not do thus with me, for is he not a Father that judges all
his sons, and that without respect of persons, as the Apostle says? Consider
also what he did to Jacob and Rebecca for consulting and agreeing to get the
blessing by a lie, for though the thing she went about was good and they had a
warrant for it, and their end was good; yet they used ill means (a lie). But
GOD met with them both for it, Jacob was therefore put to live twenty years
from his Mothers house (whereas he should have staid Gods leisure, and not have
been too hasty for the accomplishment of that promise, for he that believes
does not make haste: and so God promises riches and all good things to his
children, as much as they can desire, but they must not make haste, that is
their fault) and when he was coming home again, what a fear was he put to
from Esau, that lie of his being the cause of their falling out! and how did
Rebecca also for all that while want the comfort of a son she loved, and had
none to live with but Esau? And so Moses was dearer to God than any man upon
earth, he never spoke with any face to face as with him, yet he would have
slain him in the Inn, for not circumcising his Child, and also because of
that other sin at the waters of Meriba, he chooses an affliction for him,
wherein he most of all crossed his desires denying him to go into the Land of
Canaan, it may be some small affliction in show as this seemed to be, which
yet pincheth sorely, and some great affliction on the contrary in bulk to
others, that is not so to him that bears it; And thus he also deals with Eli,
a zealous man (would any of us were so in these days) for when news was
brought that his sons were dead, and many of the people slain, he was not so
much troubled at that, as that the Ark of the Lord was taken, and this amazed
him so as that he fell backward and brake his neck: you see the holiness of
the man, yet because he had preferred his sons before the Lord, did not
govern them well, God did not only thus take away his life, and of his
sons, but the Priesthood also from his house for ever, and have not we all
cause to fear then? How did he deal with the good Prophet that was slain by
a Lion, his fault that he believed another man's word, pretending that he had
Gods Word, when he had Gods Word expressly given to himself, this sin was as
the sin of Eve who believed the Devils word, when she had Gods Word expressly,
and therefore let us when we have the Word of the Lord stick close to it. And
so however he deal with Gideon a worthy man reckoned up among those worthies,
Heb. 11. yet when he made an Ephod, see what judgment fell upon his children,
Judge. 9. and all his house was cut off.

These examples are useful for you to consider, that you might know and fear
the Lord, and the want of this is the cause of this remissness and loosnesse
in our profession, and that we do not so consider our ways. Saint Paul was an
holy man, and one that stood in near terms with Jesus Christ, yet feared
exceedingly, 2 Cor. 5. We knowing the terror of the Lord persuade men; And
Job that was very exact in his life, which appears by the 31. Chap. which
Chapter is nothing else but an expression of the manner of his carriage, which
was very exact, verse 23. he gives this as a reason, the punishments of the
Lord were a terror to me, and so in the 2. verse the reason why he would not
give liberty to his eyes to look on a Maid, was for that he considered, what
portion then shall I have with the Almighty? and this fear of the Lord is
needful at this time, when God has discovered himself to be angry with the
Land, which is not only for the gross sins of wicked men, but the sins of
the Saints also; It is your coldness, remissness and laxitude. I have two
grounds for it, first in the Revel. 2. because Ephesus was fallen from her
first love, therefore he would remove her Candlestick, that is, the whole
Church among them, carry them into Captivity, for I cannot see by the
Candlestick how only the Ministry should be meant; and so in the Rev. 3.
because Laodicea was neither hot nor cold; therefore will I spue them out of my
mouth, God would endure them no longer, and therefore you that think your
estates the best, even you have had a hand in this plague, you think that
other men's sins, the sins of wicked men are the cause of it, but God he
knows, that they cannot pray and have no life in them, as you have; and
though-their sins also be a cause, and a maine cause, as appears by the
Amorites, whose sins when full, God punished; yet I say they are yours also:
And therefore, when there is an evident sign, that God has a controversy
with a Kingdom and the Churches, and a sign of his wrath is proclaimed from
heaven, then every man must do something; now fear the Lord, be zealous,
repent and do your first works, begin now to mend your pace to heaven: and
yet would only there were a want of zeal among you, yea is it not in
disgrace, is not a zealous man hooted at, as an Owl among us? this place, the
excellency of it is exceedingly abated and eclipsed, the zeal of it is
withered, the Lord is departed from us; learn to be more zealous, and God
will return and cause you to flourish again; for when God looks upon a
people, it is with them as with the earth in spring time, and when he departs
from them, they are as withered trees in winter, and where now is the zeal of
former times, the Communion of Saints, the heating and whetting of one another,
by mutual exhortations; where is the boldness for the Lord? Those holy
prayers, those former times are gone, the light of those times remain, but not
the heat, as also if we look back upon that Generation of Queen Elizabeth;
how are we changed! they were zealous, but here is another generation come in
their room, that is dead, and cold, and yet we have their light, but ignis qui
in illis calidus, in nobis lucidus tantum. But, I beseech you, that you would
now begin to stir up your selves, especially in these times of fasting, when
there must be an extraordinary renewing of a man's covenant with God, that you
would not now be so cold, and so dilute as you have been; and seeing you have
that you would have, and have desired long public days of humiliation, that
you would labor to spend them with all care and diligence and quickness of
spirit, and to consider that the maine is to be done at home with your selves,
for the end of these days is, that you may be humbled, which you will never
be, till you consider your particular sins, get up early in the morning, for
then your spirits are quick, and so you will have a long time before you come
to the congregation, and get you all that while alone, and consider your
particular sins, and the holy duties you neglect, and renew your repentance,
and enter into covenant; and then when you come hither you shall find the word
to have another manner of working upon you than it has ordinarily.

If God be thus ready to punish his own children, Use 2.
and that thus sharply, it shows the sin of those that are fearelesse and
careless, which provokes God exceedingly, Zach. 4. 15. I am very sore
displeased with the careless heathen, the heathens had sins enough besides to
anger the Lord, yet this sin did it above other sins, and it is not to be
wondered at that it should, for it is a rule in Philosophy, and most true, that
of all things that which provokes a man most, is contempt, in so much that
Aristotle makes it the only cause of anger, though therein he is deceived,
yet it is the maine; we use to say non respondere pro convitio est, it is a
sign of contempt not to answer again, as when a man is chidden and stricken,
and non respondere to go by, as if he took no notice of it at Gods hand,
this is contempt. And thus a Father when he is angry with his son, or a Master
with his servant, how hainously does he take it! And so God who now has
discovered his wrath to the whole Land, and to every particular man in it, this
neglect of him will cause his wrath to wax hot against us, but yet for the land
in general we have cause to hope that his wrath does not so, but that God
takes it well at our hands, that we are thus publicly assembled: but let me
say this, though, to every particular man, though God spare the Kingdom, yet
if thou neglect him and be careless, it will go the worse with thee however.
In the 50. Psalm when he had expressed great threatenings in the former
verses; he concludes with this, Consider this, O all ye that forget God! you
that mind him not, least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you: and so in the Prophet Jeremy 5, 12, 13, 14. verses, because you
say that his words are but wind, they shall be as fire, and you as dry wood,
and they shall devour you. This is the great fault of men, that they are ready
to fear things which they should not fear, the creatures, poverty and
discredit, but are backward to fear the Lord.

God says of the Church Rev. 2. 12. Fear not the things thou shall suffer;
what all the world fears, that do not you fear, fear not the things you
shall suffer, those things you ought not to fear, but fear those things you
should do, and who is afraid of them, least he should provoke God in them?
And so Christ says, fear not men, no, not those that have power of life and
death (if we should fear any, it should be them) remember that was the
commendation of Moses, he feared not the wrath of Pharaoh; when you place your
fear thus amiss, it becomes a snare to you; for it makes your hearts busy
upon the creatures, when they ought to be set upon the Lord; but when your
fear is placed upon God, it does exceedingly help you, nothing more: to give
you an instance or two, you shall find David exceedingly struck with the
fear of the Lord, when Ziglag was burnt; no accident ever so amazed him: when
he fled before Absolon, he bore it much better, yet that fear helped al, for
it set him a work to pray; so Iehoshaphats fear did also help him, when he
heard of a great Army coming against him, it set him on work to pray, and so
turned away the Judgment: and therefore things that you so fear, when your
fear is placed on God, seldom come to pass, for that sets men on work to
prevent them, whereas evil fear brings the thing with it. Saul feared the
Armies of the Philistines exceedingly, that made him seek to the Witch, and
this wrought his overthrow which he feared: so Jeroboam feared the loss of
his Kingdom, and that fear made him set up the Calves which lost him his
Kingdom indeed; learn therefore to fear the Lord: nothing brings a Judgment
so much as the want of fear, security is the next door to a Judgment.
L^^hish was a secure people, and when the Army came against them, they and
their City fell as Figgs from a tree that are ripe, so did they fall in their
enemies mouths, security is a forerunner to every man's Judgment, Esaias 66. 2.
To him that fears me, says God, and trembles at my words, to him will I
look to keep him safe; if not, I will neglect him as much as he me, I will
have no eye to save him, as he has no eye to me to cause him to fear and
tremble. But you will say, how may I bring my heart to fear the Lord? I answer,
first pray to the Lord to strike your hearts with a fear of him, it is the the
work of God to bring the fear of himself upon us, for it is he that brings
the fear of one man upon another, he brought a fear upon all the Nations of
the Land, when the people of Israel entered Canaan, much more the fear of
himself, for the affections are such things as the Lord only can meddle with,
and therefore the Apostle says, You are taught of the Lord to love one another.

It must be the Lord, that must put in such an affection into you, for his
teaching is planting the affections, and so he is said to teach other
creatures, that is, to give this or that inclination, and so the Lord is said
to fashion the hearts of men; and then they cannot choose but fear him:
therefore go to the Lord, and say, Lord I am not able to fear thee: and say,
Lord thou have promised to give the Holy Ghost to those that ask it of thee,
that works every grace: if you would seek him so, and seek him
importunately, though you had the securest hardest heart of any in the world,
he would at length teach you to fear him. Ier. 40. I will plant Ier. 40.
my fear in your hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Thus you see that
God takes the doing of this to himself, it must be of his planting, and he
has promised also you see to do it.

This is not all, but there is something we must do our selves.

Therefore secondly, observe the Lords dealing 2 Observe Gods dealing.
with his, learn to know him in his ways, and that will be a means to cause
thee to fear him: if any of his children sin, he never lets them go, for then
should they thrive in evil, and prosper in sin; but if they will be
meddling, they shall be sure to find some bitterness in the end. When a man's
heart is set upon the creatures, there being thorns in them all, and therefore
if he will graspe too much of them, or too hard, he shall find it: Gods
children are trained up so to it, that God will not let them go away with a
sin; if they be too adulterously affected, they shall find a cross in such
a thing: you may observe this, in the 30. Psalm; Psalm. 30. 5
there you may see the circle God goes in with his children; David had many
afflictions, as appears by the 5 verse, I cried, and then God returned to me,
and joy came* what did David then? I said in my heart, I shall never be
removed: his heart grew wanton, but God would not let him go away so, God
turned away his face again, and I was troubled. At the 7 verse verse 7.
he is you see, in trouble again: well, David cries again, at the 8 and 10
verses, and then God turned his mourning into joy again. And this to be his
dealing you shall find it in all the Scriptures, but because we find this his
dealing set so close together in this Psalm, therefore I name it. Therefore
observe the ways of the Lord to you, and they that are not acquainted with
these his ways, as yet in themselves, see what he has done to others in all
the world; in our neighbor Churches: when he had given a bill of divorce to
Israel, yet Judah had not feared: now when God has stricken our neighbor
Churches, do you think he will take it well, if we be idle spectators?
therefore when he has stricken another place, learn to fear.

If he afflicts his own children thus sharply, let them look to themselves,
that are not his; whether Use. 3. God will be more severe to wicked men.
they be gross sinners, profane persons, of whom there is no question; or
mere civil men, and formal professors, in whom there is no power of grace: if
he be thus hot against his own Church, his anger will be seventimes hotter
against you: it may be longer deferred as his manner is, yet when he strikes,
he will strike you in the root, not in the branches; and that so as he will
not Strike the second time: Consider that in the 50 Psalm, that he will tear
you in pieces; and you that are profane ones, Psalm. 50.
let me say to you, as 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do you provoke the Lord to anger? are
you stronger than he? Those 1 Cor. 10. 22
that lie in open prophanenes, and do fight openly 1 Profane.
against the Lord, and have not so much as a show of turning; yea and those
that are merely civil, and yet lie in secret sins; that yet are in health,
wealth and credit in the world; it is a sign that God means them no good, he
would not let his own Garden go so long unplowed.

And in the second place for professors, that do 2. Civil men.
not answer their profession in their lives, take heed, for he that is not with
me is against me; it may be thou art no enemy, not very stirring in any evil
way, but because thou art not with GOD in good earnest, because your hearts are
not perfect, at the last day you will be found against him, CHRIST will come
against you in good earnest as an enemy; and whereas all your hope lies, that
GOD is merciful and CHRIST a Savior, learn to know that this JESUS, whom
you hope to be saved by, will prove the sharpest enemy against you, Kiss the
Son lest he be angry: the Son may be angry, as he who Rev. 2. has Revel. 2.
his eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet like fi ne brass to tread you to
powder; he shall come against you that are formal: and know, that JESUS CHRIST
is not only a Savior, but a Lord; that he came into the world to be a Prince,
and the government is upon his shoulders; you forget that part of his office,
half the end for which CHRIST came into the World, and if you would know what
kind of Governor he is, Ex. 23. 21. I will send my Angel with you Exodus 23. 21.
(says God) that is Christ, beware of him and obey his voice, and provoke him
not, for my name is in him: he is of the same spirit and disposition with his
father, and they are both alike affected to sin; beware of him, he goes along
with you, and he will not spare you, for the LORD has put all the government
upon him.

Let it not seem strange, that he has or should Use 4. Not to think strange
that God afflicts his.
deal thus with his Churches abroad; what though the Candlestick be removed
out of the Palatinate, because they were lukewarm, and fallen from their first
love? what if he should do it in France? what if in England? in the Low
countries? should it seem strange to us? It is his manner so to do: He
removed Judah and Jerusalem often out of their pla ces; we should not be
offended at it, if he does, or if he should do thus with us, as thinking that
it is a sign that our religion is not the true religion, and that he does not
love his Churches; yes those he loves most he soonest affl^cts, for Judgment
must begin at the house of God, that is, he looks on all the world, as on
Europe now, and where he sees his house is, there he begins with them, for
he is to use others to afflict them; and therefore he begins with them
first. Amos 2. 2. You have I known of all the Nations, therefore will I
afflict you soonest and frequentliest, though not more deeply than others; for
though the Church be brought under water, yet she shall rise again. I speak
this, because men are subject to be offended at it, and Bell larmine I
remember, makes that an argument, that theirs is the Church, because they have
had so ma ny victories against the Protestants, and our Church has been ever
and anon down, but by that argument the captivity should not have lighted upon
Judah's, but upon Nebuchadnezzars people.

The second Doctrine was, that Though God send very sharp afflictions upon his
own people, yet therein Doct. 2. God pitties his people in affliction.
his kindness and compassions are exceeding great toward them: he calls them
you see here, my people, as if he should have said, you are mine, and I cannot
forget you; a man loves that which is his own, much more God, who is all love.
And this DoDoctrine had need to be added to the former.

Now the reasons and demonstrations of this are three.

Because he is exceeding slow to afflict, and exceeding Reas. 1. He is slow to
afflict.
long about it, ere he does begin, and therefore he makes many offers often
before he does it, as one that could find in his heart not to do it at all.
Psalm. 78. 38. It is said, he being full of compassion Psalm. 78. 38.
forgave their iniquity, yea many a time did he call back his anger, when his
hand was up, and he giving the blow, he called it back again, as one that
could not find in his heart to do it; and when he did it, he did not stir
up all his wrath; he let fall some drops of it, but would not shed the whole
shower of it; and he gives the reason of both, for they are but flesh; and
indeed his primary scope is to show mercy, and that he afflicts, is but upon
occasion; and therefore he is provoked, and provoked much before he does it:
As the Be to Simile.
give honey, it is natural to it, but it stings but by occasion, when it is
provoked; and this we see to be true in GOD by experience, who suffersmen,
and suffers them long, they continue in their sins, and yet he continues his
mercies, and withholds his judgments.

His compassion is shown in sustaining them in 2 He sustaines them in
afflictions. Dan. 11. 33. 34.
their afflictions, and in helping them in the midst of them, Daniel 11. 33,
34. When his people should fall by the sword, and by the flame etc. it is said
they should be helped with a little help, that is, so much as would sustain
them, bear them up: the like we have Zach. 13. 9. I will bring a third part
through the fire, Zach. 13. 9.
and they shall come out refined, as Gold and Silver is refined, lose nothing
but their dross, so as he would sustain them, hold them up. And this he
does by doing of two things, 1 by moderating their affliction, 2 by so framing
and fashioning their hearts, so as they shall be able to bear them.

He moderates them; they are Still in measure, and not beyond their strength,
Revel. 2. 10. says (...) By moderating them.
Christ to the Church of Smyrna, Fear none of those things which thou shall
suffer; behold Satan shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be
tried, and you shall have tribulation ten days: as if he should have said, I
will moderate this persecution, and do measure out the time to you, but ten
days and no more; and therefore fear not: so as you shall not have so much as
Satan would, for he would never give over; nor so little as you would, for
then you should not be afflicted at all. If you ask now what it is to be
afflicted in measure? I answer, if afflictions lie so To be afflicted in
measure, what.
upon his children as to cause them to put forth their hands to wickedness,
then it is above measure, but if so as they never fret nor faint under it, it
is not: now he has promised, that he will so accommodate afflictions, as they
shall not work so with his people, Psalm. 125. 3. The rod of the wicked shall
not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest he put forth his hand to Psalm.
125. 3.
iniquity; it shall not be so long as to cause a distemper in the spirit of
them, so as they should not carry themselves in a meek manner under it: I
mean not so, but that at the first it may cause a bustling in their spirits,
as it did in Job, when it grew sharp, and he spoke unadvisedly, yet not a
substantial disquiet, he came to himself again. To this purpose let the
Psalm 129. 3, 4. be compared Psalm. 129. 3, 4.
with the former, God compares there the afflicters of his people to plowers
set to plow his ground, (the Babylonians and all the other enemies were but
Gods plowers) now they should not do it, as to do them any hurt, no more than
for his advantage and his Churches, they should not go a foot further, for
then God cuts their cords in sunder, and when the traces are cut, then the plow
stands still, goes not a jot further, let the horses do what they will.

The second way of sustaining them is, in that he 2 Fashioning their hearts to
bear it.
so fashioneth their hearts, as they shall be able well to bear it; and then
though it be great, if they have strength to bear it, it is the less; A great
burden on a strong man's shoulders, is no more than a small one on a weak
man's. We often wonder that God should lay so great afflictions on his children,
but we do not see their inward strength and ability they have to bear them.

Now first he fashioneth their hearts to pray, and 1 To Pray. Romans 8. 26.
not to murmr, and the greatest affliction it is nothing if they can but
pray, in Romans 8. 26. that is one comfort brought in among the rest, that
sweetneth our afflictions, that the Spirit helps our infirmities, and
teaches us to pray.

He frames their hearts to repent, and that they 2 To Repent.
should not sin against him, and if sin be not mingled with an affliction,
it is not bitter, if a good conscience be joined with it: for then it is
heavy, when it falls upon the shoulder out of joint, or upon the sore place,
and therefore S. Paul he cared not for death or the prison, because he had a
clear conscience, all his afflictions were nothing to him, for he bare them
with a whole shoulder; sin wounds the soul, and then affliction dropped in,
causes smart.

He frames their hearts to patience, and so that keeps their spirit whole, so
as they possess their 3 To Patience.
souls, and themselves: as on the contrary impatience takes the soul off the
hinges, puts it out of it self: but whilst a man's spirit is strong and it
self, it will bear its infirmities, but when impatient, it will bear
nothing; when therefore afflictions are thus mingled with prayers, and
repentance, and a good conscience and patience, it is easy to bear them, and
it is GOD mingles their cup thus. And as CHRIST said, shall not I drink of the
Cup which my Father has mingled? although the cup be bitter, yet the
ingredients he puts in it, makes it sweet, GOD mingles a cup to them in
another manner then to others: See how he mingled a cup to Ahitophel, it was
no great thing in it self, it was but that disparagement in the rejection of
his counsel, yet such an ingredient was put in, such an apprehension by Gods
providence (for though God was not the author of it, yet he suffered Satan to
do it) as that it brake his heart, and he hanged himself. See the contrary in
David, when Ziglag was burnt, a great and sudden affliction, yet he bare it
well, for he had comfort from the Lord, an ingredient with it which encouraged
him in God, and so when he fled before Absalom his own son, a great and
bitter affliction, yet he bare it with such a mind, as if he had been in his
bed asleep, as appears by the third Psalm, which was made upon that
occasion: Psalm 3.
when ten thousand were encamped against him; yet he feared no more, then if
he had had never an enemy in the world. I will lay me down and sleep, etc.

Thirdly, his compassion is shown in bringing Reas. 3. In bringing them
through.
them through, and giving them a good issue and comfortable fruit of all; as
appears by that place of Zachary 13. 9. He carried them through the fire, and
fined them thereby as Gold, led them out, and caused them to lose nothing but
their dross; or as the Wheat loses nothing in the winnowing, but the chafe.
There is an excellent place for this purpose in Esaias 27. 8. In measure in Esaias
27. 8.
the branches thereof thou will debate with it (so some read it.) God
promises in the former part that Israel should grow like a fruitful tree, and
flourish; and though he afflicted them, yet it should not be so, as he
afflicts others, has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? no,
he smote them in the root, but him in the branches, so as he should grow the
more by it; God compares himself to a man that loppeth his tree, but medleth
not with the root or body of the tree, but with the branches only, and that
just so far as need was, and where they should be cut, and that in season,
and at the just time, that it may grow the more; for this is to do it in
measure: and this is no more than necessary, to make the tree shoot the more;
and it were spoiled, if he did not deal thus with it. Now he smites others
at such a time, as they are most unfit for it, and that in the root, so as he
causes them to wither, they are losers by it; as appears by that wicked King
Ioram, 2 Kings 6. 33. This evil is of the Lord, and what should I wait on the
Lord any longer? and by that of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. etc. Then 2 Kings 6. 33.
2 Chronicles. 28 22.
in time of distress Ahab yet trespassed more against the Lord: this was that
King Ahaz, this was the end of that affliction.

But some good soul will object and say, I do not find this fruit of my
afflictions. Quest.


It may be thou do not for the present; but stay a little till God has made
an end, and thou shall Answ. Afflictions of Gods people work good in the end.
see that affliction which thou thoughtest most sharp, and for which thou
saw no reason, and by which for a while you saw you got no good; yet when
the Lord has made an end and put all together, then I say thou shall find thy
worst takings, thy worst condition profitable and useful to thee; in the time
of Winter when the trees wither, an unwise man would wonder to see such a
spoil, but when the Spring comes, you know the benefit of it; you should not
have had such a Spring but for such a Winter: And so those varieties of
afflictions and crosses which God leads thee through, those sins, those
puttings back which we think can no way be advantageou^ to us, they ever in
the end will bring forth a Sp^^^g time, for all things work together for good.
Judge not by one particular, but stay till God has put all together, and thou
shall see it is for good. Thence it is that Saint James would have us, James 1.
2. When we fall into diverse temptations, James 1, 2.
to count it exceeding great joy, that is, he does not say, when you go in
step by step, but when you are precipitated, fall all on the sudden, and are
pluhged into them; so the word in the original signifies. And secondly, not
into one, but into all sorts, into diverse afflictions at once; affliction in
Estate, Body, Wife, Children, one upon the neck of another: yet rejoice, and
not only so, but be exceeding glad, as glad as a Merchant man is to see his
Ships come from the Indies laden with riches, and full of treasure; so
beneficial should they be in the end. Now except they did always bring home
such treasure, and proved not in the issue exceeding good and profitable, he
could not have desired them thus to rejoice.

Now if you ask the reasons why it is so, that God deals thus.
God deals thus with his Children in afflictions? I answer out of the text.

First says he, they are my people, they are his 1 Because they are his
people.
own, and therefore he is full of bowels of compassion toward them, as a man
is to his own child, because it is his, Hosea 11. 8. thou art mine, and I
cannot Hose. 11. 8.
deal with thee as with a stranger, for my bowels are turned within me, as it
is there, when it came to the casting away of his child, he cannot do it. So, 1 Samuel 12. 22. The Lord will not forsake you, for you are his people. And so
also, (...) 7. 18. Who is 1 Samuel 12. 22. Micah 7. 18.
a god like unto our God, that pard^^^ (...) iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of thine heritage? there lies the reason; they are
a remnant, they are chosen out of the rest of the world, and to them he is so
merciful, as there is none like unto him, it would make a man stand amazed at
it.

They are a people called by his name: as he has 2 They are called by his
name.
chosen them to be his, so it is taken notice of that they are his, and he
has owned them, his name is upon them by profession, and therefore he will
spare them, for his name sake, because of them that stand by and take notice of
them: for if he should deal hardly with them, none would serve him; for when
servants are hardly dealt withal, who will serve such masters? And this
argument Moses uses, Numb. 14. Lord spare them (says he) and if it be, but
for thy Names sake, for what will all the Nations Numb. 14.
say? that either thou art such a God as art unkind, and would not save them,
or a weak God, and could not.

But you will say, we see the contrary by daily experience, we see great and
sore afflictions befall Object.
Gods people, yea, it may be some here of his will say, they have felt and
tasted of great afflictions.

I answer, you may mistake in afflictions, they are not always such
afflictions as they seem to be: Answ. Mistake in afflictions.
for (...) we say of the Sun, Sol non patitur eclipsin, sed videtur tantum
pati, the Sun keeps his light even in eclipses firm and clear, so often
those afflictions which you think great, are nothing at all in themselves,
they seem so to us only: so the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. we seem to be men
sorrowful, yet always 2 Cor. 6.
rejoicing, seem to be poor, but possessing all things, all was nothing to
Paul: for affliction lies only in the apprehension, and so many of those
grevous afflictions and tortures which Martyrs and the children of God endured
though to us they seem great, yet I am persuaded were nothing to many of them.

But thou will say, this is not my case; I feel, I Object.
am sure the sting of it.

I answer thee, first, that God lays it not on thee, Answ. Afflictions
needful.
till thou have need: the Physician knows the body of the patient better than
himself, and the soul has more intricate diseases than the body, and he sees
thy secret pride, security, etc. it may be when thou see them not; as
Hezekiah did not; so that when thou see no reason of such a sharp affliction
as purging physic for thee, he does, and does not administer it but when
there is need.

And secondly, he does not go a jot beyond thy need; 2 God afflicts no more
then needs. Esaias 28. 24.
and this will appear by the opening of two excellent similitudes, Esaias 28.
(for all the wits in the world cannot find out better expressions than the
Word has; if we had eyes to see the glory of them) from the 24. verse
downward; First, does the Plowman plow all day to sow? and open and break
the clods of his ground, when he has made plain the face thereof? does he
not cast abroad the fetches? scatter the cummin, the wheat, and the rye? for
the lord has instructed him to do so. The husbandman he tells you, plowes
not but where he means to sow, and to have an harvest, and the plow goes no
longer then till the clods be broken, and says he, God has given him this
discretion; and therefore shall not God have the same and use the same
himself? do thou think that thou art plowed longer then thouneedest? it is
but till the clods, thy stiff spirit be broken; and whereas thou may
think thy heart soft enough, it may be so for some grace, but God has seeds
of all sorts to cast in the wheat and the Rye; and that ground which is soft
enough for one, is not for another. And again, secondly when it comes to
harvest, to some maturity, he has to thresh it with diverse kinds of
instruments (which is the second similitude) ver. 27. The Fitches are not
threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is the Cart wheel turned about
upon the Cummin, but they are beaten out with a staff and a rod; but
bread-corne, Wheat is bruised with the wheel, because he should not always be
threshing it. So GOD beholds every man's strength, and knows what affliction
is most suitable for him, he finds out a fit instrument for every grain; his
end is but to drive thee out of the husk of thy circumcision, of some lusts
whereof some sits more close to the heart than other: and as the wheat and the
husk sits closer together than in other grains, and therefore the wheel goes
over it, and when it is threshed enough, and GOD has unloosed the heart and
the sin, the husk and the wheat, he does it no longer: now says he, this is
from the LORD, who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working; and
therefore as when you see an husbandman do so with his ground and grain, you
judge him a wise man in doing so, so also is GOD therein.

But you will say, for all these good words and Object.
setting it forth thus, we are sure, and see and feel by experience, that the
Saints always fare as ill as the worst when general afflictions come, Plague,
Sword or Captivity, they are swept away by these as well as others, and what
afflictions are there (go through the sons of men,) that fall not upon the
Saints as well as upon others?

For answer, it is true, those deluges of afflictions Answ. Difference in
afflictions
which over-whelme whole Countries take away one as well as another, yet there
is a difference, as Ier. 24. all were carried into the same captivity by Ier. 24
the same King, but yet they were carried in diverse baskets, the bad in one
basket, the good in another; which shows the condition of the one was
different from the other: First the LORD knows the good figs, his eyes are
upon them for good, to see that no hurt should befall them, that was hurt
indeed: And secondly, again he did but send them into captivity, as one is
sent of an errand, but the other are led as a condemned man to the Jaile:
Thirdly, he would bring them again, when they had done the business for
which they were sent, when they had humbled themselves, sanctified his name
more; many the like ends the LORD has: but the other he utterly destroyed,
and they never returned.

But will some say, the afflictions that I endure Object.
are of an extraordinary nature, never any was so afflicted as I (as the manner
of man is to complain) there is a peculiarity in mine, and it is not one but
many, and these for a long time have layen upon me.

I answer, it is true, they are often of an extraordinary Answ. Why God sends
many and great afflictions.
nature, and there is good reason for it: For a small affliction would not
bring thee home to GOD, it is not a little headache, a scratch with a pin that
drives a man to the Physician; but such a disease as a man apprehends death in,
makes a man seek out for help: and the reason why; first, these afflictions
are many is, (...) because thou have many diseases to be healed, lusts of
diverse sorts, and thou must have diversity of afflictions applied to them; and
again if God should not change afflictions, thy affliction would grow
familiar; and as Physic when it is made familiar to the body works not, so
would not those afflictions: and 2 they are also often long, because some
sins stick close, and are not easily got off, the stain in some sinkes
deeper, and requires a great deal of scouring. Dan. 11. Many shall fall Dan.
11.
by the Sword, Famine, etc. their trialls were of many kinds and long, that
they might be made white, into which yet they should not fall nor continue in,
if men would be scoured and made white sooner. I have stood longer upon this
and the opening of it, because either it has or will be of much use one day
to many of us: and seeing we know not what we are reserved for, it is good to
treasure up these things, that we may know the ways of God aforehand, and so
bear what comes the better, for it is ignorance that makes afflictions so
unsupportable when they come. We will come to the uses.

Learn hence not to be discouraged whatsoever thy case be, whether thou have
been afflicted in Use 1. Not to be discouraged in afflictions.
name by reproaches, so as thou think, thou shall never get thy credit
again; or in body by diseases, that thou shall never have thy health again,
or in soul by doubts, that thou art in such an estate that thou shall never
be raised again, remember the exceeding great kindness of the Lord, and know
whatsoever thine afflictions be, he is able easily to scatter them: this I
speak, because as men in prosperity do think, it will always continue, and
tomorrow will be as to day, and much more abundant; so in affliction, that it
will never be otherwise. What unfaithfullnes is this! are not all times in
Gods hands? as David says Psalm. 31. he that alters the Psalm 31.
weather, he that turns the Winter into Summer: It is a storm now, and half
an hour after the Sun shines; all in the weather, so such alterations is God
able to make in men's estates: and comfort thy self with this, it shall lie no
longer on thee, then there is need, the plaster shall not lie a jot longer
than the sore is a healing. If it were sooner healed, it would fall off sooner;
but then it shall fall off alone; though sorrow be in the evening, yet joy
shall come in Psalm 30.
the morning; because the anger of God never lasts but for a while; and the
reason is given Mica 7. 8. Mica 7. 8.
for mercy pleases him: take him always when he is angry with his children,
and there is but a short brunt of it, his constant course is otherwise, for
mercy pleases him: now that which a man delights in he will be doing long,
he can hardly be taken off from it: as if it grieved him to do otherwise:
when therefore it is long I say, it is per accidens, as when thy heart is
harder than ordinary; for some are more stubborn than others. Ah, but thou will Object.
say, this of mine is a great affliction, and I know not how it should be
helped, unless the LORD should work miracles. It may be it is so; and indeed
Answ. No avoiding afflictions sent.
when God will send an affliction, all the world cannot keep it off. In Zach.
1. there were four horns, did beset the children of Israel to afflict them,
so as which way soever they went and would have fled, one would have met them,
whether to the East or to the West, etc. no way left to escape, no evasion; for
when God will afflict, he will afflict, and there shall be no door to go out
at; else it were not an affliction: for what matter is it for a man to be in a
smoaky house, if he has a door to go out at? but yet what do these horns
serve for but to push them home to the Lord? and though a man cannot escape
them, yet there is this comfort, that though those horns be as strong as the
horns of an Unicorn, so as all the world cannot knock them off, yet when they
have pushed them to the Lord, then the Prophet God in due time removes
affliction.
saw 4 Carpenters, and wherefore came those Carpenters? to knock off every
horn, and to cast them out, so that every nation was frayed away, that was
against Judah; not the Assyrian, not Babylon, nor none of them left: so that as
when God will afflict a man, nothing can hinder him, so also when the Lord will
scatter the affliction again, and will raise a man, nothing shall hinder
neither, he will do it be it never so great. Be not discouraged then: what
though the storm grow great and violent? one word of his mouth will allay and
still both storms and winds, as in Mar. 5. one word did it: so take the most
grievous disease that thou have long lain under, Marks 5.
and which thou think often thou shall never recover, yet one word will rebuke
it: take the worst and bitterest and powerfullest enemy of the Church, such as
Haman, if God speak but a word to him, as he did to Laban, hurt not this man,
he cannot hurt thee; one word of the Lord Jesus tames them all; Mar. 4. 40, 41.
only bring faith with thee. Mark. 4. 40, 41. In the great storm, why did you
fear, oh, you of little faith, (faith Christ to his Disciples, when they were
so exceedingly troubled) as if he had said; it is not the greatness of this
storm that breeds this fear, but the littlenes of your faith. So when all the
people murmured at the red Sea, what was the reason that Moses was quiet all
that while when they murmured? Stay (says he) a while, and you shall see the
salvation of God: the reason of the difference was, Moses believed, they did
not.

So as the trouble comes not from the greatness of the affliction, but the
littleness of your faith: when therefore afflictions shall come, be not, be
not discouraged, lose not your selves, but possess your selves with patience:
keep this as a sure conclusion against all objections, that God will be
merciful to his people.

I^ the Lord then so full of pity and bowels to Use 2. To come to God, when
we have offended him.
his own people? Learn thou to come to the Lord, when you have offended him:
If indeed God had so hard an heart as would never relent, then when you had
sinned, you might go some whither else for comfort; but now come again unto
the Lord, as being assured of good success: this use we see made of it by
Samuel in the like case to the people of Israel. 1 Samuel 12. When the people had
committed 1 Samuel 12, 20.
that great sin, wherein as he told them, they had not only cast away him,
but the Lord; and God had declared his wrath against them in storms from
heaven, in the time of the latter harvest: yet at the 20. verse. says Samuel;
Fear not, ye have done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following
the Lord; and he gives two reasons. 1. Because all other things they would go
to, would not profit them, they were vain. Secondly, because that the LORD
will not forsake his people for his great Name sake, because it has pleased
him to make you his people; as if he had said, I would not have you lessen the
sin, seek out excuses (as indeed that is our fault in such cases) no, that
is not the way, you have committed a monstrous transgression, yet forsake not
the Lord. Samuel said this, because that which keeps men off What keeps men
from coming to God.
from the Lord is discouragement; for many a man, if he had (it may be) a
voice from Heaven that would assure him, if he came in, his sins would be
pardoned; I do not think but they would come in though they love their sins
well: But the maine thing that keeps them off, is, men do not think God so
ready to receive and pardon them. Now therefore (says Samuel) you are his
people, and the LORD cannot forsake his own, let a man have a child of his
own even when it is young and troublesome, and nothing pleasant in it, yet
because it is his own, his affections will not off from it, yea his affections
will hold on, although when it is grown up, it provokes him an hundred times,
because it is his own. Now if they should ask how it comes to pass that they
are his? Samuel tells them, because it pleased him to make you his people; there
is no other reason can be given of it: so that if any of the children of God
looking upon all the world lying in wickedness, and should ask the reason why
I should be in this good condition rather then they, there is no other than
that it pleased GOD to make him so, GOD loves for no merits, which should teach
us to look out of our selves, less into our hearts in this case, and more to
the Attributes of GOD, to return in Ier. 3. GOD says there, it Jeremy 3.
is true indeed, that if you come to any man in the world when his wife has
played the harlot, will he receive her again? no, a man's heart in this case
cannot relent, he has not mercy enough, his heart is too narrow, But thou have
played the harlot many a time, yet return to me, says GOD; for look how much
larger GODS heart is then a man's, so much larger are his mercies.

If GOD be thus exceeding merciful and pitiful, Use. 3. To lead us to
repentance. Romans 2. 4.
this should lead men to repentance: there is that in the thing that leads
you, so Romans 2. 4. when either GOD expresses his mercies toward us by his
behavior and merciful dealings with us, or causes his Ministers to offer
mercies unto us, it leads to repentance. It has indeed a contrary effect
almost in all in the world; for whom do not GODS mercies lead from him rather
then to him? but take heed lest you turn the grace of GOD into wantonness,
which yet men ordinarily do. The more favor, the more means they have
enjoyed, the more wanton they grow, that is, the more bold, losing their
respect to GOD; even as a child is apt to do when his father carries himself
kind toward him, he cannot bear it, he has not the discretion to consider,
that it should lead him to obedience, but grows bold and wanton. And you
should also make this use of mercies, that the meditations of them should
stir up your hearts to a more kindly sorrow for your sins, to think that
you have deserved to be cut off long ago, and that you have committed such
sins, for which many are in hell long since. God expects this at your hands;
and let us make this use of it in these days of humiliation, the maine work
whereof is to humble your selves; and we are to labor to humble you, not only
by denouncing Gods judgments, but by expressions of his mercies also.

A digression (concerning Fasting) to the occasion.
THere is a double manner of doing this duty, Double performance of Fasts.
one wholly public, which should be from morning till night in public by the
whole land, that al together might confess and humble themselves for the
sins of it; which is more extraordinary. 1 Public.
But secondly, as for these days which are kept from week to week thus, it
is well ordered, that the time is so limited for these public exercises, as
that there is time left for the private: for the 2 Private.
business of particular humiliation goes forward better then; and these
public exercises tend but to that end, and what is the means without the end
be attained? that is, that every man should mourn apart: so Zach. 12. when it
was a business of mourning, every Zach. 12.
family did it apart, and the wives apart: the wife and the husband are the
nearest, and if any 1 By confession of sins.
should be together, one would think they should; and yet they must be then
apart: and the reason is, because nothing humbles so much as particular
sins, those wound the heart, which in public are not so much confessed, but
in general only; but when you are every one in private, then you may consider
what your lusts, your actions have been, and the circumstances of them; then
you may search your hearts and ways, look back and reflect upon your selves;
and that is the maine business and duties of these days. Some of you it may
be, will say; I know not how to spend my time in private, when I am from the
Church: but consider, have thou not committed many sins? consider them, can
thou not speak and confess them? and say, Lord I confess I have fallen back
into this again and again. But secondly when you 2 Seeking reconciliation.
have done this, seek reconciliation and beg it earnestly, which the heart
will do when it is touched with the sense of sin, and the enumeration of
them will work your hearts to it; when you see the multitudes, the
circumstances, the aggravations of them; and because this is the greatest of
all your requests, therefore you must be the most earnest in it; and therefore
God does purposely withold assurance often, to teach men, what it is to be
reconciled to him; and fasting serves to intend your prayers, that they may be
the more earnest. Thirdly renew your covenants also, consider what sins 3
Renewing covenants.
you are most inclined to, and what occasions draw you most to those sins,
and vow against them. Consider what good duties you have slighted most, and
that your hearts are most apt to fail in; and promise better obedience.
Fourthly, not only 4 To be willing to leave fin.
make a promise, but labor to bring your hearts to be willing to leave those
sins in good earnest, and to perform those duties; and when the heart is
strongly biased any way, it is hard to alter it, it is no easy matter to get
an inward willingness; you must therefore have much reasoning with your hearts
to bring them to it. Fifthly, when they are brought into a good temper, they are
easily subject to be distempered 5. Labor to keep our hearts in a good temper.
again; our affections shoot too far into worldly businesses: your love, your
fear, your grief is subject to be too much in something, and it is not easy
to bring the soul back again; you must therefore take a great deal of
pains with your hearts.

That which is said of Ministers, fullones animarum, fullers of men's souls,
that is every man now to be himself, to wash out the stains of his heart, and
to make his soul whiter, as it is, Dan. 11. and that will move GOD either not
to bring afflictions, Dan. 11.
or to remove them: and therefore cleanse your hearts from all pollution of
flesh and spirit, and know that to get stains of a deep dye out will cost a
great deal of pains, you must scour till your souls ache again, and though
it cause the skin to come off, and if you do the work your selves thus, and
plow your own hearts, GOD shall not need to do it by afflictions; therefore
do it, and give not over till you have done it, and have brought your hearts
to be thoroughly humbled for them, for that is a great means to do it. What
else is the meaning of that in James 4. Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, etc.
but how should we do it, would some say? afflict James 4.
your selves and mourn, and let your laughter be turned into mourning: be
content to sit alone, get out of company, and not to take your former
liberties, and mourn and humble your selves, and do it constantly: for it is
not bowing down the head for a day, which God regards; but let sorrow abide in
your hearts; It is continuance that God regards: do it, and do it to purpose,
for the want of this, is the reason of the coldness and remissness in our
profession; namely, that we are not thoroughly and constantly humbled, it is the
ground of every grace and the growth of it: What seed is sown in a heart
broken in pieces, thrives and prospers, but all instructions falling upon an
heart not broken will bring forth no fruit. If you were humbled, we should
find wonderful fruit of our Ministry. Do this therefore but one day, and you
will be the fitter for it the next: Sorrow should be as a spring that runs a
long constantly from day to day. The sorrows of many are but as land-flouds;
and take heed that the continuance of this duty from week to week, make you
not slacken your course herein, suffer not your hands to faint. When these
duties are new, you are apt to do much; but when a while continued, to be
perfunctory in them. And let not any man complain that he loses a days work;
for is there any work so necessary, as the salvation of the soul? Neither
complain, that a days study is lost, for is there any excellency to the
saving Image of God stamped on the heart?

We are hence to be exhorted to choose the Lord Use 4. To choose the Lord for
our God.
for our God, when you hear he is so merciful a God; for no man ever served
the Lord, but he first made choice of him to be his Master. Every man when he
comes to years of discretion, and to be master of himself, advises with
himself what course he should take, whether he should serve God or the world.
Now all the Saints of God have made this distinct choice; we will serve the
Lord, and go to no other. Moses when both stood before him, the pleasures of
Egypt on the one hand, and God and his people with their afflictions on the
other, he chose the latter before the former, Heb. 11. 25. So David says he
did, I have chosen the way of truth, thy Judgments have I laid before Heb. 11.
25.
me, Psalm. 119. 30. for to choose, is, when a thing lies before a man, and he
considers and takes it. Psalm. 119. 30
So Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord. Now I exhort you, that seeing
you are to make some choice, that seeing God is such a God, so exceeding
merciful, that you would make this choice, let him be your God; for what moves
a man to make choice of one course of life rather then another? the ground of
it is some happiness that he seeks: when men consider what makes most for
their happiness, that they will choose.

Now if men were persuaded that to choose God Happiness in choosing God.
were the best way for happiness, they could not but choose him; and surely if
God be so exceeding kind and merciful a God, their chiefest happiness cannot
but be found in him alone; and surely there is no husband, no friend so loving
as he, no father so kind as he, so tender hearted; he goes beyond all the
sons of men, for love and tenderness and kindness: for if there be any
kindness in any man or woman, the Lord has put it in him. That natural (...)
and affection in Parents, etc. is not a drop to that Ocean, not as a beam to
the Sun, to what is in him; And if the kindness in them be an excellency,
then surely it is in him; And if the Lord has commanded us to be amiable, and
full of bowels and goodness, and easy to be entreated, as being a part of
that his image, and that holy frame of heart which ought to be in us, is it not
then much more in himself? but that I may not urge a bare exhortation Motives
to choose God.
without some reason; Consider how merciful the Lord has been to us, and how
gracious he is to them that make choice of him: for first he gives them the
comfort of his presence, and there is no comfort like that. For joy and comfort
is nothing Joy what.
else but the agreeableness of a thing to a man's mind, applicatio
convenientis convenienti: Now there is nothing that better agrees with man's
mind then the presence and face of God; for lusts and pleasures are the
diseases of the soul, and the pleasures that agree to them, are the
destruction of it. Besides, when thou art reconciled to him, thou art out of
all debt and danger, he will set thy soul at rest, that was rest less before;
And besides when thou have the Lord to be thy God, thou have one to whom thou
may go, and unbosome thy self, to advise withal, when thou can not g^^
to any in the world; one thou may fetch comfort from, when thou see no
comfort any where else; thou may run to him as to a refuge, when thou art
overwhelmed with oppositions, slanders and ill reports; and besides all this,
and the glory which we shall have in heaven, consider what there is that thy
heart can desire, that he will not do for thee; If thou have any business to
do, God will do it better for thee, then thou can for thy self, the Lord
works all our works in us, and for us, Esaias 26. 12. Isay 26. 12.
Art thou a Scholar, and have studies to bring to perfection? a Tradesman, and
have enterprises to bring to pass? art in straights? he will be entreated of
thee to do all for thee, if thou go to him, and he will bring it better to
pass then thou can with all thy policy.

Again, Art thou fallen into poverty, into sickness, into disgrace? thou shall
find him exceeding kind, when thou art sick, he will be careful and
watchful over thee, this David acknowledges, Psalm. 31. 7. Psalm. 31. 7.
I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my trouble,
and have known my soul in adversities: When others overlook and forget thee
in adversity, as the Butler did Joseph, he will not, but take care of thee.
Again, if thou be persecuted, and have enemies to deal with (as who has
not that lives godlily? so that (as David says of himself) My soul is among
Lions; yet thou shall find God stand by thee, as he did by S. Paul, to del ver
thee out of the mouth of those Lions: thou shall find him to be as a Rock,
as a place of defense, to shield thee against them and all their incursions, so
that all their plots and malice shall not hurt thee. David had often trial of
God in this. Again, if thou do want any thing, he has promised to grant
whatsoever thou shall ask. But if thou shall say, I provoke him day by day;
yet know that he is exceeding kind, and will pass by many infirmities, for
he knows whereof we are made; one ill turn causes not him, as it does men,
to forget what was done before, the Lord keeps for us the sure mercies of
David, that is, such mercies that the Lord showed David, and not to him only,
but to all his posterity, so as he will not only be a God to thee, whilst
living, but when thou art dead, to thy seed also. Such a God you shall find
him; therefore take him for your God and for your husband. If men knew him they
would choose him; as Saint Paul said to Agrippa, I would that thou were
altogether as I, that is, if thou did know him as I do, and his service,
thou would not be half a Christian, but one al together: do but try if
thou likest not his service, thou may leave it. But the Saints who have
experience of both conditions, holding out may be an argument of his kindness
unto all his: and this also should move us to choose him for our master.

As the other use was to those without to choose Use 5. To confirm this choice.
the Lord, so this use is to all those that are already in the covenant, to
exhort them to confirm themselves in their choice to be more and more well
persuaded of him, that so they may love the Lord more and more, and cleave
faster to him. One that is married may love her husband well, and yet by seeing
more and more the excellencies that are in her husband, she may be more
confirmed in her choice: In all afflictions labor to think well of God, and
ill of your selves. This was the praise of David, he always labored to
extol God in all, and still hold this conclusion, yet God is good to Israel:
we are apt to fail much this way, we are ready to think that God deals
hardly with us and his people: but we must learn to correct this error, and
to have a good conceit of him, to labor to extol his mercy. But this we will
not do, till we see these two things: First Gods exceeding great kindness:
Secondly, our exceeding rebellions: you look only to Gods dealings, and so
are ready to think that God has dealt hardly with you, but never think how
abominable your carriages have been to him. But learn to think, that however
he is a God full of bowels even in your worst condition, and that you have
deserved worse at his hands, that he is exceeding kind: labor to think of
this for your selves and also for the Church. God has been merciful to it in
all ages, and is so still; so he says, I have been her habitation (that is, a
house for the Church to dwell safely in) from one generation to another, from
Abraham's time to the time they were in Egypt, and there I was their
habitation, and so in the wilderness, and so in all the times under the
Judges, and so to our times, look on the Church when it was in the worst
condition, take the Church of God, even when it deemed to be cut off, as in
that great massacre in France, yet then was the Lord an habitation to it, a
company was kept alive, that grew greater than the former. So the Church in
Queen Mary's time, he suffered the storm to overtake them a little, but it was
soon blown over, he was an habitation to keep off the storm from destroying
them, and so he has been, and will be to Bohemia and the Palatinate, but so he
has been found to be to our Church above all the rest, for our Nation has
been like Gideons Fleece; when all others about us, have been wet and
wallowed in blood, we have been dry: therefore labor to see how good God is,
and how base we are, and take heed of abusing his kindness, lest he make this
Nation wet with blood, when all others shall be dry, and we come to have war,
when all the rest have peace: the way to continue his favors is to remember
them, and to humble our selves before him in thankfulness. Thus much of this
Doctrine.

The next may be this third Doctrine:

The Lords Name is called upon his people, that is, Doct. 3. The Lords Name
called upon his People.
they are called by his Name: for the opening of this point, we must know
first, that it is the Lord that puts his name upon them; for who durst take
this honor, but those upon whom the Lord himself pleases to bestow it? this
is no small thing; where God puts his name, it brings something with it.

So as secondly, it is not an empty title, Titulus sine re, but there is a
reality in it; for where God 2
gives his Name to any man or people, there he bestows himself, and all he
has is theirs, because they are Gods, 1 Cor. 3. ult. As an husband when 1 Cor.
3. ult.
he bestows his name upon his wife, then he also gives himself to her. Now
in the Scripture the Lords name and the Lord himself are put one for another,
so that it is no small privilege to have the Lords Name called upon us.

And to open this further; let us consider, who they are yet that are called by
another name amongst men.

First, wives are called by the name of their husbands.

Secondly, children by the name of their Parents.

Thirdly, Temples are called by their names to whom they are dedicated.

Lastly, they that addict themselves to some man to follow his opinion, are
called by his name. As the Platonists, Aristotelians, Ramists, etc. from their
masters.

In the same respects, those that are called by Gods Name are such as are
married to him, and that are borne of him (for they are his children) and all
such as are his Temples dedicated to his service. Lastly, all such as are
addicted to follow him; as Joshua was, who said, I and my house will serve the
Lord, and as Jacob was, thou shall be my God, and I will serve thee; all these
are called by the name of the Lord, and the Lord is called by their names: so
he is called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, etc. so that it s^^mes that
there is (as it were) a certain match between them, a mutual agreement and
relation, as there is between a husband and a wife, a father and a son; so
if thou be one who is married to Christ, and he has changed thy heart, and
begotten thee anew by his word, and art dedicated to his service as his Temple;
then thou art called by his Name.

And the only reason of this is, because he has Reas. Because of Gods choice.
chosen thee, there is no other; when he cast his eyes upon all the earth, he
chose thee out, to have his Name called on thee; as it is said of the Temple at
Jerusalem, that he chose that place rather then any other, to put his Name
there: and there is the same reason why his Name is called upon a whole Church;
as when he looked on Europe, he chose out the reformed Churches to put his Name
there; and where the Lord puts his name, there he dwells, so as the one is put
for the other, either to say, he chose a place to dwell in, or that his name is
called upon it, they are all one. There are two places where God Isa. 57. 15.
dwells, Isa. 57. 15. Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity, whose Name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
who is of a contrite and humble spirit, etc. The highest heavens and the lowest
hearts are Gods chiefest dwelling places. He has indeed other places, he
dwells elsewhere, but in these two he manifests a peculiarity of his
presence, and that peculiarity is of the presence of his grace and comfort; for
he says in the same verse. to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones; he reveals himself to these, and his
secrets, which are hid from all the rest, and he fills their hearts with joy
and comfort.

If we be such as bear the Name of God, then Use 1. To learn Obe dience.
let us learn to be obedient unto him, to give up our selves unto him; for so
much is intimated by this, that we are called by his Name, and therefore we are
said in Scripture to be baptized into the Name of Jesus Christ; that is, we
do by our baptism profess thus much, that we give our selves to his service;
for to bear his Name is to bear our own names no more, that is, our own
natures no more. A man that is called by the Name of the Lord is no more sui
juris, his own man: As a man that gives himself to serve another, how much
he serves himself, so much he wrongeth that man And the reason why a wife
leaves her own name, it is to show that she is to give up her self to the
obedience of her husband, she is not mistress of her self, not free, she
depends on her husband as the Ivy on the tree, she has no root of her own
to rest on, but depends on him. So we having taken the Name of the LORD upon
us, we must think that we are no longer free, we leave We are not to serve
our selves.
our own names, we must have no more root of our selves, but of the Lord; we
must have no will of our own, his will must be ours: therefore, ye that bear
the Name of the Lord, let it not be in profession only, but do that thing
which the Name requires, that is, follow no more your selves but follow GOD. A
Wife before had the name of her father, but when she is married, as she leaves
that name, so she leaves father and mother also to cleave to her husband; if
her Parents command one thing, and her husband another, she leaves her father
and mother and cleaves to her husband: so as leaving father and mother, implies
leaving to bear affection to them, in comparison to her husband, and thus must
you do to Christ, as you have it in Luke 14. 26. If thou would be matched
to the Lord, thou must be divorced from Luke 14. 26.
all things else in the world, from every thing that is very near and dear to
thee: father and mother, sons and daughters are dear, but you must hate them
all for Christ's sake, or you can not be his Disciples: yea, he that is married
to the Lord, must hate and deny his own soul; when his own soul desires one
thing, and Christ another, he must deny it and be divorced from himself, and
take no root from The nearenesse of our relation to God.
himself, but from the Lord, because he is able to sustain him. Wives are not
bound to destroy themselves for their husbands, but this bond is nearer,
therefore Ephesians. 5. 31, 32. this near conjunction Ephesians. 5. 31, 32.
between man and wife is made but as a shadow of that between Christ and his
Church, who is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, verse 30. And as for
this cause they leave father and mother, as the Apostle says, verse 31. so for
this cause must we leave all to cleave to Christ and be subject to him, as
verse 24. that is, our will must be subject verse 24.
to the Lords. As if thou have such a journey to go, say, yea but what says my
husband to it? thus Saint James teaches us to speak, Iam. 4. I will go James
4.
into such a City (if God will) so in other business, say, if the Lord will
(to whom I am married) I will do it, else not: and you have reason for it,
because Christ loves us as his Spouse and body: by this union we are one flesh
with him, yea one spirit, and no man hates his own flesh, says the Apostle
there; though a man has all the imperfections in his body that may be, soars
and biles, etc. yet he hates not his own flesh, but labors partly to cover
those wounds and imperfections, and to heal them, if he can, for it is his
own body; So does the Lord love you, if you have taken him to be your
husband; you have reason therefore never to forsake him. And if any should
object and say, I am a sinful wretch, an unfit match for him; Con sider that
yet being his, he will cover your imperfections with his righteousness, as a
man covers his sores from the view of others; and he will wash you from your
corruptions. As if a man have a sore arm, he does not only cover it, but also
washes it, and heales it, because it is a member of his. So says the Apostle
there, he has washed his Church with his own blood. And this the Apostle S.
Paul calls a great mystery: as if he had said, great things are now revealed
therein to you, and worth your considering: why therefore should we not give
up our selves to him? a Wife may object against her husband and say, another
ones husband is more wise, more kind, but thou can say nothing against him.
Consider this, and let it not only be as a notion in your heads, but let it
sink down into your hearts: And let the Name of the Lord not only be upon you,
but also in you. As we have it in Exodus 23. 21. spoken of the Angel that went
with them in the wilderness; my Name is in him. My Exodus 23. 21
Name is not only upon him, so that he is not only called my Angel, but my Name
is also in him, that is, he is so affected as I am, he hates sin as I do,
and therefore will punish it in you, and loves what is good as I do. So let
the Lords Name be in you, that is, labor to be of the same mind and
disposition that God is of, to have a heart after his heart, to be affected as
he is, labor to be thus minded, and you shall be the Glory of the Lord, as the
Wife is the glory of her husband, as she is called, 1 Cor. 11. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 11.
because when she behaves her self wisely and virtuously, those that see her
do commend her The wife the glory of the husband how.
husband: Therefore so behave thy self in the world, so show thy self like
thy husband, that thou be his Glory, show forth the virtues of Christ, as the
Apostle has it in 1 Peter 2. 9. A man 1 Pet. 2. 9
must so behave himself, as the Image of God may appear in him; and then he
shall be his glory, as a wife when she carries herself as the image of her
husband, so as his wisdom and virtues appear in her, then she is his glory.
Consider this seriously; you are called by Gods Name; if you make this but an
empty title, then you shall have but an empty benefit by it: but if in earnest
you cleave to him, and follow him, then he is yours and you his, and all that
is his is yours.

If at any time you sin against God, this should Use 2. To humble our selves
having sinned.
be a great motive to humble your selves the more, that you should sin against
him whose Name you bear, to whom thou have given up thy name, and made a vow
and promise to obey him. Thus learn to aggravate your sin, for it does
aggravate it; and this use also I make for the day. There is a double
Humiliation double.
humiliation; one comes from self love, and that sometimes makes way for
grace, but is not grace: but there is another that comes from a tender
affection and love to God and Christ; for when a man loves one, he desires to
please him, and therefore when he displeases him, it grieveth him: And this
is such a humiliation, as is required of us on these days of Fasting, therefore
labor to work your hearts to this.

Now there is nothing will work our hearts kindly to be humbled more then
love: and neerenesse Love humbles.
will surely make us love GOD: for why does the wife love the husband, and the
husband the wife, but because they are near one to another? Now when the Name
of the LORD is called upon us, it is an argument that we are near unto him;
therefore let that soften thy heart, that thou should carry thy self
unworthy of this nearenesse. That was that which smote the heart of David, when
he considered how kind and loving the Lord had been to him; the LORD himself
when he comes to humble his people, he takes this course with them, to ^ell
them of the nearenesse that is between them and himself, as is plain in Ier.
2. 2, 3. Thus says the LORD, I remember thee, Ier. 2. 2, 3.
that is, put thee in mind of the kindness of thy youth, that is, which I
showed thee in thy youth, the love of thy Espousalls, when, etc. Now when we
see the LORD take this course, we should take the same; when he would humble
David, he sent Nathan to humble him, this was one part of his message to tell
him of GODS kindness to him, 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. thus says the LORD, I anointed
thee King 2 Samuel 12. 7 8.
over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, etc. And this
doubtless was the chiefest cause that made him confess and say, I have sinned
against the LORD, as it is in Psalm. 51. he repeats (against thee) twice, there
lies the Emphasis, I have Psalm. 51.
sinned against thee, against thee have I sinned, that wounded him in a manner
alone, that there was so great a nearenesse betwixt the LORD and him. When a
man commits a sin, there are two things to be considered in it; first in that
he sins against Two things in sin.
the Law of GOD, and so he sees a great obliquity in sin; when he looks on
sin and the straight Law of GOD, he sees a deformity in it; but this alone does
not humble us in that kindly manner; this will make us vile in our own eyes,
this will make us to see a wonderful deformity in our selves: but now there is
another thing to be seen in sin, and that is the person against whom we
commit it, and that is the LORD, and sin so looked upon comes to have another
relation put upon it, not only as an obliquity and deformity, but as an
injury, as a rebellion, an unkindnesse, recompensing evil for good. The first
way sin is considered as an obliquity from a straight rule; but in this
latter, as against the Person of GOD, as against thy husband.

Now therefore to humble thee, do thus; Go Way to humiliation.
through all the particular dealings of GOD with thee, remember all the
special kindnesses of the LORD, his keeping thee from thy youth, his many
deliverances, how many special kindnesses he has done thee, recount his
mercies every Fast Day; and when thou have done this, then go to thy sins and
say: These are not only transgressions against GODS straight Law, but also,
they are unkindnesses and injuries against his Person; and add to all this the
consideration of the patience of GOD: though I have played the wretch and harlot
as never any have done, yet he has been patient, and is so kind, as he bids me
yet to return, and this will cause thy heart to melt toward him: labor to
do this more and more.

There is an exercise of Humiliation which is done after this manner, spoken
of, by seeing the Lords kindness to thee, and thy injury against him, and
comparing the one with the other. But thou will say, I would feign do it, but I
cannot, my heart is hard, and I cannot get it thus melted. Therefore I say,
exercise thy self to this. The reason men's Cause of hardness of heart.
hearts are thus hard, etc. is, because men are idle, not willing to recount
Gods mercies to them. Say not thy heart is hard, but thou art sluggish, this
therefore you ought to do especially at this time. In Levit. 23. 29. there was
a time set apart for the Israelites, for the performance of this duty of
humiliation, Levit. 23. 29
and it was to be their exercise that day, they were then to labor to afflict
their souls; such as did not, were to be cut off from among his people. And
this consideration, that we are called by the name of the Lord, is a means to
do it.

But you will say, I have done this, and yet my Object.
heart is hard still.

It may be so indeed, and your heart not softened, Answ. 1 God accepts
endeavors.
but yet this I say; First for thy comfort, that if thou continue doing this,
the Lord accepts it; but if thou do it not, thy blood shall be upon thine
own head: we require that thou should only labor to do it, and the Lord
will accept it, though thou art not able to soften thine heart: And secondly,
know for thy comfort also, that God will join 2 Hell pes them.
with thee, if thou labor thus with thy heart, and send the spirit of
humiliation on thee; as the Disciples, though they rowed all night, yet CHRIST
came at the last, so though thou toilest many days, and make no proficiency
(as thou think) yet know, that God at length will come and help thee, and
that because he has commanded thee to do this, he will not suffer you to be
doing that always in vain, which he commands, and therefore he will come:
but that you may have the more ground Promises of Gods help. Luk 11. 13.
for this, remember that you have many promises made of Gods help; as in Luk
11. 13. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your chil
dren, etc. You shall never alone, of your selves, be able to soften your
hearts without the Holy Ghost, but continue knocking, and the Lord will give
you the Holy Ghost, though you be but strangers. So that every man may come to
God and say; Lord thou have made such a promise, thou can not go from thy
word, and therefore deny me not; and be earnest with God, and he cannot deny
thee. The woman of Canaan was not a Jew, yet she having this ground, that he
was the Messiah, she would not be put off, therefore do thou so, and thou
shall in the end find that thy heart is softened: and the longer thou waitest,
the greater measure thou shall have of the spirit; and when thou have him, he
shall humble thy heart, as in Zach. 12. 10. I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of Zach. 12. 1^
grace and supplications, and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for an only son. The people of
Israel were here exhorted to mourn, and to separate themselves, and to do it
every family apart. The business was the same that you are to do every
fast day. Now says GOD, if you seek me aright, you must have the spirit; and
says GOD, I will do my part, I will pour on you the spirit of bowels, for
so the word may be translated. The The Spirit works humiliation. Job 42.
meaning of it is this, that when the Spirit of God is thus upon you, you will
be tenderly affected to the Lord, even as a mother toward her child: then
says he, they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son, and be in bitterness for
him, that is, you shall then remember your rebellions, and the remembrance of
them shall be bitter to your souls, as bitter things are to your taste: so it
was with Josiah: the reason why his heart melted, and he wept when he heard the
book of the Law read, was because he had the spirit of bowels, which every
one of us should have: So Job, Now I have seen thee, I abhor my self, Job
42. he was not thus before; he Job. 42.
was a holy man, but this was a new work: for says he, I have heard of thee by
the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees thee. He was enlightened anew; as
it were, the spirit shined into his heart with a new light: I have been in a
mist all this while in comparison; but now mine eye has seen thee, and I have
an experimental feeling of thee, now I abhor my self. It is a hard thing to
abhor a man's self thus, which then a man does, when Gods Spirit with a new
light enableth a man to see Gods love and kindness, and his own unkindnesse
in their colors.

If the Lords Name be called upon us, we should Use 3. Not to pollute Gods Name.
learn hence to keep his Name fair, to keep it pure and unspotted: As it
was said of Saint Paul, he was a chosen vessel to carry Gods Name; and
therefore it behooves them to take heed how it be polluted by them, or they
give occasion that it be blasphemed; for the evil committed by you reflects
upon the Name of the Lord. A small thing is a great matter in you: one fly
corrupts a box of ointment, but many flies in a barrel of Pitch or Tar, are
counted nothing; so many sins in a wicked man, redound not so much to the
dishonor of Gods Name, as one in the Saints. When a Saint does a thing that is
uncomely, he polluteth the Name of the Lord, not that it can be polluted in it
self, but it seems so to other men. Before men are regenerate, their sins
are as blots upon a table, before a Picture be drawn upon it, which are not
Simile
regarded of any; but after it is drawn, the least blot is seen of every one:
So it is when men are but strangers to God; the sins which they commit,
reflect not to the disgrace of God: but when Gods Image is renewed in a man,
then these sins are more taken notice of, and cause the Name of God to be
blasphemed of his enemies.

This should teach us, not to be ashamed of God Use 4. Not to be ashamed to
profess Gods name.
and the profession of his Name: for shall the Lord not be ashamed of us, as he
shows he is not, when he is willing to put his Name upon us; and shall we be
ashamed of him? it is an unreasonable and an unequal thing for a child to be
ashamed of his father, for a wife to be ashamed of her husband, and so for us
to be ashamed of the Lord, whose Name we bear.

This is the rather to be spoken of, because it is a fault very common amongst
us, that we do not take notice of.

But the most will say, we are not ashamed of religion, but we account it
rather a glory to be accounted Object.
Christians.

Give me leave to examine you by these two Answ. 1 Men ashamed of the power of
re ligion.
Questions. First, are you not ashamed of the strictest ways of religion? There
is a common course of Religion, that you need not be ashamed of, because all
are for it, and commend it; but yet there are some special acts of Religion
that men cast shame upon, such was that act of David, when he daunced before
the Arc, which seemed absurd in Michals eyes for a King to do; yet he said, I
will be yes more vile: some of the ways of God give a more peculiar distaste
to wicked men, and there is a shame cast upon the power of Religion, by reason
that the multitude goes another way. Now what is singular, that shame is cast
upon: as in any Simile.
thing, let the multitude have never so ill favored a fashion, it is no shame,
whereas if a few others wear a garment far more comely, but different from
the fashion, yet it would be a shame to them; so it is here, there is shame
cast upon holiness and sincerity, because the multitude is not holy, for holy
men are like the gleanings after the harvest, or like the grapes after the
vintage, exceeding few, and not enough to bring godliness into fashion:
Therefore if thou would know whether thou art ashamed of God or no, try
whether you be ashamed of any the peculiar acts of Religion, upon which shame
is usually cast among men.

The second question I would ask is this: are 2 Before wicked men
you ashamed of God, or any task or duty, or his people among those where the
shame will do you some hurt? consider whether you are not ashamed of Religion
among sinners; it is an expression put in for some cause, in Mark. 8. 38.
Whosoever shall be Mark. 8. 38.
ashamed of me: and my words in this adulterous generation, etc. As if he
should have said, it may be you would not be ashamed of me among Saints; but he
that is ashamed of me among the worst of men, and in a dangerous time, in such
a time as when it is ignominious to be a Christian (as it was then) of that man
will I be ashamed in the day of the Resurrection. You must therefore try your
selves, what you do before wicked men, and what you do before great men, when
it is some loss to you to profess CHRIST, or any truth of H^s; and know that
this is not a small matter: We must profess CHRIST in our times, we must make
the word of God the rule of our lives. Perhaps we think that so long as our
hearts are right, and so, that we run not out into evil ways with others,
the matter of profession is but a small change, that is but as the leaves of
godliness; if GOD have the fruit, what need we care for the leaves? But
remember that in Romans 10. 10. With the heart man believes Romans 10. 10.
unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation:
This will damn many of us, the want of profession, as well as the greatest
sins. The Scripture is peremptory; we must Outward profession is required.
profess Gods Name at all times, even then when we shall do it with the
danger of our lives. You know that Daniel did so, in danger of his life, and it
was not a needless matter, but it was in a matter that concerned his life. But
that you may do this the more willingly, consider why men are ashamed of this
profession, why? because men do speak evil of you, but is this a good
reason? No, for they Why men are ashamed of profession.
do so out of their ignorance, as it is in 1 Pet. 4. 4. wherein they think it
strange, that you run not with them into the same excess of riot, speaking
evil of you. But if they knew the ground of your actions, they would not
speak evil of you. They see your actions, but your rules and principles that
you go by in these actions, they know not: and therefore they speak evil of
you. And shall we be discouraged for this? What if a Geometrician should be
drawing of lines and figures, and there should come in a Country man and seeing
him should laugh at him, would the Geometrician leave off his art for his
derision? surely no, for he knows he laughs at him out of his ignorance,
because he knows not the art and the grounds thereof: and is it not as great
a folly for us to be ashamed of godliness, because men that understand it not,
speak evil of it! surely it is. And therefore remember David's two reasons,
when he did that act for which he was reviled by his wife. I did it for the
Lord that chose me: as if he should have said, the Lord deserved it, he loved
and chose me, therefore I did it. So this is thy case: The Lord has chosen
thee, when he has passed by many thousands of others, therefore do it for
the Lord. And another reason of David's was, it makes for my honor in the eyes
of those that are good, 2 Samuel 6. 24. Men think it 2 Samuel 6. 24
brings no honor, because they shall not get any credit by it amongst men: but
know thus much, when men shrink from God, then God makes true that rule, them
that dishonor me, I will dishonor: he that has made a profession of
godliness, and afterward falls away, God never suffers such an one to escape,
but he punishes him one way or other. Therefore Moses exhorts the people in
Deuteronomy. 4. 6. to keep GODs Statutes and to do Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
them: for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the
Nations, etc. Now why should you be backward to bear the shame that the world
casts upon you? does not God observe all, look on, and with approbation? does
not God tell the Church of Ephesus, in Revel. 2. 2. I know thy works, and thy
labor, and thy patience, etc. When any man at any time casts shame upon you
for religion, it is a persecution which God will record, as Luther said, when
any spoke evil against him; this will be accounted on my reckoning at the last
day, that speech is to be considered and weighed of us all. I know thy
patience; therefore be not ashamed, but be bold in the profession and fear of
God, doing those things that are glorious in the eyes of God and men that judge
of things aright.

If the Name of the Lord be called upon us, this Use 5. Comfort concerning our
selves and the Church.
should comfort us concerning our selves, and concerning the Church of GOD; for
where GODs Name is called upon any Church, any Nation, any man, you may be sure
he will defend them, for he is engaged so to do, that his Name may not be
polluted; for the Lord is the worse spoken of, when his people suffer.
Therefore thou whosoever thou art, rich or poor, be confident, God will defend
thee in all thy sufferings. A man will not suffer his wife to be wronged; for
says he, she is my wife, he accounts himself wronged, when any injury is done
to her: so God accounts himself injured, when any wrong is done to thee on
whom his Name is called, Esaias 4. 5, 6. Although (says the Lord) they may seem
to be helpless, notwithstanding Esa. 4. 5, 6.
this (says the Lord) fear not, I will create a cloud by day and a flaming
fire by night: that is, though there be no means, yet I will work without
means. I will create them, make them of nothing: I will be both their
direction and protection; for the cloud by day, and the fire by night, has
reference to that cloud that went before the Children of Israel in the
wilderness, which led them in the way, and kept them from the heat of the
Sun. For upon all the glory shall be a defense; that is, the Churches,
though they seem never so base, yet they are glorious; for therefore they are
called glorious; and not only upon one man or two, but upon all the glory, that
is, every man in the Church, upon all the glory shall be a defense.

But then if this objection come, why? do we Object.
not see them afflicted? do they not often suffer a storm; are they not often
scortched with the heat of reproach?

Therefore, the LORD says, as they have diverse Answ. etc
persecutions, so will I have diverse means of help; and there shall be a
Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time for the heat, and for a place of re
fuge, l^ke the Cities of refuge whither they fled that were pursued by the
avengers of Blood, and for a covert from a storm, and from rain. The Saints
in a storm of persecution or any calamity, are as a man under a shelter;
whereas all others are in the midst of the storm. Therefore be you assured,
the Lord will not forsake his own people; they are as the apple of his eye: a
man may bear much, but he will not suffer you to touch the apple of his eye;
So God will suffer much, but he will be avenged on them that wrong his
people. Thus much for this Doctrine.

2 CHRONICLES. 7. 14.If my People, that are called by my Name, do humble
themselves: WE are now come to the Conditions upon which mercy and
forgiveness are here promised, whereof the first you see is Humiliation, If my
People do humble themselves: In the handling of which I will proceed two ways;

First Negatively, that without humiliation, and 1
unless men do humble themselves, they can have no interest in these promises.

Secondly, Affirmatively; That if they do humble 2
themselves, then God will be merciful to them, and forgive their sins.

For the handling of the first, I raise this Doctrine Doct. 4. Without hu
miliation no mercy.
out of the words: That without Humiliation no man shall obtain mercy: We see
that God suspendeth mercy upon it here, as without which no mercy can be
expected; which therefore must needs be thought a matter of great consequence,
and the more largely to be insisted upon.

I express the doctrine in a more large and general word humiliation, which
contains in it, as well What meant by humiliation
humiliation passive, or being humbled, as humiliation active (as for more
clear distinction sake I call them) whereby we humble our selves: which is the
maine thing intended in the Text, explicitly and directly, which also in the
prosecution of this point I mainely intend; yet I shut up both together, in
this negative part of this discourse: because they are, though in themselves
distinct, yet always conjoined in their working, and the latter does always
presuppose the former, and does necessarily imply it here: for no man did ever
come to humble himself, that was not first humbled. This negative part of
excluding men from mercy without both these, being also alike common to both,
it being a like true, that no man did ever attain mercy, that was not first
humbled, and that did not humble himself: So as in this negative part they
agree and concur.

Again, though that affirmative part mentioned is proper to that humiliation
active, the promises of interest in mercy being made to them that humble
themselves, and not to all that are humbled: there being many that are much
humbled, who yet obtain not mercy; yet I join both together in this first
part chiefly; because as they are conjoined in their working, so they must
necessarily be in the explication of them; for we cannot come distinctly to
know and find out what it is to humble our selves (which is the thing I
principally aim at) without knowing what it is to be humbled, the one
beginning where the other ends: the one being a preparative to the other. That
therefore we may see how far the one and the other goes, and how they are
distinguished, we will shut both up in this first doctrine.

Now in handling this Doctrine we will do two things.

First, show that men must be humbled and humble 1
themselves, ere they can come to have interest in these promises.

We will show what it is to humble a man's self 2
and to be humbled.

For the first, this place alone is sufficient ground. 1 Necessity of
humiliation.
GOD would not have put in such a condition in vain, if it might have been
spared in any, but besides this ground we have the practice of all the master
builders, who made it their first work (as here it is the first condition) to
humble men, that they might be brought to humble themselves: And to omit all
other instances, we have all the three Persons seals to this method.

This was GOD the Fathers method in the first Sermon that ever was preached
(which himself Humiliation required 1 By God the Father.
also preached) as a pattern for all Ministers to follow. And when he would
draw Adam and Eve in to seek the promise of mercy, he first expostulates the
matter with them, to humble them for their sin: and then lets fall the promise
of the Messiah.

And secondly, JESUS CHRIST the second 2 God the Son.
Person in his first Sermons in Preaching the Gospel, as in Luke 4. 7. shows
his approbation of Luke 4. 4.
this method in that he makes this his first subject of his first Sermon, us
appears by the text he takes to preach the Gospel, but to whom? to those
that are first humble and humbled. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because
he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to such as are poor and broken in
heart.

And the same order, the Holy Ghost the third Person was foretold by Christ,
that when he was 3 God the Holy Ghost
come, he would observe in working upon men's hearts by the ministry of the
Apostles, etc. John 16. 8. He shall convince the world of sin: for humiliation,
Ioh. 16. 8. (...)
that is his first work, then of righteousness, for justification: lastly of
Judgment; that is, that sanctification which persons justified are to have
wrought in them; We come now to the explication and reasons of this point,
which shall be,

To show the necessity of this humillation to the other that follow. 1


Of the order of it, as it is here placed the first 2
of all the rest.

For the first, it is true indeed, that the Lord might Reas. 1. From the
necessity of it.
bring men home to him without this humiliation. He could do as he did at the
first creation, say no more, but let there be light, and there would be light,
and that without any of this thunder, he might say, Let there be grace, and
there would be grace; he could come in the still voice without renting the
Rocks, and say no more but, Open ye everlasting doors, lift up your heads
ye gates, and they would be open; but as though he might have brought the
Children of Israel out of Egypt into the Land of Canaan, without leading them
through the Wilderness, yet his good pleasure was thereby rather to humble
them and prove them; so it is here.

And the reasons of this necessity may be drawn from the relation, and
respect which this humiliation has both to the other conditions that follow,
and all that is promised here in the Text: unto which we will fit the reasons
that follow.

As first, without this men will not seek out 1 The relation it has to the
other conditions.
for and come unto CHRIST: they will not seek His Face, that is, His Person:
The Laweis our Schoolmasters to bring us to CHRIST, by humbling us: men would
not come in to Him unless they were driven; men would not seek Him unless 1
Seeking for Christ.
they themselves were first lost; men would not receive Him unless they were
first humbled; the poor receive the Gospel; the poor in spirit.

It is necessary in respect of receiving and seeking for mercy and pardon, and
forgiveness, which 2 Seeking mer^cy.
is the maine thing here promised, I will be merciful to their sins, for
until then our propounding pardon and the promises of it, and inviting men to
come in would be all but lost labor: for until then, men would give us that
answer, and the promises the same entertainment, which they did that were
invited to the Marriage Feast, Matthew 22. 5, 6. The text says they made light
of it, and so Mat. 22. 5, 6
we find by experience, that when we preach the great things of the Gospel;
as Justification, and remission of sins, men account them as a small thing,
and set light by them: and the reason is, because they are not humbled; men
otherwise would not prize CHRIST nor the promise of the pardon by him (as Manna
was not prized by the Israelites) nor his righteousness, by which they are to
be forgiven: a man happily would be content to have CHRIST'S righteousness, as
a bridge to go upon to Heaven, but he will not prize it as Paul did, who was
ambitious of nothing so much as to be found in CHRIST, not having his own
righteousness, but that which is by faith, accounting all things in himself
and out of himself dross and dung in comparison of it; but a man unhumbled
will not set this high prce upon it, and God will not have his Jewels, much
less Christ and pardon of sin cast away at random to those who shall not
value them; but when a man shall see the badnesse of his nature, the multitudes
of his particular sins, and see that in his heart he never thought had been
there, and stand amazed at them, then to have such a righteousness as shall
perfectly cover all these sins, this he will think a great matter. So it was
to Saint Paul, when he saw himself the greatest of sinners. And when a man
thus sees his particular sores and diseases, and something in Christ's
righteousness to answer them all; as Christ's patience to answer his
impatience, Christ's Christ's righteousness not esteemed by men unhumbled.
love to stand for his hatred, Christ's holiness of nature to cover his
uncleanness, he will then begin to esteem every Jewel in that Cabinet, for
he knows he could not spare one part of that righteousness, he sees a
glorious righteousness to cloth and cover his nakedness from top to toe, and
this makes him prize it and every part of it, which a man unhumbled will not
do; and as he would not esteem the imputed righteousness of Christ, so nor
inherent righteousness from him, whereby he should be enabled to turn from
his evil ways; but when a man sees and knows what a heart he has, how
false, how full of sins, and empty of grace, and what strong lusts are there,
then when he shall find the contrary graces wrought in him, he prizeth them
highly, and Christ for them, because they are the precious gifts of Christ,
for he knows and acknowledges they are the sole work of Christ, because in
his nature dwells no good thing. And why else does God after conversion
suffer his people to fall into sin, and into variety of temptations, but that
they might be more humbled still, and so know the worth of Christ herein?

It is required men should be humbled, because Reas. 3. No turning else from
our evil ways.
else they will not actually turn from their evil ways, nor be obedient to
Christ in all things in their lives. An unbroken heart is like an untamed
horse, that will not endure the bridle, and be guided by it, like an untamed
Heifer that will not go Simile.
with the yoke; such a man that God may command him what he will, but he will
do what he list: but when the heart is broken and humbled once, then as Saint
Paul trembling said, Acts 9. he will say Act ^.
also; Lord, what will thou have me do? I will do what thou will, yea, and
suffer what thou will; call me to suffer, for thee.

If this question had been asked Saint Paul before he was thus humbled, he
would have given another answer: before, God may bid us do what he will, but
we as stubborn servants will do what we think good: we are proud and
unbroken, and pride is the cause of all disobedience, and therefore it is said,
High thoughts must be east down, that Pride the cause of disobedience.
exalt themselves against the knowledge of God; ere every thought can be
brought into the obedience of Christ. 2 Corin. 10. 5. They exalt themselves
against the knowledge of God and His will; for when His will 2 Cor. 5. 10.
is known, the heart yields not still: when the LORD commands any thing, as to
take heed of evil company, to have a care of their speeches, whilst men are
unhumbled, they are ready to expostulate the matter, and in the end will do
nothing at all: but when a man is humbled, and the high thoughts cast down,
then he brings every thought and affection (that exalted it self before) into
the obedience of Christ. And as all disobedience is from pride and
stubbornness of the will, so all obedience is from humility; when the heart is
humbled, it is made pliable to God, Esaias 66. 2. Esaias 66. 2.
I will look to him that is contrite, and trembles at my words; they are both
there joined: that is, when he hears any command from me, he is afraid to
break it, afraid of admitting the very occasions of sinning: A man that has
been scorched with the fire dares not easily meddle with it again, and the
reason is, it makes a man choose the Lord freely for his Husband and Lord, and
from thence follows kind obedience to Him.

He that has made the choice himself will serve, else not; but he will
condemn himself, that he should make a choice so unsuitable to him; and it
also teaches a man to set an high price upon CHRIST, and forgiveness of
sins, as you hear; and that will set all thy desires on work, and cause
thee to refuse no obedience, whether active or passive: For, what is the reason
men obey their lusts, but because they prize pleasures, have an high esteem of
honors, etc. and the same effect will the prizing of CHRIST have in thee, to
do any thing for Him, so as thou shall not count thy life dear, for Him.

They would not do all this constantly and for Reas. 4. Else there would not
be constancy.
ever, if they should come to Christ and be obedient for a while (as John's
hearers and Herod was) yet they would return unto their vomit again: and not
stay with Him if they were not humbled, they might come in, as those hearers
(signified by the second and third ground) did, who received the seed with joy,
and as those of whom it is said, Christ would not commit himself to them, but
stay with him, men will not unless they be humbled: For unless a man be
brought to part with all for Christ, and to sell all, he will in the end repent
of his bargain; if there be a reservation of any thing, the time will come he
will go back, and start aside like a broken Bow; and until a man be
thoroughly humbled, he will not be brought to part with all for CHRIST; he that
is humbled, he only is the Merchant-like minded man, who sells all he has
and goes away rejoicing, is glad at the heart that he has Christ though with
the loss of the whole world; he is willing to take Christ upon all conditions,
with losses and crosses, and to deny himself in every thing; for he knows the
bitterness of sin, and so sets such a price upon Christ as if the bargain
were to make again, he would do as he had done, but the other what he has
done in a fit, he repents him of afterward, and therefore true repentance
(which godly sorrow and true humiliation works) is called repentance never to
be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Other sorrow than Godly may 2 Cor. 7. 10
work a repentance, but it is such as men afterward repent of.

Men are soon weary of the yoke of CHRIST. because they have not felt how
grievous the yoke of sin and Satan is, but to one who has felt the burden of
sin, the yoke of CHRIST is easy and sweet.

The last Reason has relation to the last thing Reas. 5. God should not have
the praise of his mercy.
here promised, of taking away the Judgments and healing the Land. God should
not have the praise of his Judgments and of his Mercy in taking them away,
unless men were humbled; for if when God did afflict men, he should restore
them again without this humiliation, men would think that God wronged them
before, and now did but right them, but when God has humbled them so far,
that they acknowledge his Justice, in afflicting them, and their own desert to
be utterly destroyed, and confess that it is his mere Mercy they were not
consumed, and humble themselves under his mighty hand, and now if the Judgment
be taken off, and his wrath blown over, then they give him the praise of his
Mercy and Judgments.

Thus you see why of necessity it is required: Now let us see the reason of the
order of it, why it is required thus in the first place: It is the first
condition here: there is something in the order, and to Why humiliation
required first.
be said by way of reason for it, and the reason in general is, because
nothing is acceptable to God, till the heart be humbled: You may pray, which is
another condition, and you may hear, etc. but all you do is but lost labor,
unless it come from a broken heart.

For first that is alone a fit sacrifice for God, without Reas. 1. No sacrifice
accepted without it. Psalm. 51. 16, 17.
which act no sacrifice is accepted: This you may see Psalm 51. 16, 17. Thou
desire not sacrifice, else I would give it thee; thou delightest not in burnt
offerings. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, and a contrite heart, oh
God, thou will not despise. David knew that till his heart was broken, all his
good deeds and all holy duties would have been in vain, and it is as if David
should have said, Lord, before I was thus humbled and my heart thus broken (as
in the beginning of the Psalm he had expressed that it was) Thou did desire
no sacrifice of me, nor would have delighted in no burnt offering from me,
but the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, and other duties but as they
come from it. This is the maine sacrifice, and with out it, nothing acceptable,
unless it be laid upon this low Altar, which sanctifies the Sacrifice.

As it is only a fit Sacrifice for God, so this only Reas. 2. It makes us
Priests.
makes us fit Priests to God; and before we are fit to offer a sacrifice
acceptable, we must be Priests; and we become not Priests to God, till we have
offered our selves first to God as a sacrifice, 2 Cor. 8. 5. and that we are
not, till we our selves be slain, and broken, ^ Cor. 8. 5.
and so made a sacrifice.

Nothing is accepted till the Holy Ghost dwell in the heart; and until a man
be Humbled, the Reas. 3. Else the Spirit of God dwells not in us.
Spirit of God dwells not in his heart: And therefore what he does till then,
savours not of the Spirit, but a carnal heart, and so is not acceptable: Til a
man is humbled, he keeps the door shut upon the Lord and His Spirit. There is
one within, his heart is full already; he dwells in his own heart himself;
therefore it is said, Esa. 57. 15. That he dwells in a contrite heart, that is
in it alone, for there Esaias 57. 15.
is only room for him to do what he will in all the chambers of it.

Until a man will be obedient in all things, no thing he does is acceptable:
He that turns his ear Reas. 4. It makes us obedient in all things.
from the Law, his prayer shall be abominable. Now one that is not humbled
thoroughly, he may be obedient in many things, he may pray, etc. but yet he
will have by ways of his own, he has not fully renounced himself, that is,
not Humbled: Now unless a man's obedience be general, nothing is acceptable.

And so we come to the second thing propounded what this humiliation is, and
herein our maine 2 Humiliation what.
enquiry is after that which is mainely intended in the text, What it is to
humble a man's self. But because the finding of it out depends upon the other
also, we will with it show also what it is to be humbled, that so we may the
better know the true humiliation required of us; and for the finding out of
this we will first set before you the examples of them who have humbled
themselves, and have been humbled in Scripture, and from thence gather what it
is.

For this you shall find Manasses in the 2 Chro^. Examples of men hum bled. 2.
Chron. 33. 12. Manasses.
33. in his affliction humbling himself greatly, and the Lord was entreated of
him, verse. 12. Likewise we have that of S. Paul humbled. Acts 9. 6 where we
find him trembling and astonished, and saying, Lord what will thou have me do?
See another example in Acts 2. 37. of those who were The converts. Acts 2. 37.
The Jailer Acts 16.
pricked in their hearts, crying out, what shall we do to be saved? And so of
the Jailer, Acts 16. who came trembling and astonished, and would have killed
himself; and likewise of the Prodigal, Luke 15. (which Prodigal. Luke 15.
(...)
though a parable, yet sets forth this condition of a soul humbled to us,) of
whom it is said, that none gave unto him, and that he came unto himself, etc.

Out of all these we gather those two maine parts Humiliation of two parts.
of Humiliation mentioned; humiliation passive, and active. The first whereof
makes way for the second, unto which no promise is made, and which may be found
in an unregenerate man; the second, which is the fruit of Sanctification, which
is meant here, and unto which the promise is made: These go both together in
the godly; and he that has the second, never wants the first in some measure
more or less, though many have the first, that have not the second.

Now the first is nothing else but a sense of sin, and Gods wrath for it;
expressed to us in those former examples, by being pricked in the heart, it
being a wounding of the heart and spirit.

Unto which is joined trembling fear, with considering and coming to a man's
self, aswee have it in the Parable.

And this passive Legal humiliation stands in these Passive humiliation.
particulars.

A sensiblenesse of sin: before a man is as one (...) Sensiblenesse of sin.
that is in a dead sleep; what is done to him he feels not, nor what is said
he hears not, is sensible of nothing: But this is the awakening of a man to be
sensible of sin; so as now he is wounded, now he is smitten with it, now he
feels it. So the Jailer as the foundation of the prison was shaken, so was his
heart also, and had an earthquake within, as well as one without; and his
awaking out of sleep was a resemblance of his awakened heart.

This humiliation makes a man fearful of his estate; whereas before he was
bold: and others that 2 Fear of his estate.
are not humbled go on boldly and are punished, as it is said of the fool in
the Proverbs.

It makes a man consider his estate, which he never 3 It works consideration.
did before; as the Prodigal came to himself, that is, entered into a serious
consideration of his estate; before a man thought himself in a good estate;
little imagined he was in the gall of bitterness; but this work shows him
his poverty, and that he is altogether naked, and that he has nothing to
sustain him, as the Prodigal saw he had not, no worth at all in him.

And this first work of humiliation is wrought 1 It is wrought by the Law.
by the Law and the curse thereof; which says in his hearing, Cursed be he
that abides not in all things to do them.

By the Law I say, which is the rule of righteousness, whereof all particular
rules are branches; and by the threatenings thereof, which are all branches of
that great curse. The one being as the lightning to discover sin, the other
like the thunderbolt that strikes the heart with fear of Gods Judgments: the
one is like the Indictment, the other as the Sentence of the Judge. I put both
these together, because both go to humble a man. The Law is like the
Taskmasters of Egypt, that commanded the Israelites to Simile.
do the work, but gave them no straw; so the Law tells us, this and this is to
be done, and binds us to do it, but gives us no strength, and so thereby
discovers our sinfulness and unability to any good: and then as the
taskmasters did beat them that failed of their tale, so comes the curse and
strikes them dead, that continue not in all things to do the Law; and these two
put together work this Legal humiliation: The Law what.
neither by the Law is meant only those ten words spoken in Horeb, but together
with the explanation of them, as we find them expounded in the Prophets and
the whole Scriptures: so that by the Law is meant that rectitude which the
whole Scripture does require. Now therefore when the Scriptures are laid to our
hearts, the rectitude of the Scriptures is compared with the crookednes of our
hearts and lives, and thereby we come to see how that the least sin is
forbidden, and that the least duty must not be omitted, and that we must give
an account for every idle word, and every lustful thought and motion in the
heart; as S. Paul when humbled, saw lust to be sin; and then we come to see
withal the curse due to the lease: This humbles a man.

And unto this is further required the help of the Spirit joining therewith,
without which the Law 2 The Spirit works humiliation
does not humble a man: who is therefore called the spirit of bondage, because
he enlightneth a man to see his bondage and slavery to sin and Satan, and his
subjection to Gods wrath; not that he makes him such or brings bondage with
it, but discovers it; and 3 By afflictions.
this not only by showing a man his bondage, but he makes him believe it: For
there must be a faith to humble as well as to comfort, whereas we set light by
the threatenings, and believe them not; for would the swearer swear, if he
believed that threatening, the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain? When therefore the Spirit enlighteneth a man to see his sins,
and makes him believe the threatenings denounced against them, then a man is
humbled and not before.

And yet though these threatenings are propounded by the Word, and made
effectual by the Spirit, yet usually some affliction puts life into them; as
we see in Manasses, and also in S. Paul who was first struck off his horse to
the ground, and in the laylor who thought verily all his prisoners gone, for
whom his own life must have been answerable; so as he would have killed
himself: sometimes a real affliction, sometimes an imaginary one, an
apprehension of Judgment, shame, poverty, misery does God use to put life into
the threatenings, and they put life into the Law; and then the Law is brought
home to the conscience; and so sin is brought to light; for when men are
sensible of miseries, then they are often brought to to inquiry into the Law of
God to find what should be the cause of it: and when the Law is brought home
to the conscience, then sin is made alive. Saint Paul says, Romans 7. Sin
appears to be sin, Romans 7.
which before was as colors in the dark; and sin being made alive, then I
dyed, says Paul there, that is, he apprehended himself a dead man, in which
is a discovery of sin and our subjection to death for it; wherein do consist
those two parts of this former humiliation, which makes way for the second
humiliation.

Thus you see, what to be humbled is. Now we 2 Active humiliation
come to the second, what it is to humble a man's self: which begins, when the
other ends: for then a man looks out for the remedy, as those who cried out
what shall we do to be saved? which is the second thing to be observed in
those examples; after the wounding of their hearts, they made an enquiry what
to do to be saved. For those that belong to Gods Election go yet further:
there is another kind of Evangelicall humiliation wrought in them, which is a
fruit of sanctification; for in one whom GOD means to save, when he is come
to this, the LORD sends the spirit of adoption into his heart, the spirit of
grace, as Za^hary calls him, which gives him some secret hope, he shall be
received to mercy, if he will come in; which is a work of faith in some
degree begun: and then says the soul with it self, I will go and humble my
self, I will go home to God, and change my course, and give up my self to
him and serve him: and this we shall find in these examples mentioned before,
especially Examples of this humiliation. Luke 15.
of the Prodigal, Luke 15. he came to this conclusion, If I stay here, I dye
for hunger; but in my fathers house there is bread enough: here was hope that
bred this resolution. I will go home, and say to my father, I have sinned
against heaven and against thee, etc. here was that true humiliation we speak
of. So Manasses, he humbled himself greatly, out of an hope of mercy; for a
man comes not to this active humiliation wherein he kindly humbles himself,
unless he has hope of mercy; and the beginning of faith is with a hope of
mercy, which sets a man a work to go to God, and say; Lord, I have committed
such and such sins, but I will return to them no more; I am worthy of
nothing.

Now there are four several compositions or Four pay^s of ingredients in it.
four paires of ingredients, that have influence into this second kind of
humiliation, to cause us to humble our selves.

1 Payr, an hope of mercy, as well as a sense of misery: 1 Hope of (...) mercy
and sense of mi sery.
that whereas before we did look upon God as a severe Judge; we look now on
him as one willing to receive us, both are requisite. Sense of misery only,
brings a man but to himself, as the Prodigal first is said to come to
himself; but hope of mercy joined with it, drives a man home to God, as it did
also him; without which, sense of misery drives us from the LORD; but hope of
mercy being added to it, causes this active humiliation, we speak of,
whereby we say, I will go and humble my self.

2 Pair of ingredients are the sense of our own emptiness, 2 Our own
emptiness and Gods alsufficiency.
together with an apprehension of that Alsufficiency that is in God; which we
also may see in the Prodigal, when he said, I shall starve and die, if I stay
here; but in my fathers house is bread enough: he looked to that alsufficient
fullness that was in God to supply his wants. The creature whilst it finds
any thing in it self, it will stand upon its own bottom and not be humbled,
but when it finds nothing in its self but emptiness, then it begins to
seek out for a bottom; which it seeing to be in God alone, it goes out to
him; for men will not be drawn off from their own bottom, till they see
another bottom to stand upon.

3 There must be a sense of a man's own sinfulness, 3 Sense of our sins,
and Christ's righteousness.
and the LORD JESUS his righteousness, and so a light comes in that
discovers both: thus when S. Paul was humbled, there was a light shone about
him, which was an outward symbol of that new light which shone within him, of
Christ, and his own sinfulness.

A sense of the love of God and Christ, joined with the sense of a man's
unkindnesse unto God, 4 A sense of; Gods love and our unkindnesse.
whereby we look upon sins as injuries done to God, and an unkindnesse
shown therein.

And now let us see the difference betwixt these two works or parts of
humiliation, that we may Difference between active and passive humiliation. 1
In the matter.
further understand what it is to humble our selves.

And first, they differ in the matter they are conversant about; in that first,
a man is humbled properly, but for the punishment: a man indeed is humbled for
sin, yet principally as it has relation to punishment; it is guilt works on
him; he is not humbled for sin, as it is contrary to God, and his holiness,
but as contrary to himself and his own good: and thus we are not humbled, till
we come to love God, and to have a light discovering the holiness and purity of
his nature, which one that is savingly humbled has wrought in him.

They differ in their grounds and principles whence they arise. 2 In the ground.


The first arises but from self-love, and is but a work of nature; though
thus far a work of God to stir up self-love, by the sense of misery and to
awaken it; but so as any unreasonable creature if in danger, uses to be
sensible of it: and what wonder then is it for a man, when he begins to have
some sense of hell and death, let into his conscience, to be wounded and
apprehensive of it! but the other arises from the love of God kindled in the
heart by hope of grace and mercy.

They differ in the instrumental causes that work them; the one is wrought by
the spirit of bondage, 3 In the isntrumental causes.
by an enlightening merely to see his bondage, and the soul is as one that is
in bondage fearing God as a master; and he has no further light than thus to
see God as a Judge: but this other is wrought by the spirit of adoption making
the Gospel also effectual, discovering God as a father.

They differ in their effects; as,

The one drives a man from GOD, but this 4 In their of fects.
latter causes a man to go to GOD and to seek Christ: it works that
affection to Christ that the 1
Church in the Canticles had to him, who would not give over seeking him, till
she had found him whom her soul did love. Though there be twenty obstacles in
the way, yet the soul has no rest; as a stone has no rest, till it be in
its own center, so nor this soul thus humbled, but in God; and therefore gives
not over seeking him, though it has never so many denyalls.

The first breeds death, an acedia, a deadness and 2
listlesnesse, it makes a man as a log, that moves not to God in prayer. So it
wrought in Nabal, and Achitophel, it breeds such discouragement as often ends
in death. Of worldly sorrow (and such is all sorrow whereof God is not the end)
comes death: but when it is right and true and kindly sorrow for sin, it
does that which an affection should do, it quickneth him to do that which he
ought to do: so fear when it is right works, and so all other affections,
which were put into the soul for that end that it might be stirred up by them
to that which it should do, for GOD and its own good; and therefore this
affection of sorrow for sin quickens a man to seek out to God when it is
right.

The first breeds a fierceness and turbulency in a man's spirit; as we see
often in men whose consciences 3
are awakned to see their sins, they are fiercer then they were before; for
guilt of sin vexes their spirits; and where there is no sense of mercy from
God, there is none to men: but he that is broken for sin spends his anger
upon himself, frets chiefly for his own vileness and unworthiness; and the
Peace of God which his heart has a sense of makes his spirit gentle, and
peaceable and easy to be entreated and persuaded: bring him Scripture, and a
child may lead him and persuade him. The rough ways are made smooth, the rough
and froward dispositions of the heart, and every Mountainelike affection cast
down, as it is said they were by Saint John's ministry, who came to humble men
and prepare men for Christ.

They differ in their continuance; the former a lone proves but a passion, and
it comes but from 4
flesh, so as all the fruits of flesh are, it is but as the flower of the
grass: of the same fading nature the root is from whence it comes: though it
comes like a violent torrent into the heart, and swells above the banks, yet
it is but as a land-floud; but this latter is as a constant river that has a
spring, which though it keeps within the banks, and does not overflow so much
as the other, yet it runs constantly, and the further it runs, the greater
it grows. 5 Properties. of this humiliation.


I will give you also some properties of that humiliation to which the promise
is made here, by which it may be yet further known and differenced.

We will take those fruits of it we find in the 1 Prayer.
text. 1 It will make a man pray, and 2. Seek Gods face, and turn from his
evil ways: it has always these as the consequences of it:

To pray. Judas was humbled, but he had no 1
mind to pray, nor an ability to pray; the spirit of prayer went not with it;
but he that has that true humiliation, is able to pour forth his soul to
God: and indeed prayer is not the work of the memory and wit, but the proper
work of a broken heart.

Again, secondly, to seek Gods face, this true 2 Seek Gods face.
humiliation cuts a man off from his own root and bottom, and causes him to
seek the Lord alone: which seeking uses to be expressed in prayer: that other
will cause a man to seek mercy, but this to seek Gods face; that is, if they
have his favor, it is enough: they seek God as sequestered from all things
else; though such a soul had assurance of being freed from hell, it would not
content him, unless he saw Gods face.

That which Absalom counterfeited (as knowing it to be a true strain of a
loving and humbled child to a Father) when he had his life given him, though
banished from the Court, Let me see my Fathers face, though he kill me, it
is an humbled soul in truth toward God: others as God says in Hosea, Seek
mercy, but they turned not to me: they sought not me.

True humiliation causes a man to turn from his evil ways: the other makes
a man but give them 3 Turn from sin. 2 Chronicles. 33. 23.
over for a time, whilst he is sick of them; and then returns again, as a
Dog to his vomit, 2 Chronicles. 33. 23. It is said Amon humbled not himself, as
Manasses his father had humbled himself, but transgressed more and more: which
implies, that when a man is humbled as he should, he transgresses no more as
he had done; and so Manasses did so humble himself, as he transgressed no
more. It will make him become stronger against that sin he has transgressed
Simile.
in: as a bone that has been broken is stronger when it is right set again;
he especially humbles himself for and turns from his beloved sin, and with
that from all the rest.

2 Property is, it makes a man to cleave fast to 2 To cleave fast to Christ.
Christ, and so draw nigh to him in all the duties of obedience, to obey him
constantly, generally and thoroughly. Men may have light wounds made in their
hearts which do not drive them to the Physician, which awakeneth men a little,
but they fall asleep again: but when God humbles so as to save, he so
fastens the apprehension of his misery upon him, as to bring him home to
Christ: he sets on the avenger of blood to pursue him to the utmost, and not
for a mile or two, but to follow him till he be driven into the City of
refuge: There is an humiliation, which has not this effect and consequent of
it (and therefore I mention it as a property of the true) and this because of a
defect that is in it, in which respect though it come near the true, yet
differs from it: which is in the event seen in this, that the true causes to
come to Christ, and to cleave to him without separation.

That you may therefore see the difference between this and the other, and
wherein that other is defective; mark how that which is true works this in
one, who yet is not quite cut off, but hangs by a thread as it were, there
being some secret Fibrae, some veins and strings that are not cut in pieces,
which keep life in the old man, and a man remains still upon his old stock,
and so long CHRIST comes not into the heart; not until a man be unbottomed of
himself, and sees he can no way be happy in himself, or within his own
compass, but sees all is to be had in and from the LORD JESUS; until then,
he will not go out of himself, nor cleave to or follow the LORD JESUS CHRIST
fully.

Now then, the other humiliation is defective in this, in that it is not in
this manner enough bottomed, it cuts not a man wholly off from himself, the
foundation is not laid low enough; there is wanting depth of earth, there is
indeed so much earth as shall bring forth a green blade of profession, and
such a foundation as there may be erected a slight building upon, but it is
not low enough to bear a substantial building that shall stand out all winds
and weathers. This true humiliation has these two things go with it.

A man sees no bottom in himself: 1


Sees a bottom out of himself to stand upon, 2 Two things accompany this
humiliation.
and so he casts himself upon that, clasps about CHRIST, and wholly adhereth
unto him, and so draws all sap and life from him, as the branch does from the
root, and thence comes that resolution and ability to cleave to the Lord, and
to please him in all things.

As the resolution to do it, so all his ability to go through with it; for
being joined to CHRIST, there comes the spirit of grace (called the virtue of
CHRIST'S death, because it works a virtue like unto his death) into the heart:
But when the heart is not yet in this manner broken, many take up purposes and
good desires, but are not able to keep them, because they were bottomed on
their own strength; whereas if the heart were broken from it self and
engrafted into CHRIST, such purposes made in his strength would thrive and grow
there: For if the soil be made good, and fit plants be planted in it, it is
certain they will thrive. Now in a good heart those desires that be planted
there do thrive, and wither no more, and though there may now and then waves
arise, and so they may be tossed to and fro; yet substantially they do not
wither nor fall from the foundation: Those therefore who have begun a good
course for a year or Falling away the ground of it
a month, and go not on in it, it is a sign they want humbling: He that is
truly humbled, falls back no more: Manasses did not, nor Saint Paul, Lord
what will thou have me do, said he then? and he was as good as his word.
Therefore take knowledge you that do fall away, what the defect has been and
wherein: for that will be a means to set you right and recover you again.

3 Property of Humiliation is, to have all the affections 3 Moderates the
affections.
moderate, all delights in worldly things faint and remiss, and all his
affections taken chiefly up about grace and sin: True affection in him will
eat up the false. He esteems spiritual things at a high rate, and all other
things as little. Ask such an one what of all things else he would desire, and
he will tell you, Christ, and the favor of God, and the graces of the Spirit,
and to have his lusts mortified, and his sins pardoned, and that he passes
not for the things of this life, he cares not in comparison whether he be
poor or rich, bond or free, (notwithstanding if he may have a better con
dition, he will use it rather) as a man that is condemned to die; little
regards he his estate or the things of this life, his apprehensions are taken
up with greater things; give him his pardon, and take al else: So here one
truly humbled, counts the favor of God so great, as he esteems all things
else light in comparison: When therefore men are violent in their affections
toward worldly things and in their desires and delights in them, and
endeavors after them, it is a sign they are not humbled.

4 Property is to love God and Christ much, Mary loved much, because much was
forgiven her; that is, 4 To love God much.
not simply that much was forgiven her, but because withal she had a sense of
it, apprehended it as much and her sin great by a work of humiliation, and so
apprehended it a great matter to be pardoned. And so a man having once
apprehended death and hell, and the wrath of GOD as belonging to him, and God
comes on a sudden and tells him, thou shall live, when his neck was on the
block, and he expected nothing but death; this causes a man to love GOD
much, and to prize CHRIST; and this made Saint Paul also to love CHRIST so
much, that the love of Christ constrained him, because I was a persecuter and a
blasphemer, and he died for me, forgave me a great debt.

He that is truly humbled will be content with any condition, as the
Prodigal son, I am content 5 To be content with any condition.
to be as an hired servant, says he, and am unworthy to be called a son
any more; he was content to do the work of a servant, to live in the
condition of a servant, to have the lowest place in all the family: And so
Saint Paul looked on himself as the least of all the Saints, thought he could
never lay himself low enough. Now this contentedness is exercised about two
things.

In a contentedness in the want of these outward 1 In want of outward things.
good things; when a man is content with the meanest services and the least
wages, to want wealth, and credit and gifts, as Jacob being truly humbled, I am
less than the least of thy mercies: whereas an other man that is not humbled,
when he looks upon himself and GODS mercies he enjoyes, he thinking highly
of himself, thinks himself too big for them, and that the disproportion is
rather on his side; whereas Jacob though he then had many mercies, yet said,
take the least mercy, and lay it in one scale, and my self in an other, and I
am too light for it, less than it, and it too much for me.

It is exercised in bearing crosses. One that is 2 Bearing crosses.
truly humbled still blesses GOD, as Job, and bears and accepts the
punishment of his iniquity willingly and cherefully, as we see it made a
condition, Lev. Lev. 26. 41.
26. 41. If their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they bear or accept the
punishment of their iniquity, if the Lord lay upon him a sharp disease (say
the plague, disreputation, poverty,) yet he bears it willingly and
chearefully; for when a man thinks in earnest that which is said Ezech. 36.
that he is Ezech. 36.
worthy to be destroyed, whatsoever befalls him from God, which is less than
destruction, he blesses God for it, and rejoices that he escapes so.

The humble man therefore is in all conditions contented, always cheerful
and blessing God; if he has good things, they are more then he is worthy of;
if evil, though never so sharp, yet they are less than destruction, and then
he deserves, when as an unbroken heart is always turbulent, and thinks in the
secret murmurings of his heart, that he is not well dealt with.

I should come now to the application of this Doctrine; Case. Whether such a
measure of Legal sorrow be necessary
but before I must resolve a case and scruple, which does use to trouble the
hearts of many.

The Case in question is, whether to right and true humiliation, it be
necessary that such a solemn humiliation and such a measure of sorrow and
violent Legal contrition go before it.

There is a double kind of sorrow wrought in the Answ. Sorrow dou ble.
hearts of men; the one is a violent tumultuous sorrow, which arises from the
apprehension of hell and punishment: the ground whereof is self-love, and is
commonly in those who are suddenly enlightened, and so amazed therewith being
taken on the sudden; as we see in Saint Paul who was taken suddenly as he
was going to Damascus: and it was discovered to him, that he was guilty of so
great a sin, as he could never have imagined, a voice from heaven to strike
his ears on the sudden, why persecutest thou me? And this we find by
experience to have been in many who never have true humiliation, as we see in
Judas. God indeed sometimes uses it to bring men to humiliation, as he did in
Saint Paul.

But again we find in experience in some a cleaving to God, and holiness of
life, and a constant care to please him in all things, without this violent
vexing sorrow: and many that have had their hearts deeply wounded, amazed,
affrighted, and have thereupon taken up great purposes which have come to
nothing, the ground whereof having been a violent passion, as that the root
withered, so the fruit withered also; but a true apprehension and conviction of
sin; as in it self the greatest misery is more real and draws the heart
nearer to Christ; so that in this case we may say of these two sorts, as Christ
said of those who were bidden to go into the vineyard: They that said they
would go, did not, and others that said they would not go, yet went: and
therefore we answer, that it is not always necessary to have Violent sorrow
not always necessary.
such a violent sorrow, or that a man should lie any long time in such an
evident sense of wrath, though always there is a right apprehension of sin
which does humble a man: which will appear by these considerations.

1 That is not always the greatest sorrow that is 1 It (...) not always the
greatest.
thus violent: though it seem to be so, it is not always the greatest sorrow
which melts into tears; as that is not the greatest joy that discovers it
self in laughter; that is not the greatest sorrow which works the most
violent commotion in the heart; there is a sad silent quiet sorrow that sinketh
deeper, and wets more slowly, and sokes into the heart, and makes the heart
more fruitful in the issue, which arises out of a more spiritual conviction
of Judgment, of the evil of sin; though less passion accompanies it, yet a
stronger and deeper affection of sorrow is wrought. I call it deeper, because
it is more constant and lasting, more to purpose; the one being as a
land-floud, the other as a spring.

Put the case, such a violent sorrow should be 2
greater, yet it is not always alike necessary, neither on Gods part nor man's.

Not on man's part; as some disease does not 1 Not necessary on man's part.
need so sharp and quick a medicine as an other, as some men's flesh is harder
to heal than others, so some men's hearts have more stubbornnes in them than
others; some have made themselves children of the Devil by their wicked
courses, worse then they were at first; others in comparison are but as the
children of Adam, still as they were borne, and therefore the same work may be
wrought in them, with much less ado.

On Gods part it is not always so necessary, but 2 Nor on Gods part.
is proportioned to Gods ends; and God differs and is various in his ends
concerning men.

He means to bestow a greater measure of grace 1
upon one then upon an other; and where he means to set a greater building,
there he digges a lower foundation; he means to use some as a means to
comfort others, and therefore lets them see and feel more the bitterness
of sin, that they may be able to comfort others with the same comfort
wherewith they have been comforted.

He differs in the means to attain his ends; if 2
he means to bring them to the same measure of grace, yet he will not go
always the same way to work, as he often does that without affliction, which
sometimes he does with it; as a man is brought to the same Haven diverse ways,
some in a Simile
calm is tided in, others are driven in with a storm, but it is no matter how
they come so they come in, the promise is made to those that come.

A third consideration is, that it is not for want of this greatness of
humiliation, that diverse have 3 Greatness of sorrow.
not so violent a sorrow, but from some circumstance in the work it self; as,

First, because the light of comfort comes in sooner to some than to others;
they have the salve presently 1 Comfort comes late.
after the wound is given: God having broken the heart binds it up presently
again, a man may have as deep a wound which a mitigated medicine coming
near to the bottom of the disease and soon applied may sooner heal than
another less deep, to which the remedy is not applied a Simile.
long time after, which therefore asks longer: So also it is in joy,
suddenness increases it for a fit; for example, put case a man is condemned
for high treason, and brought to the block, and verily expects death, and his
pardon on the sudden comes, there is such a great sensible change wrought in
him (and our natures are sensible of great changes) and therefore how
excessively does he rejoice! but take one who is guilty of the same fault, who
knows that if he have not his pardon, he should lose his life, but has his
pardon presently after the sentence passed, he will prize his pardon as much
as the other, though happily he is not so turbulently affected as the other.

It falls out thus by reason of the ignorance some 2 From ignorance.
have lived in before, who therefore are enlightened to know their estates all
on the sudden; whereas an other has been brought up in knowledge, and the
knowledge of his misery being let in by degrees, then the case does also differ,
as between two men who were to go through a wood, whereof one is Simile.
set upon by thieves not suspecting any, and is put into a fear of his life,
and knows not how to escape, but one comes on the sudden, and rescues him
and gives him his life, but another is warned before, knows he must go
through such a passage, and that unless he has a strong guard to go along
with him, he shall certainly perish; this man apprehends the danger as great,
as the other, and the benefit as great, and the love of him that should go
with him as great; only his passion, either of fear or joy, is not so violent
as the others, though he truly rejoices in the deliverance as much as the
other, and thinks himself as much bound to the man that delivered him.

I have spoken these things, because some are scrupulous in the point, and
think they may not safely apply the Promise, because they have not had that
measure of sorrow that others have had.

But let no man suffer his assurance to he weakened for want of this, for a man
may have as high an esteem of CHRIST and be as thoroughly convinced of sin
though he want that violent work, which GOD works in some, even a great
sense of his wrath, and letting them lie there and then speaks peace, so as
these are wrought by distinct acts and causes in a great distance one from the
other, so that as their sorrow was evident so their joy was evident, in another
he works so, that as soon as he sees sin he sees God also pardoning.

And in those that have that violent shyning of affection in their first
Humiliation; look how much of it is violent, will vanish, and what is
substantial, will hold; so that even they in the end come to this solid
conviction of Judgment at last, which only is constant and abides with them.
And therefore let not thy assurance be weakend for the want of this, for faith
unites to Christ and establishes us in well doing.

But you will say, is it not good to get that sensible stirring sense and sight
of sin? Object.


I answer, yes, for to that end GOD leads through crosses, and suffers thee to
fall into sins, Answ. Sense of sin necessary.
that thou may see the vanity of the creature and the sinfulness of thy
nature, that when thou come to heaven thou may say by thine own
experience, it was not by my own righteousness that I came hither: And
therefore though it be good to get it, yet let GOD go his own way and use his
own manner of working, whether by Legal terror or otherwise, what he sees good
for thee he will do to humble thee, but do thou use means to understand the
Law, thy own heart and actions, and as thou art fallen into new sins, labor
to see what a case thou should be in, if Christ had not delivered thee: But
let not thy assurance be weakened, for you must know there are but two maine
ends of humiliation, which if they be attained in thee, thou need not call
in question thy estate. Now first Two ends of humiliation.
it serves to make thee willing to match with Christ: We are Christ's
spokes-men, and woo you every Sabbath day, but we find all the world like
them To take Christ.
who think themselves beautiful and rich and that they have matches enough, who
though they are contented to have Christ for their husband in Heaven, yet not
on the earth with all those crosses they must take him with.

Now humiliation comes and makes men willing, when a man comes to see and say,
I have no such thing in me as I imagined, no riches, etc. but I am in debt,
and shall be arrested and laid in prison, and my life must go for it, unless
Christ will marry me; in that a man sees he shall be kept from all arrests by
him, this makes a man willing to match with Christ, yea glad, though he have
many crosses follow in this life upon the marriage. Now therefore if thou
find this wrought that thou can sincerely say, I am willing to take
Christ, and to be subject to him in all things, to follow him in all
conditions, to give a full consent to take him, as I find that he in the word
has a full consent to take me; then certainly thou art humbled, else not; if
thou had taken him only in a fit, and not out of Judgment, thou would
have repented thee ere now.

The second end which humiliation serves to is for Sanctification, as the other
helped him in his Justification, 2 For Sanctification.
that every unruly lust may be broken and mortified in thee; that thou
might fear to offend and be pliable to the Lord in every thing; whereas
another that is unbroken quarrels with every thing, thinks his work too
much, and his wages too little, and knows not why he should go a contrary way
to the world, but an humbled man Simile.
will do all this chearefully, like a broken Horse that turns at every check
of the bridle, when another casts his Rider: Do thou find that thou
tremblest at the word, and fear sin, and dare not venture in it, and so
for duties, thou dare not neglect them: and this thou have experience of in
the whole course of thy life? then surely this work of humiliation has been
in thy heart: Though thou see not the fire, yet if thou findst the heat, it
has been there: for these are the effects of it, and as I speak this for the
comfort of those that have not felt such violent sorrows, so let me on the
contrary say to others, who (it may be) have had such fits of sorrow, yet if
thou find an unwillingnes to submit thus to Christ, find thy neck stiff to
the Lords yoke, and such an unbrokennesse in thee, that thou can not live
without satisfying this or that lust, but can sin and bear it out well
enough, let thy sorrow have been never so great, and now they are past and
gone, and were not right; let men therefore examine themselves by the effects,
for men are deceived on both sides: and then,

1 Use is for exhortation to stir up to the duty: Use 1.
This exhortation I direct to two sorts of men; first to those who are already
truly humbled, and secondly to strangers to it.

First you that are already humbled and have obtained 1 Exhortation to those
that are humbled.
the assurance of the forgiveness of your sins, you must be humbled more, for
if the Lord suspend his promise at this, then the duty is to be done daily:
When God requires a duty of Sanctification (and his promises are made only to
such) there can be none excuse, there may be a let in preparative
humiliation; a man may be swallowed of two Degrees of grace from degrees of
humiliation
much sorrow: but not in this which is a duty of sanctification: and know this,
that all degrees of grace arise from the degrees of this true Humiliation:
which I make good to you thus; Faith and Love are the great radical graces,
all elseare but branches springing out of them. Now they are strengthened by
this humiliation, and graces the more they grow, there is an addition still
made to them; as there is an addition made to our humiliation.

First for Faith, know that the more strongly 2 Faith.
a man lays hold on CHRIST and prizeth him, the more he goes on to apprehend
his sin, and is emptied of himself; and though a man took CHRIST truly at
his first conversion, yet there are degrees of prizing him; when a husband
takes a wife, though at their feast marriage there was such love between them
as they would have chosen each other before any other in the world, yet so as
this their love may admit degrees; after marriage, they may see more grounds of
loving each other more, so that though the match is made, yet they may be more
confirmed in their choice, which may be made more full and absolute: So toward
Christ the will and affections may be wound up to a higher peg, which is done
by a further degree of humiliation. What is faith, but a laying hold of Christ?
Now the emptier the hand is, the further ^aith what.
hold it takes, and the more we are taken off our own bottom, the further we
will cleave to Christ. A man in a river that is like to be drowned, and has a
rope cast to him, he will be sure to catch as fast hold Simile.
as he can, you shall not need to bid him. And to this end it is, that
Christians are still taught more and more, by the spirit to see the vanity of
the creature, the vileness of their natures; and they are led through this
wilderness to humble them, that so Christ may have the higher place in their
hearts.

Again, the greater the thirst is, the greater will a man's draught be; and the
more you add to your humiliation, the more will your thirst be after Christ,
and you will drink deeper of the fountain of life, and draw more sap from him.

And secondly it increases your love, for thereby 2 Love.
we come to see our selves more beholding to God, as having a greater debt
forgiven us. What made Mary love much, but because she was sensible much was
forgiven her. Therefore labor more and more to be humbled, especially as you
fall into new sins, which the Lord often lets him to do, that they might be
humbled more: and the more light a Christian gets to discover his own
vileness and the vanity of the creature, the stronger he will grow in grace,
and the more established in well doing. 2 To those that are not humbled.


Now secondly for those that are strangers to this grace of Humiliation; that
they may come to be humbled, let them observe these two rules. First labor to
see the greatness of sin. Secondly to see your own weakness and unability to
help your selves; for the first, do not weigh sin by common opinion, but in a
right balance, do not do with 1 To see the greatness of sin.
your souls as some do with their bodies; when their beauty is decayed, they
desire to hide it from themselves by false glasses, and from others by
painting; so do we for the most part with our sins; we desire to hide them
from our selves by putting false glosses upon them, and from others by fained
excuses: but deal impartially with your selves herein, and labor to see sin
in its full vileness: And that you may do so,

First pitch upon some one great sin, and take it into 1 Single out some great
sin.
consideration. So Christ, when he would humble Paul, he tells him of his
persecution, Why persecutest thou me? And so S. Peter, when he would humble
Acts 2. (...).
the Jews Acts 2. 1. he tells them of their crucifying of Christ: So Christ
when he would humble the John 4.
Woman, John 4. he remembers her of her adultery: And the method that God takes
when he would humble us, it is good for us to take: For as when a man goes to
rub a great stain out of a cloth, by the same labor he rubs out others,
that are the less, for my meaning is, not that you should let other sins
alone, when I exhort you to single out Simile.
one; but to consider all particulars else also, though never so small: the
multitudes of them will help to humble thee, as well as the greatness: When a
man sees he has many debts though but small, of sixpences and shillings; yet
being many, the total sum may arise to a great quantity, and make a man see
himself bankerupt: Therefore set your sins in order before you, give the due
weight to every sin, but yet especially let great sins be in your Sins great
how.
eye. Now some sins are greater in their own nature, as fornication,
swearing, drunkenness, etc. others are made great by their circumstances, as
that they were committed against knowledge, with deliberation, as Saul sparing
the Amalekites, and sacrificing before Samuel came, wherein a commandment on
the contrary was distinctly given. So God aggravated to Adam his sin, did not I
command thee the contrary? and did thou not know thou should not? We are
not to take sins by number only, but also by weight: as when they were
committed contrary to many promises, purposes, and so as hardness of heart
follow upon it

And secondly, withal labor to make sins present, 5 To make past sins
present.
though long since committed; look on them as if they were newly done: for
though our sins be great, yet if we apprehend them and view at a distance,
and a great way off, they move us not: which is the reason why men are not more
affected with the thought of death, in their health, which yet is one of the
greatest evils, and so apprehended by us when we come to die: the reason is,
because it is then conceived to be a far off, and so men are not moved with
it. Thus it is in our apprehension of sins also: the distance makes them seem
small; there is not a near conjunction and application of the object and the
affection, they are not brought nigh, but men look upon sins long since past
as small, whereas in truth sins long since committed are the same in themselves
and in the sight of God they were when first committed; and therefore should
be the same to thee. So a man that has committed a treason twenty years
ago, may be executed for it now: and therefore Joseph's brethren remembered
their sin as fresh, though long before committed, as if they had then
committed it: their affliction revived in their consciences, and made it as
present: but we usually look on sins past as none of ours. Job says, that the
LORD made him possess the sins of his youth: he possessed them, that is,
looked on them as his own. What is the reason why to men in jeopardy, as in a
storm at Sea and in the time of sickness their sins then appear so terrible
and fearful? they apprehend them as present. Now that which God does by
affliction, let us labor to get done by meditation, and by faith to look on
them as present; turn that end of the optike glass which will bring them
near to thee, labor to have a true Judgment of their greatness, and that
they are the same, for therein lies true humiliation, when the Judgment is
rightly convinced to esteem them the greatest evil, though it be not
accompanied with so violent and turbulent a sorrow.

When you have made them thus present, do not quickly make an end, but let
sorrow abide 3 Let sorrow abide.
upon your hearts, for the work is not so soon done; you will get into some
rock or other, unless you be continually persecuted and followed by the
apprehension of your sins, till you come unto the City of refuge: but do as
David did Psalm. 51. he sets his sin before him; and as Saint Paul, to whom that
sin of persecution was ever fresh in his Psalm 51.
memory and always in his mouth, I a persecutor, etc. In this case learn
something of the Devil, who when he would bring a man to be swallowed up of
sorrow, his manner is to keep a man's sin still before him, nor will he let a
man be at rest, therefore 2 Cor. 12. they are called the buffetings of Satan,
because he comes often with blow after blow, to 2 Cor. 12.
discourage and amaze a man now learn from that practice of his to stay and
dwell upon the meditations of our sins, and often to present them to our
souls. Thy green wood happily will not burn without much blowing: it is
frequens and intensior argumentatio, Simile.
a frequent pressing of arguments that works on the affections; and so here
keep the object near the faculty, and at last it will work: look not on thy
sins by fits, let there be no interruption by worldly joys or pleasures, no
intervalla: and this is Saint James counsel, Be afflicted, and mourn and
weep, James 4. Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into
heaviness: humble your selves, etc. that is, if you will have your hearts
humbled, abstain from lawful delights for the time, get alone. So Joel 2. he
bids them set apart Joel 2.
a day, that they might have no interruption; and if that will not do it,
sanctify another; let not one spark go out ere another be struck;
otherwise you will be always beginning and never come to be humbled.

If you would come to lay your sins to heart, and 4 Take heed of false
reasonings.
be affected with them; then be sure you be not kept off by those false
reasoning; and excuses, which hinder men from being humbled, and keep their
sins from coming in upon them: as for instance; when a man comes to consider
of his sins, I but says he, am I not in a good estate already? and then my
sins are pardoned; for I have good desires in me and a good meaning, I mean
no man no harm; and thus these keep him from seeing himself a child of
wrath: but consider, that thou may have all these good things in thee, and
more than these, and yet be a child of wrath; these will be found to the praise
of the Holy Ghost who wrought them in thee, but not to thy advantage to escape
damnation; for though these be in thee, yet they have not that full effect they
should, for they overcome not that evil that is in thee: for notwithstanding
all these good things thou art still a Sabbath profaner, a drunkard given to
company. I might go over all other sins; but in a word; if they overcome not
every sin, they are nothing for the saving thee; if they had been effectual
in thee, they would have driven out the darkness; all the good things thou
have avail not to thy salvation; because they make thee not a good man; yea
all these good things and the good fits thou have had, will help forward thy
condemnation: because thou have profaned the truth in thy heart, and have not
put fuel to these Other excuses are in those Sermons upon Romans 1. 17, 18.
sparks, which God in mercy did put in: that thou should suffer such
Talents as these to lie hid in a Napkin, will he not say, thou art an
unprofitable servant?

A second thing that is to be added to the sight of your sins to humble you,
is to know that misery 2 The sight of our misery and vanity to that end.
and vanity that is in your selves; we see by experience that men will grant
that they are great sinners, but what is the reason, that yet notwithstanding
they stand out?

They do not know their own misery and vanity, and though we have preached
to men again and again their misery; yet they are not stirred: but when death
comes, then they are humbled, and why, but because then they see what God is,
and what themselves are; death shows them the vanity of the Creature: so that
the way to be humbled, is to know how unable a man is to be happy within his
own compass. And to this end consider:

First, the greatness of God and his power, and the terrors of the Almighty,
that he is that God in 1 See the greatness of God.
whose hands is thy life and ways, and all: and consider, that unless thou
seriously lay thy sins to heart; this God is thy enemy, and him with whom for
ever thou have to do.

Consider what a weak creature thou art; think 2
with thy self; a sickness may come on my body, a cross may come on my
estate, yea an apprehension Our own weakness.
of my soul, that may suck up the marrow of my bones; and above all, I have
an immortal soul in a vessel of clay; and think when that glass, that
shell is broke, what will become of that poor soul of thine: And this would
bring a man to the Prodigalls case. Belshazzar saw this, when he saw the hand
writing upon the wall. Had it not been wisdom in him to have seen and
acknowledged it before? Thou art well now; thou do not know what alterations
may befall thee in the year, and thou had better leave a thousand businesses
undone, than this.

And yet thirdly, all this will not do it, except the spirit of God come on
thee: to humble a man 3 Labor for the Spirit.
is a mighty work. Though Eliah should preach to you, yea all the sons of
thunder should come, yet without the spirit, they will not be able to humble
you; yea God himself came down from heaven, upon Mount Sinai, and with what
terrors? and yet the people remained unbroken, though they were amazed for a
time. When Christ spoke to S. Paul and struck him off his horse, if he had not
had a light within as well as without, he had not been humbled; nor the
Iaylor, if there had not been an earthquake in his heart, as well as in the
earth. Jeroboam had as great a miracle wrought before him as Saint Paul: you
may well think the drying up of his hand amazed him, yet made him not give
over his sin; and what was the reason? there was a miracle in both, but not
the spirit: and if we did work miracles before you, from day to day; yet
unless God sent his spirit of bondage upon you you would not be humbled. See
the necessity of the spirits help in admonitions also. Amaziah was admonished
by a Prophet as well as David by N. than, yet he was not humbled: and so we
see some are humbled by afflictions, and others not. Therefore pray that God
would send his Spirit to convince you, and learn also not to be offended at
us, when in preaching the Law your consciences are troubled. It is the spirit
that troubles you; else our words would not trouble you: and therefore be not
angry at us: and therefore also do not put off this duty of getting your
hearts humbled; for thou art not able so much as to humble thy self: therefore
take the opportunities of the spirit, when he stirs thy heart.

But you will say, this rather discourageth us from the work: for then we
must ever wait like Object.
mariners, till the tide and the gale comes, and I had as good sit still: for
I may go about it to no purpose, seeing the Lord must do it.

I answer thee; that if thou would go about Answ. God gives the Spirit in
our endeavors.
it and shut up thy self in private a day, and after that another, in the end
God would send his Spirit. When Christ bad them go and row, though they rowed
all night to little purpose, yet CHRIST came at last, and they were on the
other side presently; it may be thou may be about it a month or two, ere
thou find the Spirit coming; yet he will come in the end, and then the
work will be thoroughly done; for God has made a promise of the Holy Ghost,
that he will baptize with the Holy Ghost as with fire; not only to his
Disciples; but those that yet never had it: for it is not only for increase,
but to begin grace. Yea, if God has given thee a heart to pray, to consider
this promise, so as thou have taken up a resolution to wait and to set thy
self to the work, when thou have done so; the spirit is already in thine
heart, the work is begun, though thou think not so; and never plead thou
can not do it without the spirit; for I ask thee this question, did thou
ever commit a sin in which thou could say, I did it against my will? was
there ever any duty which thou had a thought to do, that thou could say,
thou could not do it? thy heart tells thee no.

Therefore set about this duty which is the maine; which therefore we have pressed
much, because it is as a nail driven into a wall on which other graces hang.
This and Faith are the great things which the master builders are occupied
about, and indeed the foundation, which therefore above all you must look to;
and these our exhortations should be as forked Arrows to stick in you, and
not out again, and not as other Arrows that wound only.

We have done with the negative part, That such as do not humble themselves
have no interest in the promises.

We come now to the affirmative part, which is for comfort; That if any man
does humble himself, God will hear his prayer, his sins shall be forgiven,
etc.

The Doctrine is this. The Lord will be merciful Doct. The Lord is merciful
to the humble.
unto the humble.

I had thought to have gone off sooner, but that the Supper of the Lord draws
near; which time is a day of reconciliation; such as was that Feast the tenth
day in the seventh month, when the people all meeting together, Aaron the
Priest confessed their sins over the escape Goat which fled into the
wilderness, which was a type of Christ taking away all our sins; and the same
is done and represented when we receive the Sacrament. Now one condition
required of the people at that time was, that they should humble themselves,
and every soul that did not was to be cut off, Levit. 23. 27. to the 30.
verse, and that letting go of the escape Goat was at the Levit. 23. 27
same time, as appears, Levit. 16. 20. to the 31. Lev. 16. 20.


But to come to the point; the Scripture is plentiful to prove it, James 4. 6.
God gives grace to the James 4. 6.
humble, sanctifying grace, and also saving knowledge, Psalm. 25. He shows his
secrets unto the humble, Psalm 25.
yea he dwells in such, Esaias 57. 15. he has an especial Esaias 57. 15.
eye to such: those eyes that run through the whole earth fix themselves on
the humble man for good, Esaias 62. 2. other things have my hand made; (yet them
he regards not in comparison) To him will I look that is humble: he promises
also to Esaias 62. 2.
fill them with good things, to give them preferment and honor, to exalt the
humble and meek; yea he regards it so, that when evil men have humbled
themselves, they have not gone away without some mercy; as when Ahab humbled
himself, 2 Chronicles. 12. God promised he would not bring the 2 Chronicles. 12
evil in his days: and the best of Gods children when they have not humbled
themselves, he has withdrawn his favor from them, as he would not look on
David, till he had humbled himself. All the world cannot keep an humble man
down, nor all the props in the world cannot keep a proud man up.

And what are the reasons why God respects humble men so?

An humble man gives God all the glory, and Reas. 1. They give God the glory.
him that honors me (says GOD) I will honor. Now an humble man does as
Ioab did. Ioab would not take the victory to himself, but sent for David; and
it was the deepest policy that ever Ioab used: and so the Apostles, Acts 3.
know that JESUS has Acts 3.
made this man whole: and it is the humble man's wisdom, in all actions not to
set themselves up, but to say no matter how I be regarded, so God be glorified;
and God will honor such: therefore CHRIST in his prayer makes this a ground of
being glorified by God, John 17. I have glorified thee on John 17. 4.
earth; now father glorify me. And so God will deal with his Saints in a
proportion.

Humility keeps a man within his own compass; Reas. 2. It keeps a man in
com pass.
but pride lifts a man up above his proportion, it puts all out of joint and
breeds disorder, and that brings destruction; and therefore humility was
defined by some of the Ancients to be that which out of the knowledge of GOD
and a man's self keeps a man to his own bottom. That whereas a proud man
liftes up himself above his Simile.
measure, as a member in the body that swells, takes up more room then it
should, and are as bubbles in the water, which should be plain and smooth;
but this brings all into its place again, gives the Creator his due, and sets
the creature where it should be, and therefore God loves it.

It makes a man sociable and useful and profitable Reas. 3. Makes a man
useful (...) others.
to others: a man would not have a stubborn horse that will not go in the
teame with his fellows, nor such high trees as overshadow others, and will not
suffer them to grow by them, and bring forth no fruit themselves. A man will
not keep a Cow or an Ox that is still a pushing; and Simile.
such an one is a proud man: it is but, and only the humble man that will live
profitably amongst his neighbors, and will not go beyond his own Tedder.

An humble man has such a frame of heart, as the LORD delights in; for he is
fearful Reas. 4. It makes ^bedient.
to offend, always obedient, ready to do any service, and is content with any
wages; loves much, is abundant in thankfulness, and cleaves fast to the LORD,
because he has no bottom of his own, and keeps under his lusts, because
he knows the bitterness of sin; resignes up his heart to the Lord to
follow him in all things, he is a man of the Lords desires; so it is said of
Daniel, when he had humbled himself, Dan. 9. Such an one as the Lord would
have; and so it makes him fit (...) 9.
for favor; and when a man is fit for favor, he shall be sure to have it,
for God is not streight-handed to us.

Has the LORD said it, and that from heaven; Use* 1.
that if a man do humble himself he will forgive Consolation.
him? Then this is a matter of great consolation; when I can say from GOD to
any one here that droopes, that if thou do and wilt humble thy self, the
LORD will forgive thee; consider it, this is news from heaven.

Put the case (to compare spiritual things with things which you are more
sensible of) that any of you had committed high treason against the King, and
thou had forfeited thy life and goods; if any one should come from the King
to thee, and tell thee that if thou would go to him and humble thy self it
should be pardoned: And is not our case the same? We are guilty of eternal
death, and have forfeited life and all: when therefore GOD himself shall say,
If thou will humble thy self, thy sins shall be forgiven, what comfort is
it? such a word as this should not be lost. A man that knows the bitterness
of sin, would wait and wait again to gain such a word as this from the
LORDS mouth, and would keep it as his life. It was not a light thing to get
such a word as this from God, none but a favorite could get it, nay none but
his Son, and he not, but by his death; if CHRIST had not provided this Charter
for us, every man should have dyed in his sins. Now this we can and do say
from GOD through CHRIST, that though your sins be great, and you have fallen
into them many a time and committed them with the worst of circumstances; yet
if thou humblest thy self, thou shall be forgiven; so as thou may say, I may
challenge God of his promise, and put this bond in suite and he cannot deny it.
This is a great matter; if a man shall but seriously consider, what it is to
have this great God, the Governor of the World, to be an enemy, one would
think they should think this Gospel good news.

But you will say, I do yet neither know distinctly what it is to humble my
self, neither can I humble my self; there is not a harder thing then it is.
Therefore I will show it you once again, that you may know it, for why should
we not in so great a point turn it every way, and mould it for your use, and
to your apprehensions, as also that you may not think it harder then it is, by
which the Devil keeps many off.

Now you may know what it is by the expressions Humiliation what.
of those who have humbled themselves. David having numbered the people, when he
humbled himself he said, Lord I have sinned and done exceeding foolishly.
Josiah his heart melted before the Lord. And Dan. 9. Lord we have done very
wickedly, etc. and Dan. 9.
shame belongs to us: he was ashamed. And Io^ when he humbled himself, said,
Lord, I abhor my self in dust and ashes. And the Prodigal, I have sinned
against heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.
And so they are said to be weary and heavy laden. Many other expressions there
are, but I will digest all into two heads; to humble a man's self is but to
bring his heart and mind unto these two acts.

Is out of a sense of a man's unworthiness to say 1 An acknoledgi^g our vile
sins
thus unto the Lord: Oh Lord, I have done exceeding wickedly, and am worthy to
be destroyed. I have been in the wrong way, and done exceeding foolishly; but
thy ways are righteous, and thou art just: yea I have dealt unthankfully and
unequally with thee, who have been so good to me. That was it melted the heart
of Josiah, and made Job abhor himself; as vile as the dust I tread upon, as
ashes that are good for nothing, or but as sackloth (in which they used to
humble themselves, the worst of garments, I am ashamed and confounded. This is
the first act which is a sense and an acknowledgement of our own unworthiness
and vileness. And the 2 To acknowledge he is worthy to be destroyed.
second a sight of a man's worthiness to be destroyed, unability to help
himself, and of the vanity of all things else. A man must further say, that I
am not only unworthy, but guilty of death; my sins will break my back; I
am not able to stand under them, and I am utterly undone; and when I look upon
all the props of my life, my health, and riches, etc. I see they are but vain
things, reeds and feathers, and as hollow ground whereon I can set no footing:
Therefore LORD, be thou a rock to me, on whom I may pitch and build my
self. And that this sight of our own unability is also necessary we see by
that 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are rich, that they be not high minded,
nor trust in uncertain 1 Timothy 6. 17
riches: they are both joined together: For so far as a man does trust in
them, he is high minded; and the soul of man does trust in them so long as it
apprehends substance in them, and that they are not vanity, so far the heart
bears it self upon them, and so is careless of the LORD; and why else do
afflictions humble men, as Manasses, but because a man then sees the emptiness
of all things, it brings him to say with the Prodigal, I die for hunger, and
these cannot feed me, and so to hold fast to the LORD: which a man must needs
do, when he has but one thing to hold to. Now when thou art wrought on so as
to express this unfainedly, this is it, to humble thy self.

We should hence learn to strengthen our faith; if we have done this, if thou
have thus humbled thy Use 2. To strengthen faith.
self, confessed thy sins, taken up a full resolution to forsake them; thou
shall have mercy, according to that promise Prove. 28. 13. He that confesses
and ^rov. 28. 13
for saketh, shall have mercy.

But here we find those who have humbled themselves come in with two
objections, that hinder their comfort,

1. That they cannot mourn for their sins. 2 That they fall into the same
sins again and again, and that therefore they have not humbled themselves.
Now as we would not have the false deceived with false evidences, so nor the
true discomforted, and therefore we will answer these objections. To the first,

If thou be so far convinced in thy Judgment of thy sin, and misery, and
unability to help 1 When mourning is effectual.
thy self, as it has turned the bent and rudder of thy will, so as thou
say, I will go and humble my self to my Father, change my course, confess
and forsake my sins; though thy affections seem to thee not stirred, yet this
is enough to translate thee into the estate of grace: for I ask, to what end
is mourning and weeping required, but to awaken a man, to come home to God, in
this manner mentioned? when therefore thou find these effects, thou may
be sure thou have the end of these, and that is enough to save thee. Suppose a
man carries about him a deadly disease, so as upon the discovery, and knowledge
of it he is content to part with all he has to the Physicians, and is wary of
meddling Simile.
with any meat that will hurt him and increase it; if he know this that it is
deadly, though he has no sense of pain, it is all one, (and there are some
diseases you know, wherein a man feels not so much pain, that yet are
mortal) it may make him as careful to use the means: and so is it here; if
the conviction of the sinfulness and deadliness of sin work those
dispositions mentioned in thee, then thou have the end which mourning tends to,
and that is all one.

Though thy affections be not so stirred, consider 2 What the promises are made
to
the promises are made to ones coming in, and taking Christ, and believing in
him: they are not made to the commotion of the affections: and here in the
words the promise is made to, humbling thy self out of a solidity of
Judgment. It is no matter by what means you are brought to take hold on
Christ, so you come to him. It is all one whether I come to my journeys end by
land, or by water, on horse back or on foot, so I be come thither.

If thou find thou do the things that an humble man should do, then
though thy affections seem not to be moved, yet in very deed they are moved
and changed: as if thou art fearful to return to thy sins, art resolved to
please God in all things to thy power. For what are affections, but diverse
positions and scituations of the will and Affections what.
the feet it walks upon? they are but the diverse motions and inclinations
whereby the will shoots it self into the objects of it. Now look which way
thy will is resolved, and set: that way are thy affections set also: if thou
see one to rise up soon and go to bed late, to avoyde poverty, and to get
riches, a wise man will assure himself that his Simile.
aim is such, and his heart set upon riches; his actions show that his
affections do move strongly that way, though he says, he feels no such
stirradge. Therefore though thou find this stillness of affections; yet if
thou do the same things that they use to do, who mourn and weep more; thou
may assure thy self thy affections are moved.

I add this, that it is no wound, if thy affections be not so sensibly
stirred, and yet thy humiliation be sound; for it is the nature of the
affections to shoot into their own objects stilly, and to run along as water
and wind does; if they meet with no obstacle to run quietly, if it meets
with trees, then the wind rises, and if the tide meet with the wind, then
the waves rise; so if our affections be crossed, we are sure to hear of them
then: if thou had not some hopeful assurance of thy estate, thou would
hear of mourning and drooping; then it may be the work of grace in thee has
always gone evenly on, the stream has run calmely and quietly; but yet
such do find that upon some sudden accidents or drawings nigh, when the
LORD is pleased to make an impression upon them, then they hear of stirring
affections.

But (to conclude all) know and resolve upon it, that the flowing and ebbing of
thy affections is not that which thy salvation depends upon, but solidity of
conviction of Judgment which turns the will, and makes thee to cleave fast
unto Christ.

Whereas you object you fall into the same sins 2 Object. Answ Falling again
into sins.
again and again; I answer, you may fall again and again, and into great
sins, for which you have been soundly humbled: why should we speak that which
the Scripture does not? only take it with this caution, that you find a
constant war against them, as Israel with the Amalekites, so as never to
yield; to look upon their sins, as a man's greatest enemy, never to be
reconciled though he be foiled again and again: for what is true humiliation,
but True humiliation what
to reckon sin the greatest misery? and indeed if a man reckon any greater, as
loss of wealth, etc. then a man had rather fall into sin then lose his
wealth; whence it is that falsenesse of heart does a rise: but humiliation
makes a man to reckon sin such an evil, as he had rather suffer any thing
than make a truce with sin: and the general ordinary power of grace in a
man's ordinary whole course is not seen in keeping men from relapses
altogether, but in setting sin and the heart at odds, as health and
sickness; whilst a man is a living man he cannot be friends with any disease
but nature will resist it, it sets them at variance, as the Wolf and the
Lamb, as the spring and mudde, and living waters will cleanse themselves,
though the mudd arise a thousand times, if as the Wolf which reckons the Lamb
the greatest enemy it has in the world by an instinct of nature, so if thou
reckonest sin the most destroying thing in the world, whence is this but
because humiliation has made that impression and apprehension of it on thy
heart; which God has set on thy heart as a brand in the flesh that will never
out, then thou will fight against every sin and never be reconciled to it, as
a Lamb is not to a Wolf, because nature has implanted that enmity there; if
thou find this to be the constant disposition of thy mind, keep thy
assurance strong, though many weaknesses be discovered in thee; It is utterly
a fault among you to weaken your assurance by your daily slippings and
failings, Daily failings should not weaken assurance.
and Satan labors that above all other, for then when your assurance and hope
is gone you walk unevenly, and as a Ship that has lost her Anchor, or is
without a Rudder: thou may sometimes feel a hardness in thee, and yet if
this aforesaid be the constant disposition of thy mind; Weaken not thy
assurance, but say, though I find my heart hard and careless, froward and
angry often, whereas I should be meek and humble; Yet I will not question the
maine, but I will go and renew my humiliation, which will strengthen my
assurance; however, hold that firm, for it draws into nearer Communion with
GOD, and further from sin establishes a man in welldoing, and makes him
abound in the work of the Lord.

Learn hence also, that it is not enough for a Use 3. To be humble in
afflictions as well as patient.
man only to be patient in afflictions, but he must also humble himself under
them, we must not only bear the cross, but willingly and cheerfully
acknowledge Gods justice in it, and our own sin, for to be humbled is a
further thing then to be patient, as in 2 Chronicles. 12. 6. when the people were 2 Chronicles. 12 6.
left in the hand of Shishak, it is said, that the Princes of Israel humbled
themselves, and they said, the Lord is righteous, where being humbled, is
expressed by acknowledging God to be righteous, which is more then to be
patient, God looks for this in all afflictions, therefore he says in 1 Pet.
5. 6. humble 1 Pet. 5. 6.
your selves (and not be patient only) under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time. Many a man in affliction may say, he will be
patient; but that is not enough, but he must humble himself, which is more
then patience; for pati ence is only to bear it contentedly, but a man must
go to God, and say, Lord I confess I am sinful and have deserved more then
this punishment, I wonder not at thy judgment but at thy long suffering rather,
that it is no worse with me, the least of Saints and the greatest of sinners.
So we see it was with Naomi in Ruth 1. 20, 21. call me not by an Ruth 1. 20,
21.
honorable name, not Naomi, but Marah; I went out full, but I am come home
empty, and the Lord has afflicted me; and seeing he has afflicted me, I
will carry my sail accordingly. This is truly to humble a man's self. And thus
did David, when he fled before Absolon, Let the Lord do with me what seems
good in his eyes. 2 Samuel 15. 26. And so said Eli, In all this the Lord is good,
that is, the Lord 2 Samuel 15. 26.
is just in all this, and I, and my sons deserve it, and more. Thus when a
man thinks it reasonable that God should punish him, he blesses God that the
cross is no greater, without complaining or repining. If the Lord will lead
thee through variety of conditions, say with Paul, I know how to want, and how
to abound, and how to go through bad report, as well as good report; and I am
not only content, but cheerful in all this, and would be, if it were far
worse.

If the Lord has said he will be merciful to the humble, then let us humble
our selves more and Use 4. To be more humble.
more and get our hearts lower and lower, seeing there are such mighty and
large promises belonging to the humble, and know that as the Lord suspends his
promises upon this here, so they shall be fulfild upon the performance of
this, and as we do this more or less, so shall the promises be fulfilled to
us more or less, therefore let us do this more and more, for if we humble our
selves, the Lord will fill our hearts with good things; when he sees a man
taking a low place, he will say sit up higher, all the world cannot hold down
an humble man, because the Lord sets to his hand to raise him up, neither
keep up a proud man because the Lord sets himself to depresse and debase
them, when the wall swells, it is not like to stand long, when a joint is
luxated and swelled, till the swelling abate, it cannot be saved and set, he
has respect to the low estate of his handmaiden, so says Mary the blessed
Virgin, Luke 1. 48. So he dealt with Naomi, he was long Luke 1. 48.
in humbling her, and then raised her up; so with Job, when he was humbled,
then God doubled his estate: thus God deals with the humble and that
constantly, he never does any great things for any men, till he has first
humbled him; how much was Joseph humbled, ere he made that promise to him that
the Sun, Moon, and Stars should bow to him, that is, his father, and mother
and brethren, should obey him, and yet again before God made good these
promises to him, what a do there was to humble him further? which doubtless
made him more to prize these mercies, and so more thankful to God for them. So
also in his glorious appearance to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he would still
before hand humble them, and make them low by some affliction or other still
before he would make any gracious promises to them. When Jacob was flying from
the face of his brother and was in great streights and so made low in his own
eyes, then did God first appear to him: when a man is humbled, it is the next
door to preferment one way or other. Therefore it should be our wisdom to
humble our selves more and more, since there is so much benefit to be gotten by
it. Prove. Pro. 22. 4.
22. 4. By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches, and honors, and
life: the rule holds constant, the Lord makes it good; let a man be humble, and
fear God too, that is, allow himself in no sin, and the Lord will make it
good one way or other, in his time.

But you will say, we see the contrary, proud men Object Though the proud are
ex alted, and humble depressed.
are advanced, and humble men deprest, they have riches when as the humble man
is poor, and as we use to say, where the hedge is lowest, there all the beasts
go over, and tread it down: every man will be ready to trample upon the
humble man.

I answer first; The Lord gives outward gaudy things to proud men; but he
gives his Jewels Answ. 1. Yet the humble have the best gifts.
to those that are humble, he reveals his secret to them; these are Princes
though they go on foot; and the other are servants, though they ride on
horseback.

But this is not all my answer: but secondly I 2 He exalts them in due time.
say; that even for the things of this life, the Lord does exalt the humble and
bring down the proud; only with this caution, he does both in season, when
things are brought to maturity; as the Apostle Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 5. 6.
humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time. God does it not on a sudden. When 1 Pet. 5. 6.
the proud like the corn are ripe, then he puts in the sickle, and cuts them
down, and casts them into the fire. The wall which is sweld, must have a time
to moulder and fall, and so on the contrary, there is a due time, for the
exaltation of the humble. And therefore if thou say, I have humbled my
self, and have not been healed, I have not been freed from such a temptation
for all my humiliation; if this be thy case, then assure thy self thou art
not humbled enough, but go thou and yet bring thy heart lower, and then be
confident, that this rule will hold: the Lord will take off the smarting
plaster as soon as it has eaten out the proud flesh; so soon as thy heart
is truly humbled, the Lord will help thee: he will either remove the cross,
or give thee that which is equivalent: and thus the Lord has always done. So
he dealt with Joseph. You A^ Iosoph.
happily may think, and he might think, it was long before he was exalted;
but yet that time was not too long, for as soon as the LORD had truly humbled
him, then he presently exalted him; as you may see in Psalm. 105. 18, 19, 20.
Whose feet they Psalm 105 18, 19, 20.
hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron, until the time that his word came; the
word of the Lord tried him: then the King sent, and loosed him, etc. And so he
dealt Job.
with Job. All that time that his friends were reasoning with him, his heart
would not be brought down; but the Lord himself must come and reason with
him; and then he began to abhorh mselfe, in dust and ashes: and how soon after
was he restored, and al he lost restored double also? This being (as you see)
Gods constant course, if thou humbling thy self, yet lie long under a
calamity, thou may assure thy self, there is something wanting in thy heart,
and therefore be content with Gods dealing. 2 Cor. 12. lest Saint Paul should
be exalted, 2 Cor. 12.
there was given him a thorn in the flesh: if Saint Paul needed humility, who
does not? Remember this rule, that if Gods people humble themselves, then he
will certainly help them; only it will be in due season.

But you will say: how shall we get down our Quest.
stubborn hearts? Pride is very natural, and the hardest thing in the world
to overcome.

Let every man consider, whether he be released or no from the plague of his
heart; if that, there be not some calamity, which hangs continually on him: if
there be, then know, thou art not humbled enough (the meaning is not, that thou
should be brought to an apprehension and fear of hell; but thy heart is to
be brought down more; thou may be humbled truly so as to be within the
covenant, and yet not enough to have thy heart wrought to Means to humble the
heart.
this or that frame God would bring it unto.) And to bring your hearts lower,
use these means.

First consider your hearts often, consider what unruly lusts you find hid
there; make it your daily Daily search the heart.
custom, to search into this. We go not a days journey in this life, but
there is somewhat discovered in our hearts which may serve to humble us
further, as it was with them in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Thou shall
remember all the way which the Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee,
to prove thee, and to know what was in thy heart, etc. There is not one day,
but a godly-wise man may discern something in his heart, which may be matter
of humiliation to him, which he saw not before; vaineglorious speeches,
unlawful silence, cowardice in good causes, thy worldly mindedness, thy
unruly affections, that will be still stirring, and something will be
discovered without in thy actions also, which when thou see such sparks
ascending, remember to look to the fire, the furnace within; these are but the
buds, there is a deep root of bitterness within; these are but ebullitions;
consider there is a spring within, search into all the corners of the house for
this sower leaven. So the first means is studying our selves, for the way to
humble a man's self is to know himself.

And secondly, as you must study your selves, so 2 Study the Scriptures.
you must study the Scriptures, that is, you must consider the strictness, the
holiness, etc. that is required of you therein, and lay that and your hearts
together, apply this level and square to your ways, and it will discover the
crookedness of them, and dress your selves by this looking glass, every
morning; for it will show you the smallest spots; and this will exceedingly
humble us: For this is a sure rule, degrees of humiliation follow degrees of
illumination; as any Christian is enlightened more, so he is humbled more:
hence he that is most conversant in Scripture, is most humbled.

And thirdly, you must not only look to increase 3 To be constant in holy
duties.
your light, but look to your hearts and ways, to keep your selves upright,
and to be constant in an holy course, and all holy duties; and this will be
means to increase your humiliation. Many abstain from holy courses and
duties, because say they, we are not humbled enough: It is true indeed we must
begin with humility, yet this you must know, that the setting your selves to a
holy course, is of it self a notable means to increase humiliation; for thy
watchfulness will increase tenderness, and tenderness will increase thy
humiliation. Men that are bold in sinning, their hearts grow hard; and so on
the contrary, when men are fearful to offend, their hearts grow tender.

But yet add to this, diligence in your callings, 4 Diligence in our calling.
for (as the wise man says) The stuggard is more wise in his own conceit,
then ten men that can give a reason, that is, he is self conceited and proud.
A sluggard that has nothing to do, looks abroad to other men's matters, and
looks not to his own ways, nor his own heart, which would be a means to
humble him: therefore diligence is a great means to humble, to bring down
our hearts, because idleness is a means to lift them up.

And further, it is profitable for you to remember 5 Remember times and sins
past.
times and sins that are past. A man will be ready to say, I hope I am
changed now, what I have been I care not for; but the Lord to humble David
told him what he had been, I took thee from the sheep fold, etc. so with the
Jews, Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite, and I saw thee in
thy blood.

Be careful to distinguish wisely between grace in thee, and thy self of thy
self; and that will be 6 Acknowledge grace in us.
a means to humble thee. As Paul in 2 Cor. 12. 11. Not I, but the grace of God
in me. Put the case the LORD has beautified us with many graces and gifts
above others; thou must not exalt thy self above others; we must look upon
our selves as of our selves, to be the same men still. Can the wall Simile.
say, it has brought forth the beams that the Sun has cast upon it? the wall
is the same: so if God has shined upon thee, and left others in darkness, art
thou the better of thy self? shall the pen boast it self, because it has
written a fair Epistle? who made it? who put ink into it, guided it? the
glory belongs not to the pen, but to the writer. What though God has used thee
in some great work, and not others? the praise is his, not thine: We praise
not the Trumpet, but him that sounds it. Non laudamus tubam, sed tubicinem.
Paul was a better Trumpet than ten thousand others, and yet he says, I am
nothing. The smoke a dusky and obscure vapor climbes up into the light, as if
it were better than pure air. Many exalt themselves above their brethren, for
gifts and outward things which are but the trappings, and make not the
difference between man and man; as if a man were the taller, because he
stands on a hill, or a man had a better body, because he had a better suit on:
thou art the same man still. We are not to be proud, no not of any Graces,
much less of outward things.

Lastly, is the Lord thus merciful to the humble? Use 5. Not to apply promises
til we be humbled.
then take heed of applying those promises to thy self without a cause, when
thou art not humbled.

But thou will say, I am humbled. Object. Answ How to know we are humbled.


It is well if it be so: But consider, has thy humiliation brought thee home?
perhaps it has brought thee out of Egypt, but has it brought thee into
Canaan? has it driven thee to the City of refuge? to the horns of the Altar?
to thy fathers house? The Prodigal changed many places, ere he came home in
earnest. Many came out of Egypt, that never came into Canaan, but died in the
Wilderness. The Meteors have matter enough, in the vapors themselves to carry
them above the earth, but not enough to unite them to the element of fire:
therefore they fall and return to their first principles. Art thou watchful
over all thy ways, fearful to offend, looking to every step where thou
set thy foot, how thou hear, how thou prayest, how every work is done,
every word spoken, every hour spent? For this is certain, if he be humbled,
it will dry up the fountain of sin, it will heal his bloody flux, and make
him wary in all his ways and fearful to sin. Thus much for this first
condition.

If my people that are called by my name, do humble themselves, and seek my
face. WE are now come to the next condition; If my people seek my face: where
we may observe this point,

That except a man seek Gods face, all his labor is Doct. All performances
nothing without seeking Gods fac^.
lost in his humiliation and prayers, and whatsoever else he does.

This is put in among those other conditions; and therefore without this the
promise is not made to us.

For the unfoulding of this point, we must first enquire,

What it is to seek Gods face. Quest. Answ. What it is to seek Gods face.


It is to seek the LORD himself: for his face in Scripture is often taken for
his person: so the word is used Exodus 20. 2. in the first Commandment, Thou
shall have no other gods before my face, that is, Exodus 20. 2.
before me. So then the meaning is, we must seek the LORD himself. Many,
when they are in distress, will seek to the Lord for deliverance, in time of
Famine, they will seek to him for Corn and Wine and Oil, as they in the
Prophet; but they seek not the Lord himself, nor communion and reconciliation
with him; they seek to the LORD, but not the LORD: they seek what he can do
for them, but not his person, not himself: So those Hos. 7. 14. Ye have not
cried to me, says God, when ye Hos. 7. 4.
howled upon your beds. Ye assemble your selves for corn and wine, and rebel
against me.

They then wanted Corn and Wine, etc. and sought them at GODS hands; but not
me the LORD whom you had lost. Thou may seek salvation and deliverance from
hell, out of the strenght of natural wisdom, because it is for thy good: and
also being convinced of the necessity of faith and repentance, to escape hell,
and obtain salvation. Men may thereupon go far in the performance of many
duties, and be constant a while in them, and yet not seek the Lords face in
all these: and then the Lord regards them not. Take a thief that is arraigned
Simile.
at the bar, he will cry earnestly for his life, but yet he seeks not the
face of the Judge, i. e. he does it without love to the Judge, but only out of
the love of life: So we may do much to escape hell, and to attain the life
opposite to it, and yet all this while not seek the presence of God, and then
GOD regards it not. You find this disposition in your selves, and see it in
others: if a man be never so observant of any of you, and perform never so
many offices of friendship to you, yet if a man can say he loves me not for all
this, he does not prize me, nor desire my love and favor so much for it
self, but for his own ends; in this case you care not for what he does: So
the LORD, he knows the heart and the reins, and what thine end is, whether
it be communion with his person immediately, or thine own welfare merely; and
if so, regards not thy humbling thy self nor thy prayers. The promise you see
is suspended upon it: it is a distinguishing point, and will separate between
the precious and the vile, it is a mark set upon Gods people alone: To seek
Gods face Psalm 24.


We will therefore further and more particularly consider, what it is to seek
Gods face or presence. And there are three ways to find it out.

First by what is here joined with it, If they humble I
themselves, and seek my face: and so by considering the connection that these
two have together, find out what seeking of Gods face is. Now there is a
twofold humiliation wrought in men:

The one is, for that bitterness and punishment Humiliation which is twofold.
that sin brings with it, and this never brings forth either faithful prayers,
or seeking Gods face.

But there is another kind of humiliation, which has a further ingredient in
it, and that is the sight of the foulness of sin, when God opens a
crevise of light to look upon sin, not only as that which brings bitterness
with it, but as that, which in it self is most filthy and abominable, and by
that light it is made such in his account: for it is one thing to flee from the
sting of the Serpent, an other thing to hate the Serpent it self; and so to
take heed of the Wolf, because of his cruelty, and to hate the Wolf it self,
are differing things. Other creatures may hate the properties and conditions of
a Wolf; but a Lamb only hates the Wolf it self. Now with this latter kind
of humiliation there goes and is conjunct with it an enlightening, whereby God
shows to a man his own glorious face, the luster whereof helps him further
to see the foulness Discovery of Gods excellencies.
of sin. God by the same light of the Spirit, whereby he shows a men the
ugliness of sin, discovers withal his own excellencies, which makes the
sinner thus humbled to seek his face, to seek grace, as well as mercy. But
other men either see not Gods face at all, or only see his angry countenance;
only those whom the Lord calls effectually, see his gracious face. Now he
to whom it is hid and sees it not, seeks not Gods face; for none can seek it,
unless they have seen it, and he who sees it only as angry, flies from God;
but he discovers himself to the truly humble, the secrets of the Lord are with
such, Psalm. 25. and so Ioh. 15. 15. Psalm ^5. John 15. 15
I call you not servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does: but
I have called you friends, for all things I have heard of my Father, I have
made known to you. He reveals himself to those who are already his friends,
or to those he is about to make his friends; one of the first things he does,
is to reveal his face to them: With men indeed, men are first made friends,
and then secrets are revealed; but contrarily with God, he reveals his secrets
to us and his face, that we may be made friends with him, and then God reveals
his secrets to the humble.
we grow into further acquaintance with him, and they are therefore called the
secrets of the Lord, because only revealed to the Saints. Servants indeed see
what is done in the house, but there are many things which their masters
reveal not to them: and so many come here to the house of God, and hear what
is spoken of GOD and CHRIST, but yet there are some certain secrets that are
hid from them, that are told only to the children, the sons and daughters of
God: The other hear as much and see as much, for the outside, as Gods children
do, yet the secrets of things are hid from them, and among others, Gods face;
and the excellencies thereof are hid from them. This he reveals (as his other
secrets) only to those that fear him, and this revealing it is a special
work of the Spirit. If a man would see the Sun, all the stars in heaven
Simile.
and torches in the earth could not help him to see it or show it to him,
unless the Sun it self shines and arises, and there come a light from the
Sun it self, you cannot come to see it; and so all the Angels of heaven and
wits of men on earth, cannot show you Gods face, unless he opens the clouds
and reveals himself by his own Spirit, it will not be done; which is
therefore called the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 17. by which God reveals
his Ephesians. 1. 17.
secrets to his children, when he begins to call them effectually, they see him
and none else; we make known the Doctrines about GOD and CHRIST, and c. to
all alike, but the Lord makes the difference, by revealing himself to one, and
not unto another; that which is said especially of the Jews, 2 Cor. 3. 2 Cor.
3. 15. 16.
15, 16. verses, and so on, is in like manner applicable to us all. The Lords
face shines, as Moses face did, verse 15. and he gives the knowledge of his
glory in 2 Cor. 4. 6.
the face of Jesus Christ in the ministry of the word every day; but there is
a veil lies upon all men's hearts, upon all but those whom the Lord calls, and
upon theirs also, till he calls them, as upon the Jews hearts, verse 16.
Nevertheless when they shall turn unto the Lord, the veil shall be taken
away: and until then, Gods face cannot be seen, as Moses face was not; and
who shall take away that veil? The Spirit of the Lord; where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty, verse. 17. and when he does free us of that veil,
then we behold the Glory of the Lord as in a glass with open face, v. 18. that
is, we see the amiablenesse of his face, the happiness of communion with him;
and when the light breaks through the clouds thus, and the Lord gives a
glimpse of himself, then they see him, and never give over seeking his face,
more and more, till they have found him: And because that other sort I spoke
of, if they see him, they yet see but an angry face only, and that makes men
fly from the Lord; as we see in distress, and at death many will do any thing
rather than go to God; they tremble at his presence, and no way desire it, as
Adam did not, but fled from it: and thus would all do, if no word were
revealed. Therefore the Spirit of revelation, takes away the veil, and breaks
the clouds, that his own Elect may have a glimpse of his face, and the Spirit
of adoption, who is sent down into their hearts, shows God as merciful, full
of kindness and love: they see not only his face, but his face shining in all
gracious willingness to receive them: he presents him as a loving father
ready to admit of them, and graciously to forgive and receive them: They see
Gods face, that is, both his excellency, and beauty, and also his love and
graciousnesse toward them; and this makes them seek his presence and
reconciliation with him, and never to be at rest without it, as Moses, Lord we
will not stir a foot without thy presence, Exodus 34. 18. A right suitor ear
for Exodus 34. 18
nothing, but the love and presence of the person sued to: so they desire
nothing, can be content with nothing, but the presence of God, communion with
God, The light of his countenance.

The second thing whereby I express what it is to seek Gods face, is to seek
the Lord alone, as sequestered 2 To seek the Lord alone.
from punishments and rewards, in his own person, as considered in himself,
in his Attributes, in his holiness and purity; so as not to seek the things
he brings with him, but to seek himself, and the things which are in him.

But you will say, this is very hard, to set aside all respects to rewards and
punishments. Object.


It is an error to think, that you may not make use of rewards and
punishments: for, Answ


First punishments and the threatenings of the 1 Punishments the object of fear.
Lord are the true object of fear; and a faculty and an habit may lawfully be
exercised about their proper object; and so rewards are the subject of desire,
and so may lawfully be sought after and desired.

The Lord himself in Scripture, uses these motives, 2
of Judgments on the one side, and of rewards on the other, and therefore we
may make use of them to our own hearts; for to that end has God propounded
them.

Therefore I will set down two conclusions to clear this to you, what use
there may be made of rewards and threatenings.

1 Conclusion, the propounding of, and the respect What use may be made of
rewards and threatenings.
unto rewards and punishments, is a good beginning to draw us on, to seek the
Lords face: they are a good introduction. A man that has not as yet seen Gods
face, the fear of hell may cause him to reflect on his own heart and ways,
and to be sensible of the evil of them: and so the happiness of heaven may
draw him on: but all this while he (...) They are a beginning to seek Gods face
is but in beginning. A spouse that is considering with her self, whether she
should marry such an husband or no, begins to consider at first, what she
shall be without him, and what she shall have with him; she considers him
perhaps as one that will pay all her debts, and make her honorable etc. and yet
it may be, yet she considers not the man all this while, and yet these
considerations are good preparatives to draw her on, to give entertainment to
him, but after converse and acquaintance with the person, she likes the person
himself so well, that she is content to have him; though she should have
nothing with him; and so she gives her full and free consent to him, and the
match comes to be made up between them out of true and sincere free love and
liking: So it is here, men begin at first to consider their own misery most,
and that if they should apply themselves to other things as remedies, they
should be still to seek, for there is a vanity in all things; and if to
themselves, that they cannot help themselves in trouble: therefore they judge
they must go to the mighty GOD, who is able to do more than all, to rid them
out of misery: and they consider, that going to him they shall have heaven
besides: and yet all this while they consider not the LORDS person: yet this
consideration makes way, that GOD and we may meet and speak together; it
brings our hearts to give way, that the LORD may come to us (that I may so
speak, for before we are not to be spoken with) it causes us to attend to
him, to look upon him, to converse with him, to admit him as a suitor, and to
be acquainted with him, and whilst we are thus conversing with him, GOD
reveals himself; and then being come to the knowledge of him in himself by
that his special light spoken of before, we love him for himself; then we are
willing to seek his presence, to seek him for our husband, though all other
things were removed from him. And now the match is made, and not till now; and
then we so look upon him, that if all those other advantages were taken away,
we should yet still love him, and not leave him for all the world, and so as if
we should imagine he would give us never so much, and yet withdraw his face,
we could not be at rest. Before, if a man could but be assured, he should not
go to hell, and should have creatures and comforts about him; it would be
enough to him; but now it is not so. Now if Gods countenance be but clouded,
if any breach be betwixt a man and God, he cannot rest till it be made up,
and he see his face again.

Yet still after the match is made, there is a second 2 To confirm us after
we are come in
use of punishments and rewards; they are useful, not only to bring us in,
but to confirm us also in our choice; they serve both as an introduction, and
as an help, when we are come in, to confirm us in our choice: As when a woman
is married, she having this husband, I live in an house, well furnished, and I
have many conveniences. I enjoy not only my husbands person, but with many
additions. So it is with us, though the LORD alone be sufficient reward; so as
if we had nothing else, we would never go back of our choice, yet we
having many good things with him, it helps us in our love to him, and
confirms us in our choice: These are then good additions, but not good
principles and foundations; and encourage us much if added, and put to seek
the LORD for himself, as the principal. So then as ciphers added to figures,
Simile.
they help to make the number greater, though if they stand alone, they are
nothing; so these; and though they be not good leaders, yet they are good
followers: They are as a good wind, that fills the sails, and sets the Ship
forward with the greater speed, when the rudder is once set right, to steer to
God alone.

The third thing whereby I explain what is 3 To seek God with self denial.
meant by seeking GODS face, is to seek the LORDS presence in opposition to a
man's self, when a man does it with denial of himself, not serving his own
ends in seeking the Lord, but gives up himself to the LORD alone. In all
things an unregenerate man does not know the Lord, is not acquainted with him,
and therefore will not prefer the Lord to himself: but a regenerate man that
knows him reckons all things, as life, liberty, riches, etc. but as dross
and dung, so he may enjoy the LORD: he has set up the Lord for his God, in
his heart, and desires not to stand upon his own bottom; and therefore when
the Lord comes into competition with himself, and the matter is betwixt God
and his credit, etc. he is willing to deny himself.

But here the great objection is, how it is possible for a man, not to seek
his own happiness, safety Object.
and advantage?

This troubles many, and makes them think their sincerity but hypocrisy, and
may put a scruple into the best: I will therefore clear this for their sakes
whose hearts are upright, as also to exclude those whose hearts are not sound.

The answer stands upon these two points. Answ. A man may seek, and love
himself


First, it is true that a man may seek and love himself, and desire his own
happiness, yea and all his actions may take their rise from thence; so as to
be moved in seeking the LORD, in doing what he does with a respect to his own
good and safety, and that this is so, take these reasons.

Because GOD has commanded it, for he bids us love our neighbor as our
selves: where it is taken 1 God commands it.
for granted, that we must love our selves, because loving our selves is made
the prima mensura, the rule of loving our neighbor. Now to love a man's self,
what is it but to seek a man's own good?

A man is commanded not to kill himself, or to 2 Negative commands imply the
affirmative.
hurt himself, and by the rule of contraries he is thereby commanded to seek
the preservation of himself, and his own good: For as when we expound the
commandment Thou shall not kill, as suppose thy neighbor, we say it includes
this affirmative command, thou shall seek the good of thy neighbor; so when
we expound it of our selves, we are to understand it as not only forbidding
us to destroy our selves, but as commanding to preserve our selves, and to
seek our own safety.

It is impossible for the creature, not to will its 3 It is agreeable to nature.
own happiness; the Lord does not command that which is simply impossible
even to pure nature: but it is the nature of every thing that has an appetite,
appetere bonum sibi, to desire that which is good for it self.

Self-love is a plant of Gods own planting; 4 God has planted* self-love.
and therefore not to be rooted up: God did put it into us all, for it is the
nature of every thing to do so, and opus naturae est opus author is naturae.

Many motives which the Scripture uses are taken 5 Motives in Scripture from
self-love.
from self-love, as that of CHRIST, fear him that can cast both body and
soul into hell: And so when it promises us a Kingdom. The Scripture deals
with men by working upon this principle; and by arguments taken from our
selves. This is the ear which the Holy Ghost takes hold of, and leads a man
into the ways of peace by, and we must not pluck off this ear.

The second part of the answer is, that yet notwithstanding, we may and ought
to seek the Lord in opposition to our selves, that is, when God and our selves
come into competition, the commandment comes in opposition with our selves;
the case being such as if we obey God, we hurt our selves; then we must
prefer God and his commandments to our selves.

But you will ask, how can this stand with the former; that a man should make
his own good the Quest.
rise of his actions, and yet in his actions oppose himself?

When once a man is persuaded, that even to destroy himself is the best way to
provide for himself, Answ. When a man must seek God with opposition to
himself.
and that to let himself go, and his credit and life, and give up all to God,
is that whereby he shall put himself into a better condition; when a man is
persuaded of this, then you see both do stand together. And we never do
exhort a man to seek God in opposition to himself, but when it is best for
him so to do, not to give himself up to any thing that shall be an immediate
hurt to him; but when It is best for him.
otherwise it would be worse for him, and when letting himself go is the next
way to happiness; and then a man may be exhorted to it, when he shall be
persuaded that his good is contained in God more than in himself; as we say
the being of an accident is more in the subject than it self; so as take away
the subject, and the very separation is a destruction to it: So it is with the
creature which has no bottom of it self, so as the separation of it from God
is the destruction of it, as on the contrary the keeping of it close unto God,
though in a case that seems to be the ruin of it, is its happiness and
perfection. As for example, when Abraham should have destroyed his son by
offering him up, he thought he should not lose by it, nor Isaac neither: he
thought with himself, God has commanded me to do it, and I never yet lost by
keeping any commandment he gave me; God is able to raise him up again. I
never yet was a loser by him, and on the contrary I shall be sure to be a
loser, and my son also if I do it not. It is indeed impossible, that if a
man should simply be a loser, that he should do thus; but when he considers
that though he be destroyed at present, yet he believes it will be for his
good; and so it will be indeed: As take a beam of the Sun, the way to
Simile.
preserve it, is not to keep it by it self, the being of it depends upon the
Sun; take the Sun away, and it perishes for ever: but yet though it should
come to be obseured, and so cut off for a while, yet because the Sun remains
still, therefore when the Sun shines forth again, it will be renewed again.
Such a thing is the creature being compared with God. If you would preserve the
creature in it self, it is impossible for it to stand: like a glass without a
bottom, it must fall and break. When therefore this is considered by a man,
then he will say, I will be content to deny my self, and seek the LORD, when
my self comes into competition with any commandment of his. And let not this
seem strange to you, that the best way to make a man's self happy, is to
resign up himself to the utmost to glorify God. You see in common experience
that take a Corn that is fallen into the ground: if it continue whole, it
perishes; but if it die, it brings forth an hundred fold. 1 Cor. 15. 36. That
which thou sowest, says the Apostle, is not quickened, 1 Cor. 15. 36
except it dye. The Apostle there speaks it of the resurrection: but we may
truly apply it to the resurrection Simile.
of a sinner here; that except a man die, that is, be willing to let all he
has go, and to expose himself to what the Lord shall put upon him, that he
perishes indeed; but if he die, then he is quickened, he shall be a gainer by
it; even in this life he shall have an hundred fold. And when this is
considered of thoroughly by a man, he will easily seek Gods face with neglect
of himself. And that thus when ever a man suffers any thing for a good
conscience in obedience to God, it is the best way to provide for himself; that
this I say, is not a mere notion, may appear by comparing those places
together; the first where it is said, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, and thou shall love God above all, even above thy self; and with it
also that other, Deuteronomy. 10. 13, 14. Thou shall keep the Commandments of the
Lord, which I command thee for thy good. Deuteronomy. 10. 13. 14.
Now put both together: this is Gods commandment, to love God above thy self;
and all the Commandments are given for thy wealth, for thy good, therefore
this amongst the rest. And therefore denying our selves, when God and our
selves come in to competition, is the best way to provide for our selves:
therefore set it down for a conclusion, that to have God alone, and to seek
his face thus, is your happiness. The end of every thing is the perfection of
it; now God is the end of the creature, and therefore to get him, is to get thy
perfection and happiness. Again, we have all from him, as the branch has all
from the root; and therefore as the way for the branch to keep life in it
self, is to keep close to the root; and when it is broken off it dies, so we
so long as we cleave to and seek the Lord, we are preserved. And this was the
ground which all the Saints went upon in their sufferings, both of persecution
and death; and this was the case of Moses and Paul, when the one wished
himself rased out of the book of life, and Paul to be accursed from CHRIST;
that is, says Saint Paul, if this be for Gods glory, and the good of his
Church; let me perish. In which though they seemed to imply their immediate
destructon, yet they knew what was ultimately best for themselves.

And this is all the difference between a carnal Difference in men in loving
them selves.
man, and one to whom God has revealed himself; they both agree in this, they
both love themselves, and seek their own happiness; but they differ in this,
that they seek it in a different way; the one in the LORD, but a carnal man
seeks it in himself and the creatures: A godly man is so persuaded of God,
that he seeks him, and cares not what he loses to gain him; but another
man, when he is told of an invisible God, he will not trust to things
unseene; the things he sees he will rest upon, and so seeks for an happiness
within his own compass; and therefore when himself comes in competition with
the Lord, he lets the Lord go.

But then another question comes to be answered, Quest.
how these two should likewise stand together; to seek the preservation of a
man's self, and yet to expose himself to destruction, as Moses and Saint Paul
did.

For answer, you must know, that in every regenerate Answ. Two selves in the
regenerate.
man there are two selves.

That common nature, that is in every man (in which the principle is rooted, to
love a man's self) has two binsses; the one Spirit which leads to God, the
other flesh: and these two in this common nature makes two several selves. By
the first a man is carried to seek the Lord, by the other to seek 1 Flesh.
himself immediately and in the first place; and these two are reckoned two
several selves in Scripture, and so expressed to us: first, flesh and
corruption is called a man's self, 2 Cor. 4. 5. we preach not our selves, but
Christ, that is, for our own glory, which he calls himself, because men use
to reckon 2 Cor. 4. 5.
it as themselves. So 2 Cor. 12. 2, 5. I knew a man in Christ, etc. caught up
into the third heavens; of 2 Cor. 12. 2, 5.
such an one I will glory, but of my self I will not glory; by self, he
means either the corruption which was in him, but there was something else in
him, which he reckons as another man from this self, a man in Christ, of such
a man I will rejoice, that is, of my regenerate part, which is a New Creature
in Christ, but not of my self, that is, my flesh and corruptions I will not
rejoice, or of the regenerate self neither, as of it self, but as it is in
Christ, which is another expression, and this corruption is called a man's
self, because it is spread over the whole man, as the form through the whole
matter, and a man will not part with it, but fights against every thing, fights
against it as if it were himself.

And secondly, that the other regenerate part is 2 The regenerate part.
called a man's self, which a godly man reckons so rather then the other, we
have an express place for it, Romans 7. It is not I, but sin that dwells in
me, Romans 7.
that is, not the regenerate part which I account my self, but sin which I
account but an inmate; dwelling within my roof; which yet is called a man's
self, for the like reason aforesaid, because spread over the whole man; and
now it is easy to conceive, how the preservation of himself may stand, with
exposing himself to destruction, and how a man may seek the Lord in
opposition to himself.

In that which the flesh desires, a man is bound How a man may seek God and
himself.
not to seek himself, that is, not that self, but yet he may seek the good
of his other self, and seek the Lord too, for Gods will and it are unisons,
and he may be said to seek Gods face alone, though he seeks the desire of
that self: for there is no difference, no opposition between them; and
likewise that regenerate self may seek him in opposition to that other self,
that is, what it desires, when it desires amiss (for all those desires which
are amiss are from that fleshly self) and so we must not desire what
ourselves would desire, but destroy it, and the desires of it, and seek the
Lord in opposition to it, which tends to the preservation of our regenerate
self, and proves so in the end.

So then to seek Gods face contains these three things in it.

First, to have his face revealed to you, and to see him as a father. 1


To seek him as sequestered from punishments and rewards. 2


To seek him alone in opposition to your selves. 3


And that all this ought to be done, we will give you one reason, and so come
to the uses.

And that reason is drawn from the holiness of the Lord, Esaias 6. 3. One
Angel cried to another, Reas. From Gods holiness. Esaias 6. 3.
holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory:
this (...) was the proclamation of Angels, and that upon this occasion. The
Lord sends Esaias the Prophet to pronounce a Judgment to his people, and that a
great one, the rejection of the Jews, and at the same time the Angels are sent
to proclaim Gods holiness: now holiness is the appropriation of a thing to
the Lords Holiness what.
use, and a sequestration of it from common use: and so the holiness of God
himself (which is the rule of all other holiness) is an appropriation of his
actions to himself, as his end: he is then said to be holy, when he does
things for himself, therefore being about to do so great a work peculiarly
for himself and his glory, as when he would destroy his own people, and
destroy Kingdoms for his own best advantage and ends, the glory of himself,
then he lets them know this as the only reason, because he is holy; for if he
should not respect himself, he should not be holy. So Romans 11. 33. Romans 11. 33
to the end. The Apostle having spoken of this rejection here prophesied,
concludes with this; His Judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out, etc. of him, and to him, and through him are all things, and to
him be glory for ever. As if he should have said, God has done all this, but
I know not the reason of it, nor any one else; only God is for himself, for
he being of no cause but himself, therefore he may do all for himself: if he
were of another, he might do all for another, yea else he were not holy. Now
if this be Gods holiness, then the holiness of man, is to do all for God;
which he is therefore to do, because he is of another cause above himself,
and therefore is to When a man is holy
seek another end above himself, namely, the Lord; and then he is said to be
holy, when he has no eye to himself, but to God, when in his recreations, the
use of riches, etc. and in his whole course he has his eye and aim at God,
and not himself.

The nature of holiness is expressed in two Nature of holiness in two things.
things: First, in pureness: Secondly, sequestration to God, so that
holiness, purity, and chastity are much alike as it were, as there is also
much affinity 1. Purity.
between the Greek words (...) and (...): Chastity in a Wife stands in keeping
close to her husband; and being sequestered from all other; and Gods holiness
consists, first in the pureness of his nature, and secondly in a sequestration
of all things to himself: 2. Sequestration.
Now our holiness is not so, but we being of another cause, we must do all
for another end; our holiness stands therefore in giving up our selves to the
Lord: therefore says Esaias, Sanctify the Lord, and make him your dread; as if
he had said, if you make any thing else your dread, you do not sanctify the
Lord. What he says of fear, is true of all our affections, and actions:
holiness dedicates all unto the Lord: and some actions are holy for Actions
holy in several respects
the substance of them, as Prayer, keeping the Lords day, etc. and all such
immediate duties of his worship, some by putting a right end upon them; and so
all actions may be holy of what kind soever, as recreations, which are common
actions, and eating and drinking, all which when done to the Lord, do become
holy. It is the nature of moral actions to take their specification from their
circumstances, especially their end, more then from the substance it self: and
so all such common actions may be holy to the LORD, and so that place of Saint
Peter is to be understood, be holy in manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1. in all
the turnings of your lives, even in common actions, this being the 1 Pet. 1.
nature of holiness in the general, both as in God and in our actions.

There is a double holiness required in every Double holiness required in
man. 1 Giving himself to God. 2 Cor. 8. 5.
man.

A giving up a man's self to the Lord, as 2 Cor. 8. 5. They first (it is said)
gave themselves up to the Lord. To give a man's self up as a Sacrifice to the
Lord, that is, the holiness of a man, and when any thing is sacrificed, it is
given up to the use of that Lord, to whom it is sacrificed.

The second is a giving up all things with himself, 2 giving all things with
himself.
his understanding, will, thoughts, affections, life, liberty, credit, goods,
all his power, might, whereby he is able to do any thing, to resign all these
to the Lord, and by this he sanctifies the Lord; and this is the holiness of
a man, to do all for the Lord only. So that the reason is clear; let a man
do what he will, keep the Sabbath, pray, etc. If there be not this holiness
in his heart, all his labor is lost, as you all grant; for without holiness
no man shall see God. Now it is not holy, except it be given up to the Lord
alone, excluding himself and the creature.

Is all our labor lost, except we seek Gods face, Use To examine if we seek
Gods face.
though otherwise a man go never so far? then there is great reason, to
examine our selves, whether we seek the Lord for himself or no; for
otherwise, all your labor is lost, for then you do not set up God for your
God in your hearts, but something 1 Else we seek something else.
else, namely, that which you seek besides him; as in marriage we say, when a
man marries a woman, not out of love to her person, but for riches; that he
marries not the woman, but her wealth, so it is here.

And then secondly, you will never hold out 2 Fall away.
in seeking the Lord; and if you do not hold out, then all your labor will be
lost, Ezekiel. 18. though Ezekiel. 18.
a man has been righteous all his days; yet if he fall from God, all his
righteousness shall be forgotten: and such a man as seeks not the Lord for
himself, will fall away, as appears by that, Hos. 7. 16. They return, but
not to the most High: they Hos. 7. 16.
are like a deceitful bow; that is, when a man turns to the LORD, but not
for himself, he will return again, and start aside like a broken bow; for
if he attain those ends for which he sought the Lord, his seeking is at an
end. See this in Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. he went far in obedience, but 2 Chronicles.
25
yet he did not seek the Lord in it, he was content to lose an hundred
talents, and to send back the Israelites he had hired therewith (which was
such a trial as even a good man might have failed in it) yet he did not seek
the Lord in this, he was persuaded, that if he had taken the Israelites along
with him, he should have lost the battle, which was his chiefest end in that
action; he believed the Prophet so far, and so sought his safety alone, and
because he sought not the Lord, therefore he held not out; but when he was put
to other trials, to new temptations, and saw another worship, it pleased him,
and he left the Lord; and started aside like a broken bow: as a bow that is
rotten (though otherwise fair) when an arrow is drawn to the head; and so
many brought up in good families, when they come into new company, and trials,
they fall away because they sought not the Lord himself.

If you do not seek the Lord for himself, you do not love him, and then all
your labor is lost: 3 Love him not.
for all the promises are made to those that love God, Cant. 1. the two first
verses, Because of the savor Cant. 1. 2.
of thy ointments; thy name is as ointment powered forth, therefore do the
Virgins love thee, that is, take those which do much for the Lord, as much as
another does, though such a man does carry the fair semblance of a Spouse, yet
all this he does comes from the affection of an harlot. The Virgins, they love
thee. The Virgins love his person, love him for his names sake, the personal
beauty that is in him, and for the sweetness of his love, verse 5. Cant. 1. 5.
Thy love is better then wine.

This point well understood will come in among you as a messenger from the King
of Kings, to all you of the bedchamber of the Bridegroom, making this inquiry,
do you love him? are you harlots or Virgins? and will make every one to
consider, to what end have I done all, have I known the Lord, and been
acquainted with him? have I sought Gods face in all that I have done?

But men will be ready to say, we do seek the How to know when we seek the
Lords face.
Lords face. Therefore I will give you rules to distinguish, and to help men
to discern whether they seek the Lord or no.

Consider what opinion thou have of thy self Rule 1.
Every man that is regenerate, at his regeneration changes his opinion of
himself, as Saint Paul, By our opinion of our selves. Romans 7.
Romans 7. It is no longer I, but sin. Before he was Regenerate, sin was
himself; but now there was a new Lord come into the house, that renewed-selfe,
the Regenerate part; and that which before was wholly himself, he now speaks
of as one crept in, as of an Inmate, that should not be there. Now if thou
reckonest the Regenerate part thy self, then thou have sought the Lords
presence: for that part is thereby strengthened. The perfection of this self
stands in conjunction with the Lord, and so seeks him; if not, but thou
accountest flesh in thee thy self, it is impossible thou should seek God
aright, for God and it are contraries: A regenerate man says, let me have God,
and what ever I lose, whether life, liberty, yet my self is safe; he considers
still chiefly, whether does this tend to the safety of my self or no? and
though he is content, and would have the outward man do well too; as if I have
a fair house to dwell in, I would have it Simile.
safe; yet if it be set on fire, it is no great matter, so long as my self is
kept safe. Take a man who has clothes on, if he can keep his clothes whole,
it is well; but if they be rent, he cares not, so his bo die be safe; so where
the regenerate part is The self, if the outward man can be kept safe, it is
well, he had rather have it so; but however, so the regenerate part be safe, he
cares not much; for he accounts it but as the renting of his clothes: but take
another man, that as yet is no other then he was borne at first, into whom no
new man is come to dwell, he thinks thus with himself, sure I must not
destroy my self; I would keep a good conscience, but not so as to destroy my
self; and it is impossible, that what a man reckons himself, he should suffer
to be destroyed: therefore when discredit, imprisonment, etc. comes, all these
are reckoned wounds given to himself, he lets God go to defend and save
himself harmless. All this difference comes from the difference of opinion,
that a man has of what is himself. Quest. How know to opinion of our selves.


But how shall I know what opinion I have of my self?

Consider wherein thou desire to excel, all Answ. 1. By that we desire to
excel in.
things desire to have that excellency, which is proper to themselves; every
creature desires to build up it self. If therefore thou desire to excel in
things that belong to the outward man, to build up thy self in learning,
credit and wealth, and outward conveniences, then thy outward man and flesh is
thy self: but if thou seek an inward excellency, not caring for man's day,
but seeking to have the praise of God, the comfort of a good conscience, and
assurance of salvation; then it is a sign thou reckonest the inward man thy
self.

Consider where thou layest up thy treasure: 2 Where we lay up our treasure.
do thou lay it up in the regenerate part, and endeavourest to make that
richer, and every day carriest something into that chest? then thou countest
that thy self: for where the treasure is, there the heart is also. When a man
shall be thus affected, that though he has troubles abroad in the world, and
decays in estate, as in health, yet so long as he finds his regenerate part
safe, and thriving, and standing in good terms with God, he applaudes
himself. As a man when his house is broke open, he Simile.
presently runs to his chest, where his chief treasure lies, and if that be
safe, he thinks all is well: but if thou laiest up thy treasure in the outward
man, an heap of outward things; so as when these things are gone, thou
reckonest thy self undone: it is certain, thou make that thy self. This
was the case of Haman, Nabal and Achitophel, etc. and of all carnal men, whose
hearts must needs sink, when outward things leave them, or if they be put
into the fear of the loss of their lives and goods: but another man is like
to grapes which have wine in them put into the wine press; what though the
skin and husk perish? yet the wine is saved. So it is with the Saints in
persecution; their inward man is still saved, they lose but their husks: but
when a man has nothing in him but flesh and an outward man, then when these
perish, all he has is lost, and himself with them. It is good therefore to
try your selves what opinion you have of your selves before ill times come,
that you may see whether you have that in you which will not then perish, but
be kept safe and sustain you; and thereby also you shall know whether you
seek the Lords face or no.

Second rule is, consider, what it is you make your utmost end; we are now upon
a point that Rule 2. What we make our utmost end.
admits of very narrow differences, for as we have said, a man may perform
many duties, go therein as far as another, and yet lose all his labor, and
all because he seeks not the Lords presence. And the trial of that lies
especially upon this, what you make your utmost end? for though the actions be
good, yet if the end be your selves, or Gods glory be made by you, but as a
bridge, all is lost. Now that you may not mistake here, you must Double end.
know, there is a double end; the one of the work, the other of the workman:
now the end of the work it self, may be good, even in hypocrites: the action
being in it self a holy action ordinabile in se, and tending to Gods service;
when yet the end of the workman is not the Lord, but himself, this difference
runs along through all actions. Two men that go together in the same way, may
have a different journeys end, Zach. 7. he speaking both of Zach 7.
the Feasts and Fasts of the Jews (two as holy duties as any other) verse 5,
6, 7. says, but did ye 5, 6, 7.
them at all to me (says God) but to return out of Captivity? So Hos. 10. 1.
there was much fruit Hos. 10. 1.
found in Israel, yet because they brought it sorth to themselves, not to the
Lord, therefore Israel is called an empty Vine. A carnal man and a regenerate
man differ mainely, in this; that a carnal man, when he is to do any thing,
asks what good will this bring to me? what profit, what credit shall I have by
doing it? if none, he lays it a side: but a godly man (so far as he is
godly) asks this question, whether it is commanded by God? is it for his
glory and advantage? When therefore thou come to preach the Gospel or
studiest, consider thine end, whether for God or no? consider also what thy end
is in thy trade, or any civil action, and judge by that.

But is a man bound to seek God in every thing? Quest.
may he have no respect to himself?

The end must still be better then that which Answ. God must be looked to as
t^^ end.
tends to it: and that therefore which is the chiefest good must be the
chiefest end; and unless thou make God better then all things else, thou
do not make him thy end, nor thy God. Again the end commands all, is most
perfect, and comprehends all the rest, and that also is proper to the Lord
alone, this cannot be said of any man or creature, and therefore God alone is
to be made thy end.

But may not a man make his own happiness his end, and do what he does for
his own perfection? Quest.


A man may and always does so, and that upon Answ. How a man may make his own
happiness his end.
necessity, as has been said; only this, there is a double end; the one is
the thing it self which a man makes his end, the other is the benefit or fruit
comes by the attaining it. So that happiness is that sweetness, that
follows all ends, even as the shadow does the body; so then the question is,
what that thing is, which thou seek this happiness from, for that is it
which is thy maine end; whether do thou think thou can make thy self
happy by those riches and pleasures which for thy self thou aymest at? or
do thou look for all thy happiness from the Lord alone? That which a man
looks for his happiness from, that a man makes his chiefest end; if from God,
then a man makes God his utmost end, so as his own happiness is but the fruit
that arises out and accompanies his seeking him.

But may not a man provide for himself? Quest. Answ. How a man may provide for
himself.


True, but thus; whereas all that a man's mind is to be taken up about, is
either work or wages; if it be work, thou must do it to God alone whose
servant thou art; if it be matter of wages (as are the things belonging to thy
name, estate) these in like manner thou art to look for from God alone. All a
man's employment is taken up either in doing all for God, or receiving all from
God: and if any man were a perfect servant to another man, he then ought to
have an ey only to his Master in matter of work and to no other, and also to
take what wages his master will allow him for that work, and no other; he
ought to resolve all into his master: But no creature is a perfect servant unto
another creature; but we are so to God, and therefore we ought both to do
all the work we do for God, and also for matter of wages, to take all from
him, and to depend upon his providence, so that this provision for a man is but
to cast a man's self upon the Lord. It being not our work to provide for our
selves, but the Lords, let us do al for him, and it belongs to him to give us
wages, and he will do it.

But may not a man in his actions have an eye to Quest.
God, and himself also?

For answer to this, look to that place Mat. 6. Answ. Mat. 6. 22, 23.
22. 23. The light of the body is the eye; if therefore the eye be single, the
whole body shall be full of light. It is a single eye, which looks on a single
subject, upon one object only; and therefore then a man is said to have a
single eye, when he looks upon the Lord alone, when nothing else is made his
God; he looks not on riches, nor nothing else as his God: and then all the
body is light, that is, all the conversation is good, and he sees whither he
goes; but if the eye be evil, that is, by the rule of opposition, if it be
double; (for that is a rule of interpreting Scripture to open the meaning of
phrases by what is opposed to them,) A double eye is a wicked eye, that is, if
it be partly set upon GOD, partly on a man's self, it is wicked. And so Saint
James has it, he calls such an one a double minded man, who is unstable in
all his ways. When a man has partly an eye to the world and himself, partly
to GOD, he is as one distracted between two ways; he knows not which to
take, he is unstable like a drunken man that staggers in all he does, being now
on one side, now for GOD: and now on another side, for himself: and so his
whole body is dark, that is, his whole conversation is wicked, as being out of
his way; he sees not a right path to walk in, he has not a right scope
whither he should tend, he is not able to see a right object, but goes hither
and thither from one thing to another, is unstable in all his ways.

But you will say, the holiest man that is has Object.
some eye to himself in his actions.

It is one thing, when a man has chosen the Answ.
LORD as his end, and that way that leads to him though he wavers in it, and
misseth somewhat of Whence it is that good men have an eye to themselves.
the evennesse of his ways, and has falls in it; and another thing, to be
distracted between two ways, sometimes choosing one way, sometimes another, as
a carnal man does. One that is resolved to go in this way though with much
unevenness, may fall and have many mistakes in the way, he may have too many
lookings to himself, but yet he has chosen the LORD and follows him, and
this is the difference between him and the other who has two ways and is
distracted between them.

But now the maine question is, how shall we Quest. How to know we make the
Lord our utmost end. Answ. Rule 1.
know whether we make the Lord our utmost end or no?

There are these rules may help you in it.

The utmost end gives rules to a man's whole life; all other ends do it but in
particular actions, and but at such and such a time, because they are but It
rules all the life.
particular ends: but the utmost end does command all in a man, all his ways
and actions; therefore then thou make the Lord thy utmost end, when in all
thy actions whether public or private, thou look to the LORD: and in
whatsoever a man does, in all those respects and relations he stands in,
whether he be a Magistrate or a private man, whether they be businesses or
recreations, if GOD be a man's end, his eye will still be upon the LORD in all:
Now he that does not make GOD thus his utmost end, may find that he has some
secret bywayes of his own, some secret motions differing and contrary to God,
wherein he goes, (as the planets that have a motion of their own) though it is
not open to the world, unknown perhaps to himself, or not known at all times:
but the utmost end commands all, and leaves nothing out, but the least action
is subject to it.

The utmost end limits all the means, and sets Rule 2. It limits the means.
them their bounds, but is not bounded it self by any: finis praescribit
media, sed ipsi fini non praescribitur. It says, thus far you shall go, and
no further; but there are no limits set to the end it self: As the
master builder appoints every man his work; and they go so far as he
appoints them, and no further; Simile.
as if health be a man's end, it sets limits to all the means he uses, to
meat, and drink, and physic: Look what conduces to that end, he takes so
much, and no more. But there are no limits set to health it self, he can
never have too much of health. So then consider what it is gives bounds to thy
course, that thou say, when thou art come to such a pitch, thus far will I
go, and no further: he that makes himself his end, will be sure to have an
holiness of such limits as shall not lose him his great friends nor his
estate; he will go so far till it come to hurt himself; himself being his
end. Therefore he limits his holiness, he stays in such a pitch or gives
over, but if God be his end, he thinks he can never have enough of God and of
holiness, and though his actions of holiness and forwardness therein
over-runne his credit, overthrow his estate, yet he cares not, for it is not
his end to preserve himself, or that which belongs to himself.

Thou shall know thy utmost end, by a secret Rule 3. By a secret sense
accompanying our actions.
sense which accompanies every action thou do; if thou narrowly look to
it, for that is the difference between man and other creatures; that a man can
look back to his own actions, so that if thou would ask thy heart, what
is thy scope and purpose in this or that action? there is a secret sense
accompanies the action, in thy heart, that would discover it. Consider
therefore in any business thou do, why thou do it? why thou undertakest
it? why thou art at so much pains and cost in it? Ask thy heart, is it for
the Lord, or for thy self? if that will not discover it to thee, look to the
circumstances, to the manner of doing it, as why do I preach in such a manner,
and pray in such a manner? why do I do it thus and thus, and not in a better
manner?

If this will not do it, look to thy affections: Rule 4. By the affections.
consider how thou art affected or troubled about it; when the action is done;
suppose it be a business that both for the matter and manner was for the
Lord: but when it is done, what is it thou art grieved at? is it that thou have
got some discredit to thy self in the performance of it? or that God has had
no more glory by it? are thy affections troubled, that thou have offended God
in it, that something is gone from God in it, or rather that something is gone
from thy self? thus by examining how thy affections are occupied about the
thing when done, thou may est discern thy utmost end.

5 Is taken out of 2 Phil. 21. I have no man like Rule 5. Phil. 2. 21. Whether
we seek the things of Christ naturally.
minded, for all seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ; that
does naturally take care for you. Consider whether thou seek thine own
things, or the things of JESUS CHRIST? and that whether naturally, as the word
is there etc. (...), that is, as his own business, to seek a man's own, and
to do a thing naturally is made there in that place all one. Consider whether
thou seek the things of Christ as naturally as thine own, and whether that
be done or no, thou will find by these three things.

First a man will go about what he does willingly, 1 Willingly.
when a man has a business of his own to do, he does it willingly, and
beats his head about it, and is exceeding solicitous, but when the business
is another man's, he goes about it, it may be, because he sees it must be
done, and there is reason for it, but still he does his own in another manner;
and thus willingly do the Saints do the Lords business, see it in Saint Paul,
Romans 15. 20. Yea so have I Romans 15. 20.
strived to preach the Gospel, etc. the word in the original is (...), I was
ambitious to preach the Gospel: Look what desires an ambitious man has (and
there are no desires so quick as those of ambition, such a man over-lookes all
for his preferment) such desires had I to the preaching of the Gospel: The
like affection he expresses in himself, 2 Cor. 11. 28. Besides the things
without, that which comes on me daily, the care of all the Churches; 2 Cor.
11. 28
who is offended, and I burn not?

There are three expressions show his willingness and natural affecting of
the Lords business: First [(...) the cumber] that is, he had (as it were) all
care numbered and mustered together, and that Secondly with anxietie (...), with
the same solicitude that a man has about business of his own. Thirdly says
he, who is offended, and I burn not? his affections were so hot and quick, as
presently if any soul were disadvantaged, if CHRIST lost any thing, he was
presently stirred and affected with grief.

Do thou do it diligently? when any thing is 2 with'all our might.
to be done for the Lord Jesus, do thou do it with all thy might? if
remisly, thou art far from seeking the Lord: What ever a man does for
himself, so far as he conceives it to be for himself, he will do it
diligently and with all his might, and we are commanded to love the Lord with
all our might, and there is a curse upon the contrary, Cursed is he that does
the work of the LORD negligently: the meaning is not, cursed is he that does
the work of the Lord weakly, and with infirmities; for then all the Saints
should be accursed, but that is done To do Gods work negligently, what
negligently which is done hypocritically, and for other ends; for they are the
causes of that negligence; to this the curse belongs, and that justly: this
cold, remiss, formal, customary performance of duties, as when we receive the
Sacrament or are exercised in any other duty, or in any cause that concerns
the LORD, to go about it coldly, is a sign we do it not for the Lord.

Consider whether thou do them faithfully? 3 Faithfully
for so a man uses to do his own business, for no man is unfaithful to
himself; to another he may perform but eye service, but not for himself:
now so to do a thing is not to rest in the thing done, but his care will be,
that it may be done effectually, so as to see the fruit and effect of it.

And if you ask how you shall discern you do Quest.
any thing faithfully?

That is discerned by this. Answ. 1 To do it our selves.


When a good action is to be done, thou carest not so much that it be done,
but thy self would be the doer of it, for thy credit, etc. as Diotrephes, he
was a froward man, but himself would do all; but would thou do it, though
the fame thereof were not known? do thou desire to have it done, though
another man do it? and think, it is no matter by whose hand the work goes
forward, so that it goes forward.

Again, secondly what do thou, when there 2 To do it when our creditis
separated.
is a separation made, a partition betwixt the business of the Lord, and thine
own credit? art thou yet then as careful? when two go together, it is not
known who is the master of the servant of one of them that follows them both,
till they part, so when thy credit and Gods glory go together, it is not
known for which of them thou do it; but there are times when our own and
the Lords business will be separated, and then consider what thou do, is it
so, that because thou art not the first in a business, thou will do nothing
at all? or if thou shall not be seen in it; it is a sign thou do it for
thy self, and not for the Lord: when two men are to carry a beam into a
house, if both strive to go Simile.
in first, they carry it in a cross; whereas if they would be content to come
one after the other, it would go right in; so often great works both for
Church and State, might be done that are thus hindered, or are carried cross,
because men are not willing that others should go before him.

Consider therefore these things seriously, and bring them home to your hearts;
for to what end do we preach? that you might know these things only, (that
makes only for your further condem nation, and you had better never to have
known them) but we preach them, that you might lay them to heart: take
therefore some thing to consider these things, and if you have found your
selves failing in this, be not yet discouraged, but labor to make your hearts
perfect for time to come, thus to seek the Lord alone.

To exhort to which (which is the next use I Use 2. Why we should seek the
Lord not our selves.
make of it) and to quicken you to this, consider what great reason there is
thou should seek the Lord Jesus, and not thy self. Consider what ties and
bonds are upon thee toward him: the bargain between him and thee past.

I will ask you first whose servant art thou? and 1 we are his servants.
should not the servant seek the profit of his master? if a man sees a company
of sheep, and he asks whose sheep are these? says another to him, such a
man's; for he has bought and paid for them; and has not Christ bought thee?
and besides this his first buying of thee, who gives thee thy wages, and
provides for thee, meat, drink, and clothing? and is there not reason thou
should serve him alone? Then, if thou be perfectly a servant (as thou
art) thou do wrong to the LORD, if thou do not serve him.

Again secondly, I ask thee who is thy husband? 2 His spouse
Is not the Lord Jesus? and if thou be his wife, ought thou not to seek
his things? one that is unmaried is yet her own; but when she is married, she is
her husbands. When there was no King in Israel, every man did what was good in
his own eyes: and if thou had no husband, no King, so might thou; but
thou art not tui juris, the covenant is past already, thou art not now to
choose; if thou say no, consider that when thou were baptized, it was into
the Name of the Lord, and that by way of a vow, The nature of a vow.
which is an invocation with a curse, that is the nature of a vow: If thou
say yea, but I was young: then, I but since thou come to years of
discretion, thou have not disclamed it, but confirmed it in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, receiving it often, and therefore thou can not recall it;
therefore that first covenant then made, it stands good, as marriages made
under age, if when the parties are come to years, they did not disclame them
they hold, and he being thy husband. Consider that as adultery is worse than
fornication, the one being punished among the Jews with death, the other but
with a pecuniary mulct; so the sins which thou committest in going after other
lovers is worse then if a heathen man had committed the same: he that was
circumcised, Saint Paul says, was bound to keep the whole Law; and so he
that is baptized, and has received the Lords Supper, is bound to give up
himself to the Lord, as the Lord Christ to him and all things in him; and so
the Saints of 2 Cor. 8. 5.
Macedonia did, 2 Cor. 8. 5. They gave themselves up first to the Lord. 3 The
Lo^d deserves it.


And if thou were not thus bound, yet he has deserved it at thy hands; and
both these we find 2 Cor. 1. 12. 13
urged by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 12. 13. was Paul crucified for you, or were
you baptized into the name of Paul? these were men among the Corinthians that
did not seek Christ alone in their professing of Christ, for one was for Paul,
and another for Apollos, another for Cephas: (but says the Apostle) is Christ
divided? if Christ indeed had been divided amongst these three, they might have
sought them; but Christ stands alone against them all; and therefore they were
to seek Christ alone; and he brings these two arguments for it:

Because they were baptized into the Name of 1 We are baptized in to his name.
Christ, and not of Paul or any other: and secondly, was Paul crucified for
you? that is, was not Christ crucified?

And secondly, how much is there in that Word 2 He was crucified for us.
[Crucified for you?] we are not able to search into the height, and breadth,
and depth of this your engagement unto Christ. His bodily pain was the least
thing in his sufferings: that of his soul was the soul of his sufferings: My
soul is heavy unto death, says he, when the pressure of his sufferings made
him sweat drops of blood in a cold night; and yet these were but the
beginnings of his sorrows which fell on him upon the cross, when he cried
out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? 4 The equity of it.
Consider further the equity of it; for did not he the same for thee, which he
requires of thee? for did not he empty himself of that eternal glory and
happiness, which he enjoyed with his Father and might have then enjoyed? did
not he make him self poor to make thee rich? and what is it he calls thee
to deny thy self in? to forsake a friend or two? and to some disadvantage in
thy wealth? whereas he emptied himself of all his great glory. Is he not upon
equal terms with thee, nay most unequal on his part? if he calls thee to
bear the cross for him, did not he bear a greater cross for thee?
Therefore says Christ, He that forsakes not father and mother for me, is not
worthy of me, and not fit to come into the number of my Disciples.

Lastly, besides all this consider; it is best for thy self; which is the
argument moves men above all 5 It is best for us.
other: for if thou do it not, thou shall be damned for it; and if thou will,
thou shall provide for thy self abundantly; but if thou will needs save thy
life, thou shall lose it, if thou will save thy credit, liberty, thou may,
but thou shall go to hell with thy liberty and credit. These are the eye and
the hand, and it is better going to heaven without them, then to be thrown
into hell with them: but if thou be content to lose all these, thou shall
gain by it. That man that is most forward to suffer any thing for Christ and
Gods cause, provides best for himself. Judas going about to make himself
rich, lost himself, it was his undoing. Peter and the rest left all, and
gained happiness. What was Paul's making, but his going from prison to prison?
how did Abraham save his son, but by being content to offer him? what was it
gained Moses so much honor, as to be the leader of Gods people, and to be so
great a Prophet, but the losing and refusing his honors and pleasures in
Egypt? That man that comes to resolve, I will be content to be of no
reputation, so I may seek and serve the Lord, that man is of the rising hand,
it is the only way to preferment: on the contrary, he that says, I must and
will be some body in the world, that man is in his downfall, he is ruining
himself. Saul's thinking to enrich himself by the Cattle, was his ruin;
Jeroboam by plots to keep the Kingdom, lost the Kingdom, and undid himself.

Is it of so much consequence to seek God for Use 3. Not to forget the Lord in
the midst of his mercies.
himself? then take heed of forgetting the Lord in the midst of all his
mercies. It is an usual thing, that God is hidden and covered from us in his
benefits we receive from him; and whereas they should be as glasses and as
spectacles to help the Simile.
weakness of our sight of him, they prove often as clouds to hinder us from
beholding his face. But consider, that this is the maine part of the covenant,
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And upon that tenor come
in all benefits, even with himself; we do not usually think that we must
first have the Lord himself; our eyes should be in the first place fixed on
him, then on the mercies received from him: for Romans 8. it is said, that with
him, that is, Christ he will give us all things. Therefore Romans 8.
first we are to have him, then all things else. So 1 Cor. 3. last, All things
are yours; but upon what 2 Cor. 3. ult.
ground? for you are Christ's, and Christ Gods: we must first have him for our
husband, ere we can enjoy the advantages to be had by him. It is a common
fault, that men look to the comforts and privileges by Christ, but not to
him, he is forgotten. As when we come to be humbled for sin, men in the
first place look upon a promise of forgiveness of sins, and say, if I can but
believe my sins to be forgiven, and lay hold on that promise, I have enough;
but Christ is forgotten by them: but this is not the method we should take,
but rather think, how shall I have forgiveness? who gives it? who brings it?
It is a dowry comes with my husband; when I have Christ once, I shall have his
righteousness to cloth me, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him 2 Cor. 1. 30.
ye are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us wisdom, and
righteousness, sanctification and redemption. The meaning of it is, that God
the Father gives Christ to us, as a father gives his son, as a husband Simile.
to one in marriage, and says, I will make him worth thus much to you, but you
must have him first; so does God give Christ, and when we have him, God makes
him all these, Wisdom to you as a Prophet, Righteousness to you as a Priest,
and he shall sanctify you and purge you from dead works, and he shall be your
King, and deliver you out of the hands of all your enemies, he shall be made
sanctification and redemption to you. Observe the phrases in Scripture, and
they lead you still to his person, and do urge upon you to make the covenant
The Scripture leads to Christ's person.
with his person. As when it is said, in him are all the treasures of wisdom,
etc. if treasure be hid in a Casket, you must first have the Casket, then the
treasure; so if in a field, you must first buy the field, there is a mine will
hold you digging all your life long: but you must first purchase the field, and
then fall a digging for the treasure in it: and these are all sorts of
treasures in him, Adoption, Justification, etc. so John 6. he exhorts them to
eat his flesh, and to drink his blood, and that should nourish them John 6.
to life eternal: but before men can have spirits or strength by meat, they
must have that meat it self, and there must be a conjunction with it, and
assimilation of it to them, and of them to it, so 1 John 5. 12. he that has
the Son, has life. We 1 Ioh. 5. 12.
must have first the Son, and then we come to have life by him; you must
have these two distinct conditions (I suppose a man coming immediately out of
the estate of unregeneration) he is first to consider who Christ and God is,
consider the persons of them, and so choose them as a father and an husband to
live and die with. And then secondly, he is to consider what he shall have with
him, yea to look upon the benefits themselves, but chiefly to this end, and so
as that they may stir up your hearts to love him the better, and not simply
as benefits only, so as to say in your hearts, though he is most beautiful in
his person, and so though I had him alone, I should have an exceeding great
reward of himself; yet withal when I consider, that all within the compass
of this world is mine, (a great dowry) that Paul and Apollos, and all the good
Ministers that ever have been, have been for my sake, that whatsoever is in
this life or after death is all mine, and that all these he brings with him
(all which you should look on, as motives entirely to love him, and not as
bare benefits) and say, has not he given me al these? sanct^fied me, and
redeemed me and set me at liberty, when I was a bond slave of sin and Satan,
and have I not reason to love him? this is to seek his presence. It may be
though you have done the thing, yet you have not had this distinct
consideration; yet use it henceforth to help you: say not, I am in misery, and
there is a promise of pardon and adoption, but look first to the Lord Jesus,
go to him and take him. To convince you further of this, there is none of you
but will say, I cannot be saved without an holy conversation, and what is that,
but to converse with God and Christ? all converse is not with things, but
persons, therefore in an holy course, all that you have to do is with the Lord
himself, to open your hearts to him, to resort to him for counsel, to delight
in him: to converse with a man is to deal with him upon all occasions; you are
not only to look unto, to be dealing with duties alone and privileges, for
then with whom do you converse? not with the LORD, but with notions, with
duties and your sins, but your chief business is with the Lord in all
these, and with these as means to bring you to the LORD, into his presence and
unto his person: this is to walk with GOD as Enoch did, which still respects
his person, for so walking with implies.

Again, no man can be saved without love to God, and that love must not be
amor concupiscentiae, but amor amicitiae, a love of friendship; the one
respects things, the other persons: your love must first be to the person, and
then to the commodities you have by him, and the duties you are to perform to
him.

But you will say, how shall we do to bring our Quest.
heart to this? this is exceeding hard: It is easy to seek the benefits come
by CHRIST; self-love will cause most to do so. Any man that needs a thing,
would feign have his wants supplied. A man that is pressed with a burden would
willingly have it taken off: it is easy to have your desires quickened this
way.

What therefore shall we say, to set an edg upon Answ. How to seek the Lords
Person.
your affections, to seek the Lords person? If we had the tongue of men and
Angels, all would be too little; therefore let us beseech the Lord, that he
would be his own spokes-man, and reveal himself unto us. There is no way to
set our hearts a work to seek his face, but by seeing of him: and to help
you to a sight of him, is not in our power; To see him.
and yet he uses to do it, whilst we are speaking of him in the ministry of
the word. It is said Psalm. 9. Psalm. 9.
They that know his name, will trust in him: and as they will trust in him, so
they will seek his face. What was the reason Abraham and Moses sought the Lord
thus for himself? because they had seen his face. Thus of Moses it is said,
he spoke with him face to face. There are two ways to know a man; by report,
or sight, by hearsay, or by face, and this later way have all the Saints
known him in some degree, and have therefore sought him, though Moses in a more
particular manner; yet all saw him. Benevolentia, Good will says Aristotle,
may arise from a good report, but Amicitia, Friendship from sight and
acq^^intance; that is, we may bear good-wil to one of whom we have only heard
a good report, but we do not come to love him, entirely, and as friends to
him, till we have seen him, and do come to know him, and be acquainted with
him: Therefore though a man have a general knowledge of him by hearsay, yet
he will not seek his face, till he have seen him face to face, 2 Cor. 3. ult.
The Lords face appears indeed 2 Cor. 3. ult.
in the word, as in a glass, but yet till the veil be taken away, we see him
not face to face; therefore Desire God to show his face.
in the first place, go to God and beseech him, and say, Lord show me thy face,
reveal thy excellency to me, by thy spirit of revelation, that my heart may be
stirred up to seek thee; and will the LORD deny you this request, if you do
so? no, No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals Him; says CHRIST. Therefore go to CHRIST and beseech him to show you
himself and his father. The reason we see not God as we might, or but by
glimpses, is that we forget to go thus to the Son; or if we do, we seek not
earnestly. You know how hardly Moses did obtain this, and you must beg hard as
he did; and when you have obtained this, know you shall see wonderful things,
strange things in him, which eye has not seen. There are wonderful things to
be seen in the Law, if a man's eyes be opened. Open my eyes, says David,
Psalm. 119. that I may see the wonderful things of thy Law. How much more
wonderful things are there to be seen in the Lord, if if he does but reveal
himself, and open your eyes? for the Law is but an expression of him; such as
is the expression of a man in a Letter or Epistle, of which we say, it is
Character animi, it is the portrait^re of a man's mind. When therefore your
eyes are opened to see the Lord himself, you will see such things in him as
will make you in love with him. What was the reason, that the Spouse in the
Canticles, Chapter 5. was so sick of love, that she could not contain her
self? but because the Lord Cant. 5.
had taken away the veil, and shown himself unto her: And so if God would
take any of us here into the Holy of holies, and into the Presence Chamber, and
open himself to him, then we would say as Thomas and Peter did. Now Lord we
will go with thee, now Lord we will live and die with thee, and when we lose
him, we would seek him with the Spouse from watch to watch, that is, from one
ordinance to another, to find him, and never leave seeking, till we have found
him, as she did not, because she had had a sight of him: As Moses could no
have this knowledge of God, till it should please God to reveal himself to
him; so he would not give over, he would not stir a foot, till he did
reveal himself to him. Exodus 33. 13. If I have Exo. 33. 13.
found favor in thy sight, show me thy glory, that I may know thee. And so
should we pray as earnestly as he: and when he has made himself so known to
us, that will draw us, and that is the drawing meant Cant. 1. 3. Draw me, and
we will run after thee, that Cant. 1. 3.
is, show thy self, and we will follow thee, even as straw follows the jett,
or iron the lodestone; and if the Lord will but put the Adamant to the iron,
we cannot choose but follow and seek him. And God does thus by leaving an
impression of himself upon the heart, of the amiablenesse and excellencies
that are in him; as when two men are linckt together, so as no consideration
can part them, it is by an impression on their hearts of some excellency in
each other, till which be removed, they will not leave off to love and cleave
to each other: And so when this impression of Gods excellency is once stamped
upon the heart, then nothing can take it off; no accident what ever is able to
sever God and the heart, having once seen him: but till this be wrought, the
separation is easy, men will depart from God upon any occasion: when we are
taught of God him self, we so know him, as it is Ier. 31. that Ier. 31.
we seek him earnestly, and not till then.

Besides, after Gods speaking and revealing himself, 2 Grow in acquaintance
with him.
there is something to be done likewise on your parts: grow into further
acquaintance with him; which is done, partly by speaking much to him, and
partly by much observing him in all his ways. Look upon him in all his
actions and carriages, and thereby you will see how worthy he is Observe God in
his ways.
to be beloved. Consider the first action that ever he did, making of the
World: he could have enjoyed happin^sse within himself for ever, as much as
now, yet he was willing out of his goodness to 1 Creation.
make Men and Angels, and to provide abundantly for them, and afterward when
all mankind were at one throw lost, and he might have left us, as he left the
Angels that fell without any possibility of 2 Redemption.
salvation, out of his (...), his love to mankind, his love to the nation, he
gave his Son to redeem us: and if it were but for this love to our nation,
he is worthy of all love and respect from us, as he was of the Jews, that out
of his love to their Nation built them but one Synagogue: but he has not
loved the nation only, has he not given him, manifested, revealed him unto
thee, when he has passed by thousands? and whereas thou, if left to thy self,
would have lost the advantage of the possibility of being saved, as the most
of mankind do, would have been hard hearted, as millions of men are: he has
broken thy heart, and given thee Christ, and that when thou were utterly unable
so 3 Sanctification.
much as to believe in him: and since he brought thee home to his Son, how
often have thou been going quite away from him, and has he not still been as a
Shepherd to thee, and fetched thee in again? thou have played many a slippery
trick with him, but he has kept thee, and embraced thee, and established the
sure mercies of David to thee, think also of his wonderful patience, that
when the eyes of 4 Gods patience.
his glory have been so often and so highly provoked as they have been day by
day, yet he passes by all and spares thee. Think if any one would ever have
borne so much as he has done. And add 5 Bounty.
to this the consideration of his bounty added to this his patience by him, his
constancy in doing thee good; though thou art uneven in thy carriages toward
him, yet a continual current of his mercy flows in upon thee; and consider
further, that if it had been but a mere act of his will, to do thus, it had
been wonderful; but it has cost him dear to have the opportunity to do it,
it cost him his Son; and then consider the great love of his Son, that he
would give himself, and when 6 Love of Christ.
he was equal to his Father in glory, would yet leave all to come under the
same roof with thee; and what he has done, if it had not been done, thou
had been undone for ever; and consider how often he has stood with thee in
a strait, pleaded thy case, and pacified his father for thee; and labor to be
led by all these rivers and streams of his goodness to that sea of his
personal excellencies that are in him; and gather an Idea of him into your
minds out of all you have heard or seen of him; the end of all these acts of
his providence, is that men might know him by all these. As when you would have
a man known to another, you go about to comm^^d him to him, to describe him;
it is good to do so of the Lord, to be often expressing his excellencies to
others, and meditating of them our selves; it may perhaps win others to him;
however it will quicken thy self, and exercise thy love toward him. There is
a double way of knowing things, as I told you; one by report, another by sight.
Do thou labor to know him by experience, so as to be able to say, I know him
to be thus and thus, and therefore I will cleave to him.

And with all this consider his greatness, who it 7 Gods greatness.
is has done all these things for thee; the great God of heaven and earth:
this sets an high price upon all he has done for us. If a great King does but
cast his countenance upon thee, how is it prized! but that the great God should
look after such a wretch as thou art, not having any thing in thee, why he
should respect thee so, how should it affect thee! and from hence also consider
what he is able to do for thee. Men know not God in his greatness, and
therefore it is he is not sought unto. Why do we trouble our selves so much
about the creatures, fear this man and that man, and think a little credit or
preferment a great matter? if we saw but God in his greatness, all these would
vanish. See how the Prophet describes him, Isay 40. 15. when he says, all the
nations are but a small Isay 40. 15.
thing to him, like the few drops of the bucket and the dust of the balance;
put the case all the Nations of the world were for thee or against thee, who
would not think this a great matter (as what would we think if we had but
one Nation against us?) yet let them be compared to the Lord; they are but as
dust blown away with his breath. If our eyes were but opened to see as
Gehazies were, the host that was about him, so ours to see the Lord, we should
desire him alone, and seek him: and then a man would be ready for all
varieties of changes, put him where you will, he will be content to have Gods
favor whilst he lives, and heaven when he dies, and till this be wrought he
does not seek God with a perfect heart; till a man comes to this choice, I
have many things in the world, but the LORD is my portion, and he is my
exceeding great reward; and I can live on him alone, it being as impossible for
me to have him without comfort as to have the Sun without light; so as
whatever becomes of him, he is able to say, I have lost nothing, I am not
driven out of my inheritance and portion, I have Gods presence, and that will
be a direction and a protection to us in hard times, so that we may say, The
Lords Name is my strong Tower, and though others fly to other refuges, yet
Thither fly the righteous, and are safe. Thou must seek Gods presence By
seeking God we shall have
in time of peace: if thou would have it for thy refuge in time of danger.
Both these we may see, Isai. 4. the two last verses. The Lord will create upon
Isay 4. ult.
every place of Mount Sion, and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day,
and the shining of a flaming fire by night, verse 5. that is, as the People of
Israel coming out of Egypt had a pillar of fire to guide them by night, and a
cloudy pillar by day; so 1 His presence.
God promises there to his people, I will walk before you, and direct your
way in all your actions, in difficult cases. God guides them by an immediate
enlightening of his Spirit into those ways that shall be most safe for them, 1 Samuel 18. 14. The Lord was with David, and he walked wisely, God directed 1 Samuel 18. 14.
him, and was his Counselor, when as the Lord departed from Saul, and he erred
in all he did; As the Israelites, if their two pillars had been taken away,
they had been lost in the wilderness; So was Saul, when the Lord departed
from him, he was as a man wildred in a dark night: whereas a godly man shall
have a voice behind him saying, this is the way, walk in it; whereas if he
went another way, he should break his neck; and what a great privilege is
this?

But that is not all the benefit which the presence 2 Protection.
of God does afford us, but it gives protection also; as that place in Isay
shows: for it follows, upon all the glory shall be a defense, and there
shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a
place of refuge, and for a covert from the storm and from the rain; that is,
look what a shadow is to a poor traveller in the time of scorching heat, in
those hot Countries; that will the Lords presence be to all his Saints, and it
shall be a covert also; they shall be under it, as under a roof, stand like
one in an house dry, that looks out and sees others in a storm: as when the
Egyptians were beaten with hail, and perished in it, the Israelites were safe.

And lastly, he will be a refuge to them, when 3 Refuge in persecution.
they are persecuted by any, whether it be by their own sins which follow
them, as the avenger of blood, or by evil men, or the power and malice of
Satan; if they run to him, he will be their Asylum, their Sanctuary. See this
different privilege of the Saints from others in Mordecai and Haman; both were
in distress. Mordecai was persecuted, he flew to the Lord by prayer, and had
him for a refuge; but Haman had none, when he was out with the King: So both
Peter and Judas fell into sin; but Peter had a refuge to fly to, even God,
whom he had been formerly acquainted withal; but Judas had none; and so the
storm fell on him: so Saul being to fight with the Philistimes had no refuge,
God was departed from him, and therefore he fled to a witch: but David when he
was in as great a straight, and the people talked of stoning him, he had a
refuge, he encouraged himself in his God: and therefore you find it so often
repeated by him, God is my shield, and the rock of my defense. In fair
weather men care for no such shelter, because they think they need it not; but
remember, a storm may come, and it is good to provide against a rainy day, 2
Rev. 5. when the Church was fallen from her first Revel. 2. 5.
love, he threatens to remove the Candlestick, whereby he means not the
ministry only, as appears by the last verse of the first Chapter: The seven
Candlestickes thou saw are the seven Churches, and therefore Captivity is
thereby threatened, a removal from that City which was a place of ease and
safety, into a barren land where they should live more hardly. And this is
threatened, not because they had utterly forsaken, but were fallen from their
first love, and some degrees of it. What cause have we then to fear? and if
so, what cause is there we should now seek the Lords presence? and then we
shall be sure to find him a refuge; for go whither thou will, He is there.
Psalm. 139. Whether into Psalm. 139.
the furthermost parts of the earth, or the heart of the Sea, thou art there,
says David, and as nothing is so terrible to the wicked as that; go whither
they can, God is there; so nothing is more comfortable to the Godly.

Now we are come to the last condition, which the Lord requires, before he will
hear prayers and forgive their sins, or heal the land of his people; and
that is, If my people turn from their evil ways. Whence you may observe this
Doctrine.

That except a man do turn from his evil ways, Doct. 7. No interest in the
promises without turning from our evil ways.
he can have no interest in the promises of the Gospel. Now this point, as
the rest, has a double office. The one is to shut out those, to whom the
promises belong not; If you turn not from your evil ways your prayers shall
not be heard: Another to open a door of comfort to them that do it, their
prayers 2 Parts of the doctrine
shall be heard.

But first for matter of terror to those without; and herein our method shall
be, first to know what 1 Terror to the wicked.
it is to turn from our evil ways; for when the Lord shall hang all his
promises upon these conditions, we have reason to examine them narrowly.
Wherefore for the conceiving of this, we must know, that every man is borne
backward into the world, with his back turned upon God, and his face toward
sin and hell, and so continues, till he hear some call from God to the
contrary, saying, That is not the way, etc. So that this conversion of the
soul is called a turning, because it is from one term or object to another,
that is, from sin to righteousness, from Satan to God. And because there
are many false turnings, and many men that wheel about and never turn truly,
who yet suppose that they are converted, therefore we will endeavor to open to
you this true turning. Now it may be found out four ways. First by the causes
of it or motives upon which. Secondly, by the terms from which and to which we
turn. Thirdly by the manner. Turning to God known by the causes, False, (...)
Some afffliction.
Fourthly by the effects.

First, for the causes of this solid, true turning, and the motives which work
upon a man's heart to turn him; you must know, that there are many things may
cause a man to leave his evil ways for a while; As it may be, some present
affliction, for the avoiding of which a man may seem to turn unto God.
Therefore God still complains of the Jews, that they turned, but fainedly
unto him, and not with the whole heart, because when he slew them, then they
sought to him, and then they would turn from their evil ways; but when they
were delivered, they turned to their old Bias again. So Pharaoh, when as he
was plagued with any new Judgment, then he would let the Israelites go, but
as soon as that was off, he hardened his heart, and would not let them go.

As also a second cause to move men to turn 2 Present benefit.
may be some present commodity. This does appear in many of those that applied
themselves to Christ: some did it for the loaves, and some for their convenient
living, some for the hope of an earthly Kingdom, which they thought he would
have brought; but these all left him afterward. There be many such false
motives, but the only true motives are taken from the apprehension of eternal
True motives to turning whence they are.
life and eternal death: the conversion is not right till then, and the reason
is, because all other motives may be over balanced; But the motives of life
and death cannot be over topped by any thing; If preferment be offered, or what
ever the world can offer: but these exceed all that Satan, or the world, or
the flesh can suggest. Therefore a man is then turned, when the Lord shall
enlarge his thoughts, to see the greatness and the vastness of these two; for
then all those other things appear but as Candles in the Sunshine: So that if
Satan come with earthly honors and pleasures in his hand, the answer will be
easy, but what are these to eternal death, and everlasting life? and these
are not thought of nor considered by carnal men: though they talk of heaven
and hell, yet they see not the immense vastness and latitude of them, and
therefore go on so confidently, hence Christ in Mark 16. when he sends forth
his Disciples to Mark 16. 16
convert men, he bids them use these two arguments. Tell every man if he
believe he shall be saved; if not, he shall be damned. Where we see the
motives that Ministers are to use by Christ's direction, are eternal life and
death: And Saint Paul endeavoring to convert Felix, told him of the Judgment
to come, which made him to tremble: And Christ told the woman of Samaria of
that water and spring, that flows up to eternal life. John 4.
Consider therefore whether ever thou had a true apprehension of these,
without which a man cannot be thoroughly wrought upon; which apprehension if
true, has these conditions in it.

First it must be an apprehension of them as present: Eternal life, and death
how to be apprehended.
for happily a man may have a slight thought of eternal life and death, he may
look upon them as things absent and afar off; but when they are set on by
God, a man is pursued and brought into streights by the apprehensions of them,
so as he 1 Present.
has no rest till he be translated into another condition. A carnal man on
his death bed, having an actual apprehension of hell as present, is strangely
affected. Now at conversion, the apprehension of these seizes upon a man by a
work of the Spirit, and compasses him about so, as he cannot shake it off, till
he turns to God. The wise man sees the plague before hand, even as present:
and therefore stays not till it comes: but turns in the time of youth, health
and strength.

Secondly, it must be a deep, fixed, and settled apprehension: 2 Deeply.
for sometimes a man that shall never be saved, may be moved with the present
apprehension of eternal death, and life; but it is as a storm soon blown
over, but in him that shall be saved, it is set on by the spirit of bondage,
and such an impression made, as will never out, but he still remembers it; and
this is that true apprehension which moves to repentance.

But some will say, can a man be wrought upon Object.
by the mere apprehensions of eternal life and death, to turn from his evil
ways, without an apprehension of sin and grace?

When a man has a true apprehension of eternal life and death, he comes to
know what sin and Grace Answ. How men come to know sin and grace.
is, and never before: till a man knows eternal death, he looks on sin as a
trifle, as a thing of naught; therefore the wise man says, they despise their
ways; but this apprehension is it, which helps to present sin in its l^vely
colors, and so also the price of grace is then understood, when it is
apprehended, as drawing with it everlasting happiness, as the needle draws
the thread.

The second thing is the consideration of the 2 The consideration of the terms
terms, for there is no turning without going from one term to another; and
there is no true turning, except it be from Satan, and the creature, and your
own selves to God. Of this you read in Acts 26. 18. that Saint Paul was sent
to open their eyes, and Acts 26, 18.
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
etc. You see these the terms of true turning; and this is especially to be
marked: for if there be no more then a turning from misery to happiness, it is
not sound; for if you look upon sin, and misery, grace and happiness as in
themselves without respect to God, you do but turn upon your own hinges, as
axle-trees, you go but different ways to the same center, that o there wicked
men go unto, so long as you look only at the misery and the happiness of
your selves alone, which is the center of all mankind. Therefore in a true
conversion, these motives are looked upon in relation to God, as thus; if I
follow my self and the creature, they are never able to save me; but if I
apply my self to him that has the keys of life and death, I shall be happy
in him for ever: therefore henceforth I will forsake Satan and every creature,
and apply my self only to the Lord. And upon this ground a man makes this
resolution with himself, I will forsake Satan and subject my self to God;
for he only is the author of true happiness: so that now God is made a term,
to which thou turnest and appliest thy self. Hos. 7. 16. Hos. 7. 16.
They returned, but not to the most High, etc. There is a turning made mention
of, and one would think, in a special manner; for they fasted, they prayed,
but this was no turning to God; and why? because ye have turned but from
misery, and sought your own happiness, and ye have forgotten me, says the
Lord, who am the most High and only able to deliver and save you; and therefore
their turning was counterfeit, not true; this will not hold, such will start
aside like a broken bow.

Thirdly, for the manner of turning, as it is expressed 3 The manner of turning.
in Scripture, you must turn to the Lord with all your heart, and all your
soul; though it be not expressed here, yet it is to be understood, If my people
turn from their evil ways with their whole hearts.

But what is this turning with a man's whole Quest.
heart?

A man is then said to turn with his whole heart, Answ. Turning with the whole
heart what.
when he is fully enlightened and convinced in his understanding of the evil
of a thing, and thereupon does take a full resolution to forsake it: As if a
man be going out of the way, and another man come and tell him he is not in
the right way, which will lead him to his journeys end; if he be fully
persuaded of this, he will return, and that with all his heart, as we use to
say, when we do a thing willingly: So it is here, if a man be fully persuaded
that sin is the cause of all misery, and God of happiness, he turns to GOD
with his whole heart. Now unless it be with the whole heart, this turning is
but fained; as appears by that in Ier. 3. 10. And yet for all this, her
treacherous sister Judah ^er. 3. 10.
has not turned unto me with her whole heart, but fainedly says the Lord;
which falls out, when men have some motives to move them, but not enough; they
are not fully convinced, and so they turn but by halves. When therefore the
illumination is perfect Illumination.
and full; that these ways wherein he walks will bring him to misery, and the
contrary to happiness, then a man perfectly turns, and with his whole heart:
and because turning thus with the whole heart follows full conviction,
therefore the Apostle does express this turning by the phrase of opening the
eyes, Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes and to turn Acts 26. 18.
them, etc. that is, every man goes on in his ways of sinning, till his eyes
be opened, to see the thing which he saw not before: and GOD many times meets
men in the midst of their ways, and gives them some light and means, as some
exhortations and motions to good, some checks for their evil ways: and if
those admonitions be so far effectual, as to open their eyes, that is, to
convince and persuade them, that the way they go in leads to eternal misery,
then do they turn and are willing to do it. And therefore also on the
contrary, when GOD will not heal and convert a people, he suffers not their
eyes to be opened, as in Esaias 16 10. Esaias 16. 10.
Make the heart of this people fatt, and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their cares, and
understand with their hearts, and convert to be healed. Where we see, that the
first chain of our conversion is the opening of the eyes, the second chain is
the opening of the heart, the third is to be converted and healed; and the two
former will draw on the last: and because the Lord is resolved not to heal
them, therefore their eyes must be shut up. But at conversion men's eyes are
opened to see sin coming against them, even as an enemy with a sword in his
hand, and to see the riches of the inheritance of the Saints, which neither the
eyes of natural men have seen, nor their ears heard, nor their hearts
understood. And then is a man turned from his evil ways, and not before. A
man goes on in a course of sinning, as Balaam did in his way; he met an Angel
with a drawn sword, but saw him not at the first: so soon as his eyes were
opened, there needed no more persuasions to move him to turn: So a wicked man
goes on in a way, wherein he runs upon the swords point, and he sees it not;
but when his eyes are opened to see it, then he turns back, and when they
are thus turning back, like Gehazi, 2 Kings 6. 15, 16, 17. who (seeing an army
2 Kings 6. 15, 16, 17.
coming against him and his master Elisha) he cries out, Alas, what shall we
do, if we go on? and Elisha answered, fear not: for they are more that be
with us then they that be with them: and so Gehazi saw when God opened his
eyes: So do men when they set upon a new course, they meet with many
oppositions and dangers in the way, which makes them cry, alas what shall we
do? then God opens their eyes, and they see also more with them then against
them: they see the glorious privileges that they have, and the strength that
they received from God: these things encourage them, that they go on
resolutely, because that the latter are far greater than the former.

Lastly, to find out what this true turning unto 4 The effect (...) of turning.
God is, we must consider the effects of it: Now a man is then turned, when he
finds these three effects wrought in him.

First he finds that those evil ways of sin, and those corruptions which
before did dwell in his 1 Sin is put out of possession.
heart and had the rule there, are now put out of possession, and the contrary
grace is made master of the house; so that he can say with the Apostle Romans 7.
It is not I, but sin in me, that is, sin sometimes was the master of the
house, and that which I now call my self, as then was not, had no existence in
me; but now the case is altered, the regenerate part, Sin crept into the
regenerate.
that is in me is master, and though sin thrusts in and dwells there also,
yet it is but an intruder, no lust but is thrust out; and if it creepes in, it
is by one of these ways.

First, either stealing in, as a thief, by night, 1 As a thief
when they do not watch and see it, or secondly it 2 As a rebel
breaks in by violence, as rebels taking the advantage of some strange
passion, so as they are not able to resist it, yet sin dwells not there as
master, for it is expeld as soon as the rebel is found, as soon as strength
is recovered, so as possession is still kept by grace, that as it is said of
peace, Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, that is, though you be ready
to fall out with your brethren, yet let not malice rule, but peace. Now what is
said of one grace, is true of all: so then examine thy self, how comes sin
in into thee? comes it in by stealth, or by violence only? and when it is come
in, does it continue master? then thou art not turned to GOD: for if thou were
truly turned to God, though sin did creep in as a thief, yet thou would
not suffer it to take possession of the house, but you would cast it forth; and
if it did break in by violence, yet when thou had recovered thy strength,
when thou had got the hill, that is, the upper hand, thou would keep it
under.

The second effect is this, that when he has 2 Hatred of sin.
thrust out sin, then he hates it, as Amnon did his sister Thamar; he not
only thrust her out of doors, and barred the door on her, but also he hated
her worse, than ever he had loved her. So a man that is turned does hate sin,
hate it as truly as ever he did love it before. There is none but the
regenerate man that hates sin truly. Suppose a man has lived a long time in
some sin, it may be in drunkenness, or whoredom, swearing, etc. he may
sometimes thrust it out of doors, and by a resolution upon some grounds bar
the door against it; as when he lies on his sick bed, or is in some great
affliction, but does not hate it.

You will say, how shall we know that? Quest.


Hatred is implacable, and for ever, as in a man Answ. Hatred of sin what.
toward Toads and Serpents, he will never be persuaded to receive it again,
and to grow friends with it, but he forsakes it forever. And again secondly,
he will never mince the matter with sin, and say, thus far will I lop and
cut up my sin, but he will pluck it up by the roots: Hatred desires the
utter abolition and destruction of what it hates. Thirdly, he will hate all
kinds of sins. Sheep hate all kind of Wolves, and the Dove all kind of
Hawks; therefore examine thy self by these generals.

The third effect is this, fighting against it: The 3 Fighting against it.
truth of turning is seen by a man's resistance all a man's life; as the
Israelites were never to seek peace with Amalek, but to fight against them, to
seek the destruction of them while they lived. Indeed it is true, such a man
may be foyld by a sin, but still he fights against it; and so we will, if
we be truly converted.

Therein then is the difference between the relapse Difference of relapses of
the godly and others.
and backsliding of the wicked, and the falling of the godly into some sin. A
Saint never gives over the war, he never enters into league with sin. The
spirit lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5. that is, will be Gal. 5.
ever stirring him up against it: all the world cannot make peace, where GOD
has put enmity: Thou will never come to say, I cannot choose, I must needs
yield to it: but thou will never give over; for that is the property of one
truly converted, to look on sin as an enemy, and whatsoever helps him against
sin, he accounts his friend, as admonitions and reproves, and whatsoever
helps sin against him he accounts his enemy.

But you will say, if all this be to be done, I Object.
cannot say, I hate sin, for it hangs on me continually, and I find an
aptness to delight in it as before.

It is true, that there is something in thee, the flesh Answ.
to which sin is as suitable as ever it was: hence the aptnes to entertain
it, that is ready to become as friendly to it as ever it was. Yet again the
frame is such, as there is something in thee, namely a new creature, a new
self, thy regenerate part, that hates sin with a deadly hatred, yea and the
flesh also which fosters it. So then this may be thy comfort that the spirit
that is in thee hates sin, at the same time, that the flesh which is in thee
delights in it.

If this turning unto the Lord be a condition on Use 1. Of examination.
which all the promises are put; then it stands you upon to examine your
selves, whether any way of wickedness be found in you; if it be, be it
greater or smaller, then you are not converted, you are still in the bond of
iniquity (it is the Apostles phrase to Simon Magus; Acts) that is, tied up in
it as in a bond, shackled in it, as a man still in prison and bound in fetters;
thou art a fettered bond slave: For when there is* any way of wickedness in
thee, it so binds the soul, that a man is not able to run the ways of Gods
Commandments. Look back therefore upon thy former ways, search thy heart as
thoroughly and narrowly as they did for the leaven before the Passover; search
as it were for thy life, because if there be a way of wickedness, it will
cost thee thy life. Search also diligently, for self-love makes it hard to
find it out. This point needs application more than explication; the business
here is more with the heart than with the head. Put case it be a way of
enmity, having an evil eye Enmity.
toward such a man, though thy enemy; if thou go on in it, thou art in a way
of wickedness. It is the LORDS command, that thou should overcome evil
with good, and that thou should love thine enemies; and therefore you are
your own utter enemies, in walking in a way of enmity against others. Say it
be the way of evil speaking, which comes Evil speaking.
nigh to enmity (and therefore I speak of it in this next pl^ce) in Titus 3.
2. Speak evil of no man. Tit. 3. (...).
You must not speak evil of any man, though he be truly wicked; for you your
selves were such, says the Apostle, and therefore do it not: to make a
custom of this; when thou have an opportunity, and when any man will give thee
the hearing: this is a way of wickedness. It is one thing to fall into it
beyond a man's purpose, another to give a man's self liberty in it. It may be
done, for the good of the party, or when it concerns GODS glory, but not of
envy. Again, suppose it be a way of idleness, which men of all callings are
subject to; Idleness.
consider that if thou were free from all other sins, and yet were idle, thou
art in a way of wickedness. The Apostle speaks much against idle persons, as
2 These. 3. 10. For even when we were with you, this 2 These. 3 10.
we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat, etc.
that is, it is such a sin, as he is not worthy to live, that lives in it; as
for scholars that are sent hither with a price in their hands to learn the
knowledge of GOD, and his true religion, for these to spend their time idly, of
all other they are not worthy to live. If Saint Paul may be Judge, thou can
not be saved, because this is a way of wickedness. Art not thou the Lords
servant? does not he give thee thy wages? Suppose it not a positive way of
sinning in it self, yet that will follow upon it, Omnis omissio fundatur in
aliquo actu voluntatis affirmativo, the reason why a man neglects to do what
he should, is because he does what he should not: and therefore, 2 These. 3 11.
he calls those idle persons busy bodies, because 2 These. 3. 1^
whilst idle, they are busy about something else, as good fellowship,
drinking, or happily recreations, which though in themselves lawful, yet are
most unlawful, when a man makes a trade of them.

This way of idleness is usual amongst men, and misspending time is counted
no sin, if a man have enough living but to maintain him. But consider how
vehement the Apostle is against all such, 2 These. 3. from the sixth to the
thirteenth, speaking of the same persons, I command you brethren in the 2 These.
3. 6, 13.
Name of the LORD JESUS, that you withdraw your selves from every brother that
walks disorderly, etc. he gives it not from himself, but it is a command from
Christ: and besides he says, he that walks idly walks inordinately, that is,
besides his rule, which is to be painful in his calling; therefore he is like
a soldier out of his rank, a member out of joint; yea says the Apostle,, let
him not eat. He names a punishment in nature suitable to it; as if he had said,
nature has taught you so much, it is a rule ingrafted in nature; and therefore
you see drones cast out of the hive, and you see stones and all things that ly
still continually, that they eat not as beasts do, this is a mother sin, it
was the sin of Sodom. Solomon often touches upon the sluggard, and speaks
against him. As there may be a way of wickedness by being idle, so by minding
our earthly business too much; against such the Earthly mindednes.
Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. 19. minding earthly things: whose end is damnation;
minding, that is, being so content that they mind it continually; whereas men
should be so conversant in the world, and use it, as if they used it not: buy
and marry, as if they married Phil. 3. 19.
not; let it be a by-businesse, do it as if you did it not, and be so
diligent in them, as that the maine of our intentions be reserved for better
things, as getting of grace, etc. otherwise we forget the maine errand for
which we came into the world, to make our calling and election sure, and
intend that which we should do, but by the by. This is a fault even amongst Gods
people in part, as we may see in Martha, who troubled her self about many
things, but Mary left all to hear Christ preach; and Christ upon that occasion
teaches us, that he makes the better choice, that takes more time from his
calling to bestow on better things. Mark the reasons which Christ uses, why
Mary chose the better part. First, because this alone is needful, that one
thing necessary. There are many worldly things required to make up our content.
Thou art troubled about many things (says he to Martha) but this one thing is
sufficient; and again, many other things may be spared, but this is that one
thing necessary: and again, this one thing shall not be ta ken from thee; she
shall enjoy it for ever, and it will accompany you to heaven, whereas death
will strip Martha of those outward things, bring care and vexation of spirit,
as in Martha, she was cumbred, so that Mary's part was the better, and let us
also choose it.

Again, there is a way of wickedness which Unjust dealing.
Solomon often touches upon and speaks against, a false balance, whereby he
means any kind of unjust dealing in trading, putting off slight wares with a
good gloss, any such way: such an hidden mystery of unequal gayning, it is an
abomination to the LORD, says Solomon. Is this the exercising of your
callings, for the good of men? no, for the hurt of them, and the destruction of
your own souls; likewise if there be any such secret way of sinning found in
thee, as the Apostle speaks of, Uncleanness. 1 These. 4. 4.
1 These. 4. 4. that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence; by vessel he
means soul and body, which were made wholly for the LORD to put his grace
into: take heed therefore of any such lust of uncleanenesse. The Apostle
means no particular Act; therefore if there be any such secret way of
uncleanenesse of what kind soever, thou art yet in a miserable estate: for I
tell thee, if thou had any work of regeneration, would it not resist every
kind of sin? if any true tenderness of conscience, thou would be sensible
of every way of wickedness; as tender flesh is of every p^icke, o^ the eye of
every more: but you will say, the best may fall into these sins: Answer, yes,
but they Object. Answ. Good men may fall, but walk not in sin.
make not a path of them: Wicked men take their walks in sin, ye shall
find them there day by day; but not so wi^h a godly man, he never draws a
course of sin as a thread through his whole life. When there are ten thousand
ways to one place, any one is enough to lead to it; there are many ways
lead to hell, and any way of sin leads to hell, though but one; and
therefore thou belongest to Satan's division, and not to the Lord, unless thou
can say as Saint Paul and those Corinths, whereas I was sometimes a
blasphemer and unclean, now I am sanctified and washed: Thus thou must be
able to say of every evil way, or thou shall not be saved.

As for the commission of sin, so for the omission of duties, suppose it be
neglecting of GODS Sins of omission.
ordinances, as hearing the word, as it is a custom for some to be absent, it
is a monstrous thing that men should be so openly profane, manifesting to all
the world that they lie in a way of wickedness. So for negligent performance
of duties, which will Negligent performance of duties.
come up to the same degree of guilt with sins of omission, and be reckoned
as if you had not done them, thou may have a way of wickedness in the way
of performance of duties: for GOD commandes the manner of the duty as well as
the substance. A man happily will not neglect the duty, and yet negligently
performs it. Now CHRIST bids us not only to hear, but to Take heed how we
hear, namely, in such a manner, as that we should get strength by every
powerful Sermon.

If thou find not thy heart to be softened, which was hard before, and
wrought upon, I may say thou have not heard: So in prayer, when prayer brings
not thy heart into order, which before was off the hinges, thou have not
prayed. Remember, that the manner is commanded as well as the substance. So for
the communion of Saints, we are charged not to forsake the fellowship of
Saints, therefore it is a way of wickedness not to be found amongst them: what
can you say for your selves that neglect this command? how can thou look to
have thy prayers heard, thy sins forgiven? So for thy speeches, they ought to
be profitable, ministering grace to the hearers, affording not dross, but fine
silver, Prove. 10. 20. Prove. 10. 20.
The tongue of the just is as choice Silver, and this always. Let your speech
be gracious always. Col. 4. Colos. 4.
not only by fits.

So for family duties, look, if there be no way of wickedness there. Ephesians.
6. 4. Children and servants Ephesians. 6. 4.
ought to be brought up in the nurture of the LORD. This you ought to do to
your servants: for when they are delivered to you, you are become as parents to
them. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.


There is a strict command to rehearse the way of God upon all occasions. Those
families wherein nothing is done for the bringing them up in the ways of the
Lord, have a way of wickedness in them, and search it out.

I have insisted the longer upon particulars, because it is the spreading of
the net that catches the fish. Therefore Saint Paul condescends to
particulars, whereas he might have contented himself with generals, Romans 1.
29. as being filled with all unrighteousness. But he adds a catalogue of many
Romans 1. 29.
particulars; fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes, full of
envy, murder, debate, etc. So 1 Cor. 6. 9. the Apostle says, Know you not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? that might have 1
Cor. 6. 9.
been enough in the general, yet he brings in a catalogue of many
particulars; Be not deceived, no fornicator, nor drunkard, etc. shall inherit
the kingdom of God, as if he should have said, should I stay my self in
these general terms, you would be ready to shift it off, therefore I speak
it of every particular course of sinning. When a man is to shoot at a
multitude of birds, he puts not in one bullet only, but hail shot, so when we
are to speak to many Simile.
people, we are to make application of many particulars. Nathan applied his
message in particular in David, and if Ministers should omit it, yet the people
should themselves bring generals to particulars in applying the word to
themselves at home, and in applying these particulars let them consider the
doctrine delivered, that if there be any of these or any other way of
wickedness in a man, he cannot be saved.

And though many will be ready to say, we know this already, it is no news
to us; yet I fear that if the hearts of men were ransacked and searched, it
would be found they believed it not, but that they think they may lie in some
little sin, and yet be saved by the mercies of God in Christ, for if they
thought not so, they would not be so bold to lie in sin as they are: therefore
does the Apostle upon this occasion still put in this Caveat, be not deceived,
as in Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words, because of these
things ^ommeth the wrath of Ephesians. 5. 6.
God upon the children of disobedience, as if he had said; every man is apt to
think, that notwithstanding such courses of disobedience he may be saved,
therefore take heed says he, such advertisements as these the Apostle does
often use: As 1 Cor. 6. 9. it is as 2 Cor. 6. 9.
if one should say to a traveller asking him of the way, that at such and such
a place there is a by-turning, if you take not heed, if you mark it not, you
may be deceived, and go out of your way. Many have lost their ways there. So,
be not deceived, says the Apostle, it is twenty to one you will in this
particular. We are ready to think God a God all of mercy, and to see the
greatness of Gods justice requires spiritual eyes; therefore though you know
this, yet consider it: there are many things which we know, and do not know
them, we see and do not see them, that is, we do not consider them as we
should* and the Devil is apt for to delude us, saying, such a small sin may
stand with salvation: and therefore it is no wonder, if many err. I may say of
that man, that is fully persuaded of this, that to lie in any small sin
whatsoever will condemn him, a thousand to one if that man will be turned.

Yet take this in to explicate it, that notwithstanding Good men may swerve
a little swerving, a man's estate may be good: but it is continuing in it
makes it a way. For if you judge a man by a step or two, you will judge amiss
of him; therefore I say, it must be a way of wickedness: the ground is,
because a way of wickedness proceeds from the root, from the frame of the
heart, which a man will return to again, be it good or bad; for howsoever a
godly man may be transported for a time, yet he returns again to his former
course. On the contrary, a wicked man may be hedged in for a piece of his way
by education, so as he cannot go out: So Ioash was hedged in by Iehoiada, and
went strait on for many years; but consider what way you take when you come to
the lanes end, when you are your own men, at your own choice.

And therefore, because we are upon a point of salvation and damnation, we
had need distinguish exactly: And that which puts us to distinguish in this
point, is that a regenerate man may have many relapses into ways forsaken, and
wicked men may have stands in their evil ways, and sometimes turn out of
them, and perform many duties, and go far in obedience to the Law.

The question is how shall we do to distinguish Quest. Difference of men
forsaking sin.
this? it will serve to unmaske the one, and comfort the other.

Observe three rules, to find the differences.

1 In regard of the search made for sin, an upright Answ. 1 In searching for
sin.
hearted man, if therebe any ambiguous case, in his whole life, he is willing
to be informed to the full, to refer himself to the word and good men, for
the finding out what is right; when himself doubts, he would be glad to be
resolved, and would love him that would do it. Lord try me (says David) if
therebe any way of wickedness in me, which was a sign of the uprightness of
his heart. When the heart is not sound, then a man is not willing to come to
try all, as John 3. 20. 21. whence this Ioh. 3. 20, 21
difference is taken, Every man that does truth, that is, up^ight hearted,
comes to the light; but he that does evil, hates the light. The one desires
his deeds might be brought to the light, but the other hates it, because he
would not have his deeds known: It is spoken of the Pharisees, who took it in
scorn to have their uprightness questioned by our Savior. And this is
sincerity (...), as the Apostle calls it, when a man is willing to have al his
actions brought to the Sunne-beames, as that word implies, that if there be
any flaw in them, they may be discovered and amended; he desires not that they
may be kept in dark shops like bad ware, but brought to his view and
discovery: therefore the upright de lights most in the company of those that
are freest from his sin, they appear most beautiful in his eyes, and he
loves a ministry that speaks to that particular; every one is desirous to
hear evil spoken of his enemy, that sin is his greatest enemy; therefore
you could not have done David a better turn, than Abigail and Nathan did to
tell him of his fault, or a worse to Amaziah and Jeroboam, then Simile.
the Prophets did, when they reproved them; he that would have a building
down, is glad of those that come with pickaxes, but if he would have it
stand, he cannot endure any body that should offer to meddle with it; so the
strong holds of sin being to be pulled down, a godly man likes him that will
help him against them, when conscience doubts such a course is not good,
which yet is ambiguous. If thou be loath to have it examined to the full, it is
a sign thou have a false heart, and art desirous to continue in it. It is a
sweet morsel to thee, Io^ 20. 12. when sin is kept as an ulcer which Job. 20.
12.
thou will not have a man come nigh to, it is a sign thou love it, and art
not turned from it.

2 There is a great difference in the ground and principle of a godly man's
abandoning sin, and obeying 2 In the ground of forsaking
the Law, from that which is in an unregenerate man, that is not truly turned,
though he may go far in both; for the upright hearted man has not only some
present checks, and transient resolutions to leave sin, but there is a law
stamped upon his mind, whereby to resist the law of sin, for ever this law
the other wants. Romans 7. 23. I see a law in my members, warring against the law
of my mind. Romans 7. 23.
To a man truly converted there is a double law; the outward written in
Scripture, the inward prin^ed in his heart, which is able to guide him:
Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 8. The law was not given for the
righteous, that is, it is not given to him, as to 1. Tim. (...) 8.
others; for others having no law in them, must therefore be pressed only with
that without, but it is (as it were needles to the other) he has one in his
mind continually, opposing the law of sin.

Now because the explication of what this law of the mind is, will exceedingly
conduce to clear this difference the more, I will further show what this law
of the mind is.

It is an inward habit of holiness agreeing with Law of the mind what.
the Law of God, as a picture with the prototype answering in every respect
unto it.

And it is called a Law, because it commands Why it is called a law
powerfully, as a Law which has authority in it; effectually inclining and
carrying the heart on to do what the Law without commands; and on the contrary,
it does forbid with efficacy and power the committing of sin, and it has this
power in it, because it is the very power, virtue and fruit of the resurrection
of Christ, and is the immediate work of the Spirit, who is stronger than
Satan, the world, and the flesh.

And likewise, because as a law it rewards and punishes, refreshing the
obedient with peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, and when a man
disobeys it, it causes grief and wounds the heart; that law in David smote
him when he had numbered the people, and caused Peter to weep bitterly. And Why
the law of the mind.
in the second place it is called the law of the mind, because though it
sanctifies the whole, yet it is most in the mind; as the Law of the members is
called so, because in a regenerate man, it is strongest in the members, and
least in the mind and will. This law does both enlighten the mind with saving
operative knowledge of GOD and his Law, and stampes all the habits of grace
upon his will, Iere. 32. 4. An unregenerate man, may through his Ier. 32. 4.
conscience enlightened, give a stop to evil courses, but without such a law
as this. 5 Differences between a natural* conscience enlightened and the law of
the mind


This being thus explained, the difference between a natural conscience
enlightened and this Law of the mind stands in these effects.

The first is taken from the phrase it self, when it is called the law of the
mind: it having a differing work upon the mind, from that which the light of
conscience has; for the knowledge this Law stampes upon the mind, differs from
that which is brought into the conscience of a natural man.

Though an unregenerate man may first know the Law, and 2. may consent to it,
that it is good; 1 In the consent.
yet a regenerate man that has this law of the mind goes further, and consents
to it as good for him: this is the meaning of that which the Apostle says,
verse 15. that he consents to the Law, that it is good: and therefore it has
this same work upon his Romans 7. 15.
mind, as concerning also that he allows it not, verse. 16. that is not as
good for him, pro hic and nunc. This the other wants for want of light, whereby
the Holy Ghost convinces a regenerate man, that it is best for him to obey the
Law, at such and such times, in all circumstences; and when he comes to act it
upon all occasions, by answering all objections; the other sees it good in it
self, but not for him in such and such circumstances. An envious man first
knows what is good, secondly consents that it is excellent, but thirdly not
that it is good for him; and so also though an unregenerate man allows sin
to be evil in it self, yet not for him in such and such circumstances.

But then you will object, it seems then that the Object.
knowledge of a carnal man and a regenerate man differ, but in degrees, not in
kind.

The want of degrees here alters the kind, as in Answ.
numbers the addition of a degree alters the species and kind.

This law of the mind, puts a lusting into the 2 In the lusting.
soul against that which is evil and to that which is good, Gal. 5. 17. So as
he is not only stirred up Gal. 5. 17.
to his duty by conscience, but he has an inward inclination also thereunto;
and so for sin, this law does put a strong inclination into the faculties,
which does not only repress the outward acts, but it weakens the habits of
sin by a contrary ingredient: but the light of conscience, though it may
weaken the act, yet not the habit, So Gal. 5. Gal. 5. 24.
24. not only the acts are restrained, but the lusts are crucified, the vigor
of them is abated by a contrary lusting, a lusting passes through every
faculty which weakens it. Now nothing is weakened, but by that which is
contrary; if the refore we look to repressing of outward acts therein, they
both agree; and again, if we look to the abatement of a lust and no more, we
also may be deceived; but if the habit of sin be weakened by a contrary
lusting, then it is from Grace, and the law of the mind.

The difference is in the willingness to perform 3 In the will lingnesse to
perform good.
what is good, and to abstain from evil. To will is present with me, says
the Apostle in that seventh Chapter: another act of provokements of conscience,
may do what is good; but to will it, and to will it heartily with all the bent
of the soul and the sway of it; he is not able to say he does so, 1 Timothy 1 Timothy 1. 9.
1. 9. The Law is not given to a righteous man, that is, he has a Law of
grace in him, that puts him on to good without this law; as if he had said this
law without might (as it were) be spared to this man, he being a law to
himself, but it is given to the unrighteous, that is, he would do nothing
without this, he has not in himself a strong inclination to what is good, and
averseness to evil, as the other has, Romans 7. 15. I hate the evil that I
do; he hates the evil which the Law forbids, and longs after Romans 7. 15.
what the Law commands. The Law is put upon the wicked, as a restrainer to
keep him in, he looks upon the Commandments, as chains and shackles; but a
regenerate man looks on them, as upon girdles and garters, which gird up his
loins and expedite his course the better. The Law confines a regenerate man to
live in that element, where he would live; as if one should be confined to
Paradise, where he would be, though there were no such law. But another man is
confined by it to the place where he would not be; and to actions which he
would not do; and therefore as S^ime^, when he was confined, he leapt over
the hedge, comes over the pale, after profit and pleasure, and dies for it; the
Law given to him he reckons as a Prison; therefore examine whether there be
in thee such a constant inclination to walk in the ways of godliness, so as
you could even be a law to your selves, if you are left to what the Lord has
wrought in you.

4 They differ in the power that accompanies this law of the mind in a
regenerate man: where this 4 In the power.
Law of grace is; there is not only a knowledge of what should be done, but
also there is a power goes with it. This Law is a Kingdom. A government
consists not in word, but in power, 1 Cor. 4. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 20. 1 John 3. 9.
1 John 3. 9. he that is borne of God sins not, neither can he sin, etc.
compared with that, 1 John 12. John 1. 12.
who is borne, not of the will of the flesh, etc. but of the will of God. The
meaning of both compared is this; a regenerate man that is borne of God, has
first such a habit as is agreeable to the will of God in all things; and this
habit is as a thing innate, like natural qualities bred and borne with us, so
that he cannot sin; that is, he cannot but resist and strive against it, and
have in the end the victory over it; for it is a law within him which puts him
on to what God wills: and secondly, not only so, but he is borne thus, said
the Apostle, that is, though this disposition be infused, yet it is so
rivetted into him, that he can no more shake it off then a natural disposition
he is borne with; therefore he cannot sin, that is, it cannot be he should
become a sinner given up to sin. On the contrary, natural men wanting this
law are not, nor cannot be subject to the Law of God, because this disposition
to sin is natural to him, he is borne of the flesh, of the will of man; so as
this Law of grace works out all evil in the end, and if good be to be done,
breaks through all difficulties; but corruption in the other works out all
good, and returns to sin, so as he says, I am not able to keep the Sabbath
thus, and abstain from such and such a sin, I am so strongly inclined to it.

5 Difference is out of the seventh verse, not I, but 5 It makes a change.
sin, and in the last verse, with my mind I serve the Law of God, but with
the flesh the law of sin. This law of the mind makes a change in the person.
Can any unregenerate man in the world say, it is not I, but sin? if he does any
thing that is good, it is not he; if he does any thing that is evil, it is he
and only he that does it. A regenerate man himself never sins, that is,
whilst he is himself, he never yields to sin, but it is his flesh when he is
not himself, and an unregenerate man when he is himself, never yields fully
to the motions of grace; but a regenerate man when ever he is himself, acts
according to this part, he is never otherwise overcome, but with a strong
temptation, drunk and transported with passion, and when a mist is before his
eyes; I always serve in my mind the Law of God. And therefore though he be
overcome, yet with this difference, that he looks upon it, as a captivity and
a bondage worse then that of Egypt. He does not as that servant in the Law,
he is not willing to have his ear boared through, and to serve that master
for ever: whereas another looks at sin as a liberty, and the Law of God as a
restraint, and wish eth it were not, though he may accommodate himself by it;
and though he may delight in sin for a while, yet withal he delights in the
Law in the inward man, and that is the more constant prevailing overcomming
delight: so as consider if there be not another delight contrary to the
delighting in sin, though at that time, when the flesh delights in sin, it
appears not, which yet overcomes and Rule 3. The manner of resisting in four
things.
out wears the other.

3 Rule is, consider the manner of thy resisting and fighting against sin;
and here there are four notable differences comes to be laid open.

The upright in heart fights against sin with the 1 With the whole heart
whole frame of his heart. All the faculties fight in their courses, as it is
said, the Stars did against Sisera, as first the mind, there is a (...),
(...) change of mind, in him: he has another opinion of his sin. There
Judgment.
is a change in judgment, he is renewed in his mind. Let a man's opinion be
kept right, and how ever his passion may stir, they will in the end vanish.
Whilst a man is unregenerate, he is as Colos. 1. 21. Col. 1. 21.
(...) an enemy in his thoughts or reasonings, as the word translated in their
minds properly signifies; but you has he reconciled; and so after conversion
a man is a friend in his understanding to the ways of God, he is in his
judgment reconciled to them, and become therein an enemy to the ways of sin.
The question here is not, whether thou think sin evil or no, or this and
that unlawful, but whether evil to thee, pro hic and nunc, at this Conscience.
and that time, in these and these circumstances; and then comes in conscience
also, and that fights against sin, which is tender and fears always. Prove.
28. 14. Whereas he that hardneth his heart falls Pro, 28. 14.
into mischief, and it is that place of conscience is it which is only
culpable of this hardness and tenderness. He dares as well venture upon a
Canons mouth as commit a sin; and though he may sometimes be transported for a
time, yet conscience Will.
fights against it. Then for the will, that fights against sin also, whilst
with David he has sworn to keep those righteous judgments, that is, has
fixedly resolved against it. Lastly he resists sin in his affections, 2 Cor.
12. S. Paul prayed, and prayed earnestly, Affections. 1 Cor. 12.
and could not be content nor make a denial, he was so troubled. So in David,
Psalm 119. 20. My Psalm. 119. 20
soul breaks for the longing it has to thy Judgments. When a man hungers
and thirsts after righteousness, and weeps bitterly for sin, as Peter did, it
is a sign that his affections are stirred. Now on the contrary, in an evil
man, all the faculties fight in their courses for sin. As Ephesians. 4. 18. 19.
Having their understandings Ephesians. 4. 18, 19
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, because of the hardness of their heart: who being past feeling have
given themselves over to work all uncleanness with greediness: here you may
see all the four faculties in an ungodly man fighting for sin.

Their cogitations are darkened, etc. their understandings are for sin, being
estranged from the 1
ways of God.

Then secondly follows the conscience, because of the hardness of their
heart, so the word signifies, 2
their conscience being insensible of sin admi sir.

And then thirdly, for the will, they have given 3
themselves up to it, they have taken to themselves a resolution to betray
their souls to it.

Then fourthly, for the affections, they are said 4
to commit it with greediness, that is, with a (...) of affections, such as is
in a covetous man, who is greedy, and can never have enough, his affections are
so large.

This is the first difference in regard of the subject.

The second difference is in respect of the object, 2 He fights against ^mal*
ler evils.
the things they fight against; a carnal man against gross evils; as we see
in Herod, when he beheaded John, what a contention was there in him? he was
troubled about what report the people would give of it, and about the murder of
one, he knew to be so holy and good a man: but a man truly regenerate, as he is
enabled to see more than another, so also he fights against more. Another man
sees no more but the moral evil and good, and so fights against no more; but
besides this, a regenerate man sees the spiritual holiness that is in a
duty, and looks to the manner, as well as the matter, and he fights against
those smaller motes in the Sun. All the carnal men in the world find fault
with strictness, etc. but another man's chief trouble is, that he cannot be
strict enough. S. Paul was a learned man, and understood the Law of Moses
exactly, and was not ignorant of the ten Commandments, and yet when he came to
be regenerate, he saw and understood it in another manner. I was alive once
without the Law; but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and appeared, as
a monster, which before seemed but a small thing to him, above measure sinful;
so for good, when a man is changed in his mind, he discernes the whole will of
God, that perfect will, Romans 12. 2. before, he Romans 12. 2.
saw the maine duties it may be, and the grosser evils only.

This is a second difference in the Object.

The third difference is in the success; the issue of a carnal man's
resistance is still deteriora sequor; 3 In the suc cesse.
the godly in the issue still follows the best, and in the end is a conqueror;
and though much assaulted, yet he walks after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. and in
Romans 8. 1.
the end mortifies the deeds of the flesh: but a wicked man, though he may
have many good intentions, yet walks as it is Ephesians. 4. 17. after the vanity
of Ephesians. 4. 17.
his mind, and in the end fulfills the lusts of the flesh. This is Saint Paul
his estate being compared in the Romans 7. 2 Cor. 12.
seventh to the Romans, with 2 Cor. 12. though he complains much in both, yet
Grace sufficient was given him to keep him from the Act.

But some of Gods children have had the worst in the issue of the combat, as
David* who fell into Object
Adultery, Saint Peter into denial of his Master.

In some particular actions, they may be foiled, Answ. Gods children soiled in
some particular act.
but the combat is with the lust, which in the end is overcome, though the
actions give him a blow. Saint Peter's lust was fear, which made him to deny
his Master, but in the end it was overcome, Acts 4. 8. whereby his boldness it
appears there. Acts 4. 8.
So David had the victory over that lust, Psalm. 51. how does he hate it? and
was fenced against it? Psalm 51.


4 Difference is in respect of the continuance of the combat. In the wicked it
lasts but for a time, 4 Continuance.
because that in him which causes this combat, has no bottom; like a flower,
though beautiful, yet it grows but upon a stalk of grass, and therefore
soon withers: and the combatants failing, the combat ends. Saul held out a
while, and carried it fair, but in the end persecuted David, and followed his
lusts without any bridle. Judas was long restrained and kept himself in
CHRIST'S family, but at last his covetousness overcame him, and he resolves to
give up his Master to the Pharisees. Ioash restrained himself the greatest part
of his life, whilst his Uncle lived; but two years before his death, he gave
himself up to do evil; the Princes came and did reverence unto him, and he
yielded. So Amaziah after he had overcome the Edomites.

In a regenerate man the combatants always continue; it is an immortal seed
which cannot be eradicated: therefore the combat lasts and increases. There
was a strife of fear in Nicodemus, and he comes by night, but he got the
mastery and spoke boldly for Christ. And so again we see it in Peter: there
was a combat in him to his death, as appears by that which Christ tells him,
they shall carry thee whither thou would not; this was a strife in him which
never ended, till he had an end himself in this world.

Thus you have seen the differences between the relapses of the godly and the
wicked, by which examine your selves.

If no promise belongs to any but to those that Use 2. Other duties will not
serve without turning.
turn; then this follows, that if any have provoked the eyes of Gods glory by
any sin, let him not think to take up the matter by offering sacrifice, that
is, by prayers, and confessions; for God requires this absolutely, Except ye
turn, I will not be merciful; do what you will, humble your selves, fast,
pray, seek my face, etc. GOD will be satisfied with nothing, unless there be
a real turning. Therefore let no man say, I have sinned, and I am sorry, and
confess it etc. but I am not able to leave it, and yet I hope GOD will pardon
me. No, know that stoppage is no payment. God requires all this, humiliation,
and these purposes, and an act of turning beside. All is lost labor, unless
there be a divorce made from your sins. Well therefore might Daniel say to
Nebuchadnezzar, Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquity by
showing mercy to the poor Daniel 4. 27. Daniel does not exhort Nebuchadnezzar,
^an. 4. 27.
to prayer only, etc. (though this is likewise to be done) but to break off
his sins by righteousness, that is, whereas he was an oppressor, now he must
give alms and take off their burdens, that is, take the contrary course: This
is the counsel GOD gives to Joshua, Joshua 7. 8. when he was humbling Joshua
7. 8.
himself and praying, Get thee up, take away the accursed thing from among
you, etc. that is, this is not the way to fast, (though this is to be done too)
that which I most look after, is taking away the evil that has provoked me.
Though this be a truth acknowledged, yet look into men's hearts, there is a
false conceit lurking there, that hearing the word, receiving the Sacrament,
etc. is enough to save them. Men would think their estates absolutely bad, if
they should perform none of these duties, and wholly neglect them: but if they
come to Church, give some alms, etc. then they think that all is well. But
know, that except you actually turn from all evil ways, all these
performances are in vain.

And to convince you of this, consider, that the It is the end of Gods
ordinances.
end of the word, conference, and Sacraments is to turn you from your evil
ways: therefore God accepts them no further then they have this effect, Thou
shall keep my ordinances and statutes, that thou may walk in my ways, to
fear me, says the LORD: that is the end of al ordinances and statutes; so
that though there be never so much done, yet except your lusts be mortified,
and victory got over those sins which are most connaturall to you, al is lost.
Again The end of duties.
consider, that those duties in which you trust (as we are al apt so to do,) as
reading good Books, confessing thy sins, if they be rightly performed, they
will work a true change; and if they do not, it is asigne they are but
carcases not accepted; without this fruit what are they, but bodily exercises
(though happily performed, with some intention of mind) because they profit
nothing: 1 Timothy 4 8. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
for the Apostle calls that, Bodily exercise, which profits little, therefore
Romans 2 ult. there is a distinction Romans 2. ult.
put betwixt a Jew in spirit, and in the letter: and so between a right and a
false performance of the duties of the Law; the one in the letter, the other in
the spirit: the one respects the outward part of the duty only, the other the
inward; and if they be not inward in the spirit, and so thereby effectual to
work a general change both in their hearts and lives, their praise may be of
men, that is, you your selves and others may think you good Christians, but
their praise is not of GOD, says the Apostle, we are all Gods husbandry, the
Ministers d^essers of it, the ordinances are the manuring of it. Now what is
the end of all husbandry? is it not fruit? is it enough for the trees to say,
we have submitted our selves to all manuring, watering, etc. but we are still
as barren, or our fruit as bad as before? Mal. 3. 2. Mal. 3. 2.
The end of CHRIST'S coming is made to be as a refiner, to scour out stains;
which place being compared with that of the first of Esaias where GOD Esaias 1:
says, He abhorred their new moons and sacrifices, because their silver was
become dross; both afford this, that the end of Christ's coming, being to
purge out this dross, therefore if this be not done, all performances, new
Moons, Sacrifices, etc. are in vain. Conclude therefore that except there be
an universal change, both of the object, from evil to all good, and of the
subject in all the faculties, except this be wrought in you, you shall surely
die for it; the LORD will not forgive you, or hear in heaven when you cry,
though you shed never so many false tears.

If this be the condition, upon which mercy is Use 3. Good purposes only not
sufficient.
suspended, this also follows, that good purposes and intentions will not
serve the turn: not but that these must be precedent to every man's turning;
and when they are true, they do bring forth this effect of turning from all
evil ways whatsoever. But as there is a purpose which is true and the ground
of sincerity, so there are false ones also; the true always continues and
brings forth constant endeavors and fruits, but the other leaves us where it
finds us, and quickly dies and withers. There is so much in a carnal man as
may breed good purposes, and desires and resolutions; viz. natural conscience,
and desires of preservation and salvation, Ground of good purposes in carnal
men.
which two put together work serious purposes; but this being all but flesh
still, is not able to work so through a change; as we see in moorish ground
and in a rotten fenny soil, that it brings forth broad long grass, which
soon withers and Simile.
decays, neither is it sweet nor useful: So is it with conscience enlightened
to see a man's duty, and self-love, they produce good purposes, and in show
great and serious, but yet such as the people there expressed, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. who
purposed to keep the Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
Law: but Oh says God, that there were an heart to fear me! as if he had
said, the soil, the ground is not good for these purposes to grow in;
therefore they will surely wither, there wants a heart changed to afford root
to them, and to nourish them.

The next point is gathered from the order of the words, turning from our evil
ways being put last of all these four conditions, because all the other do
but make way for this. All the other, prayer and humiliation, are but
preparatives to this. As the end of all dressing and pruning of trees is the
fruit, and the end of plowing and sowing is the bringing forth of corn, so the
end of all other duties is turning from our evil ways, and the end is always
hardest, omnis difficultas in ipsa summitate, in the utmost pitch and top of
the hill; this being the utmost of all the other is therefore the hardest:
Therefore the Prophets urge this upon all occasions; if you turn, cease to do
evil, rend your hearts, then will I leave a blessing behind me. In that this
is the pin upon which all hangs and is suspended; observe thence,

That it is a very difficult thing, to turn from a man's Doct. Turning f^^m
^vill ways difficult.
evil ways.

That this is the difficultest duty of all else, we see plain in the
Israelites. The Jews religion was very costly, they being to kill so many
Sacrifices, to keep so many Feasts, yet they were content to do all this, but
not to turn; they would not be brought to it, when yet to any thing else.
Whence appears this difficulty of it: their readiness to offer sacrifice was
always acknowledged by God, when their backwardness to this was still
complained of. Again, we see it in experience. Let a man who has an evil and
a wicked heart, let him be broken in a Mortar; lay affliction on affliction,
let him be brought to deaths door, yet all this will not change him; nay let
God work miracles, not only in his sight, but upon him, yet all is not enough
to turn him. As we see in Jeroboam, there was a miracle wrought upon him,
though he had his hand withered up, and was by the Prophet reproved; and his
Kingdom was threatened to be taken away from him, yet this would not work
upon him, he would not turn from his evil ways: he found such sweetness in
that evil way, whereby he kept his Kingdom, and without which he thought he
could not hold it, if he left that. So all the great wonders in Egypt would not
soften Pharaoh his heart, nor make him let the children of Israel go, because
he thought it was for his profit to keep them still. The grounds of it are:

Because these evil ways are so pleasant to us, Reas. 1. They are pleasant.
so suitable to all men, according as men's several fancies do pitch. Now it is
a rule in morality, that those things are most difficult, about which joys and
griefs are conversant, and therefore the chief employment and end and use of
virtue, is to order them and guide them a right.

Because they are rooted in nature, and are agreeable Reas. 2. Agreeable to
nature.
to a man's natural disposition; and it is hard to stop the current of nature,
which way soever it takes, especially running down the hill: And then besides,
education adds to nature; and custom as another nature, adds strength to
sin; and Satan adds to all these: For when lusts lie as sparks under
embers, he blows them up. And to all these ad the joining of wicked men,
among whom we live, and who live with us in the same courses. Therefore in
Ephesians. 2. The course of the world, and Ephesians. 2.
the Prince that rules in the children of disobedience, are made there strong
and potent and efficacious workers in us: there is nothing so weak as water,
yet let much water be joined together, and nothing is stronger: so though sin
were weak of it self (as yet it is not) yet when multitudes join, custom,
Satan, etc. we are carried with the stream and crowd.

Because every evil way in us is backed by an inward Reas. 3. Backed by the law
of the members. Romans 7. 23.
Law of the members in us, that makes it also hard. Romans 7. 23. where the
Apostle considering of the reason, why sin should so prevail and lead him
captive gives this, I see says he, another Law in my members rebelling against
the law of my mind, etc. this is given as the reason why he cannot do the
good he would, and why he does the son he hates. And the reason why he had
so much to do with it was, because it was a law, and it is called a law, the
law of sin, because it commands powerfully as a law. A law implies a strong
commanding inclination. Laws extort obedience, and will have it done; they
come with authority, and will not be denied; and so does sin; and therefore it
is hard to resist it; and forbids good to be done, and a man cannot do it. So
2 Pet. 2. 14. We have it expressed, eyes full of adultery that cannot cease
from sin: because as a law, it is armed with punishments and rewards, this
being the definition of the law; Praeceptum minus commixtum, a naked Praeceptum
is not called a law, because it barely teaches; but when threatenings are
joined with it, then it is called a law, and such laws are our lusts; if we do
resist them, they threaten with some evil: as when Ahab would have Naboths
Vineyard, his lust being not answered casts him upon his sick bed, as if it
meant to be revenged on him, till it were satisfied: So did Aman his lust also:
And as it threatens and punishes, so it promises rewards, profit and
pleasure, if we will obey it.

Both which argue the difficulty to resist it.

As also that it is called the law of the members, argues as much: for it is so
called,

First, because it inclines not in a moral manner only, as when a man is
persuaded by reason or motives to do any thing that is evil, but because it
inclines us Physically, as nature enclines us to meat and drink. A law so
radicated in the soul, if it inclines by way of nature, as plummets hang upon
wheels, and makes them go as we say, whether they will or no; and reason may
be put off and denied, but not a strong inclination of nature, that will not be
got off so easily.

Because it discovers it self (though it be seated 2
in the whole man) and is most operative in the sensual part, as on the
contrary the law of the mind is most exercised in the superior part, though it
sanctifies the whole man. The meaning is this, it appears in the faculties of
the mind, when they are set about any action that is good, and in the relation
is called the law of the members, because it is discerned in the use of the
members, as a man that has the palsy, it lies undiscerned in the hand; but
when he comes to use it, he finds it; so the gout, or soreness or lamenesse
in the leg, though it be there, yet it is most discerned when a man goes to
walk: such a lamenesse or difficulty in our faculties appears, when we go
about any thing that is good.

In the last place, this law of the members is said to rebel against the law
of the mind; and if we will consider its forces in this war, we shall find it
difficult to resist and turn from them.

For first there is a strong faction of evil; many members, many lusts,
legions of lusts warring; so the word implies: it is not a (...), a single
fight, but of many; there is never a good motion comes into the soul, but they
give their suffrage against it, their voice against whatsoever is good; no good
intention but they are ready to gainesay it; nor do they merely say it, and
tell us they dislike it, but they will reason it out with many arguments, and
they are not able only to give a voice against what is good, but likewise to
do something what is active. They dampe, and clogge and prohibit the spirit,
when it is about any good; and therefore it is called flesh, because the nature
of it is to dampe the spirit; as in the doings and proceedings of men, there
often comes a prohibition from Chauncery to stay the proceedings at the Common
law; so from the law of the members comes a prohibition often hindering us when
we would pray and confer, etc. As it is our part in war to stop passages,
to take up the bridges, to hinder the enemy from going whither they would, so
do they fight against us in our endeavors to do good.

So Galathians 5. 17. the flesh so lusts against the Spirit, that ye cannot
do what you would; and it not only stoppes from good, but impells to what is
evil; it not only makes defensive war to hold its own, but labors to
gain ground and fight, as fire fights with water, laboring to overcome grace,
where it is begun, and to assimilate it to it self.

And lastly, they are able always to make war; though the victory be gotten
to day, yet lusts are ready to set on us to morrow. A last which you thought
you should never have heard of more, sets on you afresh: and though you stay
all the motions and assaults the flesh puts upon you this day; yet there is
such a brood, such a spring, that to morrow there will be new ones will
instaurare aciem, and make a new supply; it is still recovering strength and
setting up afresh.

All which considered, it appears to be most difficult for unregenerate men to
begin to turn; or for regenerate men to get any ground of their evil ways.

If to turn from our evil ways, and to resist the Use. To put to the more
strength to turn from sin.
law of the members be so difficult; then learn to proportion your labor to
the work; else the business will not be effected. If much labor be required,
and little bestowed; then that which is bestowed, will be lost.

Think therefore with your selves, that if you have taken none or small
pains, the work is not yet done. If any man have thought it an easy work,
let that be enough to convince him that the work is not yet wrought. The
blunter the tool is, the more strength must be put to it: many stay yet in
their sins, because they have undervalued the difficulty of this work, and
have thought less pains would have served the turn. Is it easy to change
and turn the course of nature? see it by experience; if a man have a natural
inclination, though it may be less stirring sometimes then other, yet it will
return again and again; and if thou usest not as much forces against it, as
it brings with it, thou do nothing to resist it. If one come against you
with ten thousand, and you meet him but with two thousand, who is like to get
the victory? Thou must not therefore spare any pains. Difficilia quae pulchra:
this is the most excellent thing, and therefore the most difficult. Is it easy
to build a Temple to the Lord, and to keep it clean and in repair? see what
pains Saint Paul took, 1 Cor. 9. the three last verses, Every man that
striveth, is temperate in all things; therefore I keep under my body, and do
bring it into subjection: he expressed it by what they did at the Olympian
Games, who were at great pains and labors before to enable themselves unto
those exercises.

To bring it to particulars.

Is it not a hard thing to keep watch and ward day and night against a
spiritual enemy, to keep Difficulty of a Christian course
up the banks, against the Sea of lusts continually assaulting, and breaking
in; to take up and to bear the daily cross without stooping, to carry the cup
of prosperity without spilling, to climb the hill of good duties without
fainting, to abstain from the waters of pleasure, when we are most thirsty,
and they at hand, to go against the crowd without sweating, to be as an Owl
among men, and to bear the shame (as it is said of Christ) who went out and
suffered without the Gate, he bare the reproach; and to do all this
continually? These are no easy things, and yet they must be done; men in this
case are like unthrifts, who complain of poverty, and that they cannot thrive,
and yet will take no pains. The sluggard will not pull his hand out of his
bosom; and men are sluggards in matters of salvation. But to quicken you,
consider that this is the maine business you came into the world to do. And
do you think that a little cast time spent upon it will be enough? Matthew. 11.
13. It is said, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take
it by force, that is, he that would have the Kingdom of heaven must use
violence to take it; violence must be offered to your appetites and unruly
affections: he must keep them under, and that by violence; and again he must
use violence in his prayers, and other holy duties, that is, he must wrestle
and strive in them, and be fervent in them. There are some good duties to be
done as it were with violence. Christ in that place shows, that when the
preaching of the Gospel came, and the beauty of the Kingdom came to be opened
to men, then they took it by violence. But who is so ravished now with those
privileges, the hope of their calling, etc. that they should thus take it with
violence, that is, spare no pains? Therefore stir up your selves, and
consider what it will cost you. This concerns even those that profess the
fear of the Lord. Look what anger and passion they have been subject to,
they are subject to still; look what slackenesse they used in prayer, the same
they use still; their ancient infirmities hang upon them still; they are found
in the same path: the reason is, because they think a godly course an easy
thing; therefore have they taken but small pains to be freed from the bondage
of their lusts, and to grow in grace. So also those without are not content to
be at the cost and labor to begin to repent, but think it may be spared, it
will be at any time soon done. But know beloved, it is not so. Take a man
accustomed to idleness, is it easy for him to become laborious and diligent
in his calling? so if there be any ill haunt, how hard is it to hinder a man
from going still down the hill, to pull his feet out of the pit of
uncleannenesse, sweet gain, or gaming, etc.

But you will say, what is the labor we must take? turn from our evil
ways? Quest.


Directions might soon be given. If there be Answ. Rules of turning from sin.
any edge set on your desires, if you were once resolved, even that resolution
is one means to overcome your evil ways: but to help you, take these.

To such as are strangers from the covenant, for to those I first speak: when
thou art given to evil Rule 1.
ways, go not about first a reformation in particular, but endeavor to get a
general change wrought. It is a rule in Physic, that when a man has a
particular infirmity, the way to cure it, is first to bring the whole body into
a good frame and temper, and that will work out the disease: so get the utmost
end altered. Therefore humble your selves, and seek Gods face, and leave not
till some assurance of Gods favor be gotten, till a new Lord be set up in your
hearts, a new end; till the end be changed, no good can be done. Therefore it
is in vain to go about the particulars first. The utmost end is as the Rudder
to the ship, as the bridle to the horse, which turns all; going about
particulars only, is as if one should set his shoulder to the side of the ship,
when one touch of the Rudder would do it. Therefore Rehoboam 2 Chronicles. 10. 14.
erred, because his heart was not prepared to seek the Lord; and his failing in
that particular is ascribed to his want in the general. Job 17. 9. It is said,
the righteous shall hold on his way, and he that is of pure hands shall wax
stronger and stronger: he that has his heart once changed, holds on; but till
that is done, all is in vain to strive with particulars. As put the case a
Gardener takes pains to dress a Thorn, it may have as much pains taken with
it, in manuring and pruning it, as any plant in the garden; yet it remains a
Thorn still, for all the mouldes put to it; So though thou prayest and
fastest, and humblest thy self, yet if thy nature be not changed, all will do
no good. Cast up a stone a thousand times, it comes down again, because it
remains a stone; but if it were turned into a meteor, etc. or the like, it
would not. Therefore get a general change of thy heart, and then a change in
particular would follow.

Go to CHRIST and beseech him to work Rule 2.
this chang in thee, let this be more in your practice, this we formally
confess, that the LORD only can change us, yet it is not thoroughly considered.
When thy nature is strongly inclined to any evil way, so as thou art almost
out of hope to overcome yet go to GOD. That place may encourage us, James 4,
5, 6. do you think the Scripture says in vain, The spirit that is in us
lusts after envy? but he gives more grace: he had told them verse. 1. of
lusts fighting in their members; they might ask him how they should get the
victory: true says the Apostle, it is hard to overcome, and indeed impossible
to nature, the spirit that is in us lusts after envy, and will do so: but
consider, the Scripture offers more grace then nature is able to do, it tells
you not in vain, that the grace therein offered is able to heal; though the
disease be hereditary, and is past natures cure, yet it is not past the cure of
grace, Acts 10. 31. It is said of CHRIST, Him has God raised up to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. When
lusts are too strong for a man, Christ comes as a Prince and overcomes them,
for he gives repentance; and the end of his coming was not only to give
salvation, but repentance. Though Physicians could not cure Naaman, the Prophet
could, though the Disciples could not cast out Devils, yet Christ could: And
therefore say not, it is an hereditary lust, and it hung long upon me, and I
have made many resolutions, and yet I cannot overcome it.

Take a man that is borne blind, he is past all cure by man, all Physicians
will give him over, and say, he is borne blind; yet remember that Christ did
cure those that were borne blind and lame. This course Paul took 2 Cor. 1. 2.
he had a strange lust which he could not overcome, he beseeches the Lord to
remove, for this I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart, so David
also, Psalm. 51. 10. finding the remainder of his old disease and sinful
dispositions, he goes to GOD for a new heart; when he could not make clean his
heart, he prays to the Lord, Create a clean heart in me. So he in the
Gospel, I beseech thee help my unbelief. Think not that all is done, when
thou have taken up a resolution against thy sin: to take up a resolution,
belongs to thee, but to cure it belongs alone to GOD: Go to him therefore, for
he has undertaken to circumcise thy heart. Ephesians. 3. he having prayed v. 16.
that they should be strengthened in the inward man, etc. then verse. 20.
concludes, Now to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we are
able to ask or think, according to the power that works in us, etc. as if
he had said, you may find many weaknesses in your selves, and then do as I
do for you, go to the Lord to heal them, and know that he is able to do
above all thou can think, to subdue that lust which thou thoughtest could
never have been overcome.

But how will he do it? According to that mighty power that works in us; that
power is as strong as Christ himself, for it is the power of his death, the
power that raised him up from death to glory, able to work out all
infirmities, and to work into you all the graces you want. Give not over
therefore, have faith in the promises of Sanctification, as well as in those of
Justification. Is he not bound by promise to perform these to you that
believe, as well as the other? Where ever God has a mouth to speak, faith
has an ear to hear, an hand to lay hold, as God said to Joshua, I will
conquer those Giants for thee, I will pull down those walls which they say are
built up to heaven; only be thou courageous, and do but trust me, be not
discouraged upon any occasion, give not over saying, it is a thing will never
be done, and had not Joshua trusted the Lord, he would quickly have set down
and given over. So I say to you concerning your lusts; be courageous; and so
none are but those that put their confidence in the LORD; faint not, nor be
weary; do but believe thou shall overcome, and thou shall see them all
conquered in the end. One word of his mouth was enough to still the raging
winds, and is as able to still thy lusts.

But here many will be ready to object, I have Object.
striven long and prayed long, and taken much pains, and I have not gotten the
victory; this must necessarily be answered, for this is the case of many, and
it is the scope of Satan to discourage men, and thereby to give over the
combat.

First consider, whether thy striving be right or Answ. Trial of our strife
against sin.
no: for there is a false resistance of sin, and the promise is not made to
that; and then no wonder if they be not performed; for example,

1 First it may be it is not the sin thou strivest against, but the disprofit,
the discredit, in thy name and estate, or sickness in thy body, that follows
upon it, so as if these were removed, thou should be willing enough to keep
the sin. This is not a right striving that will be accepted.

2 It may be, it is but a faint resistance, and a faint denial does but make
the beggar the more importunate. Balaam gave the messengers a denial, but it
was a faint one, they perceived his lingering, which made them the more
importunate: It may be thou art content still to parley with sin as Evah did,
and so by little and little art brought to the committing of it: these faint
denyalls are no denyalls, these pidling companions are not to be accounted
fighters against sin.

3 If thy denial be more resolute, consider whether it be not for a fi^, a
flesh for a good mood, he is but a cowardly enemy that for one volly of shot
will give over, Satan and our lusts are not of that disposition.

4 Consider whether thy resistance be not only against the gross act, and not
against the least^ inctures, the fringes and borders of sin, that do compass
the act. These are of the same kind with the act, though not of the same
degrees: thou resistest it may be the greater acts, but admittest the lesser,
some dalliance with it.

As the drunkard it may be resolves to run no more into excess, yet he will
sit with his old companions, and be sipping, till sometimes he is overtaken.
Balaam will go with them, but not speak a word but what the Lord shall put
into his mouth.

The Levite would not stay all day, but yet he would be entreated to stay and
eat his breakfast, and so to stay dinner, and so to stay all night. Thus
dalliance brings on adultery, and lesser sins greater; as a little thief let
in at a window lets in the greater. If therefore you fail thus in your
resistance, the promise is not made to you. It Is true, it is said, resist the
Devil, and he will fly from you; but the resistance must be right, and not
such as has been spoken, and that is the first answer.

As you may be deceived in your striving against Ans. 2. Trial of our victory
over sin.
sin, so also about the victory, and that on both sides: both by thinking you
have the victory when you have it not, and (2) by thinking thou have it not
when thou have it.

First thinking thou have not the victory when thou have it; for example, when
thou find the sin striven against, b^s^ing and lusting more than at other
times, thou therefore concludest, thou have not nor shall not get the victory;
when as now sin is dying and on the loosing hand; (as on the contrary, when
thou think all at peace, thou may be farthest off the victory.) Consider
with thy self, does any man but a regenerate man complain so bitterly as the
Apostle does, Romans 7. the good that I would do, that I do not, or as the same
Apostle complains, 2 Corinthians. 12. of the thorn in the flesh? do you think
that any but a sound hearted man, can come as he did with tears to Christ,
that cried out so to him, Lord help my unbelief? can any but a broken heart
pray so earnestly as David, Psalm. 51. 10. for a new and a clean heart? This
deep sense of sin, is an argument of our victory over it.

This complaining is a sign that we have the better of it: for what is the
reason thou complainest thus against it, but because thou art striving against
it? We know the mud that lies at the bottom of the water, troubles not the
water; but when they go about to ^leanse the ditch, then the mud rises and
defiles it; yet then it is a purging. When one takes a firebrand to extinguish
it, by beating out the fire, yet then it is the sparks fly most about: When we
strive against sin, we feel it most, partly because Satan his manner is, to
rend and tear, when he is going out, and it is the nature of sin also so to
do, as also because our light is increased, the more grace we have, and the
more we strive against it, and therefore we see it more, our sense of sin gowes
more exquisite.

Again on the other side thou may think thou have the victory, when thou
have it not. The soar may be skind over, when it is not healed at the bottom,
and then no wonder, if it break out again: Sin may lie but asleep when thou
take it for dead; therefore in our turning from our evil ways we must observe
a right method. Let thy humiliation be sound, thy faith and assurance perfect:
when these precedent acts are not done as they ought, and yet thou think thy
sin mortified, it may deceive thee; as we say an error in the first concoction
is never amended in the second, nor of the second in the third: So if thy
humiliation has not been sound, thy turning from thy evil ways cannot be
through.

To answer this objection, consider that thou Ans. 3.
strivest against even a spring of sin; if it were but to empty a cisterne or
to dry up a pond, when the work is once done, we should hear of it no more:
but it is a spring of sin that runs continually; and therefore think not
that because it returns again, that thy former striving is in vain. As those
that watch over the pumpe in a Ship, though they pump out all the water to day,
cannot say, that it will be empty to morrow, or that yet their pumping is in
vain, because it fills again, for if they ceased to do it, it would sink the
Ship, so it is with sin, especially with some sins: some are more properly
called the Law of the members, as being rooted in the constitution of our
bodies, in our natural dispositi ons; and these are ready to return again
ever and anon.

There is a great difference between these, and the temptations of Satan,
temptations (as blasphemous thoughts) are but as weeds thrown into the garden,
and cast out again: but these are as weeds growing in the garden that take
root there: and which though weeded out, will grow again. We must not hope or
think to dry clean up the spring of original sin, but the labor returns
upon us in a circle. As in our houses so in our hearts, we sweep them clean
to day, and again to morrow, for then they will be foul again: therefore
mervaile not, if you be kept in continual labor.

Again consider this, that GOD suffers some lusts and infirmities to hang upon
you to humble Ans. 4. Why God suffers sin to remain in his.
you; as he dealt with Paul: he sent that thorn in the flesh, that he might
not be exalted above measure; but be kept little in his own eyes: though he
cures the Ague, yet he suffers some grudgings to remain; that though we go
in the way of his commandments, yet that we go halting, that we may
remember the work of redemption, and be sensible of his mercy in CHRIST.
Likewise he suffers such lusts to haunt ^us, to make us weary of this world,
as Saint Paul, who therefore desired to be dissolved and to be with CHRIST; as
also that we might learn to be merciful and charitable unto others, and to
pity them that have the like infirmities. And therefore though thou fallest,
yet give not over striving. It is Satan's end to have us discouraged: be
importunate with God, and he cannot at lenght but give thee the victory; for as
CHRIST says, if you ask bread, will he give you a Scorpion? if you ask
grace, will he give you up to your lusts? he will not. It is Gods manner to let
his children strive, and to overcome in the end. Jacob wrestled all night till
the dawning of the day, and then he let him have the victory, and blessed him.
The Lord suffers us to strive long; but this is our comfort, that we have a
promise; that if we resist the Devil, he will fly.

And whereas you will say, I find it not: Object. Answ.


The meaning of the promise is not, as if Satan should fly away as thou
should hear of him no more, or that thy lusts should never return upon
thee again; but that if thou will be peremptory, thou shall have the victory
in that particular combat. As if when thou have a fever, if one comes and
tells thee, take such a receipt and thou shall be cured; his meaning is not,
that thou shall so be cured, as never to have Fever again, but that thou
shall be healed for the present: so in that particular combat, thou shall have
the victory.

Oh! but I am still haunted, and I do not overcome? Object.


Strive constantly and conscionably, and though it Answ. Constant striving
overcomes, Revel. 2. 2.
does return again and again, the Lord takes notice of all thy pains and
warring against it: that which he says to the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2. 2.
may be applied to this, I know thy works, and thy labor: though thy
corruptions be too strong for thee; yet if thou strivest, the LORD takes it
for a victory; thou shall not be condemned for it: give not over, but rather
think thus; if all this contention has won so little ground of my lusts,
where should I have been if I had not contended at all? and therefore I must
take yet more pains, and row harder, that at the last I may overcome.

And because this is of general use, both to regenerate and unregenerate,
therefore I will go on to add some more rules and directions, wherein this
pains consists, which we must take in resisting sin.

A third rule or means wherein this labor against evil ways must be
bestowed, is to strive to Rule 3.
take notice of all the ways of God, whereby he labors to turn thee from
thy evil ways, and let them not pass without some impression to that purpose
for which God intends them. God uses not only his Word, but many means else,
to turn men; as by his works, and by many passages of providence he strives
with us, all which should be observed. As it may be, some great cross upon
the commission of a sin, some great dangerous sickness, though not to
death; sometimes he sends great fears and terrors of conscience upon some
sin committed, sometimes an evil report is brought up of us; or he sends
friends to admonish us, or executes some Judgment upon another for the like
sin in our sight. When he meets with thee some way or other, as he met
Balaam, he looks we should understand something by it: and if we neglect
those his dealings with us, he takes it ill at our hands, and so gives us up to
our lusts more and more. Dan. 5. 22. there had been a Judgment brought upon
Nebuchadnezzar in the sight of Belshazzar his Son, which should have been a
means to have turned him: but Thou Belshazzar his Son have not humbled thy
self, though thou knew all this. As if he had said, I did all this to one
near thee in thy sight, that thou might be humbled, and turn to me. This
was the case of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 13. God sent the Prophet to him with signs
and wonders, both in tearing the Altar and withering his hand, yet still he
went on. And verse 23. it is noted and set down on purpose by the Holy Ghost,
that after this Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, etc. as if God had
said, I looked thou should have returned upon the sight of all these
Judgments, but thou would not. So Jeremy 3. 8. you know that Israel was
carried captive long before Judah. I gave Israel a bill of divorcement for her
adultery: yet treacherous Judah feared not; as if he had said, a Judgment on
their next neighbor should have made them to have returned. Therefore do thou
think, what the Lord would by all such passages of providence toward thee,
which are all as warning pieces before the great army, as crackes before the
fall, creveses through which the Lord reveals himself: For you must know,
that God brings men in by his works as well as by his word; and you may take
his works in vain as well as his word, and to let them pass without profit
is to take his Name in vain, for his Name is whatsoever he makes himself
known by: as by these acts he does, and God will not hold him guiltless that
takes his Name in vain. GOD will utterly destroy such a man, for then there is
no remedy. God cuts not his own corn till they be ripe, and all his dealings
with them tend to ripen them; nor does he bring wicked men to destruction till
they be ripe for it, and every such passage does ripen them. Now all men are
for the most part in one of these three conditions: Some take no notice at all
of such passages. God passes by them, and is not seen; and it is said of the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 29. Deuteronomy. 29. 3.
though they had seen great signs and miracles in the wilderness, verse 3.
yet they had not eyes to see them, nor ears to hear them, verse 4. Others
though they do take notice of them, yet the impression they leave behind
them, is but slight, and like a light color not well dyed, the tincture is
Mark 6. 52.
soon worn out, Mark 6. 25. for they considered not the miracle of the
loaves, for the hardness of their hearts. It was spoken upon occasion of their
being amazed at this new miracle, Christ's walking upon the water, and is as if
he had said, if ye had considered the miracle of the loaves, you would not
have wondered thus at my walking on the waters: that had made so deep an
impression on them, as it should by reason of the hardness of their hearts.
But you shall see the case quite otherwise in the Iaylor; his aff^ightment
which the earthquake and the opening of the prison doors had wrought in him,
passed not away as a dream, but left such an impression as brought him home.
And so should all such passages work with us: And that is the third direction.

4 Rule is not simply to go about to resist a sin, Rule 4.
and to turn from the evil of our ways, but to fill the heart with something
that is better; for when lusts are mortified, the stream of our affections are
not dried up, but diverted; and therefore the way is not to go about to stop
the current of a sinful lust, but to turn thy heart into another channel,
set thy heart upon something that is better: Take a crabtree stock that is
sower or bitter, the only way to sweeten it, is to put in a graft of another
nature, which will change it, and by little and little sweeten the constitution
of it.

But you will say, what is to be put in? Quest. Answ.


I answer, go not about it as a moral man, but as a Christian, get
Justification and Sanctification. It is true, it is profitable to be much
humbled for thy sin, and you ought to be so; yet this is not the only way
to heal it, but the heart must be strengthened with the assurance of the
forgiveness of it.

There is a double way to get the heart turned away 2 Ways to turn the heart
from sin.
from sin, the one to see the loathsomeness of that which we turn from, the
other the beauty of the contrary object we turn to. Spend not all your pains
about the first, but do something in the later; the more contrition the better.
But it is not got all at once, it is more increased by assurance and hope of
pardon, when a man begins to have hope he purifies himself. So it is in all
other exercises; it is hope quickens our endeavors. One that is not near a
kingdom, goes not about it: but when he comes to have hopes, he begins to
bestirre himself, toll spem, and toll conatum, therefore get and increase the
hope of the pardon of your sins. Hence the Apostle, Romans 15. 13. prays, Now
the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace, through believing etc. Romans 15.
13
By the words following, it appears to be to strengthen and set them right
concerning al their infirmities: and he points to this as one means, to be
filled with joy and peace in believing; as if he had said, if your hearts were
full of spiritual joy through faith and assurance, your hearts would be
purified, and therefore faith also is said to purify the heart; and besides,
when the blood of Christ is applied by faith, there goes a virtue with it. Heb.
9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through Heb. 9. 14.
the eternal spirit offered up himself to God, purge your consciences from
dead works? And add to this sanctification, set upon that work. Ioh. 17.
Christ has prayed, that they might be preserved from the evil of the world.

But how shall that be done? Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is
truth, that is, when they shall pass through this world full of evil and
corruption, the way to preserve them spotless and untainted is, to have the
heart sanctified. When the heart is well oyled with grace, the dirt of the
world falls off* This is an antidote against corruption. Though in your
passage, you meet with much bad air and infection, this will preserve you.
But then how should we be sanctified? By truth: The more truth you get into
your hearts, the more grace. Grace and Truth goes together, 1 John, and came 1
John.
by CHRIST, who is full of both. Therefore 2 Pet. 3. ult. these two are joined,
grow in grace, and 2 Pet. 3. ult.
in the knowledge of Christ. By truth: but what truth? thy word is truth. Every
truth is not fit to sanctify, as all water will not take soap to scowre, the
word is that truth that does it. Moral truths may do many things in the
soul, they may adorn it, but they cannot heal or purify it. Wash in Jordan,
says the Prophet to leaprous Naaman. There is a special virtue in this Jordan
to heal thee of thy seprofie, that is not in the waters of Damascus. You came
not to the word as to a lecture of Philosophy, but as to that which works
wonders: the power of God goes with it. For withal mark this, that it is not
the word of it self that does it; it does not work as Physic that has a
virtue in it of its own, but the LORD does it by the word; and therefore
CHRIST prays to his father to sanctify them by the word. As a man writes a
letter by a pen, so the Lord sanctifies by the word. To consecrate the heart to
GOD is to sanctify it; and divine truths alone do consecrate the heart to
God, and no other. Let us therefore get much grace and truth into our hearts,
assurance of justification and joy in the Holy Ghost, that by tasting of better
the heart may be taken off from the pleasures of sinful ways; sound joy will
swallow up all other joys, the joys of sin.

Stir up those graces that are in thee: for when Rule 5.
we exhort you to go to God to help you, our meaning is not, that you should
leave all the work: some labor is required of thee. I speak to those who
have some beginnings of grace: you must stir up those graces GOD has given
you. Hence Saint Paul says, 1 Timothy 4. 15. neglect not the gift that was given
thee, as if he had said, Timothy, thou may do much, if thou consider what
ability thou have received; so much spirit; so much liberty; so much
regeneration, so much free will to good. So he says to the Church of
Philadelphia, Thou have a little strength, it is a Talent, therefore use it.
Therefore also he says in Jude 20. build up your selves, and cleanse your
selves, and many the like.

But you will say, how can we do this, seeing Object.
it is the LORD that works in us the will and the deed, and we can do
nothing without the Spirit?

Though the Spirit does it, yet we, in this work Answ.
are to be agents also. Romans 8. 13. If you through the Spirit mortify the
deeds of the flesh; as if he had said, though you do it by the Spirit, yet do
you go about it. We may do something to draw the Spirit nigher us; as we may
do something to grieve the Spirit, and to smoke him out of the house, so to
please the Spirit; as we intend the flame of the Spiritby pure thoughts, so we
put him out by foggy thoughts.

But you will ask, what it is to stir up our graces? Quest.


Stir up thy light, examine thy self of thy evil Answ 1. To stir up grace
what.
ways, endeavor to see them clearly, and confess them, for that is the way
to forsake them, Prove. 28. 13. and despise none of them: with that light thou
have, examine every thing what ever thou have, the least doubt, search it out
to the full. This idle speech, this jollity and vanity of conversation how
little soever it seems, as dalliance in thy thoughts and eyes, overly
performance of duties.

Use that light further to get reason against thy 2
sin. This is to consider a man's ways as David did, to ponder the reasons.
Let a man take pains with his heart from day to day, and consider what reasons
there are by which a man's heart may be taken off from his sin? as against
unlawful gain, to think it but as stealing custom, whereby a man forfeits
all the rest; that what is unlawfully gotten, is as the coal that was carried
in by the Eagle into her nest with a piece of broyled flesh, which consumed her
nest, young, and her self; and all treaties of infirmities, that what is
unlawfully gotten is as a coal carried in by the Eagle into her nest, and the
flesh among the rest to consume all and thy nest. Had not Ahab better have
bee^e without his Vineyard? if pleasure; consider how it is but for a season,
and what bitterness it will bring in the end, and lose the joy which by far
exceeds it: if matter of vainglory, that all thy pains taken is lost, for it
will be all thy reward.

When thou have done this; add a third, namely 3
exercise, to overcome it: as Saint Paul says to Timothy, exercise thy self
to godliness. Think of these things, 1 Timothy 4. 15. if thy failing be in
good, accustom thy self to the duty; if in bad, disuse it, and that will
exceedingly help thee. A Child that could not want the teat for an hour or
two, yet being disused and weaned a while, seeks not after it: and do this
against your bosom sin; that sin that hangs on thee more then the rest,
single out, and do thus to it, as David, Psalm. 18. kept himself from his
iniquity. Psalm 18.


Lastly, observe the manner of their growing Rule 6.
upon you, and how they fight for themselves. The lusts that are in us are
warring lusts, as I told you out of Romans 7. and so Saint James tells us: and so
in Saint Peter, they have a method in fighting, Romans 7.
which observing, you may learn to resist and prevent them.

Observe, when any affection goes beyond the 1
bounds Christ has set it, that then it begins to war and rebel, even as
subjects do; when they break their Sovereigns laws, they begin to rebel: so
when Rachel would needs have children, and nothing would content her else, it
was a warring lust.

Observe the manner how they fight for themselves: 2
the wiles they have in warring: they en deavour to possess the ports, the
senses, suffering no good if they can to be brought in, that may oppose them,
and drawing in by them what may feed and strengthen them, such objects as may
give supply. For when the heart within is full of adultery; the eyes is so
also. They take also away the supply from the contrary side, causing us to
neglect prayer and reading, and such holy duties, as the Philistims disarmed
the Israelites, and would let them have no Smith.

They draw men out with trains from their forts, till they have led them into
an Ambush, as Joshua drew the men of Ai from their Town, and as the fishers
drive the fishes out of their corners, where they are safe, and when they are
wandering in the river, take them in their nets; so do lusts draw out from the
rock of our salvation, from our resolutions, the ordinances, and our callings,
and then surprise us. They lead us into ambush by little and little; As Peter
was drawn to deny his Master by degrees. They will also come upon us at first
but with light skirmishes. Lust comes not upon us with inticement and onsets,
to great sins at first: and we making account of little, and so being
negligent, it comes upon us with the maine battle. David looks but upon
Bathsheba at first, and then is drawn to speech with her, and then to folly.
Therefore observe this, that you may be skillful in war, as the Athenians by
reason of their neighbor enemies; and having observed this to be their manner
to deal thus subtly, as Saul said of David look about thee, and take Saint
Peter's counsel, abstain from them; when once an affection grows violent,
meddle not with it, have nothing to do with it; if thou do, thou admittest
an enemy into thy soul, that will betray it: as David when he had such a
desire to the water the Soldiers fetched him, he would not drink it, but powered
it out upon the ground: so if once thy mind be set upon such a sport, or
company, if affections once exceed their measure, meddle not with them.

And then stand upon thy watch also; for though thou have armor on, yet if
thou watchest not, it will do thee no good: as Saul though he was armed, yet
being asleep, David came and took his Spear away; therefore be sober and
watch, and that thou may not fall asleep, keep thy self sober, and
endeavor to weaken that law in thy mem bers that fights against you, by doing
something. A law not execured is antiquated, and weakened, and wears out, and
custom strengthens a law; the less obedience you yield to these lusts, the
more you weaken them: when these lusts would have thee omit such a duty, if
thou yieldest to it, thou strengthenest it; if not, thou weakenest it.

And again, a law is weakened when it is not cared for: care not for their
threats; and when the threatenings of a law are contemned, they lose their
force. If sin tell thee thou will lose such a friend, incur such dangers,
care not; and that weakens the force of it.

And if thou can not do it by reason, do it by force, by a strong
resolution; resistenda sunt, non subtilitate, sed impetu. Overcome the desires
of sin by a contrary resolution.

And I will be merciful to their sins, etc. THese that follow here are the
particular instances wherein he would especially hear their prayers.

If they humble themselves and pray, whatsoever their sins are, God will be
merciful unto them.

Now the reasons why he says he will be merciful to their sins (for so
according to the former translation I rather read it.)

That the Lord hereby might take away all objections: 1
for some might say, their sins were exceeding great and many, and many times
reiterated; why but all these are but fit objects for mercy, which triumphs over
them all, as a mighty Sea swallows them up as mole hills.

To take away that conceit, that all their humbling 2
themselves, and prayers, and new obedience here required, is not required as a
condign satisfaction for their sins: no says the Lord, I will do it merely
out of mercy; though not without these, yet not for these. There is a secret
popery to think something must be given, some satisfaction must be made, as if
God else would not forgive, unless they satisfy for themselves, etc. and so
balance their sins. No, it is mere mercy, free forgiveness.

To set an high price upon this gift, the pardon 3
of sin, I will be merciful and forgive them. As if he had said, remember,
that you are worthy to be destroyed, and not able to pay the least farthing.
But it is of my mere pity, that thou art forgiven. So that the matter we have
in hand, is a gracious promise of mercy and forgiveness, which of all points
else I fall most willingly upon, which will make men come in, if any thing will
do it. It is the proclamation of pardon, that must bring in pirates; when as
the proclamation of rebellion drives them away. Men are more easily overcome
with kindness then with threats; it is the Gospel melts and makes men vile
in their own eyes.

But then some will say, that it is not necessary, Object.
that the preaching of the Law should go before, if the Gospel does it.

Yes, the preaching of the Law is notwithstanding as a preparative. In all that
are brought up in Answ.
the Church, there is some knowledge in the Law that praecedes, but it is the
Gospel that softneth the heart first; as ice is broken in pieces with hot
water as well as with hammers, so is the heart with the Gospel, as well as with
the hammer of the Law, and indeed makes that knowledge of the Law that
proceeded to be operative, and sets it a work: so as the Law in its true
working cannot be without the Gospel, nor the Gospel without the Law: so as
to a perfect work of the Gospel the knowledge of the Law must precede.

Whatsoever a man's sins are, if he be truly humbled for them and forsake
them, they shall be forgiven him.

This is the maine point you may observe by the way, that the Gospel was as
fully preached to the Jews, as to us. So you see it was here, they had the
same way of being saved, that we have, as great mercy promised and dispensed.
Only these great mysteries of the Gospel wherein grace and mercy is displayed,
were not opened so to them as unto us; they had the promises of forgiveness as
fully and clearly, but knew not the grounds of them; as Christ's incarnation,
death, and resurrection, as we do; nor those glorious privileges in
particular which we have by Christ. For the proof of the maine point, take that
one place to make it good to you, Esaias 1. 18. Come now, and let us reason
together, says the LORD: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow; though they be red as crimson: ^hey shall be as wool. The
Prophet had exhorted them to learn to do well, etc. But the people might
object: What shall we be the nearer for all this? if we be such great
sinners as you have even now declared us to be? to prevent this the Prophet
tells them, what though their sins be great and bloody sins, of the deepest
dye of guilt? (there are many kinds of red, but crimson and scarlet are the
highest) yet you shall be as perfectly cleansed from all your sins as if you
should see scarlet turned as white as snow, or crimson as white as wool, and
none of the former die remaining: and when he tells this to them, mark his
expression, Come, let us reason together, as if he had said, this is a point
requires strong reasonings to persuade you to believe it; and indeed it is a
hard thing truly to believe the pardon of their sins; and the time will come
when you will find it to be so: We will therefore set the Lord and your
consciences together, and you shall see how the Lord reasons for himself,
and how he will make this go^d.

We will first prove it to you from all his attributes.

1 From his truth, the Lord has said it, and this is argument enough, to
persuade you: And therefore Rule 1. From God.
having made this promise of forgiveness in the verse before, that he would
subdue their iniquities and cast their sins into the depths of the Sea, he
adds, thou 1 From his truth. Mica. 7. ult.
wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have
sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. As if he had said, you must rest
persw G^d of this: for he has not only promised it, but has sworn it, and
that oath not taken lately, but of old; there is an oath to it, and an old one,
an oath that has many witnesses, Abraham and Jacob, and all the fathers that
have been since: and will he not, think you, be as good as his word? and
that Acts 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets Acts 10. 43.
witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins. It is Saint Peter's speech to Cornelius; says Peter, we
deliver this from God to you, and not only we that are the Apostles say this,
but to this truth do all the Prophets, Isay, Jeremy, and all the rest bear
witness. Now when the Lord has said such things, and made an absolute
promise, he expects you should believe it. It is a greater sin then you
imagine, not to lay hold upon such promises. See how the Lord reasons it 1 John
5. 9. 10, 11. If we receive the witness 1 Ioh. 5. 9. 10, 11.
of men, the witness of God is greater; for this is the witness of God etc.
He that believes not God, has made him a liar. As if he should say, will you
not believe? If a man that is of an honest disposition should promise you a
thing, you would believe him: and will you not believe me? As if a man had more
truth in him then I have: yea further, you make the Lord a liar, if you believe
not this his record of his Son, what is this record? why says the Apostle, I
will repeat it again, The Lord has given us eternal life, and this life is
in his Son, that is, whosoever believes and takes CHRIST, his sins shall be
forgiven, and he shall have life. It is the pardon that brings life to the
condemned traitor.

2 But though he has said, this is engaged sufficiently, 2 From his mercy.
and this is much to help our faith, yet when we shall further hear and know
him to be one of a merciful nature and gracious disposition, we will go the
more willingly to him. Therefore add to this, how the Lord expresses his
nature to us, Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord God, merciful, Exodus 34. 6, 7.
gracious and long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin. As if he should have said to Moses, would
thou know the very inward disposition and frame of my soul? this is my nature,
to be merciful and gracious, etc. this is the Lords Idea, for his end here was
to express himself unto us; know that this is his nature, and this will
strengthen our faith in the promises, for all his promises do but flow from
this nature of his, and receive their strength therefrom, and he is rich in
mercy, because it is his nature.

3 Add to this the attribute of his wisdom, and 3 From his wisdom.
that will also help us to believe his mercies. GOD that has made these
promises is exceeding wise, and knows with whom he has to do, he knows,
that original corruption that is in us, and is the mother of all sin, he
knows our infirmities, and what is in our hearts, as he that made us knows
what we are, as he that makes any thing knows the inward frame of it. It is
no strange thing for him to see us fall into sin. Therefore Psalm. 78. 38, 39.
after he had spoken of those strange Psalm 78. 38, 39.
rebellions, of the people of Israel into which they fell after their coming
out of Egypt, yet says he, He being full of compassion, destroyed them not,
but forgave their iniquity, and why? because he remembered they were but flesh.
And indeed, one would wonder how the LORD could forgive so obstinate a people,
that had such experience of his power and mercy by those great works which he
wrought before them in bringing them out of Egypt, yet he did, because he
remmebred and wisely considered what ingredients went to make up their natures;
he remembered they were but flesh. So Psalm 103. 13, 14. Psalm. 103. 13 14
the former part of that Psalm, is nothing else, but an expression of promises
of forgiveness, and in the 14. verse he gives this as the reason of all, for
he knows our frame, he remembereth that we are dust: 14.
he knows whereof we are made, and therefore is exceeding merciful.

4 Whereas there is one Attribute from which 4 From his justice.
you object against the pardon of their sins, that the Lord notwithstanding
is just, and this terrifies you and puts you off: even from this we may fetch
an argument to strengthen our faith herein; for know that the Lord is therefore
ready and willing to forgive, because he is just. 1 John 1. 9. If we 1 John
1. 9.
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us. This is the
ground of all our comfort, that he eis just and faithful, for is he not
engaged by promise, and is he not faithful to keep his promise? Again, has
he not been satisfied and paid for our sins by CHRIST? and his justice will
not suffer him to require a second payment. It is just now with him to forgive,
faithfulness has reference to his promises, justice to that blood of CHRIST
the ransom received, which cleanses us from all our sins.

5 If all these will not serve to persuade our hearts 5 From our readiness to
forgive.
to believe, the Lord descends a little lower, and helps us out with an
argument of his readiness to pardon, from the consideration of what is in our
selves, consider how you would deal with your children. Psalm. 103. 13. Like as
a father pitieth his Psalm. 103 13
children, so the Lord them that fear him. If a child that is yours, offend
you an hundred times, yet if he come in and humble himself, you will pardon
him: And will not God, when his people humble themselves? We use but such
arguments as God himself does, and do but set him and your consciences
together, to reason the case: But you will object again, and say, it is
possible for a child so to offend, as that a father will not nor cannot forgive
him. True, but the Psalmists meaning is, not as if GOD would pardon no more,
then an earthly father; but on the contrary, if you that are earthly fathers
can do so much, I that am an infinite Lord God and not man, can do much more,
who is Omnipotent and can do whatsoever he will, and shows his omnipotency in
pardoning. I compare with this, Esaias 55. 9. My thoughts are not as your
thoughts. What though your sins be great and in their own thoughts
unpardonable, and you think them greater then can be forgiven? but my
thoughts says GOD, are not as your thoughts; he speaks this of pardoning; but
as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my thoughts above your
thoughts, and my ways above yours, in multiplying to pardon. Though you could
not forgive, nay though you cannot think or imagine how such transgressions
should be forgiven, yet I can forgive them.

A second sort of arguments is taken from the Reas. 2. From the means of
conveying forgivenes.
means and instrument by which forgiveness is conveyed. We are come to JESUS
the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks
better things then the blood of Abel. Hebrews 12. 24. He speaks this as an
encouragement to their faith, and it is as if he Heb. 22. 24.
had said, consider how the blood of Abel, though but the blood of a poor man,
cried so loud that it came up to heaven, that it brought down vengeance upon
Cain, how loud then shall CHRIST'S blood speak? What is it able to procure for
us? which speaks better things, that is, for mercy (which God is more ready to
hear the cry for, then for vengeance) and this cry is not of the blood of an
ordinary man, as Abel was, but of the blood of his own Son, to which purpose
compare with this that place, Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the Heb. 9. 14.
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself without
spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works? As in the other place he
compares it with Abels blood, so here with the blood of Bulls and Goats; which
in the old law served by Gods appointment for the outward purification of the
flesh, how much more, how infinitely transcendently more above our thoughts or
imaginations, shall the blood of the Son of God be able to purge your
consciences? we not able to conceive, nor he to express; he only says, how
much more, etc. and he backeth it with two Reasons, which put together, show
the transcendency of that sufficiency in Christ's blood to cleanse us: the first
from the eternal Spirit, whereby he offered up himself; it was not the blood
or sacrifice of a mere man, but of God: which sacrifice was in it self
without spot.

There are three objections we usually make against 3 Objections from our sins.
our selves by reason of our sins.

1. That they are so many. 2. So great. 3. That they are reiterated and often
fallen into. Answered,

Now the sprinkling of the blood of Christ thus offered is sufficient to
cleanse your consciences from, and to take away all these, Ezekiel. 36. 25. then
will I Ezekiel. 36. 25.
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. The blood of Christ is
the water there meant, which cleanses from sin and filthiness; and from
all, though never so many; and from filthiness, and idols, from such sins,
though never so great. Ah! but I have also fallen often into them, Zach. 13. 1.
His blood is therefore compared to a fountain set open for sin and for
uncleanness; not a cisterne, but a fountain, a continual spring perpetually
running to cleanse us; so that as there is a spring of sin in us, so as we
are defiled again and again, so there is a spring of virtue in his blood, to
cleanse us, never to be dried up.

The last reason is taken from the freeness of the covenant which God has
made with mankind, if Reas. 3. From the freeness of Gods covenant. John 7. 37.
any man be a thirst, yea if any man will come, let him come and drink of the
waters of life freely. See the manner how it is set down, John 7. 37. In the
last day, a great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink: he makes a proclamation for all to
come, as also, Rev. 21. 6. and 22. 17. where he makes the like general Revel.
21. 6. ver. 22. 17.
invitation and adds, that they shall have it freely; so the tenor of the
covenant runs: that if any thirst (those indeed that do not, have nothing to
do with it) let him come and take freely; that is, I will bestow it without any
other condition, but coming, without which no man can partake of it, and
thirsting, without which no man will come, or prize it.

The consideration of which covenant therefore should move us and help us to
believe the truth of this point, that whatsoever our sins are, yet if we
humble our selves, etc. they shall be pardoned.

Before I come to apply this to any man; I must Use. Who are excluded from
pardon Exodus 34. 6.
exclude those whom the Lord excludes, or rather who exclude themselves. Still
remember what is the last letter of his name. Exodus 34. 6. That he will not
hold the wicked innocent. Thou that art a carnal man, have nothing to do with
this childrens bread; thou art a Dog: which may be made good to thy
conscience, out of 1 Pet. 2. ult. Like the dog 1 Pet. 2. ult.
thou returnest to thy vomit: For in thy sickness and in thy distress did
thou not make many promises and resolutions against thy ways and courses? and
after thy recovery, did thou not return to them again with as much
greediness as ever?

2 Again, thou art such an one as do not thirst after these promises;
carest no more for them then for thy old shoes; these precious promises (which
as is said before) contain in them most rich and precious promises, and none
shall ever obtain them that does not in some measure of truth prize them above
all things whatsoever. Thou that never had thy heart broken with the
apprehension of sin and Gods wrath can not come to thirst after them, and so
have nothing to do with this water of life. A man that is still whole hearted
ever since he was borne, and never affrighted with sin and wrath, may hear
these promises spoken of, but has nothing to do with them.

3 They that are hypocrites, are also excluded, for they are to have their
portion in hell fire, and therefore whilst remaining such, have nothing to do
with the promises. Now an hypocrite is one that is not willing to omit holy
duties altogether, and yet not willing to do them thoroughly, one that like the
Eagle soars high in fair pretenses, but still has the prey that is below in
his eye, and will stoop for it upon occasion, eying preferment, credit, riches
etc. all the while: Thou may be white in thine own eyes, and washed before a
Communion, or so, as a Swine may be washed as well as a Sheep, but yet the
Swinish nature remains.

4 Or it may be thou art a wicked man.

But you will say, who are those wicked men? Object. Answ. wicked men who,


I will give you a description of them, which no man shall refuse, they are
such as hate the Lord, nor can any man think much, if he be called a wicked
man, coming within the compass of this character; for it is the note given in
the second commandment. Now when we hear this, every man will be ready to
say, I hope my condition is good, I am none of them that hate the Lord: but
know, there are many thousands that think well of themselves, who yet when it
comes to the trial will be found to hate the Lord. And therefore to try thee
in this, give me Signs of such as hate God.
leave to ask thee but a few questions.

1 Do thou not hate the law? do thou not wish that the Law were not so
strict, and that it gave more liberty? Let an unregenerate man try himself by
this, and he will find such a disposition in him, that he desires that the law
would give him leave to commit such and such a sin; he esteems of the Law as a
thing that is contrary to him, and therefore their complaint of godly men is,
that their ways are contrary to ours, in the book of Wisdom. What ways?
the ways of the law: for where is contrariety, there is hatred; and if they
hate the law, they hate the lawgiver God, for the law is the express image of
God.

2. Again, I would ask thee, if this be not also thy disposition, that thou
have no great delight to be where the Lord is? thou have not any delight in
holy duties, otherwise than as custom, and natural conscience have made them
familiar to thee; nor to be in the company of the Saints (for where two or
three of them are, there God is among them) but when thou art among them, thou
art as it were out of thy element; if they be such as are formal like thy
self, thou can away with them; but if they be holy, and the holiness of God
appear in them, thou delightest not in them; thou could, it may be, be
among the Saints, if they hold their tongues; but let God shine in them, then
thou can not endure to be there.

3 Again, do thou hate those that are like the Lord? for if thou do, thou
hate the Lord himself: for as we try our love to the Lord, by our love to
the brethren; so our hatred also. Is there a secret dislike of them, though
thou know not why, an antipathy, though happily thou can not give a reason
of it? It is because God has put an enmity, and there no man can put amity:
all endowments, sweetness of converse and disposition, eminency of parts in
the Saints, will not take away the enmity that is in wicked men against them.
David was a Poet, a soldier, a man of excellent parts, wise and valiant, yet
had abundance of hatred amongst men for his goodness.

4 Again, do thou not desire that there were no God? Could thou not be
content to live for ever in this world, so that thou were happy here, and so
there were no hell? Could thou not be content that there were no heaven, no
GOD, no Judge at the last? If every unregenerate man would examine himself, he
should find this in himself. Now if any wish that such an one were not, that
he were sublatus demedio, it is a sign he hates him: for that is the property
of hatred, to desire the utter removal of the things hated.

5 Again, do thou not lie in some sin which thou know is a sin? Now
every man that lies in a sin, a known sin, fears GOD as a Judge. Let him
be a thief, and he will fear the Judge, and whom a man thus fears, he
hates, Quem metuunt, oderunt, he that walks in darkness hates the light, and
God who is the author of that light. Do thou therefore live in some evil way
or other, wherein thou do allow thy self? thou have no interest in these
promises: only those that claim interest in the promises, who make conscience
of all their ways, dare not omit the least duty, nor perform it slightly.

Lastly, consider, art thou not one of the foolish virgins, deferring
repentance, not caring to provide oil in time, but think thou can do it
time enough at death? and, I will come in ere I die, like the sluggard in the
Proverbs, tumbling in the bed of thy sin securely, and loath to rise, turning
like the door on the hinges; but still remaining upon the same hinges. The
Lord has said, Deuteronomy. 29. that Deuteronomy. 29.
he will not be merciful to such a man, but his anger shall smoke against him.

But you will say, what do you preach damnation to me? will you leave us
desperate?

I answer you, we preach damnation to you whilst you are in such courses, and
would make you despair of your selves, to drive you out of your selves unto
Christ, and it were an hour well spent, to put you out of hope; but what? may
we have no hope left? None, in the estate you stand, but that of the
hypocrite, which perishes with him: for if thy hope were true, it would
purify thy heart, as S. John speaks. But I may pray? But if thou continuest
in thy sins, thy sins shall out cry thy prayers, and at the day of thy
death, when the least interest of these promises will be worth a world, it
will be said to thee, that thou had nothing to do with them, and there was
a time when God called upon thee, and thou would not: and therefore then,
though thou cry to him, God will not hear thee.

But if there be any brokenhearted sinner desiring Use 2. To Trust perfectly
in Gods mercy.
to fear the Lord, and serve him sincerely, that have this witness in their
consciences, that though they do not that good they would, yet they strive
against all sins, allow themselves in none, whether small or great; to you I
say, that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Trust perfectly on the grace brought
unto you by the revelation of Jesus Christ, (...), 1 Pet. 1. 13.
trust not by halves, but trust perfectly: if I had bidden you trust in your
sanctification; you might have done it imperfectly, because your sanctification
is but imperfect; but seeing it is the free grace of God is brought to you as a
rock to trust and rely upon; trust perfectly upon it; commit all your weight
and burden to it; Heb. 6. 18. God, when he made the covenant of grace, took
an oath to that end, that we might have strong consolation; this is an argument
commonly forgotten among Christians, and so they want that strong consolation
which they might have. Do you think it a small matter, to take an oath of God
partly and in any degree in vain? God has sworn that you might have strong
consolation, and he would have it so strong, that when Satan sets upon you, it
may be as a strong fortress to hold out against all assaults; why is your
faith so weak then? what are the impediments? Impediments, to this trust. 1
Mistake in the covenant. Romans 4. 5.


1 One is, that we are deceived in the covenant: has not the Lord promised to
justify the ungodly, and commanded us to believe on him that justifies the
ungodly? Romans 4. 5. and bidden us come with an empty hand? and thou come
with an handful of humiliation, and say, that thou durst not come before,
and now I can come better in: the more thou have in thy hand, the less firm
is thy hold. A man that is in danger to be drowned, cannot take hold of a
Cable cast to save his life, if he keeps any thing in his hand, an empty hand
takes the fastest hold: thy humiliation if true, will empty thee of all self
conceit: therefore if thou through humiliation have nothing of thine own to
trust to, thou art the fitter object for mercy. Be not always poring
downwards on thy sins, but look up to God, Heb. 6. They have strong
consolation, Heb. 6. 18, 19
who have fled for refuge to the hope laid before us, which hope we have as an
anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the veil, Verse 18, 19. This our hope is not said to be any thing in our
selves, but is as a refuge which we fly unto out of our selves, and is laid
before us, grows not within from what is within us, and is from above: now by
hope, we are not to understand the thing hoped for, or the grace of hope in
us, but that sure promise of God ratified by an oath; this is the object of our
hope, and so called our hope, that is it which is our refuge, and which is laid
before us, and proceeds from Gods own breast and nature; which if we anchor
upon, we shall have strong consolation, both for surenesse of not failing us,
and for steadiness establishing our hearts; but whilst we fly for refuge to
any thing in our selves, or cast anchor upon it, we are tossed with every wave.

2 Our daily infirmities, they also are a great 2 Daily infirmities.
impediment. A man thinks, if I had faith, that would so purify my heart, as
I should not fall thus often as I do; which whilst I do, how can I have such
strong consolation? for this I say to all upright hearted Christians, that
their infirmities should not dishearten their faith and consolation, but they
should rather labor to strengthen their sanctification. Say with thy self,
because my sins are and have been greater than other men's, therefore I will
labor more for sanctification hereafter, I will love more than others, and be
more serviceable for the time to come; but say not, therefore I will doubt or
despair of Gods mercy. 3 Supposed want of humiliation.


3. Hinderance to their laying hold of the promises of forgiveness, is a
conceit of their want of humiliation, as if they were not humbled enough; but
if it be so much as brings thee home to Christ, if thou thirst for Christ, so
as nothing will content thee till thou have him; fear not to lay hold, this is
enough, stand not upon the measure.

Lastly, it may be thou have not prayed enough for assurance of forgiveness,
and therefore want 4 Want of Prayer for pardon.
it. It is here put in as a condition, if my people pray, and among other
things for this, to forgive your sins, and to give them the assurance of it.
All the arguments in the world cannot persuade the heart of this, nothing but
the spirit of adoption; and can so great a mercy be obtained without fervent
prayer? therefore go to God, and entreat his favor, and though he deferres,
yet continue in prayer: for it may be the Lord also withholds it, because he
would have thee set an high prize upon it: which thou would not do, if thou
should obtain it easily: but be not discouraged, continue thou to pray
still, and in the end thou shall have it with a full hand.

Hear you me, all ye that are upright and sincere in heart, here is your
comfort, continue thus to seek Gods face, and all your sins shall be as if
they had never been committed by you: and what is said of the sins of Israel
and Judah, Ier. 50. 20. The iniquity of Jacob shall be sought for, and there
Ier. 50. 20.
shall none be found: so shall thine be in the day when they shall be sought
for: Is not this a great and unspeakeable mercy? A man shall be as if he had
never committed sin: even as if he were as innocent as Adam was in Paradise.
Object.


But you will object and say, can sins that have been committed cease to have
been committed, or cease to have been sins?

Answer: it is true, that which is once done can Answ. The efficacy of sin taken
away in forgiveness
never be undone. All the acts remain as things once done, so as it may be
said, they were committed, and were thus heinous; when therefore it is said,
there shall be none, the meaning is, they shall be of no efficacy, they shall
never be able to do you hurt, as our Savior said to his Disciples, Luke 10.
19 Luke 10. 19.
You shall tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and they shall not hurt you, so I
may say of sin, it shall not hurt you, because the sting is taken away in and by
Christ; or as that fire in Nebuchadnezzars furnace, it had power enough to
burn others, but not so much as to singe an hair of the three children,
because Christ was with them; so those sins which would sting and shall sting
others to death, because of their impenitence, yet shall do thee no hurt, but
fall off like the Viper off from Saint Paul's hands, but not hurt thee. It is an
opinion of some, that GOD can see no sin in his children, because, they say
there are none (when a man is once in Christ) son to be seen: But that is not
the meaning of that saying, God sees no iniquity in Jacob: they are there, but
as in a debt-booke crossed and cancelled though the lines be drawn over, yet
the sums may be read, yet so as they cannot be enacted, or sued for, because
they are crossed and cancelled. A falling star loses its light by little and
little, and when it comes to the earth, it goes quite out: so when sins begin
to fall from their proper element and Sphere, that is an unregenerate heart,
where they had dominion and reigned and moved as in their Orb, the light and
influence of it decays, and shall at length both in the guilt and power of it
wholly vanish.

I will also add to this, this caution: the Saints must know that for all
this, their sins are retained, Caution. Sins of the Saints retained till
actual repentance.
till they actually repent again, the Lords wrath is kindled against them, and
they may feel such effects of it as may make their hearts ache. Thus the Lord
met Moses, and would have slain him in the Inn for neglecting that ordinance
of circumcision; the sin was not forgiven till he had humbled himself, and
amended his fault; so GOD was angry with the Israelites that fled before their
enemies, till the accursed thing was taken away: So when David sinned in the
matter of Vriah, it is said in the end of that Chapter 2 Samuel 11. 27. The thing
that David had done displeased the Lord, and there was the wrath 2 Samuel 11. 27.
of a father against him, though not of an enemy: and when was it that GOD was
well pleased with him again, but when he had humbled himself and repented?
Therefore that you may have strong consolation, search and examine your hearts
and lives, see that there be no way of wickedness unrepented of in you,
before you apply all these promises, which then you may do to your comfort.

Somewhat is now to be said, even to those Use. 3 Exhortation to be humbled.
whom before we excluded; for the end of our preaching is not to shut them for
ever out. If the LORD will be merciful to our sins, if we be humbled;
there is an open door for those that are without, a ground, to exhort them to
come in. Come, and welcome. God is exceeding merciful, and ready to forgive,
and receive you. If any thing will draw men in, they are the promises of mercy;
the Hue and Cry makes the Thief to fly away the faster.

The Proclamation of pardon brings the Rebels in, and what greater motive can
we use than this, that whatever your sins are or have been, never so great
in themselves and aggravated with never so many circumstances, yet if you will
come in and humble your selves, and turn to God, God will be merciful to
you. No matter what thy sins have been: all the matter is, what thy humility
is, what thy resolutions to confess and forsake thy sins are; thy have not
gone beyond that price which has been paid for them: And God will not only
pardon their sins but also leave a blessing behind. If you indeed should come
thus to any man whom you have offended, he would say, what are you not ashamed
to come to me having wronged me thus, to look me in the face? not to ask
forgiveness only, but to ask such a kindness, such a favor at my hands
also? how could you have the face to do it? But the Lord, he never gives that
answer, for he is not as man, Ier. 3. 11. Though if a man put away his wife,
and she becomes Ier. 3. 11.
another man's, he will not receive her again; yet return to me, says God.
It is possible for men to commit such sins, that men cannot forgive, but God
can pardon any.

You know the pernicious counsel which Achitophel gave to Absolon; to go in
to his fathers wives, to make an irrecoverable breach between his father and
him, judgeing it such an injury, as David would never put up, yet return to
me says God. God can pardon any, I will scatter thy sins as a mist, and
thine iniquity as a cloud.

Some sins are small as mysts, some more great and grosser, as a cloud. Gods
mercy is able to scatter both. Do not say, oh I had been a happy man, if I
had not fallen into this or that sin, I had then been pardoned. It Is true,
that in respect of Gods dishonor, it had been better thou had not committed
it; but yet this I will say, that in respect of obtaining pardon thou may
be happy notwithstanding: if thou humble thy self, this sin will not bar
thee from happiness; but thou may be in as good a condition after thou art
come home as any other whose sins have been smaller: and know that when thou
art once come home, God looking upon thee in Christ, all thy sins displease
him not so much, as thy repentance in and through Christ pleases him.

But how shall a man be persuaded of this Gods Quest.
readiness to forgive?

Consider that place, As I live, says the Lord, I will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he turn Answ. Gods readiness to forgive.
from his wickedness and live: He has taken an oath for it, that he
delights more in saving than in destroying: and you may believe him. Consider
also what Christ was wont to do in the days of his flesh: and he is still as
merciful an high Priest as ever: None were more welcome to him than Publicans
and Harlots, that came with repentance to him; and he is as ready to receive us
now as them then.

I doubt not but that Christ is willing, but what Object.
will God the Father do?

It is certain, that he is not willing to have his Resp.
Sons blood spilt in vain, which should be of none effect, if such sinners
as you are should not be saved: Hereby the blood of Christ is improved, that
it is sprinkled on many for great sins. Think not therefore that God is
backward to pardon, Psalm. Psalm. 130. 3, 4
130. 3, 4. There are two arguments more to help us in this, If he should
mark what is done amiss, who should stand? none should be saved. Now it is
not his will that all flesh should perish, and therefore he will not take the
advantage to cast men clean off for their sins; again, none else would
worship him. There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared: It is his
full purpose to have some servants to fear and worship him. Yea shall I go
further? God is not only ready to forgive, but desirous of it, yea he is glad
at the heart when a great sinner does come in: which is noted to us in the
Parable of the lost sheep, and the lost groat: how did the woman rejoice for
the finding of her groat, and the Shepherd for his sheep? And likewise in the
Parable of the lost Son, how glad was he when he heard that his Son was
coming home, that yet had lived riotously and spent his goods? it was to show,
that GOD was so affected, when a great sinner returns to him. Besides, he does
not only say, if you will come, I keep open house, I will not shut you out;
but inviteth them, calls them; yea more, sends his ministers to fetch them
in; yea more, entreats, beseeches, commands, threatens.

But you will say, is it possible, that I should Object.
be forgiven, that have committed so many sins, so great, so heinous, and
continued so long in them?

Yes, it is possible for you. Mark that place, Answ. 1 Cor. 6 9.
1 Cor. 6. 9. He reckons up as great sins, as can be named. And such were
some of you, but now you are washed. You see what kind of people there were
forgiven, whence we may gather, that those that are guilty of those sins now
may be forgiven as well as then, such were some of you. Whosoever thou art, it
is no matter what thou have been; all the matter is what thou will be. Put
case, any of the old Prophets should come to thee, or any man in particular,
and say, will thou be content now to turn to GOD? if thou will, all thy
sins shall be washed away, and thou shall be made an heir of Heaven: it
would cause him that has any ingenuity, to relent and say, LORD, can thou
now be so merciful to me as to forgive me after all this? lo LORD, I will
come in and turn unto thee.

I ask thee this question, whether art thou content to quit all thy sins
presently upon assurance of being received, if thou do? if thou answerest no,
art thou not worthy to be destroyed? if yes, is not this great comfort?

But some may say, if heaven gate stand thus wide open, I may come and be
welcome at any time. Thou vile wretch, that dare to have such a Refusal of
the offer of grace dangerous.
thought! Do thou not know, that every such refusal of such an offer is so
dangerous, as it may put thee into hazard of never having the like again? If
the gate of heaven stood thus always open, why then did God swear in his
wrath of some Israelites, that they should never enter into his rest? and what
is the reason that God said of those that were invited to the feast, but
refused to come, that they should never taste of it? The reason is there given,
it is said, the master of the feast was full of wrath at the refusal of his
offer, both because his love and kindness was despised: that fills a man
with indignation, and so the Lord: and also because the thing offered was of so
much price; it being the kingdom of heaven, and the precious blood of Christ.
Therefore whenever such an offer is made and refused, God is exceeding angry.
There goes an axe and a sword with this offer, to cut down every tree that
will not bring forth good fruit. Say not when you hear of this offer, I am
glad there is such a thing, I will accept of it another time, but it comes too
soon for me now. Consider this, that the end of the coming of the Lord
Jesus, was not only to save the souls of men; if only so, then indeed this
might have been done at any time, even at the last: but his end also was,
Titus 2. 14. That he mtght purify to himself a Tit. 2. 14.
peculiar people, zealous of good works,' which is a greater end than that
which went before in the verse, to redeem us from all iniquity, to purchase to
himself a people that should serve him in their life time: and can thou
think, that thou that have served thy lusts all thy life time, shall yet be
accepted at death? It is a common saying with you, that if a man be called at
the eleventh hour, he shall be received: it is true, if thou be called then
first, and not before, as the thief, who was not called before, was then
accepted: but what if thou have been called before, and have not accepted, but
put off till death? thy case then will be exceeding dangerous. Again, I ask
thee, what is it makes thee resolve to come in at death? If love to Christ,
then it would sooner; if to thy self, how shall such conversion be accepted?

Come we now to the last words. And I will heal their land.WE have these three
points may be observed out of them.

1. That all calamities and troubles proceed from Doct. All calamity is from
sin.
sin; this I note from the order of the words: he first forgives their
sins, then heales their land.

2. That if calamities be removed, and sins be not forgiven; they are
removed in judgment, not in mercy.

3. That if sin be once forgiven, the calamity will soon be taken away.

For the first, all calamity is from sin, troubles from transgression. In the
chain of evils, sin is the first link that draws on all the rest; as
grace is in the chain of blessings and comforts. Consider this in all kinds of
judgments, which we may reduce to three heads. 3 Kind of Iudgemen^^


1. Temporal calamities, about the things of this life, they are all from
sin, both public and private. What was the reason of Salomons troubles? The
Lord stirred up an adversary against him, because he departed from the Lord,
and had set up idolatry: so the sword departed not from David's house, because
of his sin with Bathsheba, and the murder of Vriah. So Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 2 Chronicles 16
the Prophet tells him, Hence forth thou shall have war, because thou have not
rested on the Lord. I could give a hundred instances for this.

2. Sort of judgments are spiritual, which are much more grievous than the
former; when a man is given up to his lusts, and to hardness of heart: and
this proceeds from some other sins that went before; and it is a sure rule,
that you never see a man given up to work uncleanness with greediness, or to
such open scandalous sins, but the first rise of it was his unconscionable
walking with God in secret, as the Apostle Paul says of the Gentiles. Romans 1.
20. to 24. That because when they To. 1. 20, 24.
knew God, they glorified him not as God, God gave them up to vile affections,
So Psalm. 80. 11, 12. But my people would not bearken, and Israel would none of
me: Psalm. 80. 11, 12.
So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own
counsels. As if he had said, I used all the means: they still refused, and
would none of me, and therefore I gave them up. See thou a man given up to a
lust, his heart so cemented to it, as he cannot live without it? know this is
in judgment to him for some unconscionable walking before, and not practicing
according to his knowledge.

3 There is yet a judgment beyond these, when the Lord forsakes the creature,
and withdrawes himself from a man; which though men do little account of, is
the fearefullest of all others. The loss of Gods presence is a loss
unvaluable. Take a man that makes wealth or honor his God, take that prop from
him, and how does his heart sink within him? how much more, when the true God
shall be departed from a man? that God that is the God of all comfort, if he
be withdrawn, the heart sinks into a bottomless pit of horror; as when the
Sun is gone, all things run into darkness. All comfort is from some measure or
degree of Gods presence, though men do not take notice of it; which when it is
taken away, there remains nothing but horror and despair: when God was
departed from Saul, 1 Samuel 16. he from that day 1 Samuel 16.
ran into one error after another, in his government, till he was
destroyed; and the cause of this was sin; he had cast off the Lord, and
therefore the Lord rejected him. The like was Caines case, Genesis 4. His
judgment was, to be banished from Genesis 4.
the presence of the Lord, which he acknowledges to be an insupportable
punishment, which he was not able to bear.

When any trouble is upon thee, stick not in the Use 1. To see sin in all
troubles.
rind and ba^ke of it, but look through it and beyond it, to the inward root
of it; look to sin as the cause, and thou shall find it so: it may be the
immediate cause and instrument may be some outward thing, some enemy of thy
disgrace, some sickness, etc. but who has permitted them to work? is it not
the Lord? and what is the motive of his permission but sin? men may have many
several motives to do this or. that, but nothing moves the Lord but sin and
grace. When an enemy comes upon thee, say not, this man is the cause of this
evil, but the Lord has suffered him to work, and sin has occasioned this
suffering, 2 Chronicles. 12. 5, 7. Shishak was but the violl, through 2 Chr. 12. 5,
6, 7.
whose hands God powered out his wrath; so I may say, sickness is but the
violl, it is the Lords wrath that is powered out in it. Amend this common
error, that men are ready to seek out the natural causes of the evils that
befall them: if it be sickness, they look to such a distemper in diet, or
cold, etc. as the cause of it: so if they miscarry in any enterprise, what
folly and oversight has been the cause of it? These are but the natural and
immediate causes, but Christians should look to and seek out to the
supernatural. When there came a famine upon the land of Judah for three
years, 2 Samuel 21. 1. the natural cause was evident, which 2 Samuel 21. 1
was a great drought (for that famine was healed by rain afterward) and so in
those hot countries famine came by drought alone, but David rests not here, but
went to the Lord, and enquired out the reason, the sin that should be the
cause of it: And God told him it was for the sin of Saul, and his bloody
house in slaying the Gibeonites: as wise statesmen, when they find a mean
person in a treason, they rest not there, but seek further what deep heads
was in the business, and who was the contriver of the plot. When Jacob saw the
Angels descend and ascend, he looks to the top of the ladder, and saw the Lord
there sending them to and fro. Look not to the stayres of the ladder, one or
two that are next to thee, but to the top of the ladder, and there thou shall
see the Lord sending one Angel to do thee a mischief, another to be a Savior
to thee. If you say, how shall I know for what sin it is? Pray earnestly, and
enquire as David did, and as Joshua did, when he saw the people fly before
their enemies, that God would reveal to thee the particular sin; and if thou
can not find out the particular sin (for it may be some sin long ago
committed, or some secret sin) yet be sure that sin is the cause of it; for
as in the works of nature, we know the vapors arise out of the earth, and
ascend invisibly, but come down again in storms and showers which we are
able to see, and are sensible of; so the judgments may be open and manifest
enough, but not the sins, but some secret sin that past by thee without notice
taken is the cause of it.

Learn hence to see sin in its own colors; Use 2. Sin hard to find out.
sin is a secret and invisible evil, and in it self as abstractly
considered, is hard to be seen of the best: therefore look upon it as it is
clothed with calamities; and when you view it under the clothing, you will
have another opinion of it than you had before. If you should know a man, who,
whersoever he comes, does nothing but mischief, poisons one, stabs another,
etc. and leaves every where some prints of his villainy; how hateful and
terrible would he be unto you? it is sin that plays all these reaks among us;
if sin come upon a man clothed and armed with Gods wrath, as it often does at
death, then it is terrible. Why do we not look upon it thus at other times, but
because we do not behold it in the fearful effects of it, as then in the
wrath due to it we do? Sin is the same at all times else, but our fancy is not
always the same, as the body is always the same, though the shadow be
greater or lesser: that which we now count a small sin, as swearing, and
petty oaths, will one day be terrible; such a sin as was committed by
Ananias and Sapphira would seem small, it may be, to you in it self alone,
but see it clothed with that judgment that befell them dying at the Apostles
feet; so see the sin of Ahabs oppressing Naboth, which you may look at but
as doing a little wrong to a poor man, by a great man, but see it clothed
with Ahabs death, and the dogs licking his blood, and it will appear to be
most heinous; so the profaneness of Nadab and Abihu, offering strange fire.

Learn, that if you would remove the cross, you must remove the sin first.
You may observe Use 3. How to remove crosses.
it in diseases, that twenty medicines may be used, and yet if you hit not
right upon the cause of the disease, the patient is never the better; but if
that be removed, the symptoms presently vanish: so when some cross is upon
us, we set our heads, and hands, and friends aworke to remove it, but all in
vain, whilst we hit not the cause, and that is sin, which whilst it
continues, the cross will continue.

The reason why our peace and prosperity is entertained with so many crosses
and troubles is, because our lives are interwoven with so many sins. The
cause of Gods unevenness in his dispensations of his mercy toward thee, is
the unevenness of thy carriage toward him. Have thou a healthful body, a
sure estate, many friends? Think not that these shall secure thee: see Adam in
paradise, Solomon in his glory, David on his mountain, which he thought made
strong; and you shall see Adam, when sin had made a breach upon him once,
quickly made miserable; and sin bringing in upon Solomon an army of troubles
after it; and upon David in the height, sin bringing in upon him the hazard of
his kingdom, the rebellion of his son: sin in a man's best estate makes him
miserable, and grace in the worst estate makes a man happy. Saint Paul with a
good conscience was happy in prison, David through faith was happy at Ziglag.

But you will say, how is it, that calamities thus Object.
follow upon sin? we feel no such thing: and thus because it is deferred,
the hearts of men are set to do evil.

All this is to be understood with this caution, that sin when it is
perfected, brings forth death, Resp.
and not till then. God stayed till Ahab had oppressed Naboth, and gotten
possession, and then when he was seen, God sends the message of death to him,
What, have thou killed, and also taken possession? Thus Judas, he was a thief
whilst he kept the bag, and went on in many sins in Christ's family, and Chri
stlets him alone, and he goes on till he had betrayed his Master; and then
when his sin was perfected, and come to its full ripeness, then at last
CHRIST comes with judgment upon him. There is a certain period of judgment,
and if the Lord stay execution till then, thou have little cause to comfort thy
self, Eccles. 8. 11, 12. Because sentence Eccl. 8. 11, 12
against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of men
are set to do evil: As if the wise man should have said, Go to you, you that
have peace, and comfort your selves in this, that whatsoever the Word and the
Ministers threatten, yet you feel nothing; yet remember that as soon as the sin
is committed, the sentence goes forth, (and therefore he uses the word
sentence to express this) though it be not so speedily executed, yet it goes
forth at the same time with the commission of the sin. The sentence, you
know, is one thing, the execution another; and many times there is (and so may
be here) a long distance betwixt the sentence of the Judge, and the execution
of it: So as his meaning is, that execution is deferred. Therefore flatter not
your selves; sentence is gone forth, and execution will follow. For the
amplification of this, that vision of Zachary seems to make it good, Zach. 5.
When swearing Zach. 5. 2, 3
and theft had been committed, Verse 3. He saw a flying roll, Verse 2. Which
Verse the 3. is interpreted to be the curse that goes over all the earth, for
him that steals and swears, Verse 3. which curse may be upon the wing long
ere it seizes on the prey: but it goes forth as soon as those sins were
committed, that is, the execution may be deferred: which is there further
showed in the parable of the Ephah, which sets out (as there) the measure of
the peoples iniquities, for so, Verse 8. he says, this is wickedness, which
until it be filled, has not the weight of lead laid upon the mouth of it, it
being a long while ere God comes to execution, and not till their sins are
full, the plummet of lead being laid; as it signifies that then their sins are
sealed up, with the weight of lead rolled upon them, that none might be lost
or forgotten, but God remembers them all: and then he saw two women come, and
the wind was in their wings, Verse 9. that is, when their sins are thus full,
and their measure sealed up, their judgment comes swiftly like the wind, and
carries it into Shinar, and there this wickedness is set upon its own base,
that is, in its proper place, a place of misery, as hell is said to be Judas
his own place. Sin may sleep a long time, like a sleeping debt, which is
not called for and demanded for many years: but if a man has not an
acquaintance, the creditor may call for it in the end and lay the debtor in
prison. It was forty years after Saul's slaying of the Gibeonites ere execution
went forth, and vengeance was called for it. So Ioabs sin which he committed in
slaying Abner (which was slaying innocent blood) slept all David's time, til
Solomon came to the crown.

Do not therefore as ill husbands in debt, that suffer the suite to run on
from term to term, till they be out-lawed, and pay both debts and charges,
and all. Thy sins are a bringing swift damnation, and it slumbers not: it is
on foot already, and will overtake thee, and meet at thy journeyes end, the
end of thy days. Let it therefore be thy wisdom to take up the suite and
compound the matter with God betimes, else thou shall not only pay the debt
and smart for the sin it self, but for all the time of Gods patience toward
thee, the riches of Gods patience spent, and bear all the arrerages, Rev. 2. I
gave her space to repent, but she repented not; Revel. 2.
God meant to make her pay for all the time he gave her to repent in.

The next point from these words is:

That if the calamity be removed, and the sin be Doct. Calamities may be
removed in judgment
not healed, it is never removed in mercy, but in judgment.

He does here promise first to forgive the sin, and then to heal the Land;
so as if he should have healed the Land without forgiveness, it had been no
mercy.

Because sin is worse than any cross whatsoever. If therefore he takes away
the cross, and Reas. 1.
leaves the sin behind, it is a sign thou art a man whom the Lord hates.
When a Physician takes away the medicine, and leaves the disease uncured, it is
a sign the parties case is desperate; or that the Physician means to let him
perish.

Because the Lord does nothing in vain; if therefore Reas. 2.
an affliction does a man no good, it must needs do him hurt; for that which
does neither good nor hurt, must needs be in vain. That was a property of the
Idols of the Heathens (which are called the vanities of the Heathen) that they
did neither good nor hurt: And such should Gods actions be. Therefore if the
cross does a man no good by healing his sin, it must needs do him hurt. You
will ask what hurt? It does aedificare ad Gehennam, builds thee up to
destruction. If you saw a corrasive applied to the live flesh, and to eat out
that, and not the dead, you would say it were applied for hurt: So if you see
an affliction that works upon the live flesh, that wounds the heart with
sorrow, but takes not away the sin, such a cross you would reckon not the
medicine of a friend, but the wound of an enemy.

By this thou may judge of thine estate, and of Use. How to judge of our
estate.
Gods love to thee, by the issue of thine afflictions. It Is true, that all
kinds of crosses fall alike to all, sickness, poverty, etc. upon the godly
and the wicked; the difference is only in the issue: The same Sun sh^nes
upon all, but it hardens one, and it softens another; and the same wind blows
upon all, but it carries one Ship into an Haven, and dasheth another against a
rock. Consider therefore whether thy afflictions brings thee home to the Lord,
or whether it drives thee from the Lord upon the rocks. It Is a common
observation, that when physic works not, you say the party is mortally sick:
So when afflictions work not, it is a sign he is a man of death. If, as
Matthew. 7. He that takes not an admonition from his brother, is desperately
wicked, either as a Swine to trample on it, or as a Dog to devour: How much
more, when a man is admonished by God himself, and is worse after it? Now
every affliction is an admonition from the Lord. In the fifth of Esaias when God
had pruned his Vineyard, and it did it not good; it was then at the next door
to destruction, and laying wast. If therefore thou have had some great
affliction, and now it is off; think with thy self what profit and good came
to thee by it. Did it come from Gods providence, or not? if it did, there was
something he intended, and which it did imtimate to thee: If thou then did
suffer it to passeby without taking any notice of God in it, or if thou did,
yet art not reclamed, God must needs be exceedingly provoked, he will suffer
the tree to stand one year or so, to see if it will bring forth fruit, but if
it does not, then says, cut it down.

There are certain times wherein the LORD by affliction, sh^wes himself (as
it were) to a man, makes apparitions, so as a man may grope after him and feel
him, and take notice what he would have. If such pass away, and no good is
done, it is no presage of health, as is that sickness which comes by physic,
but of destruction; it is but as a drop of wrath fore-running the great storm,
a crack fore running the ruin of the whole building. Seek not therefore in
distress, so much to have the cross removed, as the sin, James 1. Rejoice,
says the Apostle, when you fall into sundry tentations; which he would not
have said, if healing the sin had not been the greater mercy, than the enduring
the affliction is grievous and dolorous; and if thou have an affliction on
thee, say, it is best, I will be content to endure it still, for God means me
good by it: on the contrary, if thou lashest out, and yet art in health and
prosperity, etc. and thy sins still continue, but thou art not afflicted, and
God suffers thee to thrive in sin; it is a sign God will destroy thee, that
he leaves thee wast as a vineyard, to be overgrowne with briars and thorns.

And the last doctrine is,

That, take away the sin, the cross will surely follow, and be taken away
also: either it, or the sting of Doct. 3. Sin removed, calamity removed.
it; so as it shall be as good as no cross. An Affliction consists not in the
bulk of it, but in the burden. What is a serpent without a sting? what is a
great bulk, if it have no weight? God can so fashion the heart, as that it
shall not feel the burden of it.

1. Because crosses do come for sin. Indeed, some are not for sin, but for
trial, for the confirmation Reas. 1.
of the Gospel; some for the glory of God, as that blindness in the blind
man; some for trial only, as Abraham's offering up his son, yet for the most
part they come from sin.

2. God never afflicts but for our profit: so says Reas. 2.
the Apostle, Heb. 12. Our fathers after the flesh corrected us, not always
for our profit, but they out of passion oftentimes; but, He for our profit: Now
when he has thereby made us partakers of his holiness, and so we have ceased
from sin, then he will cease to afflict.

It was otherwise (you will say) with David: his Object.
sin was forgiven, as Nathan told him, and yet the cross was not removed,
for his child died, and the sword departed not from his house.

There is an exception in these two cases.

1. Of scandal, when the name of God is blasphemed: Answ.
then though he forgive the sin, yet he may go on to punish for his names
sake.

2. When we are not thoroughly humbled: for there may be true repentance, when
our lusts are not enough mortified: God does it, that the heart may be the more
cleansed. Thus David Psalm. 51. cries out of his broken bones, and why? his
heart (he says) was not cleansed, and therefore he prays for a clean heart
and a right spirit.

This affords matter of comfort. When any Use. Comfort in afflictions.
judgment is upon us, we are apt to think we shall never be rid of it: but if
thou can get but thy heart humbled, and thy lusts mortified, God will take
away the cross. It is our fault to say, when we are afflicted, that we shall
never see better days: why so? is not God able to remove it? and if the sin
be removed, he will be willing also. No man is in an hard case, but he that
has an hard heart: we are apt to think in all conditions, that what is at
present, will always continue; if we be in prosperity, we are apt to think as
they in the Prophet, that to morrow will be as to day, and much more abundant;
so if in affliction, to say also, that as it is to day, it will be to morrow,
and so for ever. But know, that if you humble your selves, and turn from the
evil ways, God will take away the calamity. There is an excellent place for
this, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and he
shall exalt you in due time. When a man is humbled by God, let him humble
himself, and then God will exalt him; that is the due time, and he will not
stay one jot longer. And that which I say of present affliction, I say also of
crosses for the future, which you may fear, that your sins will bring; That
if you humble your selves, and turn from your evil ways, God will be
merciful to you, and heal you.

FINIS.

