THE BREAST PLATE OF FAITH AND LOVE.

A Treatise, Wherein the ground and exercise of FAITH and LOVE, as they are set
upon Christ their Object, and as they are expressed in Good Works, is
explained. Delivered In 18. Sermons upon three several Texts, By the late
faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON, Dr. in Divinity,
Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge,
and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

But let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the breastplate of Faith
and Love,

1 These 5.8. What will it profit, my Brethren, if a man say he have faith, and
has not works? Can faith save him?

James 2.14. LONDON, Printed by W. I. for Nicolas Bourne, and are to be sold
at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1630

ILLVSTRISSIMO, NOBILISSIMOQVE VIRO, ROBERTO COMITI WARVVICENCI, IOHANNIS
PRESTONI S. T. D. ET COLLEGII IMMANVELIS Q. MAGISTRI (CVIVS TVTELAE, DVM IN
VIVIS ESSET, PRIMOGENITVM SVVM, IN DISCIPLINAM, ET LITERIS EXPOLIENDVM,
TRADIDIT) POSTHVMORVM TRACTATVVM PARTEM, DE NATVRA FIDEI, EIVSQVE EFFICACIA,
DEQVE AMORE, ET OPERIBVS BONIS, DEVOTISSIMI, TAM AVTHORIS, DVM VIVERET, QVAM
IPSORVM QVI SVPERSVNT, OBSEQVII TESTIMONIVM M. D. D. D.

RICHARDVS SIBS. JOHANNES DAVENPORT.


To the Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
INnumerable are the sleights of Satan, to hinder a Christian in his course
toward Heaven, by exciting the corruption of his own heart to disturb him,
when he is about to do any good; or by discouraging him with inward terrors,
when he would solace himself with heavenly comforts; or by disheartening him
under the fears of sufferings, when he should be resolute in a good cause. A
type whereof were the Israelites, whose servitude was redoubled, when they
turned themselves to forsake Egypt: Wherefore we have much need of Christian
fortitude, according to that direction; Watch ye, stand fast, quit your selves
like men: 1 Cor. 16.13.
especially since Satan, like a Serpentine Crocodile pursued, is by resistance
put to flight.

But, as in wars, (which the Philistines knew well in putting their hope in
Goliath) the chief strength of the Soldiers lies in their Captain, so in
spiritual conflicts, all a Christians strength is in Christ, and from him.
For, before our conversion, we were of no strength: since our conversion, we
are not sufficient of our selves to think a good thought. And, to work out
from the Saints all selfe-confidence, God, by their falls teaches them, To
rejoice in the Lord Jesus, and to have no confidence in the flesh.

Whatsoever Christ has for us is made ours by Faith, which is the hand of the
soul enriching it by receiving Christ, who is the treasure hid in the field,
and with him, those unsearchable riches of grace, which are revealed and
offered in the Gospel: Yea it is part of our spiritual armor. That which was
fabulously spoken of the race of Giants, is truly said of a Christian, he is
borne with his armor upon him; 1 These. 5, 8. (...) Ephesians. 6.16. (...) of (...).
as soon as he is regenerate he is armed. Its called a Breast Plate, because
it preserves the heart, a long, large shield, (as the word signifies) which is
useful to defend the whole man from all sorts of assaults: Which part of
spiritual armor, and how it is to be managed, is declared in the former part
of the ensuing Treatise, in ten Sermons.

Now, as all rivers return into the sea, whence they came, so the believing
soul, having received all from Christ, returns all to Christ. For thus the
believer reasons. Was Gods undeserved, unexpected love such to me, that he
spared not his only begotten Son, but gave him to die for me? Its but
aequall that I should live to him, die for him, bring in my strength, time,
gifts, liberty, all that I have, all that I am, in his service, to his glory.
That affection, whence these resolutions arise, is called Love, which so
inclines the soul, that it moves in a direct line toward that object,
wherein it expects contentment. The soul is miserably deluded in pursuing
the wind, and in taking aim at a flying foul, whilst it seeks happiness
in any creature: which appears in the restlesnesse of those irregular
agitations, and endless motions of the minds of ambitious, voluptuous and
covetous persons, whose frame of spirit is like the lower part of the
elementary region, the seat of winds, tempests and earthquakes, full of
unquietness; whilst the believers soul, like that part toward heaven, which
is always peaceable and still, enjoys true rest and joy. And indeed the
perfection of our spirits cannot be but in union with the chief of spirits,
which communicates his goodness to the creature according to its capacity.
This affection of Love, as it reflecteth upon Christ, being a fruit and effect
of his love to us apprehended by faith, is the subject of the second part of
the following Treatise in 7. Sermons.

The judicious Author out of a piercing insight into the methods of the
Tempter, knowing upon what rocks the faith of many suffers shipwreck; that
neither the weak Christian might lose the comfort of his faith, through want of
evidences, nor the presumptuous rest upon a fancy in stead of faith, nor the
adversaries be emboldened to cast upon us, by reason of this doctrine of
Justification by faith only, their wonted nicknames of Soli-fidians, and
Nulli-fidians; throughout the whole Treatise, and more especially in the last
Sermon, he discourses of good Works, as they arise from faith and love. This
is the sum of the faithful and fruitful labors of this Reverend, learned
and godly Minister of the Gospel, who whilst he lived was an example of the
life of faith and love, and of good works, to so many as were acquainted with
his aequall and even walking in the ways of God, in the several turnings and
occasions of his life. But it will be too much injury to the godly Reader to be
detained longer in the porch. We now dismiss thee to the reading of this
profitable work, beseeching God to increase faith, and to perfect love in thy
heart, that thou may be fruitful in good works.

Thine in our Lord Jesus Christ, RICHARD SIBS. JOHN DAVENPORT.

OF FAITH. The first Sermon.
ROMANS 1.17. For by it the righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith: As it is written, The just shall live by Faith.


IN the words I have read unto you, Paul tells them that he is not ashamed of
the Gospel of CHRIST. For it was a shame to him, partly, because the very
substance of the Gospel was then persecution; and partly, because he was
plain in speech; he came not with excellency of words, or man's wisdom; and
therefore you may observe what ado he had to defend himself in his Epistles
to the Corinthians, a wise people, who partly hated, and partly despised his
manner of delivery: but, says he, I am not ashamed of it, for it is the power
of God to salvation: it is that which, being received, will bring men to
heaven; being rejected, will shut men up in Hell; and therefore it is of no
small moment. He gives a reason in these words, why it is the power of GOD to
salvation: For, says he, by it the righteousness of God is revealed. That is,
the righteousness which is of GOD, which only GOD accepts, and by which alone
men can be saved, is revealed by the Gospel, and no other way.

But to what purpose is this revealed, if I know not how to come by it? Many
things are revealed, but how shall I know that they are mine? Therefore he
adds, it is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. As it
is revealed by the Gospel, so something is to be done on our part; as GOD
manifests it, exposes it, and lays it open, so you must receive it by faith.

I, but I have not so strong a faith, I cannot believe as I would, and as I
should. Says he, Faith has degrees, it is revealed from faith to faith. That
is, one receives it in one degree, and the same afterward receives it in a
greater degree, and so forward. All are alike justified, but there is
difference in Faith, some is stronger, some is weaker, which I will afterward
show at large.

The point to be gathered out of these words is this: That Righteousness by
which alone we can be saved now in the time of the Gospel, Doct.
is revealed and offered to all that will take it.

When you hear this, it may be, at the very reading, you may not have such a
conceit of the thing as you should have: but it is not a matter of light
moment, but an exceeding great thing to see the righteousness of GOD revealed.
It is the great, glorious mystery of the Gospel, which the Angels desire to
pry into, which made Paul in his Ministry so glorious, which swallowed up his
thoughts, that he could not tell how to express it: that now in this last Age,
Christ has revealed through us the unsearchable Riches of his Grace, that is,
Riches which I know not how to express. Therefore he prays that God would
open their eyes, that they might comprehend with all the Saints, the height,
and length, and breadth of that Redemption, which Christ has wrought for them.
It is past a full comprehension, yet he prays that they may comprehend it in
such a measure as is possible, though there is a height, and breadth, and depth
therein, which could not be measured. And this is it that is revealed to the
souls of men, the scaping of Hell and death, this free access to the Throne
of Grace, which none before had; this liberty to be made sons of GOD, an
heirs of heaven, yea, Kings and Priests to GOD, and making good of all
promises, and the entayling of them to our posterity, and making them Yea and
Amen. All this, I say, is now revealed, which before was not.

2. It is said to be revealed, (mark that) partly, because this of all other
things was never written in the hearts of men. The Moral Law was written
therein, but they had not the least inckling, the least creuice of light to see
this; partly, because it is now opened in a larger measure then it was
heretofore, in the times of the Prophets: the door was a little open before,
but now it is wide open, and nothing is hid from the souls of men, that is
necessary for them to know.

Again, it is revealed not only in regard of the Preachers that make it
known, but likewise in regard of them that hear it: for there is a greater
measure of the Spirit of Revelation dispensed under the Gospel. Therefore,
Ephesians. 1.18. Ephesians. 1.1^.
the Apostle prays that the eyes of their understanding might be opened, that
they might know what is the hope of their Calling, and the riches of his
glorious inheritance in the Saints. For what is it to have a light shining, if
their eyes be shut to whom it shines? So the thing revealed is the
Righteousness of God. And lastly, it is that Righteousness, by which alone
men can be saved.

This is the maine point, which that you may understand, 6. Questions about
this righteousness.
I will open, by answering these 6. Questions.

1. How this righteousness of GOD, or, which is accepted of GOD, saues. 2. How
it is offered to us. 3. To whom it is offered. 4. Upon what qualifications. 5.
How it is made ours. And lastly, What is required of us, when we have it. These
hang one on another, but for memory sake I have thus distinguished them.
First: How does it save? 1. Quest. How it saves.
I answer: 1. This righteousness saues after the same manner that the
unrighteousness of Adam did condemn: let us set these two together, and the
thing will be plain.

First, Ans. 1.
as Adam was one man, yet the common root of all mankind, of whom all that
are guilty of death, and shall be damned, must be borne: so CHRIST, the second
Adam, stands as a public person, and the Root of all that shall be ingrafted
into, and borne of him.

Secondly, as Adams first unrighteousness, the first sin he committed, is
communicated to men, and made theirs by imputation; and not so only, but by
inherencie also; (for it has bred in them original sin:) After the same
manner, and by the same equity, the righteousness that Christ wrought, is made
ours by imputation, and this imputative righteousness of Christ works a
righteousness which qualifies the person, and is inherent in us. Lastly, as
after this unrighteousness comes death, which rules and reigns in us, bringing
every thing into subjection, so that all the comforts men possess are overcome
in some degree, while we live here; (all sicknesses, and troubles, and crosses,
being as so many skirmishes which Death has with us, before the maine Battle
comes:) So in CHRIST life reigns over all, and brings all into subjection to
him: that is, it brings all the troubles man sustaineth, all the enemies he
has, yea death and sin into subjection, by degrees in this life, and after
death perfectly. There is a comparison made in Romans 5.14. Romans 5.14.
which you shall find more fully to express, and more largely to set this out
then I have done. The first Adam was a figure of him that was to come, and 1
Cor. 15.45. 1 Cor. 15.45.
CHRIST is called the second Adam; now you do see the miserable fruit of Adams
fall, you see by lamentable experience, what original sin is, and how much
it has corrupted us; why then should you think it a strange thing, that the
righteousness of CHRIST should be imputed? Again, Death, you see, reigns
over all by one, Why then will not you believe that life shall reign over all
men, that is, bring every enemy of ours into subjection by the other? For the
righteousness of one saues, as the unrighteousness of the other condemns.

Answ. 2.
Another expression I find in 2 Cor. 5.21. 2 Cor. 5.21.
As CHRIST was made sin for us, who knew no sin, so are we made the
righteousness of God in him. That is, though CHRIST was a man without sin in
himself, yet our sin was imputed to him, and he was by GOD reckoned as a
sinner; and then he kills him, putting our curse upon him: so to us that are
free from righteousness, CHRIST is made righteousness, so that GOD looks on
us as if we had performed perfect righteousness, and when that is done, he
saues us. And so much for the first Question.

But now when we hear that this righteousness saues, 2. Quest. How we shall
come by it.
the Question is, How shall we come by it? In that it saues, it is good and
comfortable, but it may save some men, and yet I have no share nor part in
salvation?

I answer, Ans.
It is freely given to us, even as Fathers give Lands and Inheritances to their
children, and as Kings give Pardons and Titles, and Honors, and Riches, out of
their clemency, because they will, to show their magnificence, and goodness
to their Subjects; So does GOD give this righteousness. As you shall find it
expressed, Esaias 9.6.
Esaias 9.6. To us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given: a place worth your
marking and observation. And John 3.16. Ioh. 3.16.
GOD so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, Romans 5.17.
etc. And Romans 5.17. it is called the Gift of Righteousness. That is, a thing
which GOD freely, simply, voluntarily, and only because he will, bestows on
men, not looking on any worthiness in them of the same: (as we say, nothing is
so free as gift.) The passage is this: For, if through the offense of one,
Death reigned in all, much more they which receive abundance of grace, and the
gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. So that GOD gives
it freely out of his mere love, without any other motive or end, but to show
his magnificence, and to make manifest in the Ages to come, the unsearchable
riches of CHRIST, the great and exceeding glorious riches that he has provided
for them that love him.

Reasons why it is by gift.
But what is the reason that God will have it communicated to the sons of men
no other way but by gift? Romans 4.5.
You shall see it, Romans 4.5. that it is for these causes:

That no man might boast in himself, but that he that rejoices may rejoice in
the Lord. If any other bargain or manner of conueyance had been made, we
should have had something to boast of, but coming merely from God as a gift,
we have cause to glory in God, and nothing else. Again, it is a gift, that men
may learn to depend upon GOD for it: GOD will have no man challenge it as due;
for that it may be sure to all the seed. If there had been any thing required
at our hands, This do, fulfill this Law, and you shall have this
righteousness, it had not been sure, nay none had been saved: for by the Law
is transgression and wrath, but being by gift, it is firm and sure to all the
seed: for when a thing is freely given, and nothing expected, but taking it,
and thanksgiving for it, what is more sure?

But, 3. Quest. To whom it is given.
when you hear this righteousness is given, the next Question will be, To
whom is it given? If it be only given to some, what comfort is this to me?

But (which is the ground of all comfort) it is given to every man, Ans.
there is not a man excepted; for which we have the sure Word of GOD, which
will not fail. When you have the Charter of a King well confirmed, you reckon
it of great moment. What is it then, when you have the Charter of GOD himself?
which you shall evidently see in these two places, Mark. Mark. 16.15.
vlt. 15. Go and preach the Gospel to every creature under Heaven: What is
that? Go and tell every man without exception, that there is good news for
him, Christ is dead for him, and if he will take him, and accept of his
righteousness, he shall have it; restrain it not, but go and tell every man
under haeuen. The other Text is Reu. vlt. Whosoever will, Reu. 22.17.
let him come, and take of the waters of life freely. There is a guicunque
vult, whosoever will come, (none excepted) may have life, and it shall cost him
nothing. Many other places of Scripture there be, to prove the generality of
the offer: and having a sure Word for it, consider it.

But if it be objected, Object.
It is given only to the Elect, and therefore not to every man.

Ans. 1.
I answer, when we have a sure word that it is given to every man under Heaven,
without any restraint at all, why should any except himself? Indeed when
Christ was offered, freely to every man, and one received him, another rejected
him, then the Mystery of Election and reprobation was revealed; the reason why
some received him being, because GOD gave them a heart, which to the rest he
gave not; but, in point of offering of Christ, we must be general without
having respect to Election. For otherwise the Elect of CHRIST should have no
ground for their faith, none knowing he is elected until he has believed and
repented.

But Christ's righteousness being offered to men in state of unregeneration,
How shall I know it belongs to me? There is no other ground but this
Syllogism. This righteousness belongs to every man that believes: but I
believe, therefore it belongs to me. Therefore, though it be applied only to
the believers, yet it must be offered to every man.

Answ. 2.
Again, we are bound to believe that the thing is true, before we can believe
our share in it; we do not therefore make it true because we believe; but our
believing presupposes the object of our Faith, which is this, that CHRIST is
given: now the very believing does not cause Christ to be given; but he is
given, and therefore we believe. In all actions the object is in order of
nature before the action it self; my belief makes not a thing true, but it is
true in it self, and therefore I believe it. It being true that CHRIST is
offered to all men, therefore I believe that I am reconciled and adopted, and
that my sins are forgiven.

Again, Ans. 3.
if he should not be offered to every man, we could not say to every man, if
thou do believe thou shall be saved; but this we may say to all, even to
Judas, if thou beleeuest, Judas, thou shall be saved.

Again, Ans. 4.
if it were not offered to all, then wicked men should be excluded as much as
the Devils; but Christ took their nature on him, therefore it is possible for
them, if they believe, to be saved.

But how differs this from the doctrine of the Adversaries; Object.
for they also say that Christ is offered equally to all:

I answer, Ans.
In 2 respects: (not to run through all) The first is this, We say, Though
CHRIST be offered, and freely given to all, yet GOD intends him only to the
Elect. They say, His intention is the same to all, to Judas as to Peter. The
other is, They affirm, that as CHRIST is offered to all men, so all men have
sufficient grace to receive him, there is an ability by that as well as a
freedom, and universality in the offer. This we altogether deny. Though Christ
be given to all, yet the gift of faith is a fruit of Election. God gives faith
and repentance, and ability to receive him, where he pleases. The gate is
open to all, we shut out none; but none will come in, but those whom GOD
inables. A Pardon may be offered to all, and yet none accept it, but those
whose minds GOD has inclined. Therefore that he is offered to all it is
without question. They that question it, do it because they do not understand
the Doctrine of our Divines; for we propound it no otherwise in substance then
they do, only we differ in the method: but it will be your wisdom to look to
that which will be of use, and yield comfort when you come to dye. As this you
may build on, The Gospel is preached to every creature under heaven, and
therefore I have my share in it. If a Pardon be offered to some, whose names
alone are inserted therein, you cannot say on any good ground, I I am pardoned:
but when the Pardon is general, and offered to all, then I can believe the
Pardon belongs to me. Were it only to the Elect, whose names are written in
the pardon, we should first enquire whether we be elect or no, but that is not
the method. Build you on the sure promise, they that are pardoned, shall take
hold of it, they that take not hold of it, shall be excluded.

4. Quest.
The next thing a man will desire to know, is this. Upon what qualifications it
is given.
What qualifications are expected? Does not GOD require to find something in
us, if he give it us?

Ans.
I answer, that it is offered to all, and no qualification at all is required as
praeexistent to be found in us, but any may come and take it. GOD requires no
qualification as concerning our sins; he says not, you shall be pardoned, so
your sins be of such a number, or of such a nature, but though they be never
so many, though of never so extraordinary a nature, though they may be
aggrauated with all the circumstances that can be, yet there is no exception at
all of you, the pardon runs in general terms, This is the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world. And seeing it is in general terms, why
will you interline and restrain it? You see it runs in general, and so you
may take it.

And as it is propounded generally, so is it generally executed: 1 Cor. 6.9. 1
Cor. 6.9.
you shall find, the greatest sins that can be named are there pardoned: Be
not deceived, you know how no fornicator, nor adulterer, nor unclean person,
etc. shall enter into the Kingdom of God, and such were some of you: but now
you are justified, now you are sanctified, now you are washed. Though they had
committed the greatest sins, you see, it is generally executed, without
exception.

But there is another sort of qualification. Is there not something first to
be done? I know, that though I have committed all the sins of the world, yet
they shall not prejudice my pardon; but I must do something to qualify me
for it. No, not any thing as antecedareous and precedent to the pardon; it is
only required of thee to come with the hand of faith, and receive it in the
midst of all thy unworthiness, whatsoever it be, lay hold on the pardon, and
embrace it, and it shall be thine.

1. Object.
But you will object, then to what end is the Doctrine of humiliation? to what
end is the Law preached to be a Schoolmaster, if no qualification be required?

Ans. 1.
I answer, humiliation is not required as a qualification; for no tears of ours
can give satisfaction. And again, it has been found in a Reprobate; For
Judas had it. Neither is it any part of sanctification.

But how is it required then?

Ans. 2.
As that without which we will not come to CHRIST. As for example, If we say to
a man, The Physician is ready to heal you; before you will be healed, you must
have a sense of your your sickness: this sense is not required by the
Physician: (for the Physician is ready to heal him) but if he be not sick,
and have a sense of it, he will not come to the Physician. If at a general
Dole it be proclaimed, let all come hither that be hungry, Simile.
a man is not excluded if he be not hungry, but else he will not come:
therefore we preach, that none receive the Gospel but the poor, those that be
humble, and touched with sense of sin and wrath; and we preach so, because
indeed no man will come without it.

5. Quest.
In the next place, the Question will be, How this righteousness of CHRIST is
made ours; or, What is to be done of him to whom it belongs.

To this I answer; Ans.
though no precedent qualification be required, yet this must be taken, a man
must not reflect on himself, and consider, Am I worthy of it? but he must take
it as a Plaster, which if it be not applied, will not heal; Simile.
or as meat, which if it be not eaten, does not nourish. As the Husband wooes
his Spouse, and says thus, I require nothing at thy hands, no condition at
all, I do not examine whether thou art wealthy, or no; whether thou be fair,
or no; whether thou be out of debt, or well conditioned, it is no matter what
thou art, I require thee simply to take me for thy Husband. After this manner
comes Christ to us; we must not say, Am I worthy to make a Spouse for Christ?
Am I fit to receive so great mercies? Thou art only to take him. When we
exclude all conditions, we exclude such a frame and habit of mind, which we
think is necessarily required to make us worthy to take him. Simile.
As if a Physician come and offer thee a Medicine, by which thou may be
healed, and say, I require nothing at your hands, only to drink it, for else
it will do you no good: So GOD offers the righteousness of Christ, which is
that that heales the souls of men; GOD looks for nothing at your hands, it
matters not what your person is, only you must take it. So you shall find
himself expressing it, Esaias 55.1. Esaias 55.1.
where he compares this to the offer of Wine and Milk: Come buy Wine and Milk
without money. Let him that is athirst come, and he that has no money. As if
he had said, it is freely offered, you are only to take it.

What this taking is.
But, when you hear you must take it, the Question will be, What this taking is.

Ans.
I answer, This taking is nothing else but that which we call Faith: and
therefore that we may not err in the maine, I will declare what Faith is.
Faith, what.
And it is nothing else but this, when these two things concur, that God the
Father will give his Son, and freely offers righteousness, and we receive
this rghteousnesse, taking Christ for our Husband, our King and Lord. Object.


But, you will say, Faith is more: for Fides est actus intellectus, It is an
act of the understanding, assenting to Truths for the Authority of the Speaker;
therefore the mind and will must concur to make up this Faith. Answ.


For the better understanding of it, mark this word, the righteousness of God
is revealed; wherein is likewise employed, (though it be not expressed) that it
is offered: for to what purpose, or what comfort is it to see that there is
such a righteousness, if it be nothing to us? but it is so revealed, that it
is also offered. Now being both revealed, and offered, you must find something
in men answerable to both these: to the revelation of it the understanding
assenting to it as a Truth, that CHRIST is come in the flesh, and offered to
all men.

Again, to answer to the matter of the offer, there is also an act of the
will, whereby it comes in, and takes or embraces this righteousness. Both
these, 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 Timothy 1.15.
are put together, This is a faithful saying, and worthy to be received, that
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. It is true, says the
understanding, and therefore that believes it; but it is worthy to be received,
says the will, therefore that comes in, Simile.
takes and accepts it. As in matter of marriage, If one come and tell a Woman,
there is such a man in the world that is willing to bestow himself on you, if
you will take him, and accept him for your husband: Now (mark what it is that
makes up the marriage on her part:) first she must believe that there is such a
man, and that that man is willing to have her, that this message is true, that
it is brought from the man himself, and that it is nothing else but a true
declaration of the man's mind. This is an act of her mind or understanding:
But will you take him, and accept of him for your Husband? now comes the will,
and the concurrence of these two makes up the match. So we come and tell you,
There is such a one, the Messiah, that is willing to bestow himself on you; If
you believe that we deliver the message from Christ, and do consequently
embrace and take him, now are you justified, this is the very translation of
you from death to life, at this very instant you are delivered from Satan,
possessed of a Kingdom, and salvation is come to your house.

Now because this taking of CHRIST is the maine point which makes CHRIST ours,
and the want whereof is the cause that every man is condemned, Three things
must concur in receiving Christ.
(it coming nearest to life and death) that you may know what it is, we must
tell you that this is required therein: First, there must not be Error
personae, error of the person. Secondly, you must understand aright what this
taking is. Thirdly, there must be a complete deliberate will, which must
concur to this action of taking.


These three being declared, we shall not easily be deceived in it.

Christ indeed, but only in their own fancy. Therefore when you come to make
this marriage, you must know that CHRIST is most holy, that he is also such a
one as will bring persecution with him, as says of himself, that he knows
not where to lay his head, such a one as for whose sake you must part with
every thing; such a one as is hated in the World, and for whose sake you must
be hated: some would have the man, but they know not the man, and so many
thousands are deceived, that are willing to take CHRIST, but they know not what
they take, they understand not Christ aright, there is an error of the person,
and so a miss of the match, and consequently of Justification: for, so as to
make him their Lord, so as to be subject to him, they take him not, they do not
consider that he requires such and such things at their hands.

Secondly, If there be no mistake of the person, Christ, but then they will
love the World too: but GOD tells them, that if they love the World, the love of
the Father nor the Son is not in them. You must have your affections weaned
from every kind of vanity. Go through the whole Universe, look on all the
things that are, Riches, and Pleasures, and Honors, Wife, and Children, if
your heart be not weaned from every of them, you take him not as a Husband.

Again, others will serve CHRIST and their riches too, their credit too, their
own praise with men too; but CHRIST tells them no man can serve both; you must
serve him alone, and be obedient to none but him: if you do so, you take him
for your Lord indeed. So many will be subject to him as a King, but they will
be subject to their lusts too; if their lusts command them, they cannot deny
them, some they will reserve; and, you know, how many this excludes. Therefore
you shall find that no man can take Christ and his wealth: you know, the young
man was shut out, because he would not let go his possessions, which he must
part with, or else have none of him. So, Ioh. 5.44. Ioh. 5.44.
If you receive the praise of men, how can you believe? That is, if you be not
weaned and divorced from all, you cannot believe. Though you be the
off-scowring of men, though you be mocked and scorned, it matters not; but if
you seek the praise of men, you cannot believe.

Where, by the way, you may mark something, and add it to that I said before.
What is the reason that the seeking praise of men should hinder from believing?
Certainly, if Faith were only an Act of the understanding, assenting to the
truth for the Authority of its Speaker, it would be no hindrance or impediment
to the act of the mind, in believing that such a thing is true; so that it must
needs have reference to the will. Therefore, says CHRIST, While you seek the
praise of men, how can you believe? That is, take me for your GOD and LORD whom
you will serve altogether? So that to take CHRIST with a justifying faith, is
nothing else but to receive him, as it is expressed in many other places of
Scripture: Ioh. 1.11. Ioh. 1.11.12.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not; but to as many as
received him, he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them that
believe on his Name. And so it is not (as the Papists say) a mere act of the
understanding, but a taking of him for your GOD, your Savior, to whom alone
you will be subject, and give your self.

Last of all; When these two are done and years of discretion, when a man has
not the use of his will, or when a man is in a phrenzie, because there is then
no complete or deliberate will; Three things required in the will in taking
Christ.
so in this spiritual Match, you shall see how many the want of such a will
excludes.

Aequilibrio, that would have CHRIST, but not yet; that would live a little
longer at ease, and have a little more wealth, but are not come to a resolute
peremptory will, that have only a weak inclination, which is not enough: for
in a match, the will must be complete, and it is needful it should be so, it
being a thing that must continue all a man's life.



the day of sickness and trouble, when Hell and Heaven are presented to them,
will take CHRIST: Indeed you can scarce come to any, but, in such a case, he
will profess that he is now content to take CHRIST for his Lord and Sauionr;
but this is done by constraint, and so the will is not free. So I say, when all
these concur, the match is now made, and you are justified.

But after the match is made, 6. Quest. What is required of us when we have it.
something is required. Therefore there is one Question more: and that is, What
is this that is required after the making of the match?

I answer, Ans.
It is required that you love your Husband, Jesus Christ, that you forsake
Father and Mother, and become one Spirit with him, as you are one flesh with
your Wife: for you are now bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.

2. Again, it is now required that you should repent. And that is the meaning
of that place, Mat. 3.2.
Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. I tell you of a Kingdom, and a
great Kingdom, but no man can come into that Kingdom, except he repent: You
must walk no longer after the flesh, but after the Spirit: You must have your
flesh crucified, with all the affections and lusts of it.

Thirdly, You must part with every thing for his sake, whether you have riches,
or honors, or credit, or whatsoever, it is no matter, you must be ready to let
them all go.

4. Again, You must be ready to undergo any thing for his sake: you must have
him for worse as well as for better: you must be content to be hated of all
men for his sake, you must take up your cross, and follow him.

5. Again, You must do much, as well as as suffer much for him, he dyed to
this end, that he might purchase to him a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14.
zealous of good works: you must respect him as a Wife does her Husband, not
as a servant does a hard Master; you must not look on his Commandments as a
hard task, whereof you could willingly be excused, but as one that has his
heart inflamed to walk in them, as a loving Wife, that needs not to be bidden
to do this or that, but i^ the doing of it may advantage her Husband, it will
be a greater grief to her to let them lie undone, then labor to do them.

Object.
But now men say, This is a hard condition, I little thought of it.

Ans.
It is true, the condition is hard, and that is the reason that so few are
willing to come in, when they understand these after-clap conditions, that they
must part with all, that they must be persecuted, that their will must be
perfectly subject to the will of Christ, that they must be holy as he is holy,
that the same mind must be in them that is in Christ Jesus that they must be of
those peculiar people of GOD. And therefore have we told you that none will
come in to take CHRIST for their Husband, till they have been bitten with the
sense of their sins, till they be heavy laden, and have felt the weight of
Satan's yoke, till then they will not come under the yoke of CHRIST; but those
that be humble, that have their hearts broken, that know what the wrath of GOD
is, that have their consciences awaked to see sin, will come in, and be glad
they have CHRIST, though on these conditions; but the other will not. If you
will have CHRIST on these condition, you may: But we preach in vain, all the
world refuses CHRIST, because they will not leave their covetousness, and
idleness, and swearing, and their several sports and pleasures, their living
at liberty, and Company-keeping, they will not do the things that CHRIST
requires at their hands, and all because they are not humbled, they know not
what sinnne means; whereas, should GOD show it to them in its right colors,
should they be but in Judas his case, had they tasted of the Terrors of the
Almighty, were their consciences enlightened, and did it set them on, they
would take him with all their heart.

But an other Objection comes in, Object.
I would come in, but how should I do it, I want power and ability, I cannot
mortify the deeds of the body, could I do that, I would not stand on the
business.

Ans.
To this I give a speedy answer: If thou can come with this resolution to take
him, take no care for doing of it; for as soon as thou art his, he will give
thee another spirit he will enable thee to all things, Ioh. 1.16. Ioh. 1.12, 13.
To as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God:
What is that? Is it an empty Title? No, he made them sons not borne of the
flesh, or of the will of man, but of God. It is true, with thy own heart thou
art not able to do it; but what if GOD give thee a new heart and a new spirit?
When the match is made, and concluded between him and us, he sends his Spirit
into our hearts, and this Spirit gives us ability, making us like CHRIST,
changing us, and causing us to delight in the duties of new obedience in the
inner man. Therefore take not care for ability, only labor for an honest
heart, armed with this resolution; I am resolved to take Christ from
henceforth, and you shall find another Spirit to enable you exceedingly.

And now, that we may not let all this go without some application, we will
hereof make two Uses.

Use 1.
First, this great Use is to be made of it, To learn hence to see how great the
sin of men is, and how just is their condemnation for the same, that when
this righteousness of God is revealed from heaven by this Gospel, which we
now preach, they resist it, casting it at their heels, not regarding it, but
despising these glad tidings of salvation, which is so glorious a mystery.
This very thing that we preach to you, is it that was so many thousand years
ago foretold, and as long expected, being the greatest work that ever God
did. This is it which Paul magnified so much, and stood so amazed at.
Therefore, if you reject it, know that your sin is exceeding great: we that
preach the Gospel, are Messengers sent from the Father, to inuit every one of
you to come to the Marriage of his Son: If you will not come, (as some of you
are young, and mind other things; others of you have gone long in an old tract,
and will not turn; some have married a Wife, others have other business, and
therefore you will not come; or if you do come, it is without your Wedding
Garment, you come not with a conjugall affection) I say, if you refuse, the
LORD will deal with you, as with them in the Gospel, he will have you
brought and slain before his face. And we come not from the Father only, but
we are also sent from the Son, he is a Suitor to you, and has dispatched us
as Ambassadors to woo you, and to beseech you to be reconciled; if you will
come, he has made known his mind to you, you may have him; if you will not
come, you will make him angry; and you had need to kiss the Son lest he be
angry: though he be so merciful, as not to quench the smoking Flax, nor to
break the bruised Reed, yet notwithstanding, that Son has feet like
burning brass, he has a two-edged Sword in his hand, and his eyes are like
flames of fire: So you shall find him to be, if you refuse him. As he is a
corner stone for some to build on, so he is a corner stone to grind them to
powder that refuse him. When the better is the suitor, and is rejected, what
wrath, what indignation breeds it among men? And so take all the sins you
have committed, there is none like this, none shall be so much laid to your
charge at the Day of Judgment, as your rejecting of the Son, and of his
righteousness revealed, and freely offered to you. What Christ said, Mar.
16.16.
( It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah then for such a City) I may apply
to every one that is come to hear me this time; If you will not give ear to my
inuitation, it shall be easier for Jews and Turks, for the Saluages at the
East Indies, then for you. It had been better for you that Christ had never
come in the flesh, that his righteousness had never been offered to you.
Therefore is that added, Mar. 16. He that believes not, is damned. Of such
consequence is the Gospel. When Moses was on Mount Ebal, he set before them a
blessing and a curse, life and death: so do I now; If you will not accept of
CHRIST, you are cursed. Therefore, when you hear this offer, Let every man
examine himself how he stands affected unto it. For all hearers are divided
into these 2 sorts, some are worthy, and some unworthy. As when Christ sent
away his Disciples, if any were worthy, their peace was to rest upon them, if
they were not worthy, they were to shake off the dust of their feet against
that City. I say, consider if you be worthy of this righteousness: for if you
find your hearts to long after it, if you find you prize it much, so that you
can reckon all as dross and dung in comparison of it, and will sell all to buy
this Pearl, then are you worthy: But if, when you hear of it, you neglect it,
and attend unto it coldly, you are unworthy, and against such we are to shake
off the dust of our feet: that is, God shall shake you off as dust, when you
come for salvation to him at the day of Judgment.

If in examination you find your selves unworthy, that this work has not bin
wrought in you, (wherein it is your best way to deal plainly with your
selves) then give no rest to your selves, but enter into a serious
consideration of your sins, attend on Gods Ordinances, make use of all that
has been delivered concerning humiliation, and give not over until you have
attained this eager desire after Christ. Indeed this is wrought by GOD
himself, but give not you over. This is it S. John calls drawing: Ioh. 6.44.
none can come to me, except the Father draw him: and that is done when GOD
gives another will; when, on the propounding of Christ, he gives agninam
voluntatem, the nature of a Lamb, changing the heart, and working such an
inclination to Christ, as is in the Iron to follow the Lodestone, which never
rests until it be attained. Cant. 3.


Thus it was with the Woman of Canaan, she would have no denial; and Cant. 3.
with the Spouse, that would not be at quiet until she had found her Beloved,
seeking him day and night; finding him not within she enquires of the
Watchmen, and never gives over till she has found him whom her soul loved. As
GOD puts an instinct in the creature, such a violent, strong, impetuous
disposition and instigation is in them that shall be saved, and belong to
CHRIST, GOD puts into them such a disposition as was in Sampson, when he was
athirst, give me water or else I dye; so are they athirst after CHRIST, give me
CHRIST or else I dye. And this you must have; for GOD will put you to it, he
will try whether you be worthy comers or no. Commonly, at the beginning, he is
as a man that is in bed with his children, and loath to rise, but you must
knock and knock again; and as it was with the unjust Judge, importunity must
do it; though your desire be strong, yet, for a time, in his ordinary course,
he withholds, and turns a deaf ear, to try if thou have an eager desire: for
if it ceases quickly, he should have lost his labor in bestowing Christ on
thee. But if nothing will make thee give over, if thou will beseech him, and
give him no rest, I Will assure thee, GOD cannot deny thee, and the longer he
holds thee off, the better answer thou shall have at the end. And when thou
have CHRIST, thou have that that cannot be expressed; for, with him, thou have
all things, When you have him, you may go to him for Justification, and say,
LORD, give me remission of sins, I have CHRIST, and thou have promised that
all that are in CHRIST shall have pardon, that they shall have thy Spirit, and
be made new creatures; now, LORD, fulfill these promises. If say, It is a
condition beyond expression, next to that we shall have in heaven, and far
above that which any Prince or Potentate in the World has, far beyond that
which any man that swims in pleasures, and abundance of wealth has; which, if
it were known, would by all the World be sought after. Therefore, when you
hear of such a condition offered, take heed of refusing it: for if you do,
your sin is heinous, Use. 2.
and your condemnation will be just.

The second Use I will only name: Consider what it is to refuse, yea what it
is to defer your acceptance of it. GOD may take your deferring for a denial;
you that think, Well, I will take it, but not yet, take heed lest you never
have such an opportunity again. I say, be exhorted, be moved, be besought to
take it. This I speak to you, that be humble, to so many among you as have
broken hearts; others may take him if they will; but they will not, they mind
not this Doctrine, they regard not things of this nature, they will when they
lie a dying, but now they have something else to do. But you that mourn in
Sion, you that have broken hearts, that know the bitterness of sin, to such
as you is this Word of Salvation sent: The others have nothing to do with it;
and let them not think much to be excluded; for CHRIST excludes them: Mat.
11.28, 29.
Come to me all ye that are heavy laden, and ye shall find rest: Not but the
others shall have him, if they will come, but they will not take him on the
precedent conditions, named before. It may be, they would have redemption, and
freedom, and salvation by him, but they will not take him for their King. They
that be humble, that have their hearts wounded with the sense of sin, are
willing to take him on his own terms, to keep his Commandments, and not
think them grievous; to bear his burden, and think it light; to take his
yoke, and count it easy; to give all they have for him, and to think all too
little; to suffer persecution for his sake, and to rejoice in it; to be
content to be scoffed at, and hated of men; to do, to suffer any thing for his
sake; and when all this is done, to regard it as nothing, to reckon themselves
unprofitable servants, to account of all as not worthy of him. Therefore be not
thou shye in taking of him: for you have free liberty.

But, before I dismiss you, let me speak a word to you that be not yet
humble, Three considerations to move men to take Christ.
let me beseech you to consider 3. things to move you. First, the great
danger that is in not taking of him. If you could be well without

Secondly, as the danger of refusing him, so consider the benefit of taking
him: if you will have him, you shall with him have a Kingdom, you shall change
for the better; for whatsoever you part withal, you shall have an hundred fold
in this life: if you forgo any pleasure or lust, you shall have for it the joy
of the Holy Ghost, far exceeding them: If you part with riches, you shall be
truly rich in another world; yea, you shall there have a Treasure: If you lose
friends, you shall have GOD for your friend, and shall be a Favorite in the
Court of Heaven. In a word, you shall have an hundred fold.

3. You shall be sure to have it, you shall God has put out his word, he has
declared that to be his will, and it stands now with his Justice as well as
with his mercy, to give Christ: his Word is a corner stone, and you may build
on it: Nay by 2. immutable things he has confirmed it, his Word and his Oath,
and Heaven and Earth may pass, but they shall not pass, you may build on
them, to have Christ and salvation by him. When Paul had delivered Gods mind,
if an Angel from Heaven should tell them the foundation is sandy, nay if he
himself should preach another doctrine, they were not to believe him.
Therefore if you will take him and have him, trust perfectly in the grace that
is revealed by Jesus Christ, do it not by halues; It may be I shall be saved,
it may be not, thou may build on it, thou may venture thy life on it. All
these things considered, the greatness of the danger in refusing, of the
benefit in accepting; and if it be thus sure if we will take him, then put it
to venture, why do you stand off? What can we say more to persuade you? If
you will take him, and this righteousness, you may have it. GOD has committed
this to us, what we loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. He has given us
the Keys of Heaven and Hell, and if we open the Gates of Heaven to any, they
shall stand open, but now in the preaching of the Word, the Gates of Heaven
stand open to every one of you. Therefore come in while it is called to day,
before the Sun set on you, as you know not how soon it may. Indeed, if we
had not made the offer, the danger had been ours, and we should have perished
for your sakes: but seeing we have made manifest the whole Council of GOD, we
are now free from the blood of every one of you; for we have made known the
will of GOD to the full; you know what is offered to you; and if you take him
not, your blood shall be on your own heads. Therefore consider whether you
will take him or refuse him; that is the question, Will you take him, or not
take him? You that now refuse and slight this offer, the day may come, when you
would be glad to have it. You that are now in the height and flower of your
youth, and you that are more ancient, living in health and wealth, and having
your fill of pleasures, it may be, for the present, you have other things to
take up your minds, but the time will come when the Bridegroom shall enter
in, and the doors shall be shut, when your Houre-glasse shall be out, and
your time spent, and then this relation of righteousness, and remission of
sins, now offered, would be reckoned glad tidings: but take heed that it be
not too late, beware lest you cry, and GOD refuses to hear: Not but that GOD
will hear every man, if his cry comes from unfeigned faith and love; but, it
may be, GOD will not give thee that unfeigned faith and love when you be come
to that extremity; seeing you would not come when he called, it may be he will
not come when you call; it may be, he will not breathe the breath of life, nor
give such a spirit and disposition as he will accept of. Christ dyed to
purchase to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, and not only
to save men. He dyed for this end, that men might do him service; and if you
will not come in now in time of strength and youth, when you are able to do
him service; I say, in his ordinary course, he will reject you now in your
extremity, you may not then expect mercy at his hands. Therefore do not say,
I will follow my covetousness and idleness, my pleasures and business, my
lusts and humors, and hereafter come in; for you are not to choose your own
time. If he call you, and you refuse to come, take heed lest in his wrath he
swear that you shall not enter into his rest.

FINIS.
OF FAITH. The second Sermon.
ROMANS 1.17. For by it the righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith: As it is written, The just shall live by Faith.


THe next point that these words afford us, is this; that,

Faith is that whereby the righteousness of God is made ours to salvation.
Doct. 2.


The righteousness of GOD (says the Apostle) is revealed from faith to faith.
That is, it is so revealed and offered by GOD, that it is made ours by faith,
we are made partakers of it by faith: you see it arises clearly from the
words.

Now for the opening of this point to you, you must understand that there are
two ways or Covenants, Two Covenants.
whereby GOD offers salvation to men. One is the Covenant of works, and that
was that righteousness by which Adam had been saved if he had stood in his
innocence; for it was that way that GOD appointed for him, Do^ this, and live:
But Adam performed not the condition of that Covenant, and therefore now there
is another Covenant, that is, the Covenant of Grace, a Board given us against
Ship-wracke. Now this Covenant of Grace is double:

Either absolute and peculiar;

Or conditional.

1. Absolute.
Absolute, and peculiar only to the Elect; so it is expressed, Ier. 31. Ier. 31.
I will put my Law into your inward parts, and write it in your hearts, and I
will be your God, and you shall be my people. So likewise, in Ezekiel. 36. Ezekiel.
36.
I will give you a new heart, and put a new spirit within you, and I will take
your stony hearts out of your bodies. Here the Covenant is expressed
absolutely, and this is proper only to the Elect.

2. Conditional.
But now beside this, there is a conditional Covenant of Grace, which is common
to all; and that is expressed in these terms, Christ has provided a
righteousness and salvation, that is his work that he has done already; Now
if you will believe, and take him upon those terms that he is offered, you
shall be saved: This, I say, belongs to all men, This you have thus expressed
in the Gospel in many places, Mar. 16.
If you believe, you shall be saved, as it is, Mark. 16. Go and preach the
Gospel to every creature under Heaven; he that will believe shall be saved,
he that will not believe shall be damned. It is the same with that Romans 4.5.
Romans 4.5.
To him which works not, but believes in him which justifies the ungodly,
his faith is accounted righteousness, Mark it: To him that believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, that is, there is a certain justice or
righteousness that CHRIST has prepared or purchased for men, though they be
ungodly, he requires nothing of them beforehand, though they be wicked and
ungodly, yet this righteousness is prepared for them; that which is required
of them, is only that they take it. Now he that will believe GOD that he has
prepared this for him, and will receive it, it is enough to make him a
righteous man in GODS acceptance; so that this is the only way now by which
men shall be saved. The work is already done on Christ's part, there is a
righteousness that GOD has prepared, which is therefore called the
righteousness of GOD; and there is nothing precedently required or looked for
on our part, but taking and applying of it.

But, Quest.
you will say, Is there nothing else required of us? Must GOD do all, and must
we do nothing but only take that righteousness that is prepared for us?

Ans.
I answer, it is true indeed, we must lead a holy life, Though holiness be
required, it is Gods work.
a religious, sober, and righteous life, for, for this end has the grace of
God appeared, says the Apostle: yet you must know withal, that we cannot
work in our selves this holiness, this religious and sober conversation, that
must be Gods work altogether, we are only to take this righteousness, and
the other is but a consequent that follows upon it. To illustrate this unto
you by a similitude; A Wheel or a Bowl runs, Simile.
not that it may be made round, that is the business of the workman, who
makes it round, that it may run: So it is in this case, GOD does not look
that we should bring holiness and piety with us, for we have it not to bring: we
are at the first only to believe and accept this righteousness that is
offered us; when that is done, it is Gods part to frame us, and to fit and
fashion us for a holy life: such a kind of speech you have it expressed in,
Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians. 2.10.
We are Gods workmanship, fashioned in Christ Jesus to walk in good works,
which he has ordained, etc. Mark it: it is not an action of our own, but GOD
is the workman, we are the materials, as the clay, and the wood, that he takes
into his hands; when we have but taken this righteousness that is offered, it
is Gods work to cast us into a new Mould, to give us a new heart, and to frame
a new spirit within us, that so we may walk in good works before him: this is
the great mystery of godliness: for we have much ado to persuade men to
believe that the righteousness prepared by CHRIST should be offered to them,
and nothing be required but receiving of it: this will not sink into the
hearts of men by nature, they think they must do something precedently, or
else this righteousness is not offered them. But, my beloved, we must learn
to believe this, and know that it is the work of GOD to sanctify us after he
has justified us. I confess, it is not so in other things, there is still
some action of our own required to gain this or that habit or ability, as you
see in natural things, there are some kind of habits that we get by some
precedent actions of our own, Habits.
as the learning of Arts and Sciences, to learn to write well, etc. here there
is some action of our own required to fit us for it, and then we get the
ability to do it.

But besides these, there are other habits, that are planted by nature in us,
as, an ability to hear, to see, to taste, etc. Now for these, we need not any
action of our own for the attaining of them, because they are planted in us by
nature: So it is in these things that belong to salvation: It is true indeed,
we may get habits of moral Virtues by labor and pains of our own, there are
actions of our own required to them; and in that the Philosopher said right,
that we learn to be temperate, and sober, and chaste, etc. But now for the
Graces of the Spirit there it is not so, those habits that nature has planted
in us, we exercise them naturally, without doing any action of our own to
attain them; as we do not by seeing often learn to see, but it is a faculty
naturally planted in us: so it is in all the works that we must do, which are
the way to salvation, GOD works them in us, he infuseth those habits into us.
Therefore this conclusion is good, that it is faith alone, by which this
righteousness is made ours to salvation.

This is evident by the Apostle, Gal. 2. vlt. Says he, it is not by the Law,
If righteousness had been by the works of the Law, then Christ had dyed
without a cause. As if he should have said, salvation must needs be by one of
these two.

Either by something that we do our selves, some actions that we our selves
have wrought, or else it must be merely by faith. Now if it had been
attainable by any work of our own, CHRIST dyed without a cause: as if he
should say, CHRIST could have given you ability to do those works without his
dying; but for this very cause Christ came into the World, and dyed, that he
might work righteousness, and make satisfaction to God: so that you have
nothing to do for the first attaining of it, but to receive it by faith.

Why God will save men by faith.
And if you would know the reason, why GOD, that might have found out many other
ways to lead men to salvation, yet has chosen this way above all others to
save men, only by faith, receiving the righteousness of CHRIST, which he has
wrought for us; you shall find these four reasons for it in the Scriptures.
Two of them are set down, Romans 4.16. Therefore it is by faith, that it might
come by grace. 1. Reason.
Mark it: This is one reason why GOD will have it by faith, that it might be
of grace: For if any thing had been wrought by us, (as he says in the
beginning of the Chapter) it must have been given as wages, and so it had
been received by debt, and not by favor; but this was Gods end in it to make
known the exceeding length and breadth of his love, and how unsearchable the
riches of Christ are: his end was to have his Grace magnified. Now if there had
been any action of ours required, but merely the receiving of it by faith, it
had not bin merely of grace; for faith empties a man, it takes a man quite off
his own bottom; faith comes as an empty hand, and receives all from GOD,
and gives all to GOD. Now that it might be acknowledged to be free, and to be
altogether of grace; for this cause GOD would have salvation propounded to men,
to be received by faith only.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
as it is by faith, that it might come by grace, so also that it might be sure,
that the promise might be sure; if it had been any other way, it had never
been sure: Put the case that GOD had put us upon the condition of obedience,
and had given us grace and ability, as he did to Adam, yet the Law is strict,
and the least failing would have bred fears and doubts, and would have caused
death. But now, when the righteousness that saves us is wrought already by
GOD, and offered to us by him, and offered freely, and that the ground of this
offer is the sure Word of GOD, and it is not a conjecturall thing, now we may
build infallibly upon it: for unless faith have footing on the Word, we
cannot say it is sure, all things else are mutable, and subject to change:
therefore when GOD has once said it, we may firmly rest in it, and it is
sure. And this is the second reason why it is only by faith.

3. Reason
Thirdly, it is by faith, that it might be to all the seed, not only to those
that are of the Law, but also to them which were strangers to the Law. If it
had been by the Law, then salvation had been shut up within the compass of
the Jews; for the Gentiles were strangers to the Law of GOD, they were
unclean men, shut out from the Commonwealth of Israel; but when it is now
freely propounded in the Gospel, and nothing is required but only faith to
lay hold upon it, when there is no more looked for but believing, and
receiving; hence it comes to be to all the seed: for Abraham himself, before
he was circumcised, he was as a common man, the veil was not then set up; yet,
even then, his faith was imputed to him for righteousness.

The last reason why it is of faith, 4. Reason.
is that no man might boast, that no flesh might rejoice in it self; for if it
had been by any other means, by any thing done in our selves, we had had cause
to rejoice in our selves, but, for this cause, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.30.
1 Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,
that he that rejoices might rejoice in the Lord. As if he had said, if GOD had
given us a wisdom of our own, we had had cause to have rejoiced in our
selves; but we are darkness, Ephesians. 4. Ephesians 4.
there is nothing but foolishness and weakness in us, to the end that no
flesh might rejoice in his presence.

Again, if we had had grace put into our selves, (though it had been but
little) for which GOD might have accepted us, the flesh would have boasted;
therefore his righteousness is made ours.

But, when this is done, yet, if after justification, it had been in our power
and ability to have performed the works of sanctification by any power or
strength of our own, we should yet have been ready to boast thereof, Christ is
made sanctification too, so that we are not able to think a good thought, we
are not able to do the least good thing without him: It is I (says the Lord)
that does sanctify you: It is I that does act every Grace; it is I that do
put your hearts into a good frame: Christ is made sanctification to us; so that
take a holy man, after he is justified, it is CHRIST that sanctifies him, and
that carries him through his life in a holy and righteous conversation, and all
this is done that no flesh should rejoice in it self.

And yet one thing more is added by the Apostle; for if a man could rid
himself out of misery, if a man could help himself when he is under any
cross or trouble, he would then be ready to boast in himself: therefore,
says he Christ is made to us redemption also: so that take any evil, though
it be but a small evil, a small disease, a little trouble, no man is able to
help himself, in this case, it is Christ that redeemes us from the least
evils, as well as from hell it self: For you must know, that all the miseries
that befall us in the World, they are but so many degrees, so many descents and
steps toward hell; now all the redemption that we have, it is from CHRIST; so
that let us look into our lives, and see what evils we have escaped, and see
what troubles we have gone through, see what afflictions we have been delivered
from, it is all through CHRIST, who is made redemption for us.

It is true indeed, there are some general works of GODS providence, that
all men taste of; Freedom from evil to the Saints, whence it is.
but there is no evil that the Saints are freed from, but it is purchased by
the Blood of CHRIST; and all this GOD has done, that no flesh might rejoice in
it self: and for this cause, salvation is propounded to be received only by
faith, there is no more required at our hands, but the taking of Christ by
faith; and when we have taken him, then he is all this to us.

So that now you see the point cleared, and the reasons why it is by faith
only, that the righteousness of CHRIST is made ours to salvation.

Now, in the next place, If to this that we have said, we add but one thing
more to clear the point, we shall then have done enough to satisfy you in
this point; and that is this, to show you what this faith is: for, when we
speak so much of faith (as we do,) every man will be inquisitiue to know
what this faith is: therefore we will endeavor to do that at this time.

First, Faith, if we should take it in the general, it is nothing else but
this: An act of the understanding, Faith what in general.
assenting to something.

But now this assent is of three sorts. Assent of three sorts.


First, there is such an assent to a truth, as opinion, when we so assent to
any proposition, as that that which is contrary, may be true, for ought we know.

There is a second kind of assent, which is and that we call Science or
knowledge: that is, when we are sure of the thing we assent to, we make no
doubt of it; but we are led unto it by the force of reason.

Faith: So that a general definition of Faith is this:

It is (nothing else but) a firm assent given to the things contained in the
holy Scriptures, for the authority of God that spoke them.

This is properly Faith, or believing, if we take the word in the general.

Justifying faith.
But if we speak of justifying Faith, we shall find that that is not commonly
expressed in the word believing only, but believing in Christ, which is another
thing; and therefore you shall find that it differs in two things from this
common and general faith. How it differs from general faith.


First, in regard of the object, and indeed that is the maine difference: for
whereas the other faith looks upon the whole Book of GOD, In the object.
and believes all that GOD has revealed, because GOD has revealed it; This
justifying Faith pitcheth upon CHRIST, and takes him, with his benefits and
privileges: so that the difference lies not in the habit of Faith, but in the
object; for with the same faith that we believe other things, we believe this;
as with the same hand that a man takes other Writings with, he takes a Pardon;
with the same eyes that the Israelites see other things, they looked upon the
brazen Serpent, the difference was not in the faculty, but in the object upon
which they looked, by which they were healed; so it is in this, between this
^aith and the other, they differ not in the habit, but in the object.

There is a second difference, which is a maine difference too; In the act of
the will.
the other faith does no more but believe the truth that is revealed, it
believes that all is true that is contained in the Scriptures, and the Devils
may have this faith, and wicked men may have it; but justifying faith goes
further, it takes CHRIST, and receives him, so that there is an act of the Will
added to that faith, as it is expressed, Heb. 11.13. Heb. 11.1^.
They saw the promises afar off, and embraced them thankfully: Others (it may
be) see the promises, and believe them, but they take them not, they do not
embrace them. So that if I should define justifying Faith unto you, it may be
thus described:

It is a Grace or a habit infused into the soul by the Holy Ghost, Definition
of justifying faith.
whereby we are enabled to believe, not only that the Messiah is offered to
us, but also to take and receive him as a Lord and Savior.

That is, both to be saved by him, How faith takes Christ.
and to obey him (Mark it) I put them together, to take him as a Lord, and as
a Savior: for you shall find that in the ordinary phrase of Scripture these
two are put together, Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Therefore we must take
heed of disjoyning those that GOD has joined together, we must take CHRIST
as well for a Lord as a Savior, let a man do this, and he may be assured that
his faith is a justifying faith. Therefore mark it diligently, if a man will
take CHRIST as a Savior only, that will not serve the turn, CHRIST gives
not himself to any upon that condition, only to save him, but we must take him
as a Lord too, to be subject to him, to obey him, and to square our actions
according to his will in every thing. For he is not only a Savior, but also a
Lord, and he will be a Savior to none but those to whom he is a Master. His
servants you are to whom you obey, says the Apostle. If you will obey him, and
be subject unto him in all things, if you make him your Lord, that he may have
the command over you, and that you will be subject to him in every thing, if
you take him upon these conditions, you shall have him as a Savior also: For,
as he is a Priest, so you must know that he is a King that sits upon the
Throne of David, and rules those that are to be saved by him: Therefore, I say,
you must not only take him as a Priest, to intercede for you, to petition for
you, but to be your King also; you must suffer him to rule you in all things,
you must be content to obey all his Commandments. It is not enough to take
CHRIST as a head, only to receive influence and comfort from him, but you must
take him also as a head to be ruled by him, as the members are ruled by the
head; you must not take one benefit alone of the members, to receive influence
from the head, but you must be content also to be guided by him in all things,
else you take him in vain.

Again, We must not only believe but receive Christ.
this must be marked, that I say, you must take or receive him: you must not
only believe that he is the Messiah, and that he is offered, but there is a
taking and receiving that is necessary to make you partakers of that that is
offered: those words John 3. Ioh. 3.
make it plain; God so loved the World, that he GAVE his only begotten Son,
etc. Giving is but a Relative, it implies that there is a receiving or taking
required: For when CHRIST is given, unless he be taken by us, he does us no
good, he is not made ours. If a man be willing to give another any thing,
unless he take it, it is not his. It is true indeed, there is a sufficiency
in CHRIST to save all men, and he is that great Physician that heales the
souls of men, there is righteousness enough in him to justify all the World:
But, my beloved, unless we take him, and apply him to our selves, we can have
no part in that righteousness: this is plainly expressed in Matthew. 22. where
it is said, the King sent forth his servants to bid men to the Marriage of his
Son: And so in Eth. 5. the same similitude and comparison is used by the
Apostle, where he sets forth the union that is between Christ and the
Church, by that union there is between the Husband and the Wife: put the case
that a Husband should offer himself to a woman to marry her, and she should
believe it, yet unless there be a taking of him on her part, the match is not
made; and so it is ^ere, and in this thing the essence of faith consists, when
CHRIST offers himself unto you, you must believe that there is such a thing,
and that God intends it really, but it is the taking that consummates the
marriage; and when the Wife has taken the Husband, then all that is his is
hers, she has an interest in all his goods: so also it is here, there must be
a believing that Christ is offered, that he is the Messiah and that there is a
righteousness in him to save us; but that is not enough, we must also take him,
and when that is done, we are justified, then we are at peace with GOD.

But that you may more fully understand what this faith is, I will add these
4. things more.

Four things touching faith.
First, I will show you the object of this faith. Secondly, the subject or
place where it is. Thirdly, the manner how it justifies us. Fourthly, the
actions of it.
The object of it.
I say, that you may more fully understand what this faith is, consider first
the object of it, and that is CHRIST, (as I told you before) and herein this is
to be marked, that a man must first take Christ himself, and after, the
privileges that come by him. And this point I could wish were more pressed by
our Divines, and that our hearers would more intend it. I say, first remember
that you must first take CHRIST himself, and then other things that we have by
him, as the Apostle says, Rom 8. If God have given us him, that is Christ, he
will with him give us all things else: but first have CHRIST himself, and then
all things with him. And so, 2 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 1.
All the promises IN HIM are Yea and Amen. That is, first we must have CHRIST,
and then look to the promises; this must be still remembered, that we must
first take his person, we must have our eyes fixed upon that: And so that place
before-named, Ioh. 3. Ioh. 3.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son: he gives his
Son, as a Father gives his Son in marriage; the Father gives the Son, and
the Son himself must be taken: So that we must first take CHRIST, we must
fix our eyes upon him: For faith does not leap over CHRIST, and pitch upon
the promises of Justification, and Adoption, but it first takes CHRIST. The
distinct and clear vnderstand^ning of this will help us much in apprehending
and understanding aright what justifying faith is: we must remember to take
CHRIST himself; for it is an adulterous affection for a Wife not to think of
the person of her Husband, True love looks first to Christ's person
but to think only what commodity she shall have by him, what honors, what
riches, what conueniences, as if that made the match, to be content only to
take those; will this, think you, make a match amongst men? Surely no, there
must be a fixing of the eyes upon the person, that must do it: Do you love
him? are you content to forsake all, that you may enjoy him? It is true indeed,
you shall have all this into the bargain, but first you must have the person
of your Husband: therefore remember to fix your eyes upon Christ, take him for
your Husband, consider his beauty and his excellencies, (which indeed are
motives to us) as a Woman that takes a Husband, is encouraged by the benefits
that she shall have by him: but still remember that he himself must be
taken. As it is in other things, if you would have light, you must first have
the Sun; if you would have strength, you must first take meat and drink,
before you can have that benefit by it: so you must first have Christ himself,
before you can partake of those benefits by him: and that I take to be the
meaning of that in Mar. 16. Go preach the Gospel to every creature under
heaven; Mar. 16.
he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: that is, he that will
believe that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and that he is offered to
mankind for a Savior, and will be baptized, that will give up himself to
him, Baptizing, what meant by it in Mat. 16.
that will take his mark upon him: for in that place, by baptizing, is meant
nothing else but the giving up of a man's self to CHRIST, and making a public
testimony of it, although there be something more meant generally by baptizing;
but here it is meant, a justification to all the world, that we have taken
CHRIST. Now every one that will believe and be baptized, that is, every one
that will do this, shall be saved: so that a man must first take CHRIST
himself, and then he may do as the Wife, after she has her Husband, she may
think of all the benefits she has by him, and may take them, and use them as
her own. This is the first thing.

The second thing that I promised, The subject of faith.
was to show you the subject of faith, and that is the whole heart of man; that
is to say, (to name it distinctly) both the mind, and the will: Now to show
you that both these are the subject of faith, you must know that these two
things are required:

First, What required in the understanding.
on the part of the understanding, it is required that it believe; that is,
that it conceive and apprehend what GOD has revealed in the Scriptures; and
here an act of GOD must come in, putting a light into the understanding: for,
my beloved, Faith is but an addition of a new light to reason, that whereas
reason is purblinde, faith comes, and gives a new light, and makes us see the
things revealed by GOD, which reason cannot do; by faith we apprehend these
great and glorious Mysteries, which otherwise we could not apprehend, as we
see it expressed in 2 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 4.
The god of this World has blinded their eyes, that the light should not shine
into their hearts, by which they should believe this glorious Gospel. So then
there must be a light put into the mind, that a man may be able by that to
eleuate and raise his reason to believe this: that is, to conceive and to
apprehend the things that are offered and tendered in the Gospel.

What required of the will.
But this is not all, there is an act also of the will required, which is to
take and receive Christ: for this taking is an act of the will; therefore there
must be a consent as well as an assent. Now it is the act of the understanding
to assent to the truth, which is contained in the promises wherein Christ is
offered: but that is not all, there is also an act of will requisite to consent
unto them, that is, to embrace them, to take them, and to lay hold upon them,
and to apply them to a man's self. This I will the rather clear, because it is
a thing controuerted. I say, there is a double act, an act of the mind, and an
act of the will: to this purpose consider that in Romans 5 17. Romans 5.17.
For if by the offense of one, death reigned by one, much more they which
receive abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness, shall reign in
life by one, Jesus Christ. Mark it, you may see what faith is in those words;
Those that receive the gift of righteousness: righteousness is given and
offered by God, and those that receive that gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life: so that taking and receiving being an act of the will, it must
needs be that the will must come in to this work as well as the understanding.
Like unto this is that 1 Ioh. 12. Ioh. 1.12.
To as many as received him, etc. That is, to as many as believed in his Name:
for so the words afterward express; that is, when we are willing to take
Christ, which is nothing else but the consent of the will, when the will is
resolved to take him, being so apprehended as he has been described, as a
Lord, and as a Savior, this is faith; this, I say, is an act of the will,
because it is an act of receiving. Io^. 5.44 it is evident, How can y^ believe
which receive honor one of another etc? If believing in Christ were only an
act of the mind, as the Papists affirm, and some others besides; it believing
were nothing else but an assenting to the truth of GOD, which is an act of the
understanding, how could the praise of men be opposite to believing? But the
meaning is, How can you believe, and take me for your Husband, and yet seek
praise of men too? for that will come in competition with me, and then you will
forsake me. I say, this makes it evident, that iusti^ying faith is not only an
act of the mind, but an act of the will also; because otherwise the seeking
praise with men, could be no impediment to the act of believing.

Now this also, This act of the will wrought by God.
as well as the former, must be wrought by God and God puts a new light into the
understanding, he raises it up to see and believe these truths; so there is
another act which GOD also works on the will, and unless he work it, it is
not done: for come to any man that is in the state of nature, and ask him,
Will you be content to take Christ? that is to say, to receive him in that
manner as he has been described? His answer would be, No. Beloved, the lives
of men express it, though they speak it not in so many words: Therefore till
GOD come and draw a man, and change his will the work is not done. If you
take a Bough, and offer it to a Swine or a Wolf, they will refuse it, and
trample it under their feet; but offer it to a Sheep, and the Sheep receives
it, and follows it: so when Christ is offered to men upon these conditions
that we have named, men refuse him, they reject him, and slight him: but when
GOD takes away these woluish and swinish hearts of ours, and turn our wills
another way, (which is the drawing the Scripture speaks of) then we are
willing to take Christ. If you take other metal then Iron, the Loadstone will
not stir it; but turn the metal into Iron, and it will follow the
Lodestone: So, let the hearts of men continue in that condition wherein they
are by nature, and they will never take CHRIST, they will never accept him; but
when GOD puts into them such a strong and impetuous instigation and disposition
as that of the Spouze in the Canticles, that had no rest till she had found her
Beloved, then they will take CHRIST upon his own conditions. So the we see
this Faith is an action both of the mind and the will, wrought by GOD,
enlightening the mind, and changing the will; which is that which our Savior
Christ calls drawing; none comes to me unless the Father draw him: that is,
except his will be set on work, unless GOD change him, and put such a
disposition and instigation into him, that he can find no rest till he come
to Christ.

Thirdly, How faith justifies.
the thing we are to speak of, is, How this Faith justifies.

Now for this, know that this faith is considered two ways; either As it
works, or, As it receives:


Either as a quality, or as an instrument.

As a quality it works; and in this sense it has nothing to do with
Justification.

It justifies us as it is an instrument, Faith alters not the nature of
sin.
and that not by altering the nature of sin; that is, by making sin to be
no sin, but by taking away the efficacy of sin. Note.
As, for example, when a man has committed sins, Faith does not make his
sins to be no sins; indeed, it scatters them as a Cloud: You may
consider it after this manner: First, it cannot be that that sin that is once
committed, should be made to be no sin; for what is once done, it cannot be
undone, GOD himself cannot do that, because it is a thing that cannot be; for
when the sins are committed, they do remain so: and therefore, I say, it
cannot be that that which is sin should be made to be no sin; we cannot
make Adultery to be no adultery, for the nature and essence of the thing must
remain. Well now what does faith? It does this, though the sin be the same
that it was, yet it takes away the sting and the guilt of sin, by which it
puts us into the state of condemnation, and by which it binds us over to
punishment. As the Lions to which Daniel was cast, they were the same as they
were before, they had the same propensenesse, and disposition to devour as
they had before, they had the ordinary nature of Lions; but at that time, GOD
took away from them that fierceness that was in them, so that they did not
devour him, though they were there still: so it is with sin, the nature of
sin is to condemn us* but now when GOD shall take away this efficacy from
it, it does not condemn: and this is that that faith does.

Even as the Viper that was upon Paul's hand, though the nature of it was to
kill presently, yet when GOD had charmed it, you see it hurt him not: so it is
with sin, though it be in us, and though it hang upon us, yet the venom of
it is taken away, it hurts us not, it condemns us not: thus faith, by taking
away the efficacy and power of sin, it iustifies us, as an instrument, as a
hand that takes the Pardon.

The King, when he pardons a Traitor, he does not make his Treason to be no
Treason, for the act of the Treason remains still; but the taking of the
Pardon makes the Traitor not to be under condemnation: So, my belo^ed, faith is
that act that takes the Pardon from GOD, so that though the sin remain the
same, and of its own nature is of power to bind us over to death, yet by this
faith taking the Pardon from GOD, it comes to pass that it hurts us not, we
are not condemned for it.

You know, debts in a man's book, the writing remains still, the lines are not
blotted out, yet when they are once crossed, the creditour cannot come and ask
his debt any more, because it is crossed: So it is in this, our sins are the
same after we are justified, as they were before; but faith is that that
crosses the book; faith, I say, by apprehending the Pardon, and taking the
acquittance at Gods hands that he offers.

I^ a man have anacquittance, although the debt remain the same in the Book,
yet there can no more be required at the hands of him that has taken the
acquittance.

Thus, I say, faith iustifies us as an instrument, by accepting, receiving, and
taking the acquittance that GOD has given to us through Christ.

The acts of faith.
Let me add one word more of the next thing: which is, What are the acts of
this faith?

They are these three: First, To reconcile, or to justify. Secondly, To
pacify the heart. Thirdly, To purify, or sanctify.


To reconcile us.
The first thing that Faith does, is to reconcile: That is, (as I said before)
by faith we are pitched upon CHRIST; we take him first, and then we take the
privileges, they all follow upon it, forgiveness, and adoption; this is the
first act of Faith, to reconcile us to CHRIST himself; and upon this we have
boldness to go to CHRIST for forgiveness, to go to CHRIST to make us heirs
of all things: For after this manner faith does it; All things are yours,
whether Paul or Apollo, etc. And why? Because you are CHRIST'S. (Mark it,) you
must first be CHRIST'S: that is, even as the Wife is the Husband's, so you
must be knit and united to CHRIST, and then all things are yours: so that Faith
first makes us Christ's, it reconciles us to him, and makes us one with him,
and in him, one with GOD the Father; and then all things are given unto us, and
made ours.

To pacify the heart.
The second act of faith is to quiet and pacify the heart; to comfort us, in
assuring us that our sins and transgressions are forgiven; and this is
different from the former: There are two acts of faith:

The one is the direct act by which we apprehend and take CHRIST, Direct and
reflect act of faith.
and the righteousness that is offered through him, by which we take
forgiveness.

And the second is the reflect act by which we know that we have taken CHRIST,
and have taken out our pardon; and this act is very different from the former,
we may have the former without this.

We commonly think that we are not justified by CHRIST, unless we have
assurance of it; and when we look for that, and find it not presently, all
our hopes are gone, but it should not be so; It is one act of Faith to take
CHRIST, and another act of faith to comfort and pacify the heart; and that
these are two distinct things, consider but this in a word.

The first act is constant, Difference between them*
when a man has once taken and accepted of CHRIST, he is always his; after
we once have CHRIST, there is no divorce: But the other act of assurance,
whereby we know that we have taken him, that is a thing that may fail and
deceive a man.

Again, the first act admits of no degrees; for when a man is once in CHRIST,
he is always CHRIST'S, when he is once married to him: Marriage, you know,
admits of no degrees; so Justification is equal to every man, it admits of no
degrees, it is always the same; we are not now less justified* and then more,
but we are always alike justified, being once justified: but the other act of
faith, whereby I am assured that I have taken CHRIST, that admits of degrees, a
man may have sometimes more comfort, sometimes less; and therefore
righteousness is said here to be revealed from faith to faith.

Lastly, the first act of faith, whereby we take CHRIST, and those privileges
by him, as the Wife takes the Husband, that is founded upon the sure Word of
GOD, GOD has tendered it to us upon his Word and promise, and he must perform
it, it cannot be altered nor changed; he that builds upon it, builds upon the
cornerstone, that will not fail him: But now the second act, whereby I come
to know that I have done this, that is grounded upon experience: Indeed, we
are helped by the Holy Ghost to know it, but it is chiefly grounded upon our
own experience: for it is no more but the act of a man's own heart, reflecting
upon what he has done, when he considers, Have I taken CHRIST, or no? as a
Lord, and as a Savior* as a Priest, to save me; as a King, to live by his
Laws; this is a looking upon an act of mine own, therefore the understanding
and knowing of it must come from experience.

The last act of faith is to purify, To purify the heart.
and to sanctify. I cannot stand upon it at this time, nor make Use, and apply
this as I desired: therefore I will break off here. So much for this time.

FINIS.
OF FAITH. The third Sermon.
ROMANS 1.17. For by it the righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith: As it is written, The just shall live by Faith.


THe last point that we delivered out of these words, was this, that

Faith is that whereby we are made partakers of the righteousness of Christ.

We come now to the Uses of it.

And first of all, Use 1. Not to be discouraged to come to God.
if it be by faith only by which we are made partakers of that righteousness
that saves us, the first consectary that we will draw from hence is this, That
we should learn to come to CHRIST with an empty hand, and not to be
discouraged for any want that we find in our selves, nor for the greatness
of our sins; we should not be discouraged for the want of a perfect degree
of repentance and godly sorrow, or for the want of whatsoever good work you
think is requisite to salvation, for, my beloved, you must know that this is
the nature of faith, that it does its work best alone; and faith is so far
from requiring any thing in the party that shall have CHRIST, that necessarily
he must let go all things else, otherwise he cannot believe: and this is a
point necessarily to be considered: for every man is apt to conceive and think
that it is impossible that GOD should accept him, unless there be something
in him why GOD should regard him: If he find himself to be exceeding ungodly,
he thinks that CHRIST will never look after him.

And again, if he have nothing at all to give, if he have nothing to bring
with him in his hand, he thinks that he shall have no pardon: But you see
that faith requires nothing in the first apprehension of CHRIST, if a man be
never so ungodly, it is all one, the promise notwithstanding is made unto him.

Again, Why should you look for righteousness in your selves? The work of
faith (and it has nothing else to do) is to take that righteousness of
Christ, that is none of your own: so that there is nothing else at all
required; for all that faith has to do, is only to take from Christ that
righteousness that we want our selves: so that I say there is no reason why
any man should be discouraged in his first coming, for any want that he
finds in himself, or for any condition that he is in, because faith only is
that that makes us partakers of a righteousness to justify us, because we our
selves have it not. I say, faith is so far from requiring any thing to be
added to it, to help it in the act of justifying, that of necessity it
excludes all things else: for faith has this double quality, not only to lay
hold of Christ offered, but to empty a man of all things else whatsoever. As
for example, Faith is not only the believing of a truth which is delivered,
from the authority of him that does deliver it; but it is a resting upon
Christ, a casting of our selves upon him. Now when a man leanes upon any other
thing, he stands not upon his own legs, he stands not upon his own
bottom; for if he did, he could not properly be said to lean. If a man
trust and depend upon another, he prouides not for himself, but he that so
looks to himself, that he provide so as to make him self safe if another
should fail him, so far he trusts himself; so that, beloved, if you trust
CHRIST, it is of necessity required that you must be vnbottomed of your
selves, you must altogether lean upon him, you must cast your selves wholly
upon him: For faith has such an attracting virtue in it, that it fills the
heart with CHRIST. Now it cannot fill the heart with CHRIST, unless the heart
be emptyed first. Therefore I say, faith has a double quality, A double
quality in faith.
not only to take, but to empty; and they are reciprocal, the one cannot be
without the other.

Hence it is that we say, faith ingrafts a man, a man cannot be ingraft into a
new stock unless he be quite cut off from the former root; therefore faith
drives a man out of himself, and makes him nothing in himself, so that when
he comes to lay hold on the promise of GOD, he looks at no quality or
excellency of his own, he looks at no fitness nor worthiness in himself,
but he comes with a hand and a heart altogether empty: So that when a man comes
to beseech GOD to receive him to mercy, and to grant him a Pardon of his
sins, when he comes to take hold of the righteousness of CHRIST for his
justification, if he think that there is any little worthiness in him, or
that there be no fault in him at all, and from thence shall think that GOD
will receive him, this man is not fit to come to Christ, he must be wholly
emptied of himself, and then God will speak peace unto him.

Quest.
But you will ask, What is that that faith does empty a man of?

Faith emptieth a man of two things: Ans.
First, Faith emptieth a man of two things.
of all opinion of righteousness in himself. Secondly, of all opinion of
strength and ability to help himself: for if either of these remain in the
heart, a man cannot receive CHRIST.


First, I say, a man must be emptied of all Go and sell all that thou have:
Christ's end was nothing else but to discover to him his own unworthiness. If
thou will be perfect, (says CHRIST) take this trial, Can thou be content to
let thy wealth go, to follow me? Can thou be content to suffer persecution?
This showed that he was not perfect, but that he was still a sinful man;
this was the way to prepare him for Christ, this course we see CHRIST always
took: we see it expressed in the Parable of the Publican and of the Pharise,
the Publican went away justified, because he was wholly emptyed of all conceit
and opinion of worth in himself.

But the Pharise was not justified, (not because he was not a iuster man then
the Publican, for he was in outward performances better then he; but) because
he had an opinion of his own righteousness, he was conceited of a worthiness
in himself, therefore he went home not justified.

What was it that excluded the Jews? was it not an opinion of something they
had of their own?

The Laodiceans, they thought they were rich and increased, and wanted nothing,
therefore they never came to buy of CHRIST. That which a man thinks he has
already of his own, he will never be at the cost to buy; therefore that is
the first thing that a man must do, he must think himself of no worth at
all, he must be empty of all opinion and conceit of his own excellency.

Christ; but when GOD shall show a man's heart to himself, when GOD shows a
man his danger, and shows it him as a present, and how unable he is to help
himself out of danger, then a man will have no rest till he have Christ.
Therefore you shall see both these required, 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Cor. 1.30.
CHRIST must be to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption
too. First, if a man think that there is any thing in him, either wisdom,
righteousness, or sanctification, that excludes him, for he will rejoice in
himself: and that concerns the first condition required, to be empty of all
opinion of worth.

But yet if a man think that he is able to stand safe and secure for a time,
that he is able to be a Buckler to himself, that he has somewhat whereunto
he may lean, and does not see that CHRIST must be his redemption also, he will
not come at CHRIST.

That which kept the Prodigal son away, it was not an opinion of any worth
in himself, but because he thought he could live without his father, he had
his portion in his own hands, and at his own disposing; and he would not come
home to his Father, till he could live of himself no longer: so that, though
we have an opinion of no worth in our selves, yet if we conceive or think
that we can live without CHRIST, we will not care for him.

This was the fault of those that were invited to the marriage, they refused to
come, not because they thought that themselves were of worth, but they were
persuaded that they needed not those things to which they were invited.
Therefore, I say, these two things must be done, a man must be emptied of all
opinion of worth in himself.

And secondly, of all ability in himself to help himself, and when faith
has done both these, then it brings a man to CHRIST, when a man sees that
there is nothing in him why GOD should regard him, and that he cannot stand
longer, nor be in safety longer then CHRIST helps him, and speaks peace to
him, now a man is fit to take hold upon CHRIST: and therefore we must learn to
come to CHRIST with an empty heart.

Many men complain that they would believe, but they want that sorrow that
they should have, they want that repentance that they would have, they think
they are not yet fit, therefore they dare not apply the promises.

Double complaint in sense of want.
To these we say now, that there is a double kind of complaint.

One is, when a man looks upon these things, as upon things that make him fit,
which if he have, he thinks GOD will respect him; and if he have not, he
thinks that GOD will not look after him. If thy complaint be thus, it is
sinful; for in this thou seek something in thy self.

But if a man's complaint be this, that he is not yet awaked enough, that he is
not yet sensible enough of his sins, the doctrine of the remission of his
sins, and free Justification does not affect him as it should. Indeed, here
is just cause of complaint; for these things are necessary before you can come
to take CHRIST. Therefore that place in Mat. 10.11. will explain this, and
answer an objection that may be made against it, when the Apostles were sent
out to preach the Gospel, when they came to any house, they were bidden to
Enquire who were worthy; If any man be worthy (says CHRIST) your peace shall
come upon him: but if he be not worthy, shake off the dust, etc. A man would
think by this that there were some worthiness required in the party that
comes to CHRIST, and that before he can apply the first promise of
Justification.

To this we answer, the worthiness that is required here is nothing else but
an ability to prize CHRIST, to set him at a high rate, to long after him, to
hunger and thirst after his righteousness, your peace shall come upon such a
man. That is, if there be a brokenhearted man that looks after CHRIST, whose
heart yeranes after him, that he is able to prize him aright, he shall be
accepted: but if they be such men as will not receive you, such as will not
set meat before you, such as will give you no respect, shake off the dust of
your feet, etc. So that I say, such a complaint we may make, If we find a
want of desire after CHRIST; for that is required; but if we look upon any
thing as a qualification in our selves, such a worthiness is not required, we
must be driven out of all conceit of it, or else we cannot take Christ. So much
for the Use, that seeing it is only faith whereby we lay hold of Christ's
righteousness, that then we have no reason to be discouraged, in respect of
any want; nay, we must find a want of all things, before we can be made
partakers of this righteousness.

Use. 2. To rejoice in God.
Again, secondly, if it be by faith only, by which we are made partakers of
this righteousness, and by which we are saved, then we should learn hence to
rejoice only in GOD, and not to rejoice in our selves; for this is the very
end why GOD has appointed this way of salvation: Ephesians. 1.6. Ephesians. 1.6.
For he has chosen us to the praise of the glory of his grace, in his Beloved.
That is, that he might have the praise of the glory of his grace, as it is in
Ephesians. 2. Therefore it is of faith, Ephesians. 2.
and not by works, that no man should boast of himself: 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor.
1.30.
Therefore CHRIST is made to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that no flesh should rejoice in it self. Now if that be GODS end,
if that be his aim, why he will have us saved by faith, let not us disappoint
him of his aim, let us not take from him the glory of his grace; but let us
glory in the Lord.

This point we should especially look to, not to rejoice in our selves, but in
GOD: For, my beloved, we are all naturally exceeding apt to rejoice in our
selves, we would feign find some excellency in our selves, every man is apt
to reflect upon himself, and he would feign see some worth there that he
might rejoice in; and if he be no body at all there, it is contrary to his
nature to think that he shall be accepted: there is nothing in the world that
we are so backward to as this. It was Adams fault in Paradise, whereas he
should have trusted GOD, and have been wholly dependant upon him for all, he
would needs know good and evil, he would have something of his own; and this
was it that lost him all, and brought the curse upon him, because he would not
be dependant.

Now in the Gospel, GOD comes by a second means of saving men, and in this
the LORD would have the creature to have nothing in himself to glory in, but
man is hardly brought to this, but exalts and lifts up himself, and would
feign have some worth and excellency of his own; but as long as we do thus,
we cannot be saved: that is the argument that is used Romans 6.4. Romans 6.4.
why Abraham was justified by faith; if there had been any other way, Abraham
had had wherein to rejoice in himself: but faith excludes this rejoicing, and
only faith, we should, I say, learn to do this in good earnest, to see that
there is no worth in our selves, to have CHRIST to be to us all in all: Col.
3.11. is an excellent place to this purpose, says the Apostle there, (in the
matter of salvation) There is neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, but
Christ is all in all. That is, when we come to be justified before GOD, when
we come to the matter of salvation, God looks at nothing in a man, he looks
at no difference between man and man; one man is virtuous, another man is
wicked; one man is a Jew, and has all those privileges; another man is a
Gentile, an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel; one man is circumcised,
another man is uncircumcised; but all this is nothing: Why? For CHRIST is all
in all. Mark it: First, he is all; that is, there is nothing else required to
justify: Indeed, if we were something, and he were not all, we might then
look at something besides; but he is all.

Again, he is all in all: that is, go through all things that you may think
will help you to salvation, in all those things CHRIST is only to be
respected, and nothing but Christ, whatsoever is done without Christ, GOD
regards it not; If you will do any work of your own to help your selves in
salvation, if you will rest upon any privileges, Christ is not all in all; but
Christ must be all in all in every thing: and if only Christ be all, then we
must come only with faith; for it is faith only that lays hold upon Christ.

Now a natural man, he will not have Christ to be all, but himself will be
something; or if Christ be all in some things, he will not have Christ to be
all in every thing, to have Christ to be his wisdom, his righteousness, his
sanctification; to do nothing but by Christ; to have Christ to be his
redemption, not to be able to help himself without Christ, but that Christ
must help him out of every trouble, and bestow upon him every comfort, this,
I say, is contrary to the nature of man: therefore we must be thoroughly emptyed
of our selves in this matter of rejoicing, as well as in the matter of taking:
for in what measure any man sets any price upon himself, so far as he has
any opinion of himself that he is something, just so far he detracts from
Christ: but when a man boasts not of himself at all, such a man rejoices in
GOD altogether, such a man will stand amazed at the height, and breadth, and
length, and depth of the love of GOD; such a man will be able to see that there
are unsearchable riches in Christ; such a man will be able to say with Paul,
that he cares for nothing, he reckons all things dung, Phil. 3. Phil 3.
I have all the privileges (says he) that other men have; I am a Jew, I am a
Pharise; but I reckon all these things as dung; that is, I care for none of
them, if I had an hundred more: It is true, I have been as strict as any man;
yea, I went beyond others: for I was zealous in that course wherein I was, yet
I have been taught thus much, that all these things are nothing, for GOD
regards them not, he regards nothing but Christ and his righteousness, therefore
I look not after these things, but that I may be found in him, not having mine
own righteousness, but that righteousness that GOD accepts, which is
through faith in him. Therefore, my brethren, learn thus to rejoice in CHRIST,
and in GOD, and not in your selves; this is the most excellent work that we
can perform, it is the work of the Saints and Angels in Heaven, we should
learn to come as near them now as we can: In Reu. 7.11. Reu. 7.11.
they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation comes by our God, that
sits upon the Throne, and by the Lamb; and therefore, praise, and wisdom,
and glory be given to God for evermore; because salvation is from the Lord, and
from the Lamb, and not from our selves at all: hence it is that they fell
down, and worshipped him; and for this cause they all cry, wisdom, and glory,
and praise be to our GOD for evermore.

If salvation had been from our selves, if we had done any thing to help our
selves therein, there had not been ground of giving all praise and glory to
GOD; and if this be the work of the Saints and Angels, we should labor to
perform it as abundantly as we can now: and let us do it in good earnest: for
if men could be brought to this, to rejoice in GOD alone, their mouths would
be filled with praise exceedingly, they would regard nothing else, and in the
course of their lives they would make it evident to the world, that they were
such as made no account of the World, so they might have CHRIST, they would be
content with any condition: for Christ is all in all to them.

Thirdly, Use. 3. To labor for faith above all
if it be by faith only by which we are made partakers of the righteousness
by which we are saved, then it should teach us to let other things go, and
principally to mind this matter, to labor to get faith, whatsoever become of
other things; for it is that by which we have salvation.

The Papists, they teach that works are the maine, and many things they
prescribe that men must do: our Doctrine is, you see, that faith only is
required: Indeed, many things follow upon faith, but faith is that you must
only labor for, and then the rest will follow upon it.

This Doctrine of ours, you shall find that it is delivered clearly in Gal.
5.5, 6. Gal. 5.5.6.
We wait, through the Spirit, for the hope of righteousness, which is through
faith. That is, we look for nothing from the Law, we regard no works at all
in the matter of justification; that which we look for, is only that
righteousness which is taken by faith: and why do we so? For, says he, in
Christ Jesus, neither circumcision is any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith,
etc. As if he should say, there is good reason why we should expect salvation
only by faith, because nothing else will help us in that work, circumcision
is nothing, nor uncircumcision is nothing: by those two he means all other
things, that is, the having of all the privileges in the world, the doing of
all the works that can be done, faith is all in all; but it must be such a
faith as works by love; though it be by faith only, yet it is not an idle
faith: therefore you are especially to labor for faith.

Without faith God regards not moral virtues.
There are many other excellencies that we are capable of, many moral virtues,
such as Aristotle and Socrates have described; but without faith, GOD regards
none of these: take one that is a wicked man, and take another, let him be
never so virtuous, as Socrates, and Seneca, that were the strictest in morality
of all the Heathen; nay, take any man that lives in the Church, that lives the
most strict and exact life, and yet is not justified by faith, God makes no
difference between these men, the one is as near to heaven as the other, GOD
looks upon them both with the same eye; for he regards nothing without faith.
He that is the most profane and ungodly, if he come with faith, he shall
obtain Christ; the other that has all other moral Virtues in the most exact
manner, without faith, they shall do him no good: therefore we are to seek
for nothing in the matter of justification, but how we may be enabled to
believe, we are principally to study this matter of faith.

Take such a one as Socrates, Difference between faith and moral virtues.
and such a one as Saint Paul, it may be Socrates might be outwardly as
temperate, and as patient, and be endued with as many excellencies, he might
appear in his carriage as strict as Saint Paul; but here is the great
difference, The one does what he does of himself, and through himself, and
for himself; the other does what he does of CHRIST, and through CHRIST, and
for CHRIST: therefore faith mainely is requisite.

If we had all other excellencies, yet we shall find this in them, that they
do always give something to the creature.

Again, if you go never so far in them, yet you shall find that there is
some imperfection in them.

But faith it emptieth the creature of all things, it leaves nothing in a man,
it makes him lean and rest only upon CHRIST, and upon his righteousness for
salvation.

Again, faith works in us a love to GOD: for, we having nothing in our
selves, but all that we have being from him, we cannot but love him again.

Again, faith presents to God a perfect righteousness, and therefore God only
accepts it: for God must be just, and nothing can satisfy the Justice of GOD,
but a righteousness that is perfect, nothing can attain a righteousness that
is perfect, but only faith, labor therefore to believe this, and to turn all
your study and care how to get faith. My beloved, this is a thing that we are
bound to preach to you; this is the sum of that Doctrine that CHRIST so often
preached when he was upon the Earth, Believe, for the Kingdom of God is at
hand: this is the sum of all the Doctrine of the Apostles, it was all they
had to do, to persuade men to believe: What was the sum of all Paul's
Doctrine? We go up and down, says he, from place to place, witnessing both
to Jews and Gentiles, etc. So it is our part, when we come to preach to you,
when we come to dispense to you that which is for the nourishment of your
souls, we must do as those Stewards that set bread and salt upon the Table,
whatsoever other dish there is; so we should always preach Christ, and persuade
you to believe in him, and stir you up to turn the stream of your endeavors
after the obtaining of that faith that takes this righteousness; the
principal thing we are to look unto, is, to see from what Fountain that that
we have comes; if a man have never so many virtues in him, if they arise not
from this fountain, if they spring not from this root, they are nothing, GOD
looks upon them without acceptance or delight.

Again, this is that that you are to do in hearing, that which you are
chiefly to look after, is, how to get faith; and therefore if men will employ
their strength and their endeavors, and busy themselves to attain such and
such virtues, it is but as the watering of the branches, and to let the root
alone; faith is the root; that is, it is that that makes all acceptable to
GOD: for what is the difference between Christianity and Morality, and without
this, what is our preaching? We may gather welneere as good instructions to
resist vice, ouf of Plutarch, and out of Seneca, as out of Paul's Epistles, but
this differenceth it, that we preach CHRIST, and from Christ we derive ability
and strength to do all things else, and that makes all else to be acceptable;
so that this is it that you must look after, to have CHRIST, to receive all
from him, to do all for him; for these are reciprocal, unless you think you
have all from CHRIST, you will never do all for him; when we think CHRIST is
alsufficient, we will be perfect with him again.

But, Difference between faith and shows of holiness.
by the way, in this you see not only the difference between moral virtues,
and those in a true Christian, which is godliness, that they come from
different fountains, and look to different ends; but you see also the
difference between those shows of strictness that are among the Papists, and
that sincerity of life that we preach unto you, which is an effect of this
faith: for, if you mark it, you shall find that all that they do, either is
without Christ, or adds to Christ; they think they shall be saved for doing
such and such things, which prepare and fit them for salvation, they look
mainely to the works of humbling the body, and doing many actions of
mortification, but still Christ only is not sought after in all this. But now
look to the Doctrine that we have delivered, it is CHRIST that we preach, it
is faith that we preach unto you. It is true, we preach those things too, we
lay the same necessity upon you of doing good works, we stir you up to
holiness of life, and mortification; but here is the difference, we derive it
all from Christ by faith, we say that faith does all.

Indeed when you have faith, if that faith be right, it will work by love:
here then you see the difference, we do the same things, but we derive all
from a justifying faith, laying hold upon CHRIST; and so love to him, and all
other graces do arise from this.

Use 4. To apply the promises with boldness.
Again, a fourth Use of this point is this, If salvation be only by faith,
then we should learn hence to go with boldness to GOD, to take the promises,
and to reckon them sure to us. If something else had been required on our
part, we should then have gone with a great deal of doubting to GOD; but now,
seeing there is nothing required, but only to go and take it, this should make
us to go with boldness to the Throne of Grace, to come with assurance that we
shall speed.

And therefore in the business of seeking to GOD for the remission of our
sins, (which indeed is the greatest business that we have to do) what
greater comfort can there be, then to have this assurance, that if we come to
GOD for it, we shall not fail nor be deceived of it?

For the present occasion of receiving the Sacrament: What is the end of the
Sacrament, but to preach faith? The Sacrament preaches that to your outward
senses, that we do to your understandings; it presents to the eye, that
which we now preach to the ear: for what is the Covenant of GOD in the
Gospel, but only this? GOD offers Christ unto you freely, as the Bread and
Wine is given unto you. To us a Son is given, etc.

Again, we take him, and bind our selves to obey him, and to love him, to be
to him alone, to marry him, to make him our Lord and our Husband. Now in the
Sacrament both these are done: when the Bread and Wine are offered, they are
but a resemblance of the offer of CHRIST. Indeed there is a blessing in it: for
it is Gods Ordinance, it increases this grace of faith. And again, there is a
bond on our part, wherein we tie our selves to obey CHRIST.

Now if any of you will offer to come, and yet have not given up your selves to
GOD in good earnest, you receive your own condemnation, you are divorced from
CHRIST, and married to the World; and this is to receive the Sacrament
unworthily. The maine end of the Sacrament, is to increase faith, and salvation
is ours by faith; therefore we should come with boldness, and lay hold upon
the promises of it.

Gods free promise should encourage us to come with boldness.
We should do in this case as Ioab did, lay hold upon the horns of the Altar;
that is, take hold upon CHRIST, and remember that sure word of promise, To us a
Son is given, to us a Child is borne. And, Let whosoever will, come and take
of the waters of life freely. Go through the whole Book of GOD, all the
promises therein are as so many grounds for faith to build upon; it is
impossible that God should slay you, if you come and lay hold of the horns of
the Altar. If you will take Christ, and receive these promises, and rest on
them, it is impossible but that God should perform them, he has bound
himself to perform what he has said, in 1 Ioh. 1.9. 1 Ioh 1.9.
If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive them: As if
he were unjust and unfaithful if he should not do it. His Oath is passed, he
has added an Oath to his promise, that by 2. immutable witnesses it should
stand firm.

We should do in this case as Jacob did, after he had once a promise from GOD,
when he meets his brother Esau, Lord, (says he) Thou have promised to do me
good, therefore deliver me from the hand of my brother. So, when we have a
promise, and GOD has said, He that will take CHRIST shall be saved, and
CHRIST is freely given, and the pardon is general, therefore what should
hinder us? Urge GOD upon his promise, wrestle with GOD, as Jacob did, and let
him not go without a blessing; wrestling implies resisting, it is a sign GOD
resisted him for a time: so, it may be, GOD will deny thee a great while, yet
continue thou to seek him, let him not go, he cannot deny thee in the end,
thou shall have the blessing at the last: we should learn thus to importune
GOD; tell him, Lord, I have a sure promise, and thou have made the pardon
general, and I am sure I come within the number of that Commission: Go and
preach the Gospel to every creature, go and tell every man under heaven, that
Christ is offered to him, he is freely given to him by GOD the Father, and
there is nothing required of you, but that you marry him, nothing but to accept
of him; here is a word sure enough, if there were nothing else but this.
Therefore learn to do in this as the Woman of Canaan did, though Christ denied
her, yet she would not give over: for she had this ground to build upon, that
he was Jesus, he was the Son of David, he was merciful, and she had
exceeding great need of him, and therefore she would not give over; so, I say,
having this ground for your faith, go to GOD with boldness, and never give
over; it is impossible (if you seek him in good earnest, with all your heart)
but that he should receive you.

It is true indeed, he gives to some sooner then he does to others; with some
he deals as he did with the Woman of Canan; to some he gives an answer
quickly, some again he defers longer, and he will put us to the trial.
CHRIST deals differently with his children, he does with us sometimes as the
unjust Judge, he turns the deaf ear to us, or like the man that was in bed
with his children, and was unwilling to rise; but what says the Text? Luke
11.6. Luke 11.6.8.
though he would not do it for him as a friend, yet his importunity makes him
rise and lend him: so thou think (it may be) GOD is not thy friend, yet by
thy importunity he will rise at the last; therefore, though thou find GOD to
be as an enemy, though he be never so backward to rise, yet give not over, I
can assure thee, as certainly as there is any truth in the Book of GOD, thou
shall be heard in the end, Heaven and Earth shall pass away before this sure
Word shall perish. It is Gods manner to put men to the trial, and it is his
wisdom so to do, otherwise, he would have many that would be forward at the
first, that would fall off in the end.

It was Naomies wisdom to bid her Daughter Ruth go back to her kindred, but
she would not, she stood it out: I will go (says she) where thou go, and
nothing but death shall part between me and thee. When Naomi saw that she was
steadfastly minded, she took her along with her. So, if GOD should receive men
at the first, many men would come in, and take hold upon Christ, and make a
profession of his Name, but they would not hold out to the end with him: But
when CHRIST shall tell them, I have not so much as a place to lay my head in,
if thou will have me, thou must deny thy self, and take up thy Cross, and
thou shall find a great deal of trouble, and suffer persecution; If a man
now, notwithstanding this, will not be beaten off from Christ, but, though
Christ turn the deaf ear to him for the present, and present to him all
manner of difficulties, yet if he will, notwithstanding all this, be constant
still in importuning God to have CHRIST, when GOD shall see that his mind is
thus set, he will take him along with him, he will be thine, and thou shall be
his, his people shall be thy people: this is it that knits the knot between
you: My Beloved is mine, and I am his; his Word is passed for it, he has
promised his consent, now if we will give ours, the match is made.

If it were doubtful whether we should have his consent, it were another
case; but we have a sure Word for it, we should learn therefore to importune
him.

Now when we have done this, when we are come with this boldness, and have
laid hold upon CHRIST, then let us look to the privileges, then let us take
the pardon of our sins, adoption, and reconciliation, and all things else,
only remember that condition of after-obedience, that though we may come
freely, and come with this boldness, and though nothing be required, but that
we take this Son of GOD that is offered, yet, I say, there is a condition of
after-obedience, we must resolve to serve him, and to love him with all our
heart, we must resolve to do that that Ruth promises to Naomi, to live with
him, and to be with him, and that his people shall be our people, etc.

Object
But you will say, I am willing to do this, to part from my lusts, and to be to
CHRIST alone, but I am not able, my lusts are strong and preualent.

Answ.
To this I answer, If thou be but willing, Christ desires no more: Christ
requires but a willingness to mortify our lusts.
I would but ask thee this, Suppose that thou were able to overcome those
lusts; take a man that is strongly given to good-fellowship, (as they call it)
to company-keeping, that is given to fornication, to swearing, or whatsoever
the sin be, take any preualent lust that is in any man that now hears me,
I would ask him this Question; Put the case thou were able to get the victory
over thy lust, would thou be content to part with it, and to take CHRIST? If
thou say, No, I had rather enjoy the sweetness of my lusts still, Art thou
not now worthy to be condemned? But if thou answer, I would, upon condition I
were able to overcome my lusts; I assure thee, GOD will make thee able, GOD
requires no more but a willingness to come, and take CHRIST, the other is Gods
work.

I, Object.
but I have tried, and have not found it so.

I answer, Answ.
it cannot be, thou have not yet solued to part with thy lusts, thou have not
yet set down this peremptory conclusion in thy self, that thou will forsake
every thing that you may have CHRIST: If any man say he is willing to take
CHRIST, and to part with the sweetness, and the pleasantness, and the
profitablenesse that his lust brings to him, if he could get the victory, if
he were freed from the solicitations of them: Let me tell thee, thou must
first resolve to take Christ upon his own conditions, and for the other, GOD
has promised to do that himself: 1. Cor. 8.9. 2 Cor. 8.9.
God will confirm you, and keep you blameless; for he is faithful that has
called you to the fellowship of his Son. As if he should have said, Do you
think that GOD will call men to CHRIST, that he will beseech men to take his
Son, will he call you to the fellowship of his Son, and will he not keep
you blameles? he has promised it, and sworn it, if he should not do it, he
should be unfaithful; when GOD calls you to come unto Christ, he promises
that the virtue of Christ's death shall kill sin in you, and that the virtue
of Christ's Resurrection shall raise you up to newness of life; GOD has
promised that he will give the Holy Ghost: for he never gives his Son to any,
but he gives them the Spirit of his Son too. Now, He that has called you is
faithful, and he will do it. So that I say, if thou will come in, (that is)
if thou will accept of CHRIST upon his conditions, it is certain GOD will
receive thee; and if thou find thy self troubled with the violence of any
lust, or of any temptation, press upon GOD, urge him with his Word and
promise, that he would assist thee by his own strength, that he would enable
thee to overcome, that he would give thee the Spirit of his Son, and resolve
as Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him: for I have a sure promise,
Heaven and Earth shall pass, but not one tittle of his sure Word shall pass
till it be fulfilled.

Now because this is a point of much moment, this laying hold upon the
promises, and because it is a thing that is not easily done, therefore I will
show you these two things. Two things in laying hold on the promises.


The first is this, that the understanding must be rightly informed, what
ground a man has to do it; when a man comes to believe the forgiveness of
his sins, let him not think, I have a persuasion that my sins are
forgiven, therefore they are forgiven, but a man must labor to see the ground
of it: for, a thing is not true because we are persuaded it is so; but the
thing is first true, and then we believe it: GOD has first offered
forgiveness of sins to you, and then you look upon his Word, and so believe
it; But, I say, when a man is persuaded in a confused manner, without any just
ground, without a clear knowledge of the progress of faith, how it goes
along, this is not right, this keeps many from assurance, because they are
not clearly instructed in it: For, to the end that faith may take hold of the
promise, that it may be sure to us, 4. Things in the understanding.
we must conceive of the right method, and that stands in these four things.

First, we must see our own condition, we

By looking into the Book of GOD, (and certainety there is of the Scriptures
in general, there is the same certainety in these particular promises: so that
with the same faith that a man is to believe the Word of GOD, with the same
faith he is to believe this offer of CHRIST.

Quest.
I, but is it sure to me?

Then a man looks to the generality of the promise, that it is offered to all,
none excepted, and therefore, says he, it is offered to me.

But will Christ do to me as he has promised, is he powerful and willing to
do it? Then a man looks into the Word, and finds that he is Almighty, that he
is able to make him the Son of God, that whatsoever Christ has by nature, he
shall have it by matching with him: Indeed Christ has it immediately as he is
the Son of GOD, but we have it mediately, as the Wife has the riches of her
Husband. If a Woman marry the Kings Son, she has the same privileges, and
the same inheritance that he has: so, whatsoever CHRIST has becomes ours:
Paul, and Apollo, and all are CHRIST'S, the World is CHRIST'S, and all things
present and to come are CHRIST'S, and they are all made ours. Now when this is
well pondered, and we find that we have a sure Word to confirm this,

have well considered, as the saying is of marriage, that it is a bestowing of
ones self upon such a one, so it is in this; every one therefore should
consider beforehand, what it is to bestow himself upon CHRIST, and when this
is done, that we have made the match, and bestowed our selves upon CHRIST, then,

In the next place, we come to see what we God, and I shall be sanctified; (for
together with him I have his Spirit,) all my prayers shall be heard, all the
promises in the Book of GOD are mine; for In him they are all Yea and Amen: as
all the World is his, so it is all the wealth of a Christian after he has
taken CHRIST. Now when this is distinctly propounded to us, and we conceive it
aright, it makes the way much more easy to us; but when we go on in a
confused manner, because the Gospel is not clearly understood by us, hence it
is that we labor much, and yet the thing is not done: therefore, my beloved,
if you have a persuasion of the forgiveness of your sins, if it be but a
mere persuasion, it will alter exceedingly, it will go and come in the time
of temptation; but when you have a sure Word, when you have built your selves
upon the Scriptures, it is not dependant upon your persuasion, but it is the
Word that you rest upon: For fancy, and opinion, and persuasion, it will grow
sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter, as the shadow does, whereas the body
of the thing is the same; but when your eye is upon the Word, when you rest
upon that, then your persuasion will continue the same as the Word continues.
Indeed, your comfort may be sometimes more, sometimes less; but when it is
pitched upon the sure Word, that is it that will bring you comfort in the
working of it, to observe the method and degrees of it. Indeed, my beloved, it
is a point of another nature to believe then the world thinks of; therefore
examine, and recall, and understand this Doctrine that we have now taught you
distinctly, it will be worth all your labor, for the present you shall have a
good conscience, and the assurance of Gods favor, and when death comes, the
right understanding of it will be worth all the world besides.

It is said of the second ground, that they fell away, because they had no
root in themselves: they had some root, but their faith was pitched upon a
general Doctrine, upon a general persuasion, that has a kind of root, but
it has no root in it self: so many Christians go far, and they do much,
but they have no root in themselves, that is, they do not understand
distinctly, and thoroughly, the grounds upon which their faith is built, they
see not a sure ground for it in the Word of GOD, they know not how faith is
built upon the ^ure corner stone; for CHRIST is that sure corner stone, he that
is built upon him shall never be ashamed, we should learn therefore not to
give over till we be rooted and grounded. If a man should ask many people,
What is the reason that you are persuaded that your sins are forgiven? (for
you ought to build that upon an infallible ground) I^ it be no more but because
you are persuaded, it is nothing; but if you can say, My sins are forgiven,
because I have Christ, and he that has the Son has life, I have the sure
Word of God for it, God cannot lie, he is Truth it self that has said it, and
he has offered CHRIST to every creature under Heaven; then is the ground good,
thou may take him boldly, being within that number.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
OF FAITH. The fourth Sermon.
ROMANS 1.17. For by it the righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith: As it is written, The just shall live by Faith.


THe next thing to be done is this, to draw the will to take the promises;
for, though the understanding rightly apprehend all that is delivered in the
Word, yet except the will be bowed, except we incline, and be willing to
embrace these offers, and willingly take Christ upon these conditions, the
thing is not done; for, I say, justifying faith is as well in the will as in
the understanding: for that which I deliver now, is built upon that which I
delivered before; and I speak chiefly to those that understand the premises,
or else you will not fully understand that we are now about.

But seeing that the will has a part in faith as well as the understanding,
the second thing is to draw the will: But how is that done? This is the work
of God, he only has the soueraignety over the will and affections of a man,
it is the great prerogative of GOD, when a business is to be done with the
will and affections, GOD must persuade it, as in Noah's speech, God persuade
Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem: As if he should say, I may persuade in
vain, except GOD put to his hand to the work: So it is the property of the
Spirit to convince; as Ioh. 16. Ioh. 16.
The Spirit shall convince the World of sin and righteousness. That is, he
shall show men their sins, and their need, and withal convince them, and
persuade them to take Christ's righteousness. Thus I say, it is GOD that draws
the will, it is he that puts a strong instinct into the heart of man, it is he
that must work on the heart, as in Ioh. 6.44. Ioh. 6.44.
None can come to me except the Father draw him. How shall that be done? If GOD
does once draw a man, he will have no rest till he have Christ, he will not
be at quiet till he have gotten him: compare that place, None come to me
except the Father draw him, with that Cant. 2.3. Cant. 2.3.
Draw us, and we will run after thee, it is not such drawing as when a man is
drawn by force, but it is a drawing which is done by changing the will and
affections, when GOD alters the bent of the mind, when GOD iustifies a man, he
will affect a man's heart so, that he shall be so affected with Christ, as
that he shall have no rest till he have him; when he does see his need of him,
he shall not give over, till he be assured that he is reconciled to him: Draw
us, and we will run after thee: It is such a drawing as is called the
teaching of GOD: Ioh. 6.45. Ye shall be taught of God: that is, when GOD comes
to teach a thing, he boweth the will and affections to do it. We heretofore
exemplified this by the similitude of the Ant, and the Be, and other
creatures, they are said to be taught of GOD, when GOD puts a strong instinct
into them to do such and such a thing, he teaches them to do this and this:
So GOD teaches men to come to Christ, that is, he puts a strong inclination
into their hearts, and when that is there once, they can have no rest; as the
Iron cannot rest till it come to the Loadstone, and as the stone cannot rest
till it come to the center, so the heart of man, when GOD draws it, when he
has changed the will, then he finds such a disposition in him as was in the
Spouse, Cant. 2. She fought him whom her soul loved, she sought him by night,
and by day, she sought him in the street, and among the Watchmen, and never
rested until she had found him: So when GOD has drawn a man's heart, when
he has inclined a man's will to embrace Christ, he is never satisfied until
he have found him.

But, you will say, GOD does this by means, he uses Arguments to draw the
will.

It is true, The Question therefore is, How GOD does this: we will propound 3.
means by which GOD does usually do it.

The will drawn by 3. means.
First, the will is drawn, by being persuaded what the miserable condition of a
man is that is not yet come to CHRIST, that has not yet taken him, that has
not gotten the pardon and forgiveness of his sins, that has not got
assurance that Christ has received him to mercy.

The second thing is, the good that he shall get by it.

The third thing is, that he shall not lose his labor if he do attempt it.

1. Means.
The first thing, I say, that draws us to CHRIST, is to consider how miserable
we are without him, if men were persuaded of this, they would more seek him.
It is true, if a man could live alone he would not come to him: take Rebels,
and Pirates, if they were able to maintain themselves abroad, if they could be
as happy in rebellion as in receiving mercy, they would never come in: So it
is in this case, If we be brought to this exigent, that we see we cannot hold
out any longer, we are not stronger then he, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 1
Cor. 10.
Are we stronger then he? when a man is persuaded of that, when a man sees
this necessity is laid upon him, or else he perishes, then he will come in: So
take a servant or a son, if he be able to live from his Father, or Masters
house, perhaps he will run at riot still; but when he sees he cannot have so
much as husks, he can have nothing to sustain him, that is it that will
bring him home: So take a Wife, a Spouse, if one come to woo her, if she be
able to live without him, it may be she will refuse him, but if the case be so
that she cannot subsist, but the Creditors will come upon her, she must needs
have a Husband to protect her, to be a bar and a covering unto her, now she
sees a necessity of it: Therefore we say the Law drives men unto CHRIST, and
the Law does it by showing a man his sin, and the curse due to it, by showing
a man his vileness, and if this will not do it, then it shows him the curse;
when a man sees the misery that the Law brings upon him, and pronounces
against him, that he is condemned, that persuades him: Therefore the Law draws
a man, and the sense of his misery, showing him that he is out of CHRIST, this
draws him to consider that GOD is his enemy, that all the creatures are his
enemies,: for if GOD be thine enemy, then needs must all the creatures be so,
because they turn with him to and fro, as an Army turns at the beck of the
General. Now to have GOD and the creatures to be a man's enemy, to have every
thing to work together for a man's hurt; prosperity slaies him, and adversity
is not a Plaster or Medicine, but a poison to him, every thing ioynes for his
hurt; the Word, which is the savor of life to others, is the savor of death
to him; the Sacraments, which are a means to convey grace and assurance to
others, it is a means to convey Satan to his heart, it increases his
condemnation and his judgment, when the wrath of GOD abides upon a man; that
is, it shall be upon him for eternity hereafter: for he that has not the
Son, has not life, Ioh. 3. vlt. when a man seriously considers all this,
when he sees what case he is in, that he cannot live without CHRIST, this will
be one thing that boweth and inclines the will to come in and take CHRIST: but
this is not all.

2. Means.
But in the second place, a man will know what good he shall have by such a
Husband; and indeed, if this were all, he could never marry out of love, and
if he do not, it can be no match: Therefore we must find some good, some
excellency in CHRIST; and this is the second thing that draws the will, If we
take him, we shall have all his wealth, and all his honor, all the joy and
pleasure he can afford, we shall have all his wealth; that is, go to the whole
Universe, and see what there is profitable or comfortable to the sons of men,
and all that is ours, whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world,
or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all is yours, you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, all this is yours. As for the things of the world,
if we take him once, we have all these: would not a man desire all these, Is
not this a strong argument to move a man to take Christ, that all the Angels in
Heaven, all the excellent Ministers on the Earth, (that are next to Angels)
they are all his servants; God has bestowed these gifts for his sake, they are
set aworke for the furthering of his salvation: and the Angels, you know, are
ministering Spirits, sent forth for the good of the Elect; for the World, as the
Apostle says, that is, whatsoever is in the World, all the good and all the
evil in the world, even that evil does him service, the afflictions, and
persecutions, and storms, drive him to his haven, as well as fair gales; every
thing scoures him, does him some good or other, all in the world is his, both
life and death; that is, whatsoever belongs to this life or another, all is for
his service; and not that only, but when death comes, that a man thinks is the
greatest enemy; that there is no good in death, yet that does him good, it
heales our sins, it is a means of happiness; in a word, when the Apostle could
say no more, things present, or things to come; for a man should look to both:
as heaven will not content him without the things of this life, so the things
of this life will not content him without Heaven; but when there is both, the
mind is satisfied.

Now when a man considers what wealth he has by Christ, and again, that he
shall have all his honor; now look what honor Christ has, the same he has
by matching with him; having him we have all things: If a man could enter into
a serious consideration of this, to think that he is a King, that he is an
heir of all things, that all the promises do belong to him; do but think
with your selves, if any of you should be raised from a mean ordinary
condition, to be made an earthly Prince, how would you be affected with it?
would it not put other thoughts into you? Why should you not believe spiritual
privileges to be as real? Why should you not rejoice more in them? they are
more durable, they are more excellent, they have all in them the other have:
Indeed they are things that are not seen with the eye, they are spiritual,
they are things that are enjoyed and reserved for afterward, but yet there is
much for the present: Learn to consider this, and it would draw and move you;
but because these things are looked on with a general eye, as matters of fancy
and speculation, they are looked on as things that are rather talked of, we see
no such thing, we have no feeling of them, therefore we do not affect them:
but we should labor to believe this: The Scripture often mentions and repeates
this, Ye are a Royal Priesthood, Heirs with CHRIST. Labor to come to this
disjunction, if these things be not so, why do you believe them at all? if
they be so, why do you not rejoice in them, proportionable to these
privileges? And so for Joy; at his right hand there are Joys and pleasures
for evermore. And as it is so for eternity, so the nearer we draw to him in
this life, the more pleasure we have; for he is the God of all comfort, the
nearer we are to him, the more comfort, all the ways of wisdom are ways of
pleasure, because they lead nearer to GOD who is the cause of all comfort, So
that is the second thing to consider, the good you shall have by CHRIST when
once you see how miserable you are without him, and that you shall gain so
much by him.

Now in the third place, 3. Means.
there is one thing remaining, How shall I have him? I may attempt it, and go
without him, I may seek, and be denied: and therefore, in the third place, you
shall be sure to obtain; that is a great means to encourage us to come unto
him, when you see you shall not fail, there is nothing can hinder on your
part, as you have heard of in the precedent condition; there is required but an
earnest hunger and thirst after him, he iustifies the ungodly, and therefore
nothing can hinder on your parts: and therefore if any thing hinder it, it must
be on GODS part. Now what is there on GODS part that hinders? He has promised,
and bound himself, and he will not go from his Word, he will not deny
himself: and therefore when there is no hinderance on neither part, then why
do you not believe? If you will consider Christ, Arguments to persuade us of
Christ's willingness to rec^iue sinners.
and see how he describes himself in the Word, if you look unto all those
arguments that are propounded unto us therein, to persuade us, you will make no
question, but if you are willing to come, you are sure to receive him, you
shall have remission of all your sins: By expressions in Scripture.
If you consider, first those speeches in E^^kiel, I desire not the death of a
sinner: and Why will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? such expostulations are very
frequent; Oh that my people would return: and How often would I have gathered
you, as the Hen gathers her Chickens: I say, these are the speeches of GOD,
and GOD speaks as he means; you shall find by the manner, and the fashion,
and the figure of the speeches, that GOD desires it earnestly: Why will ye dye,
O ye house of Israel? by way of interrogations: and, Oh that my people would
do thus and thus: Even this GOD desires, that a sinner would return. There is
no action that God does, but he does it willingly, that he forgiues sinners,
that he receives those men that will come home unto him. You see in the Father
of the Prodigal, that does express the disposition of GOD, he runs to
meet his Son, he was the forwarder of the two, he falls upon him, and
kisseth him, he could not express his joy for his coming home: such is the
disposition of GOD: I take no delight, as I ^^ue, says the LORD, in the death
of a sinner: but rather that he should live. And therefore when GOD says it,
we have a surer Word, you should better think of it, undoubtedly he will
receive you to mercy.

Again, By Christ's practice when he was on Earth.
consider how Christ did in the days of his flesh, how he behaved himself
then, was he not exceeding gentle to all that came unto him, exceeding
compassionate and pitiful, ready to heal every one, ready to do any thing
that was requested of him, that he denied not any that was importunate with
him: do you think that he has put off that disposition; is he not the same
still? as it is in the Hebrews, Is he not a merciful High Priest still? and
that the bowels of compassion in him melt over a straying sinner, and is ready
to receive him, his bowels yearne within him, and therefore doubt not but the
Lord will receive you.

Again, Else Christ's blood were shed in vain.
of necessity he must receive you, or else the blood of CHRIST were in vain,
his Cross and death were of none effect: What now can make the death of CHRIST
to be of none effect, but when it is not regarded, when his blood is trampled
under feere and despised of men, when it does no good, when it is not improued
for the purpose it was shed for? Do you think that GOD sent his only Son
from Heaven, to dye a cursed death, and would he have his blood shed in vain?
Now except he should receive poor sinners when they come, the death of CHRIST
should be of none effect: And therefore it cannot be but GOD must be ready to
receive them. So that there is no difficulty in him, all the difficulty is in
our selves, we are not willing to come.

By the example of others pardoned.
Again, if we consider what he has done for others, how many he has received
to mercy, when one sees such Rebels received to mercy, and considers with
himself, and thinks how he gave pardon to Manasses of his sins, which were
crying sins, and of an extraordinary nature, sins that were of long
continuance; he forgave Mary Magdalens sins, he forgave these greater
sinners, and why should he not forgive me? If one should come to a Physician,
of whom he has heard a great fame, and if he should meet with hundreds by the
way of his Patients, and all of them should tell him he has cured them, and
healed them, it would encourage a man to go on with confidence. Or if one
should come to a Well of which he has heard much, and should meet with
hundreds of people by the way, and all of them should tell him, we have been
at the Well, and it has cured us, and made us whole, this would encourage a
man to go with confidence, because of the multitude that have tried the
experience of it: so we should run to CHRIST; when so many thousands have
been forgiven, why should not these persuade us that he is ready to forgive
us, as Paul says, he has showed mercy to me, that others might believe in
GOD, I am an example for them to trust in God: therefore when we see he has
forgiven others so many and so great sins, why should we doubt?

Again, if CHRIST should not be ready to receive us, no flesh should be saved,
nor there is no man that would fear him, or hear him; Psalm. 130.3. there the
same argument is used; If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, who should
stand? but there is mercy with thee that thou may be feared. That is, if GOD
should not be pitiful to mankind, and ready to receive them, notwithstanding
their manifold failings, and infirmities, and rebellions they are subject unto,
no flesh should be saved, but all the world should perish.

Again, Else no flesh should be saved.
not so only, but GOD himself should not be worshipped, men would not regard
him; men would not serve him: Therefore, I say, of necessity GOD must have
mercy upon men, that they may fear him, and serve him, and that men may be
willing to serve.

Take a hard Master, a cruel King, a man that shuts out men, and excludes them
that have no hope, there is none that will serve such a man, there is no man
that will come in to him; but there is mercy with the Lord that he may be
feared and worshipped, and men may come in and worship him: and therefore doubt
not but Christ is willing to receive you.

If all this will not persuade you, yet in Esaias 55. there is one thing more, By
the infiniteness of Gods mercy.
if it will not enter into your thoughts; If you think your condition be such,
if you think your sins so circumstantiated, as I may say, that they are
committed in such a manner, that you think, though others have been forgiven,
yet you cannot, it passes your thoughts, you know not how to imagine it; yet
know, his mercy is above all: a man must hold that conclusion still.

And if this alone will not persuade me, yet when all this is put together,
when I see the misery of a man without CHRIST, when I see I shall be happy with
him, when I see it is of necessity, and if I come I shall certainly be
received, he cannot refuse me, all this will help to persuade a man; this you
should learn to press upon your own hearts, we that are the Ministers of
CHRIST are bound to do it: and therefore he has sent us out to compel men to
come in, that his House may be full: therefore he commands them to go unto the
highway, and unto the hedges, and compel men to come in. (And what is that?)
That is, be so importunate with them, promise them, threaten them, command them
in the Name of Christ to consent and come in, GOD would feign have his House
filled, he has killed his fatlings, he would not have his Table ready, and
have no guests; he would have his House filled, that his Table might not be
prepared in vain* and that it may not be in vain, we are to inuit you to
this marriage, we are to inuit you to these fatlings, to this Wine and Milk;
it is a banquet, and a banquet you know what it is; In a banquet there is as
much as will cheer the body, a concourse of all pleasant things; Such things
are in Christ, there is spiritual comfort, a concourse, a heap of all
spiritual joy and comfort, of all precious things you can find; and if you
will come and taste, you shall have all his Jewels, all his Graces, to
beautify and to adorn you withal: let this persuade you to come in.

But some may object, Object
If I come in, I must lose my right eye, or my right hand, I must part with my
lusts, which are as dear to me as these members.

I will be brief for t^is point, Ans.
because I will finish the Text at this time, and will answer it even as CHRIST
does, Matthew. 5. It is true, we must do so, but then remember we shall have
heaven for our labor: if Heaven be not worthy losing of a right eye, or a
right hand, keep thine eye still, if thou will needs keep it, but thou shall
be sure to go to hell: There needs no other answer, do but seriously consider
of this; If I will, I may keep this lust, this fleshly desire, but certainly
that will lead me to hell. Let that answer serve for this.

But it may be further objected, 2. Object.
If I do thus, I must deny my self, and this is a difficult thing for a man
to offer violence to himself, to cross himself in all his desires, a man is
able to do much, he may be willing to take great pains, and to suffer much,
but to cross himself still of his most inward desires that he has, those
that are most rooted in the soul, that stick near and close unto him, this
is difficult.

Ans.
I answer, CHRIST is worthy of all these, thou shall provide better for thy
self by doing this, By denying our selves, we enjoy our selves better.
there is another life in the regenerate part, and it perfects that, though you
destroy the flesh, and offer violence unto that, yet there is the inward man
that is growing up daily, though the outward man fail: It is true, violence
must be offered to the flesh, you must be content to part with pleasures, and
the outward man in that sense must suffer somewhat, but remember what you
gain, there is the inward man that so much the more prouides for it self; and
if you will not then deny your self, you deny not your disease that will slay
you. If a man have a disease that cries hard to him to have such and such
things given it, it is wisdom for him to deny it, because he nourishes that
that would destroy him: so herein himself is his disease, and to give to that,
is his destruction: so that that which you call your self is your disease, and
when you feed your self, you feed your disease: and therefore every one is to
be ruled by the Physicians advice, who teaches to do othewise, CHRIST
teaches us another way, which is for our health and safety: I cannot stand to
press that.

But I shall endure persecution, Object.
and loss of friends; nay, perhaps loss of life.

I, Ans.
but thou shall receive an hundred fold, thou shall have no loss by that
bargain, thou shall find Christ worth all that thou give him. More I should
add, but I come to the last point.

The righteousness of CHRIST is revealed from faith to faith.

The first point ye have heard; that,

Righteousness is revealed and offered in the Gospel to as many as will take
it. Doct. 1.
As also,

The second, Doct. 2.
That it is by faith by which we are made to partake of this righteousness, it
is revealed from faith to faith; that is, it is so revealed as that it is taken
by faith.

The third point, that we are now to handle, is this, that,

Faith admits degrees, Doct. 3.
and we ought every Christian to grow from degree to degree. Faith admits
degrees.


In this proposition faith admits of degrees, and that we ought to grow from
one degree to another, I find two parts: Two parts in the Doctrine.
First, that there are degrees of faith. Secondly, that we ought to grow from
degree to degree.


For the first, that I may run through them as briefly as I can, Faith admits
of degrees in 4. respects.
There are degrees in faith in these four respects: as there are two acts of
faith, one whereby we take Christ, and that we call a direct act, by which we
truly lay hold on him, and receive him as our Lord and Savior. The second is
that act of faith by which we know we have received him, the reflect act which
is assurance, both these receive degrees: The first receives degrees in three
respects: the last receives degrees, I will name but one, and so make up the
fourth.

In persuasion.
The first act by which we receive and take Christ the Messiah offered unto us,
it admits this first degree, there is a great degree of persuasion that Christ
is offered, and that he is ours, that he is given by GOD the Father; and
though I find this proposed in the Word, that Christ is given to us, yet there
are degrees of the persuasion of the truth of this; and this we need not wonder
at; for though it be faith, and though the persuasion be true, and good, and
firm, yet notwithstanding it may admit of degrees, else any man might object;

Object
If a man be fully persuaded, what needs he more? If he be not fully persuaded,
it is not faith; if he be fully persuaded, that makes it faith, and how can
that admit degrees?

Ans.
I answer, it may, because there are degrees in the very persuasion, though the
persuasion be good and true, yet there are degrees in it: As for example, there
is such a proposition of Truth, which I am persuaded to believe by arguments
that overcome me, I must needs yield to it, and yet there are more arguments
and reasons that may be brought, that may work a greater persuasion, as we
say, that may be more immediate to persuade us of that conclusion: as, a man
may see a thing by a little glimmering light of a candle, he may see it
certainly and firmly, but when there come more Candles or a Torch in, he may
see more clearly, although he saw it certainly before: So the promises of
God, we may behold them, and apply them to our selves to be sure and firm, and
yet this may admit more degrees, when there is more light, and more arguments,
when the Spirit of Adoption speaks more clearly and fully to us, there may be
a greater degree of persuasion: and therefore that objection, that either it is
not faith if there be doubting, or if it be firm in a man, he needs no more;
I say, it is not so, for faith admits degrees, there is a full persuasion, Col.
2. which intimates there is a lesser faith then that: As, you know, a Ship may
be carried with a gentle gale of wind as well as with a stronger gale, though
it go not so fast, but it may be moved, it may be put on with a gentle wind as
well as with a strong gale.

So a Tree may be rooted, and rooted strongly and firmly, and yet may be more
rooted afterward; The phrase of Scripture carries it so: Oh ye of little faith:
there is a little faith, and therefore it implies there is a strong faith, yet
the least is accounted faith. So, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief: it was
unbelief, and yet it was reckoned for belief.

So our Savior said to Peter, Why do thou doubt? Certainly Peter believed,
or else he could not cast himself vhon the water; and yet there was doubting
indeed mingled with it: And indeed, if faith were not mixed with doubting, who
should have faith? Did not David trust GOD much? and yet his faith was mixed
with doubting: says he, I shall perish one day by the hand of Saul, and yet he
had faith: Therefore, I say, there may be faith, though we have not so full a
persuasion.

Object.
But, you will say, how differs it from opinion?

Ans.
Opinion is an assent to a truth, with a fear lest the contrary may be true:
Wherein faith and opinion differ.
it differs from opinion in the object: the object of opinion is something in
its own nature uncertain, but Faith pitcheth upon the Word of GOD, which is
in its own nature infallible, and cannot deceive.

Again, opinion is a matter of speculation and no more: faith is a matter of
practice, but that is not all.

Opinion goes no further, but stays in a doubt, but faith proceeds to full
assurance: And therefore it has the denomination of full assent. As we say of
a Wall that is a little white, it is white, because it tends to full
whiteness: and as we say water is hot, that is a little hot; so faith that is
but in a little degree, yet it may be true, firm and substantial.

But what is the least degree of faith, the least assent, the least belief of
the promises, without which it cannot be said to be faith?

I answer, the least degree of faith is that which brings us to CHRIST, which
makes us willing to take him. Mark this point, for it will be of much use to
you, when the promises of GOD are preached to you, and made known unto you,
when the arguments that move you to come to CHRIST are declared and made
manifest: Now if a man stands and knows not whether he were best to take him
or no, this is not faith, such a man acts nothing, he is such a one as is
spoken of in Iam. 1. for that I take to be the meaning of that place; a man
that knows not whether he should come to CHRIST or no, that stands in a doubt,
and sometimes he will go, and sometimes he will not; he is off and on, to
and fro, such a man has not faith; such a one CHRIST rejects: but now when
there is so much weight as will cast the Balance the right way, though there
be something left in the other end of the Balance; that is, though there be
some doubting, some fear, yet if I so far believe the promises, and the Word
of GOD, as that I am willing to take CHRIST for my Husband, I am willing to
rest on him, to pitch on him, to bestow my self upon him; this is faith,
though it come not to the full degree.

As for example, if one be a spokesman for a Suitor, he comes and tells the
Spouse to whom he is a Suitor, that such a man is of such parentage, has such
honor, and such wealth, and is thus qualified; now, if she be but so far
persuaded as that she is willing to take him for her husband, that is enough to
bring her to make the match, that persuasion will bring her to do it;
afterward she may come to know the thing more fully, and to be better
persuaded, but that adds to the degrees: So, if there be but so much assent,
so much firmness of persuasion to bring us to CHRIST, to make us willing to
come to take him for our Savior and for our LORD, that is the least degree of
faith, and though there be doubting left, and though there be some fears,
yet, if there be but so much as will produce that, it is faith. Let me
exemplify it in some other thing: Take Hester, when she was to come to the
King, she knew not what success she should have, she was fearful, as we may
see by the manner of going about the business, yet, seeing there was so much
as drew her to the action, she comes and says, If I perish, I perish; as if
she had doubted she might have perished, yet she resolved to do it; this may
be said to be an act of faith, that put her on the work. Take a Martyr that
comes to suffer, he has many doubts and fears, and yet if there be but so
much persuasion as will produce the act in him, as that he is moved to do the
thing, he may properly be said to do it out of faith.

And so of all other actions. The three Children, GOD can deliver us, if he
will, (say they) if he do not, we will not worship that Image that thou have
set up. There might be some doubting in them, and yet, because there was so
much trust in GOD as to bring them to do the thing, here was faith enough to
make them acceptable in the sight of GOD. So, I say, if there be so much faith
as will bring us to GOD and to CHRIST, that is the least degree, other degrees
there are that may be added afterward, but this is thy comfort, if thou have
but so much as will produce such an effect, thou may be sure that thou have
faith.

Secondly, In respect of difficulties.
Faith admits degrees in regard of the difficulty and hardness of the things
that are to be believed.

As for example, Martha and Mary both believed in CHRIST when he feasted with
them, but when Lazarus was dead, and had been in the grave four days, that
put them to a stand: Now if they had been able to believe this, there had
been a greater degree of faith. And that was it that magnified Abraham's faith
so, that when there was so great difficulty that he must go and offer his
son, the son in whom GOD had promised that his seed should be blessed, who
was called the son of the promise: Now here was a great degree of faith,
because there was great difficulty.

Moses, we see, when he came to believe the promise of God, in Numbers 11.
Numb. 11.
that so many, even six hundred thousand should be fed with flesh, and that
they should be so fed a whole month together, it set Moses at a stand, he knew
not what to say; Not one day, (says he) not ten days, not twenty days, but
a whole month together, and six hundred thousand people! If all the Flocks
and Herds should be killed, and all the Fishes in the Sea should be gathered
together, how should this be done? This was a great thing to believe: and
therefore GOD pittyed Moses, GOD sees when things are hard to be believed, and
pitties man; GOD bears with Moses in that case, because the thing was
difficult and high; there are some things which are above hope, and in such
cases GOD is willing that his people should ask him a sign, he knows their
strength, they had need of something to confirm them. And therefore in such a
case, when GOD comes in such manner, if they ask him a sign, GOD is willing
to give them a sign: Indeed, when men will ask a sign to tempt GOD: an
adulterous generation asks a sign; that is, for trial or temptation, not for
love of CHRIST, and to be persuaded he is fit for them, but an adulterous
generation, they did it not out of love: but, I say, when either the thing is
high, or else when the means of persuasion is weak and slender, As, we know,
CHRIST said unto Nathaniel, Do thou believe this? as if he should say, This
shows thy faith is great, that for so small a thing as this thou beleeuest; I
said no more but I saw thee under the Fig Tree. And this showed the weakness
of Thomas his faith, that he would not believe unless he might put his
finger into the print of CHRIST'S wounds, and his hand into his side: so that
when a man believes by slender means, or when he believes things of a higher
nature, which is more above hope, when there is great difficulty, in this sense
faith admits degrees.

Thirdly, In regard of extent.
Faith admits degrees in regard of the extent of it, when there is more things
revealed to them; and I take it, this place will carry, that the righteousness
of GOD is revealed from faith to faith; that is, the righteousness of CHRIST
was revealed in the time of the Law and the Prophets, it was revealed
obscurely, and there was a little says among them to believe, it was enough to
save them, but when the time drew nearer, there were greater revelations, as we
know, in the time of the Prophets, their faith was great, as there were more
revelations, so there was more faith: So, I say, it admits degrees in regard of
the extent of revelation; as the Apostles, when CHRIST was upon the earth, they
had a degree of faith, but when Christ ascended, then there was more
revelations, then they grew from faith to faith, because they grew from
revelation to revelation, then the Spirit of God was sent into their hearts to
reveal all things, and to lead them into all truth, you know they had
abundance of revelations afterward. So in this regard, in regard of the
extent, faith receives degrees, not because the habit is increased, but because
the revelations and objects are more: And therefore that is the comfort of
poor Christians, those that are yet ignorant, they may have a true habit, and
as true a grace in the heart; and though a man be more conversant in
Scripture, and knows more then they, he has more revelations, and in that
sense, though he have a greater faith then the other, yet the other has a like
precious faith with him, in regard of that grace.

So, we see how faith receives degrees in these three respects.

The reflect act of faith admits degrees.
Now, last of all, that faith that gives assurance, that pacifieth and
comfort the heart, which is nothing but a reflect act, by which we know and
are persuaded that we have taken CHRIST, and that our sins are forgiven,
this admits of degrees of proof. And here, as the evidences of sanctification
are more, so is the assurance; as the Apostle says, the Spirit witnesses to
our spirit; he discouers good things to us, we had need of the light of the
Spirit, to judge aright of the sincerity of the graces that we have, we shall
go amiss else, we shall not be able, except we have the Spirit to help and
assist us, and so we grow from assurance to assurance.

Now for the second part, that we must grow in all these.

First, as faith admits of degrees, so we must labor to grow in all these
degrees.

First labor to grow to a more full and firm assent, by that means we shall
draw nearer to CHRIST, and receive him in a greater measure: Mark, this very
act of taking CHRIST, that immediately iustifies, but it is fed with assurance
in the understanding, it is that which does increase, and strengthen, and
supply this action of the will in taking CHRIST. So that, the more strong
assent the mind and understanding of a man gives to those truths which
concern justification, delivered in the Scripture, the stronger his will is in
taking Christ: As in the Act of marriage, a Woman takes such a one to be her
husband, but yet there are degrees in the will, one may take him with greater
greediness, with a more full persuasion that it is best for her, with more
love, and with more resolution: So, the stronger the assent is that we give to
the promises of GOD, wherein he assures us of the pardon of our sins, wherein
CHRIST is offered freely unto us, the more we take CHRIST, and so the union is
greater between us, we are linkt and knit together, and married, as it were,
in a greater degree.

Secondly, in regard of difficulty, which is the second thing wherein faith
admits degrees, when we believe hard things, or easy things propounded with
slender arguments. Labor to grow in this: for this is very profitable for you;
I will give you but these two instances.

You know what Moses lost, and what Abraham got; Moses lost Canaan, he lost the
honor of carrying in the people, he lost the honor of concluding his work,
when he had taken so much pains, and all because he did not believe when he
struck the Rock, for want of faith. Abraham now, that believed things that
were of a high, of a difficult nature, you see what he got by it; for this
cause, says the LORD, I will do thus and thus, because thou have not spared
thine only Son, which is repeated, Romans 4. Abraham being strong in faith,
gave glory to GOD. And therefore, you see, Abraham is set above all men, he is
the Father of all the faithful, he is the head, the top of those to whom GOD
showed mercy, he showed mercy to all for Abraham's sake: Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; Abraham is first, this did Abraham get for ever, because he believed in
God in so great a matter; this you shall gain, if you will believe, it will
bring a great reward, yea it will not only bring a reward, such as Abraham
had, but it will bring increase of the same faith, God will reveal more to
you, and give you more of his Spirit, as he did to Nathaniel: Beleeuest thou?
for this says Christ, thou shall see greater things then these: If we believe
in difficult cases, GOD will make us with facility to believe them another time.

Thirdly, for the multitude of revelations, for the extent of faith, that way
we should labor to be filled full of faith, as Barnabas is said to be full of
faith; And how is that? By studying the Word much, for therein will GOD reveal
this: this is it that Paul magnifies so much in 2 Cor. 12. that which he
gloried in, he does not name it in his own person, but says, I knew a man in
CHRIST had such a revelation: he glories not in this, that he had wealth, or
honor, but in the multitude of revelations; that of all other might have
exalted Paul, but he was wise, he knew what he did when he was so apt to be
exalted, in that it seems there was some extraordinary excellency in it.

Lastly, labor to get full assurance, the more assurance you have, the more
love.

Again, you shall do the more work when once we are assured that our labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord, as 1 Cor. 15. vlt. it will make us abound in
the works of the Lord.

Again, it stablisheth a man in well doing, he shall never hold out and be
constant till he come to have assurance that he shall not lose his reward. I
cannot stand on this point: I will name the Uses, that so I may not leave the
point unfinished.

Use 1. To comfort.
The first is a Use of much comfort, if there be such degrees in faith, then let
us not be discouraged, though we come not to the highest, if we have but a
little, yet since there are degrees, this is enough to make us partakers of the
righteousness of CHRIST, and of salvation. The end of this is to comfort those
which are apt to be discouraged. A little grain of true Musk is able to
sweeten a great deal; So if faith be true, a little true faith will perfume
all the heart and soul, it has influence into every thing, and it puts a good
tincture upon all that a man does, though it be but little, yet the influence
is great, Therefore though thou have not a great measure of faith, if thou have
a little, comfort thy self with that; we know, the best bud draws sap from
the root, as well as the greatest branches, as truly; so they that budde, that
are but yet in the beginning of faith, yet they are as truly grafted into
CHRIST and receive life from him, as those that are grown Christians. And
therefore be no^ discouraged because thou have not, as yet, a great measure of
Faith, say not, because I am not as strong as such, therefore I am no body,
reason not so, if thou have but as much as will bring thee within the door,
within the Covenant, within compass once; it is true, when a man is within the
door, there are greater degrees, he may go farther into the house, or a
little way in, but all is one when he is in once: So in faith, a little faith
is enough to put a man within the Covenant, to put one within the Gate of
Heaven, as it were; indeed when they are in, some go further, and some go not
so far: but if thou be in at all, comfort thy self with that, and think not
that every little infirmity shall break the Covenant when thou art in: No,
that which makes a divorce betwixt GOD and you, will do it, but every
infirmity does not that. Take heed therefore of robbing GOD of his glory, and
your selves of comfort; you know what a Father he is, he is a tender, and a
wife Father: we reckon it wisdom in parents, when they consider the
infirmities of their children, GOD is wise, let us go to him, a Father will
bear with his son and receive him again and again, though he have
infirmities: So GOD is thy Father, what though he see many failings in thee,
what though he see we have little grace, or little faith, yet we are sons,
GOD will spare us; and therefore cast not away your hope, but labor to know
that though you be but as smoking Flax, yet there is fire there, as well as if
it were all on a flame.

Now it is Satan's end indeed to discourage, and remember but that, that the
thing he labors, is to persuade you that you have no faith, and that a little
will not serve the turn, and that because thou art not so strong as the
strongest Christians, that therefore thou have a false heart, and art no body
at all; his end is to discourage, labor to resist him. And we that are
Ministers of CHRIST, we are in this case to comfort and encourage you, as Paul
says, we were gentle among you, as a Nurse among her children; we should be
tender over you, and comfort and encourage you, we are not Lords of your
faith. And therefor in Ezekiel 33. it was the fault of the Shepherds, they
ruled all the people with rigor, but we are helpers of your joy; for what have
we to do, but what our Master has set us about to do? as he did; how did he
behave himself? the smoking Flax, he did not blow it with a tender breath to
kindle it more, he dealt not roughly with it: So the Ministers of GOD should
labor to build men up, to draw them on; Indeed sometimes the Minister must be
sharp, to wake men when they sleep, to discover hypocrites, and temporizing
professors, to teach those to know themselves, that have a form of godliness,
without the power thereof, here the Word preached must be a two-edged sword,
that must pierce between the marrow and the joints; here the Word must be as
the Thunder and Lightning, it must have terror in it: So Christ comes with his
Fan in his hand, and with his Axe in his hand, he will burn the chafe with
unquenchable fire, and hew down the unfruitful Trees; but this is to be
understood of those that are false-hearted, those that are not sound, that have
Christ offered them, but do not receive him. Indeed, to those our Ministry
is sharp, but for others it is not so: And therefore in Ezekiel 34. we are to
do as the Shepherds do there with their Flocks, some Sheep are weak, and
are not able to go the pace of the rest; some are broken, some are lost, and
some are gone astray, and some are great with young; our business is to seek
those that are lost, to drive all according to the pace of the weakest, to
bind up the broken, to carry them in our arms; thus Christ did, and if we
fail in this, CHRIST, who is the great Shepherd of the Flock, he sees it, if
we go astray, he fetches us in; if we be broken, and have lost our wool, and
be not in right order, he binds us up, he feeds us, and tenders us; thus
Christ deals with you: And therefore be not discouraged, though thou be not so
strong as the strongest, yet if thou be a Sheep, if thou be in the fold, if
thou have the least degree of faith, it is able to make thee partaker of this
righteousness, although thou have not the highest degree, though thou have not
that excellency that others have.

Use 2. For exhortation.
The second use is, to exhort you to grow in faith, (and so I end) content not
your selves with a little, a small measure of faith, though notwithstanding a
little will serve to put you in the state of salvation, yet it should be your
wisdom to get a great degree, as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1.13. 2 Pet. 1. 13.
Trust perfectly in the grace brought in by the revelation of CHRIST: (Mark
it) for it is an excellent place for this purpose; study it, and think well of
it, trust perfectly in the grace revealed; that is to say, do it not by
halues, let no^ there be some odd reckonings between GOD and thee, stand not
in distance from him, but trust upon him perfectly, believe fully and assuredly
that your sins are forgiven you, believe fully the grace that is given you
through CHRIST, do it perfectly, thoroughly, trust perfectly in the grace
brought in by CHRIST, that is our fault that we do it not in such a manner;
hence it is that our Joy is weak, our grace is weak, trust perfectly, that
your Joy may be full, that you may have full communion and fellowship with
CHRIST, the benefit is exceeding great when we trust perfectly, and why will
you not? why should you limit the holy one of Israel? It was their sin and
transgression to limit him in his power and alsufficiencie, as if he were not
able to do such and such things, and is it not as great a sin to limit him
in his mercy and goodness? Why cannot he forgive sins and transgressions,
that in all circumstances are the greatest sins, in what nature soever? to
think otherwise, is to limit the holy one of Israel; trust perfectly
therefore. Motives to grow in faith.
It is not a little that will serve the turn, as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 3.
vlt. grow in grace, there is need of it; you shall find, that as you wade
further in the profession of Christianity, so you shall have need of more
strength, you shall have greater employment, therefore you have more need of
growth to go forward, and persevere.

Again, you shall meet with greater temptations and assaults, if you be not
more strong then at the first, you are not able to resist.

Again, If you grow in faith, you shall grow likewise in Joy, and that is a
thing which we have continual use of, that is of only use to comfort and
strengthen us, to make us abound in the works of the LORD, that helps us to
go through all variety of conditions, that enables us to abound and to want, to
pass through good report and evil report, to suffer and endure persecution,
now the more you grow in faith, the more you grow in joy, as the Apostle says,
Romans 15.13. The God of peace fulfill you with all joy by believing: So that the
more we believe, the more joy, the more consolation we have.

Again, the more you grow in faith, the more you shall gain the favor of
GOD, the more you shall win his love; there is nothing in the World does so
much win the favor of GOD, as a great degree of faith: and therefore, though
thou may be saved with a less degree, yet that thou may be in a greater
degree of favor, seek more faith; and this, though it be reckoned a small
matter to have a great degree of GODS favor, yet, it is the greatest dignity
in the world; Look upon all the difference of men, it is their difference in
the favor of God that makes them so. Why was Moses a man above all the rest?
says GOD I will have compassion upon whom I will have compassion, and I will
show mercy to whom I will show mercy; I have chosen Moses: look to what
difference of men you will: look into what estate, what condition thou
would have, either thy soul or thy body, whatsoever it be, it is by the
grace and favor of GOD in CHRIST Jesus, that all thy comfort and consolation
increases.

What shall make me grow in the favor of GOD?

I answer, there is nothing that causes God to set so much by us as faith: the
woman of Canaan, see what cause Christ had to give her such a great
commendation, great is thy faith, and because her faith was great, therefore
he set her at so high a rate. So the Centurion, says CHRIST, I have not found
so great faith in Israel, and that is the thing that he set so great a price
upon. So Jacob, when he got the name of Israel, when he prevailed with GOD,
certainly it was the greatest blessing that ever he had: Why was that? Because
he showed the greatest faith that ever he did, it was a strong faith that
prevailed with GOD: And what set him at so high a rate in GODS Book? It was
the faith he had in GOD, therefore he is remembered in the whole Book of GOD for
his faith, Therefore the more faith you have, the more GOD prizeth you, it is
it that winnes his love. I cannot stand upon the arguments why we should grow
in faith, they are many; The more faith we have, the more powerful are our
prayers in prevailing with GOD, for faith gives strength to them.

Again, the more faith you have, the more you bring glory to GOD; if there be
much faith, there will be much fruit, it is the root of all grace, as, John
15.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit. Get much
faith then if you will have much fruit, that you may bring glory to GOD: as if
he should say, If a man have but some faith, he brings forth fruit, yet there
shall be something wanting: but when a man is eminent, when he is conspicuous,
when he is as a great light that every man turns his eye to, when he is as a
Tree that brings forth much fruit, which turns the eyes of the beholders to
it, So it is with Christians, herein, says Christ, is my Father glorified, etc.

A Christian has no such motive as this, he shall glorify GOD exceedingly, if
he have abundance of faith, he shall have abundance of every Grace, he shall
grow rich in good works; this is that which we should all labor for: I cannot
stand to press it further. So much for this time, and for this Text.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF EFFECTVALL FAITH: Delivered in six Sermons upon 1 These. 1.3. By
the late faithful and worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN PRESTON, Dr. in
Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty; Master of Emanuel College in
Cambridge; and sometime Preacher of Lincolnes-Inne.

The just shall line by faith.

Hab. 2.4. Who through faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained promises, etc.

Heb. 11.33, 34. LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Bourne. 1630.

OF EFFECTVALL FAITH. The first Sermon.
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering your effectual Faith, etc.


IN the former Verses, the Apostle sets down this general, We give thanks
always for you, making mention of you in our prayers, without ceasing. First,
he tells them that he prays for them; and then he tells them more
particularly, that his prayer was a thanksgiving. And this giving of thanks for
them, he expresses by the continuance of it, he did it constantly, without
ceasing, (not by fits) making mention of you in my prayers. Then he names the
particulars for which he gives thanks, namely these three: For their
Effectual Faith, Diligent Love, Patient hope.


Now these three Graces he describes and sets forth three ways:

First, from a certain property or character which distinguishes the true
faith from the false faith, the true love from the false love, the true hope
from false hope. I give not thanks for every faith, but for such a faith as is
effectual, (that is the property or character by which the truth of faith is
discerned.) Again, not for every love, but for such a love as is laborious,
(for so the word signifies.) Thirdly, not for every hope, but for such a hope
as makes you patient; that is the character by which to know hope. And this is
the first way whereby he describes these Graces.

Secondly, he describes them from the object upon which these Graces are
pitched, and that is Jesus Christ our Lord, that is to say, I give thanks for
the faith you have in Christ, for the love you have toward him, for the hope
you have of what he will do for you: I give thanks for that faith, for that
love, for that hope, that has Christ for the object of it.

Thirdly, he describes these graces from the sincerity of them: I give thanks
for all these graces that you have in the sight of God; that is to say, not in
the sight of man only; as if he should have said, many make a profession of
faith, and go for believers in GOD, and for lovers of GOD, and men judge them
so: but you have it in the sight of God: that is, not only in the sight of men,
not only in your own fancy, apprehension, and opinion, but indeed, in good
earnest, in sincerity.

Lastly, In the sight of God our Father: he describes GOD by this property,
he is a Father. I need not say more for the opening of the words. We will come
to that point for which we have chosen them, which is the first thing for
which he gives thanks.

Remembering your effectual Faith.
This point we will deliver to you out of them, that The Faith that saues us
must be effectual. Doct.

The faith that saues us must be effectual.





This Doctrine we have need to add to that which we formerly delivered: for
having said so much of faith, that faith is that that saves men, and that
there is no more required of you, but to take the gift of righteousness, only
that you receive CHRIST, only that you believe in God that justifies the
ungodly; that is, that you only accept o^ that justification that God is ready
to give to every man, be he never so ungodly. Now (when we hear so much of
faith, and that there is nothing at all required of us, but a mere taking,
left any man should be deceived, and run away with a false opinion, Men are
apt to deceive themselves.
that if he have but a naked apprehension, and no more, he shall do well
enough,) I have chosen this Text, that you may know what kind of faith it is
that is required of us, namely eff^ctuall faith. The faith that saues us must
be effectual.

Now Saint Paul adding this word to it, (remembering your effectual faith,) he
gives us this intimation, That many men have a false faith, proved by
instances, both in the Old and New Testament.
that there is a faith which is not effectual; there is a faith in the world,
that goes for true faith, which, if it be examined, is not a faith that saues.
We see, through the Scriptures, much mention made of a certain faith which men
had, which yet was not a saving faith: we see, many came and believed in our
Savior, Ioh. 2.23.24.
but he would not commit himself to them: for he knew what was in their
hearts. Here was a faith to believe in him: nay further, it was such a faith as
had some effect too, (for it made them come to him) and yet, for all this, it
was not such a faith as God accepts, it was not an effectual faith.

So when John Baptist came, before Christ, there were many hundreds that came
to him, and rejoiced in his light, Ioh. 5.35.
but it was not effectual, but a counterfeit faith that they had,
notwithstanding all that.

So there came many that were invited to the Wedding, Mat. 22.8, 9, 10, 11.
opened.
so that the house was full; but yet every man had not a Wedding garment. There
was a certain faith which brought them to the House, but they had not true
faith, they had not the Wedding garment; that is, they had not such a faith as
could produce and bring forth in them a conjugall affection, which is the
Wedding garment. So two of the four grounds had faith, Mat. 13.
they brought forth some fruit, that faith strengthened and enabled them to
do so much as they did; but yet it was not true faith, it was not the faith
which the fourth ground had.

And not only in the New Testament, but in the Old Testament also, there is
often mention made of such a faith, and of such a trust in GOD, as enabled men
to do much, but it was not an unfeigned trust, it was not effectual, but as it
is Jeremy 3.10. Ier. 3.10. opened.
Treacherous Judah has not turned to me with her whole heart, but feignedly,
says the LORD. Therefore certainly, says the LORD, their turn of evil and
misery shall come: they trusted in GOD, but not with their whole heart.

So likewise, Deuteronomy. 5.25.
Deuteronomy. 5.25 the people there desire Moses to go and receive the Commandments
from God for them, and whatsoever God should say to them, that they would do:
here was a fair profession; it is likely themselves thought it to be sound
and good, yet Moses tells them they were deceived in it: Oh (says he) that
this people had a heart to do this indeed. Verse 29.
So, we see, there is a faith that is not effectual, and therefore we have
the more need to look to it, because there is so much false faith in the
World. As, when you that are Tradesmen, Simile.
do hear that there are so many counterfeit Drugges, or so many counterfeit
Colors, or whatsoever you deal in, you will look the more to it; so we
should look the better to our faith in this regard. Therefore to open this
point a little, we will do these three things: Three things opened.
First, I will show the cause why there is so much ineffectual faith, why there
is so much faith that is not sound and substantial. Secondly, I will show
wherein the efficacy of faith consists, what it is for faith to be effectual.
Thirdly, I will show the reasons, why God will accept no other faith at our
hands, why we cannot be saved, unless we have such a faith.


The Causes why the faith of many is ineffectual, which are five.
For the first, namely the causes of ineffectual faith, the reasons why the
faith of many is ineffectual, that it works not powerfully, that it is not
substantial, you shall find them to be these five.

Cause 1. Taking Christ upon misinformation.
First, the vanity or vneffectualnesse of faith arises upon our taking of
CHRIST upon misinformation, when we know not who it is that we take, when
there is an error in the person we take, Instances.
when we understand not aright what we do. The young man that came to Christ.
Many do as the young man that came running to CHRIST, he came hastily, he made
account to be his follower, but CHRIST tells him that he might mistake him,
and therefore he lets him know what it was to follow him, what a Master he had
betaken himself unto: says he, Luke 18.
if thou will be my servant, go sell all that thou have. As if he should have
said; Mistake me not, if thou will be mine, thou must be mine altogether, thou
must take up thy Cross, thou must part with any thing. Now, if the young man
had gone away with this mistake, that he had not understood CHRIST, he had
become a Disciple of CHRIST, as well as others, but it had been upon a mistake.

And so likewise that Scribe, The Scribe. Mat. 8.20. opened.
to whom CHRIST said, The Son of Man has not whereon to lay his head. As if
he should have said, It may be thou look for ease, for Bed and Board with
me, thou look for a pleasant life, but it will not be so; I lead not a
pleasant life my self, I have not whereon to lay my head; I am not in so good
a condition as many Fowls are, as many Beasts are, I have not a nest, I have
not a den; that is, I have not that which should be in stead of these to
me, and therefore know what thou do before thou betake thy self to my
service. Now men, not considering this, they put themselves upon Christ, they
take upon them the profession of his Name, before they enter into a serious
consideration, and this is it that causes faith to be ineffectual: as one
speaking of false fortitude, Note.
names this for one amongst the rest; Many (says he) are valiant for want of
experience: that is, they know not what the wars are, they know not what
hardness they must endure, and therefore when they come to feel it, when they
come to see what pains they must take, and what they must endure, they
shrink: so it is in this; many men enter upon the profession of Christianity,
upon that warfare, (for so our profession is called) I say, many enter upon it
out of mistake; they understand not what it is, they have not experience of it,
they know not how many will come against them, they know not that the force of
their enemies is so great, they know not that they have so many thousands to
meet them; therefore they undertake the business, they go about the
enterprise, and it comes to naught, because they considered not what they did.
Therefore, says Christ, let him that builds a House, set down before what it
will cost. That is to say, if a man consider not what CHRIST looks for at his
hands, if he consider not beforehand, that, if he will be Christ's, he must
cr^cifie the flesh, with the affections thereof, that he must deny himself in
those things that are dearest to him, he must be content to be hated of all
men, this is a thing that will go hard. This is that, that a man can hardly
endure to be scoffed at, to have every man his enemy, to part with all his
friends, to live a despised man, to suffer persecution, that the end of one
persecution should be the beginning of another, and the end of one suffering
the beginning of another.

Again, for a man to have his inward lusts and desires so mortified, and so
crucified, and so restrained, to be so strait-laced in every thing, I say,
because men consider not this, what it is to take this profession on them, when
the time comes, what do they? They go back again. Hence it is, that many,
out of flashes, and in good moodes, will be ready to embrace Religion; but we
see by experience, how soon there is an end of it. As the people, when Christ
came to Jerusalem, how ready were they to receive him, with blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord, and Hosanna, etc? but how soon were they gone
again? so many young comers on, in this City, and many, even of our
profession, in the beginning of their time, are ready to take upon them the
profession of Christ; but afterward, when they come to see what must be done,
when they see that Christ and the world cannot stand together, that Christ and
pleasures cannot stand, but they must be content to go another course, then
they go back, and their faith proves ineffectual: this, I say, is the first
cause, when men are not thoroughly informed what they do.

Cause 2. Taking Christ out of fear.
A second cause of the vneffectualnesse of faith is, when men take Christ out of
fear, when they are in some present distress, and would have ease, and upon
this they take Christ, not because of any true love to him, but because they
would be delivered out of that present exigent which they are in; and this is
as usual as the other. How many are there, that, when God affrights them a
little with the terrors of the Law, when their consciences are troubled, when
then begin to apprehend Hell* so long as they are in such a condition, they are
willing to take Christ: but as soon as these storms are over, and their
hearts are at peace again, when their consciences return to some quiet, and
when there is an end of those terrors, then there is an end of their religion,
and of their faith, so that their faith proves ineffectuall. So, many men, when
they are in some great calamity; as, you know, Pharaoh, when he was in the
present strait, then he would do any thing: so many men under great crosses,
afflictions, and disgraces in the World, then they will be religious, but let
them have peace and prosperity, let them abound in all things again, and they
will forget GOD. Such Isay complains of, Isay 58. Isa. 58. opened
they hang down their heads for a day: That is, when the storm is on them,
when they have some affliction, for such a time, they will do any thing; there
is nothing more usual then this. When men come to have sickness, and to
apprehend death, what will not a man do for his salvation at such a time? and
therefore you find by experience, that few of those that make such promises in
their sicknesses, Note.
when they apprehend death, do keep them afterward: for they come from fear,
and therefore they last not.

Take any man, the most ambitious man in the world, when he comes to dye, the
praise of men is then nothing to him, then he will part with any thing. Take a
covetous man, to save his life, Simile.
what will not he do? A Merchant that loves his goods never so well, yet when
the Ship is ready to sink, he will cast them out, he is willing to lose them,
rather then to lose his life: So when a man comes to such an exigent, when he
comes to stand in the gate of destruction, as it were, when he sees Heaven and
Hell before him, he is ready to do any thing then, not because indeed he
loves Christ, or is willing to take him, but to save himself; as the foolish
Virgins, when the Gate was shut, then they cry, Lord, Lord, open to us: They
would feign have had Christ then, not out of love to Christ; for then they
would have taken him before: It was not out of any love to the Bridegroom, but
out of fear, and fence of their own misery that they had when they were shut
out, and that made them cry, Lord, Lord, open to us. And this is the second
cause that makes the faith of men to be ineffectual, when they take Christ out
of fear.

Cause 3. Taking Christ for love of the good things by him, and not for love to
his person.
The third cause is, when men take Christ, not out of love to his person, but
out of love to those commodities and advantages they shall have by him, when
they look not upon him, when they fix not their eyes upon his person, and the
beauty that is in him: but they look upon the Kingdom, they look upon the
wealth they shall have, they look to what they shall get by him. This faith
proves ineffectual; Note.
because when other commodities are presented, that are present, and sensible,
and in their apprehension greater then these, then they let Christ go again.
Men do in this case, Simile.
as those that marry for wealth; if that be their end, when they have gotten
the wealth that they would have, when they have that which they desire, they
care for their Wives no longer: so in this case; when men look at nothing but
simply at heaven, disjoined from Christ; or, when they look at some other
advantages, when they look at an earthly Kingdom, (as many of the Disciples
did) when they look for great matters by Christ in this world, when they find
it quite otherwise, when they lose in the world, and all that they have is in
hope, it is in things spiritual, that are not seen with the eye, things that
are not sensible, then they are ready to slip from Christ again. So it is
usually among us, many take Christ for advantages, as Christ tells them
plainly, Ioh. 6. Ioh. 6.26. opened.
(says he) you seek me, not for the Miracles which I did, but for the loaves:
That is to say, not out of love to the work, not because you judge aright of
the things of the spirit, not because you love grace, but because you love some
advantage that you have by religion, some profit that it brings you for the
present, and because you would be freed from Hell for the future; such things
as carnal men may see, and be affected with: but this will not hold out.

The manner of these men is to seek mercy and not grace. Some men seek
mercy, and not grace.
If they can be but assured that it shall go well with them, that they shall
be freed from the fears they might have of Hell, that they may have some hope
of being in a better condition, this is that they look for: but as for grace,
for repayring the Image of GOD in their hearts, to be enabled to obey Christ in
all things, this is a thing that they desire not, this is a thing they long not
for: therefore the secret inquisition of their heart is, What good shall we
get by it? They enquire not, what excellency, and what beauty there is in
CHRIST, what manner of one he is, that they may love him; but what good shall
we get by him? what advantage will it be to us? Contrary to that in Cant.
5.12. Cant. 5.12. opened.
when the Spouse is there asked what the reason was that she followed her
Beloved so much? and that she magnified him so much? She does not tell them,
because I shall have such things by him, or he is thus wealthy, or I shall
have this honor by matching with him; but mark her answer; My beloved is
white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand, his head is as the most fine
Gold, his looks are black as a Raven, his eyes are as the eyes of Doves by
the rivers of waters, washed with milk and fitly set: and so she goes along in
a holy delectaction; This is my beloved, oh ye Daughters of Jerusalem. I say,
so it is with those that take CHRIST in good earnest, that look upon the
excellencies of CHRIST, as he is considered in himself: not that the other is
excluded: for we may look at the advantages, We may look to our own
advantages by Christ.
and commodities that we have by him, but not upon that alone; but, mark, in
her answer she describes what a one he was, and therefore she loved him. My
Beloved is white and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousand, such a one is my
Beloved, therefore, Chap. 1. Verse. 2. she describes him to be such a one as he
is; and (says she) therefore the Virgins love thee: as if she had said, there
is a Harlots love, that looks only what they shall have by him: but none but
Virgins, that is, those that have chaste and good affections, those that have
holy and right affections, indeed the Virgins love thee; but the others do
not: for they have adulterous and Harlot-like affections, (as we may call them,
when a man looks not unto GOD himself, but to his own advantage and profit.)
And this is the third cause that makes faith prove ineffectual.

Fourthly, Cause 4. Want of humiliation.
faith proves ineffectuall for want of preparation, and humiliation that should
go before it; because the heart is not circumcised, the heart is not broken
yet, it is not emptyed of those things that it must be emptyed of before a man
can take CHRIST, and therefore in Deuteronomy. 30.6. Deuteronomy. 30.6. opened.
says Moses, The Lord your God will circumcise your hearts, and then you shall
love him with all your soul, and with all your strength. As if he should have
said, It is impossible you should cleave to GOD, to love him indeed, to take
him in good earnest, unfeignedly, with all your hearts, except first your
hearts be circumcised; therefore the Lord your God will circumcise your hearts;
that is, he will humble you, he will break your hearts, that your lusts
shall be mortified in you; he will take away those strong, violent, those
carnal and sinful desires, that abounded in your hearts before, and when that
is done, then you shall love the Lord in good earnest, not feignedly, but with
all your hearts: Now, if a man come to take Christ before he be thus
circumcised, he takes him in vain, he takes him so, as that he cannot hold
him, nor continue with him.

Now this circumcision is done by a certain work of preparation or
humiliation, by which these strong lusts are broken in us: therefore, when men
come to Christ, before the Law has been a sufficient Schoolmaster to them,
before it has indicted them, before it have put them in prison, and told them
that they must pay every farthing, (when a man comes to this, he sees that
he cannot do it, then he goes to Christ, and beseeches him to pay his
debt,) before the Law have done this, men care not for Christ, they take him
negligently, and therefore they hold him not. And for this it was, that before
Christ came into the World, he would make way before him: so, before he will
come into a man's heart, the Mountains must be brought down, The Spirit of
Elias, what.
the spirit of Elias must make way; that is, there must be a sharp ministry to
show men their sins, that they may be thoroughly humbled, and prepared, or
else they will never take Christ so as to keep close to him.

A man must be brought to have a present apprehension of death, and of the
wrath of GOD, and damnation, or else he will not lay hold on the Horns of the
Altar; as Ioab, when he saw that Solomon would slay him indeed, and take away
his life, then he lays hold on the Horns of the Altar, and would not let
go; so when a man sees present death, he will keep close to Christ, Without
sound humiliation, sin is not accounted the greatest evil, nor Christ the
greatest good.
and till this be wrought, a man may take Christ, but his faith will be
ineffectual, because indeed, till a man be soundly humbled, he never accounts
and reckons sin to be the greatest evil; and till he do that, he never
accounts CHRIST to be the greatest good, and if a man do not reckon CHRIST to
be the chief good of all other, there will be somewhat propounded, which will
be esteemed before him, and when that comes, he lets go CHRIST. But when
there is a sound humiliation, which makes a man prize CHRIST above all other
things, then faith proves effectual; that is, a man holds out, he goes through
with the work, he cleaues so to Christ, as that he will not part with him: but
for want of this, because men's hearts are not circumcised, because way is not
made, because the Mountains are not brought down, because the Ministry is
not sharp enough to prepare them, hence it is that their faith is vain, and
comes to nothing.

Fifthly and lastly, Cause 5. Because faith is not grounded aright.
the faith of men proves ineffectuall, because it is not well grounded, they
take to themselves a persuasion of the remission of their sins, upon an
uncertain ground; they are not built upon the Rock, they take CHRIST, but
they are not well bottomed: for there is a certain false persuasion, which is
nothing else but a strong fancy, which makes a man to think that his sins
are forgiven, and that he is in a good estate: but when it comes to
examination, he can give no sound reason for it. When men take CHRIST on this
manner, when they are persuaded their sins are remitted, and yet have no good
ground for this persuasion and peace, it holds not out, it continues not.
Therefore to such as these Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4.10. Ephesians. 4.10. opened.
Be not children (says he) in understanding, to be carried about with every
wind of doctrine. As if he had said, Indeed you are such as have embraced
CHRIST, but you must not do as children do, that being not able to use their
own judgment, they see what other men do, and they hear what they say: but,
says he, you must learn to be men, that you may use your own understanding,
that you may see with your own eyes, or else you will be like a Ship tossed
and carried about with every wind. That is to say, it was a false persuasion
that drove you to CHRIST, and another wind will drive you from him: therefore
be not children in understanding. So, I say, when you have a persuasion of the
remission of your sins, of believing in Christ, be not children in
understanding, see that it be soundly grounded. That is a condition required
by the Apostle, Colos. 1.23. Col. 1.23. opened.
CHRIST has reconciled us to GOD the Father, to be blameless, and without
fault. But (says he) I must put in this condition, If you continue grounded,
and stablished in the faith, that you be not moved from the hope of the
Gospel. As if he should have said, There is a certain faith, by which you may
take Christ, and so you may be persuaded of reconciliation; but, says he,
that will not do, unless you be grounded and stablished in the faith. The
word in the Original signifies, Except you be so built as a house is built
upon a sure foundation, as a Tree that is soundly rooted, when you are so
pitched upon Christ, that when new objects come, new temptations come, things
that you never thought on, yet nothing can move you from the hope of the
Gospel: If you be not grounded, you may take a hope to your selves of
reconciliation, and of being without fault in the sight of GOD, but it will
never hold out, unless it be soundly grounded. Hope that is not well grounded,
holds not out.
Hence you see therefore, that if a man be not well rooted, if he be not
built upon the Rock, if this persuasion of the remission of his sins be not
well bottomed, that causes him not to hold out, but to fall off again.
Whereas it is required of us, that we keep so close to God, in such a case our
faith should be built on so sure a ground, that nothing in the World should
move us, no not the most probable arguments that may be brought in: as we
see, Deuteronomy. 13. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. opened,
says Moses, If a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams come, and give you signs
and wonders, and the thing that he foretold come to pass, that you could not
answer any thing, you can see no reason but that he should be a true Prophet,
says he, God will put you to such trials, to prove you to see if you be
soundly grounded. All that are saved, he will have them so fixed, he will
have them take their salvation upon so good a ground, upon such infallibility,
that whatsoever shall be brought against them, they shall keep them close to
GOD. This is that that we should labor for, and for want of this, when men
have a confused persuasion that their sins are forgiven, and think it
enough, if their hearts be quiet, if they have rest in their consciences, that
they be not troubled, and never examine what the grounds are: I say, for want
of this it is, that in temptation they fall away; when other men come and
preach other doctrines, then they are plucked away with the error of the
wicked, as Peter says, 2 Pet. 3.17. 2 Pet. 3.17.
Be not plucked away with the error of the wicked, but grow in knowledge. As
if he should have said, If you have but some persuasion, but some good opinion
that Christ is yours, and that it is best for you to cleave to him, this will
not hold, you will be plucked away with those errors that other men are
plucked away with. This is the first thing which we have done with, to show
the causes of the ineffectualnesse of faith.

Wherein the efficacy of faith consists.
In the next place, I am to declare unto you what it is that makes faith
effectual, wherein the effectualnesse of faith consists. In this we will show
you 3. things. Three things opened.


First, in what sense it is called effectual faith: for the very opening of
this word which the Apostle uses, will open a Window to us, it will open a
creuice of light, to see into the nature of the thing it self.

Secondly; we will show you particularly and distinctly, wherein this
effectualnesse of faith consists.

Thirdly, we will show you how it is wrought, how this faith is made
effectual in us; and when we have done these three, you will fully understand
what effectual faith is.

First, In what sense faith is called effectual.

Things are said to be effectual in 4. respects.


for the opening of this very appellation, this name effectual faith: you
shall find that a thing is said to be effectual in 4. respects.

First, we say a thing is effectual, when it does its office, When they do
their proper office.
when it exercises that proper function that belongs to that quality, or that
grace, or that gift, or that creature whatsoever it is; and when it does not
that, then we say it is ineffectuall, when it does not the thing that we look
for from it. In this sense, faith is said to be effectual, when it does the
thing for which faith is, when it does the thing that God expects of faith,
that is the proper function of faith: The proper function of faith, what.
and what that is, you heard before; namely to take Christ: If faith take
Christ, it is effectual faith.

Now, for the opening of this a little further to you, to show you what this
proper function of faith is. It is, when a man is so far peswaded of the truth
of the Scriptures, of the truth of the promises, and does so far appropriate
them to himself, that he is willing to take Christ, though there be some
doubtings and wauerings in him, yet if there be so much faith as to do the
thing, this is properly effectual faith, though it be not perfect faith: For
you must know, Faith may be effectual, though it be mingled with doubting.
that there is a doubting mingled with the best faith: Therefore when we say
effectual faith, we do not mean that it is such a faith as is without
doubtings, and without fears mingled with it: but, if it be such a faith as
does the thing it self, for which faith is appointed, it is properly said to
be effectual faith. It is a point necessary for you to understand; and if you
compare this that we have said (concerning this description, of this first
explication of effectual faith) with that in Iam. 1.7, 8. Iam. 1.7, 8. opened.
we shall see what the meaning is. He speaks there of doubting, and tells you,
that those that doubt, they are like a wave of the Sea, tossed to and fro, and
in the end they vanish away. Says the Apostle, Let not such a man think to
obtain any thing at Gods hands: for he is a double-minded man, and is unstable
in all his ways. The meaning is, that there is such a faith that makes a man
doubt, when he knows not what he should do, but is unstable; as a wave of
the Sea, that is tossed to and fro: he is sometimes going toward GOD,
sometimes from him again, and in the end he goes quite away. (Says he) such a
man shall not receive any thing. Why? Because he is a double-minded man. Now,
by a double-minded man, A double-minded man, who.
is not meant a man that has one thing in his face, and another in his heart,
one that pretends one thing, and intends another, (though the word be sometimes
so taken, yet in that place it is not so to be understood) but by a
double-minded man this is meant, when the mind is divided, between two objects,
that it knows not which to choose, but stands as one in Biuio, that has two
ways before him, and knows not whether to go this way, or that way; a man
that is distracted in his own mind, he knows not what to resolve on. Now
when a man's faith comes to this, that he knows not whether to take CHRIST, or
the World; he doubts whether he should choose, GOD, or the World, there is an
uncertainty in his mind, that it is divided: sometimes he thinks it is
best, and sometimes he thinks it not best, aliud stans, aliud sedens, when he
thus wauers, this is not effectual faith. But now, if a man go beyond this,
and pitch upon CHRIST resolutely, when he goes so far, as that he resolves
to take him, although he have many pluck-backs, although there be many things
that may dissuade him from it, though there be some reluctancie in his mind,
some fear whether it be the best way or no, yet if he pitch on CHRIST, he
chooses him rather then the World, though he have some inclination to the
World still, though there be somewhat offensive in his his heart, though, as I
said, there be some doubts, some fears whether it be the best way or no, yet
if faith come so far as to pitch on Christ, to choose him, to take him, this
is properly effectual faith. Indeed, it is far from perfect faith, but it is
effectual faith, and such as shall save you. Therefore you shall find this
rule among the Schoolmen, (I name them, because they were Papists, and their
doctrine of faith is contrary to this) they say, it is not faith, except it be
a full persuasion; they speak not there of resting on CHRIST, that is not the
thing, but of the full persuasion of the truth of the thing to be believed;
yet notwithstanding, you shall find this rule among some of the Schoolmen,
Papists tenent of doubting.
Fides non excludit omnem dubitationem: faith does not exclude all doubting,
What doubting it is that faith excludes.
but that doubting that overcomes, that doubting that casts the balance
the contrary way: if it be such a doubting as does not overcome, it may stand
with true and sound faith. So, I say, if you would know now, what it is to
pitch on Christ, and so to take him, How to try truth of doubting.
though there be some reluctancie, some doubt, some fear, you shall know it by
this: if a man have so taken him, that still he is growing, still his faith is
prevailing, still his faith is ouercomming those doubts and fears from day to
day, he is better and better resolved; I say, though his faith be not perfect
at the first, yet if it be still thus on the growing hand, it is saving and
effectual faith. Whereas another man, that is not soundly rooted, that is
divided thus, he takes Christ, but it is not upon any good ground, but as the
Weather-cocke stands such a way, while the wind blows that way, Simile.
not because the Weather-cocke is fixed, (for for when the wind turns, the
Weather-cocke turns too: Some men cleave to Christ for wans of temptations.
) so, such men cleave to Christ, not because they have any good ground, but
because they want temptations to a contrary way: let temptations from the World
come, let there come reasons that they knew not before, let there come new
objects, new allurements, which they knew not of before, they will forsake
Christ again, but when the heart is fixed, when there is an Anchor that holds
the soul though the ship waver, when there is an anchor, to hold it fast
though it be much tossed to and fro, though there be much doubting, thou may
be sure it is true and effectual faith.

This point you must mark; when I say it is effectual it is no more but when
it thus pitcheth on CHRIST, True faith not without doubtings and fears
sometimes.
though there be some doubting: It is so far from being true that faith must
be without all doubting, that we may boldly say, it is not faith, except it
have much doubting, unless there be some fears, unless there be some
troubles within, that resist this faith, and strive against it; otherwise it is
no faith: for certainly, there is no man that has perfect faith, especially
at the first, or afterward either, so as to set his heart fully at peace, and
then if it be not perfect faith, if there be no doubting, there must be
perfect flesh, that is, there is nothing but flesh, and if there be some faith
which is imperfect, always in the beginning there must needs be doubting,
because there is some flesh, and some spirit, there is fire and water, and
therefore there must needs be striving. We may say of doubting, Simile.
in this case, as we say of Thistles; they are ill weeds, but the ground is
fat and good where they grow: so doubting is a thing that resists faith, it is
bad, but it is a sign the heart is good where it is. Doubting a sign of a
good heart.
So that, where there is all peace, where there is no questioning, where the
heart is not perplexed and troubled, and complains not, it is a sign that the
strong man possesses the House wholly; it is a sign there is nothing but
flesh there. Therefore mark this point to your comfort, that if there be but
so much faith as will produce this work of taking CHRIST, though there be
some doubtings mingled with it, yet it is properly effectual faith, because it
does the thing, though not perfectly. That is the first acception of the word
effectual, a thing is said to be effectual, when it does the proper function
of it, though it do it not perfectly, and thoroughly, yet, if it do it, it is
said to be effectual: so faith, if it pitch upon CHRIST, though not so
perfectly as afterward it may, it is effectual.

Secondly, A thing is effectual, in opposition to that which is vain and
empty.
a thing is said to be effectual, as it is opposed to that which is vain and
empty, to that which is but a name, a shadow of it, but is not such a thing
indeed. So faith is said to be effectual, when it is true, real, and
substantial, you know, there be empty clouds, Simile.
we see the heavens many times full of clouds, but there is no rain folloues,
they are driven away with the winds, they are empty clouds, they are not
clouds indeed: so there is a great show of faith sometimes, that makes a man
show like these clouds, and yet it is vain and empty, no rain follows.
Simile.
A counterfeit Piece, although it show to be good money, yet, when we find it
counterfeit, when we find it clipped, we cast it away: so true faith is said to
be effectual, when it is opposed to vain faith: in Iam. 2 the later end of
the Chapter, the Apostle speaks to that purpose, to show the difference
between true faith, Iam. 2.17.20, 26.
and dead faith, which is but the name of faith, but is not faith indeed.

Thirdly, A thing is said to be effectual, when it is operative.
a thing is said to be effectual, when it lies not idle and still, but is
doing something: As a Pylot in a Ship, he sits not still there, if he do
sit still and do nothing, we may say he is an ineffectual Pylot, Simile.
he were as good not be there: so when faith lies still in the heart, and is
not stirred and moved, nor shows it self in the fruits of it, this we say is
ineffectuall faith; whereas faith should be in the soul, as the soul is in
the body, which is never there in vain, but still it is stirring, and showing
it self by motion, by action, by doing somewhat or other. And in this sense
faith is said to be effectual, when it is a stirring faith, when it is a
lively and fruitful faith, that is doing somewhat in the soul of a man.

When it goes through with the work in hand.
Last of all, a thing is said to be effectual, when it goes through with the
work that it has in hand: this differs from that which I named first,
therefore the Greek word, that is rendered effectualnesse, signifies
perfectness, to bring a thing to an end; so that faith is said to be
effectual, that goes through with the work it undertakes; that is, when it
sanctifies the heart throughout, in respect of parts, and throughout in regard
of time, when it brings a man to the end of his salvation, when it carries a
man through all impediments, when it leaps over all difficulties; so that a
growing, prevailing, ouercomming faith, that is said to be an effectual faith,
such a faith as leaves not the work half done; such a faith as leaves not the
building in the beginning, in the rudiments, but sets it up, and puts the roof
upon it; such a faith, which, though it may sink, as a Cork, for a time, yet
it rises again: such a faith as ouercomes, and perfects the work of our
salvation: in this sense faith must be effectual, and this differs from the
other three: so that in these four senses faith is said to be effectual. And
this is the first thing.

The second thing which we undertook, wherein the efectualnesse of faith
consists, in 4. things.
was to show you wherein the effectualnesse of faith consists. It consists in
these four things. That which we said before to you, when we showed you the
causes of the ineffectualnesse of faith, will make good way to this.

The first thing wherein the effectualnesse

The second is, when the understanding is

The third is, when the will takes Christ,

The fourth is, when it turns not only the

First, When the preparation is good.
I say, faith is effectual, when there is a good way made for it, when the
rubbish and false earth is taken away where it should be built; that is, when
the humiliation is sound and good, when the preparation is perfect, when it is
such as makes a man fit for the Kingdom of GOD: For I find that phrase used,
Luke 9.62. opened.
He that puts his hand to the Plow, and looks back, is unfit for the Kingdom
of GOD: As if he had said, there are certain men, which come to the
profession of Christianity, as many come to husbandry, which is a hard
employment; some there are which do this, and go back again. Why? because
they are not fit for the Kingdom of God, that is, they are not thoroughly
prepared for it: that is to say, when a man is not thoroughly humbled to know
what sin is, and what the wrath of God is, he is not fit for the Kingdom of
God; but if he do come to Christ, if he do begin to believe, he will go back
again. So a man is properly said not to be fit for the Kingdom of GOD, Sound
humiliation fits men for Christ.
till he be thoroughly humbled, till he have tasted the bitterness of sin,
till he have felt what the Devils yoke is. Instances.
As it was with the Israelites, put the case they had been carried out of
Egypt before the time that they were, In the Israelites.
indeed they had not been fit for the Land of Canaan, because they would have
been ready to have turned back in their hearts into Egypt, and though the
LORD laid load on them, though their yoke were hard, though he caused them to
wander up and down long, yet all was little enough, still they were lingering
after Egypt, and if they had been taken out of Egypt, before the tale of Brick
was required of them, without giving them straw, before the taskemasters had
dealt hardly with them, what would they have done? Might it not truly be said
of them, they would not have been fit for Canaan? So in this case, if a man
will take CHRIST, it is a laborious work, as laborious as husbandry, as
laborious as putting the hand to the Plow, as taking the yoke. Now before a
man have felt how hard the yoke is that he has already, (for there be many
that wear the yoke of Satan, and see no hardness in it, but go in a fair
course, their consciences are not wounded with the sense of their sins, they
never had afflictions wherein they tasted the wrath of GOD) alas, such men may
come to put their hand to the Plow, but when they come to see what work they
have in hand, they go back, they are not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. Till
a man be weary, and heavy laden, with the burden of Satan, till he see
Satan's yoke to be intolerable, he will never continue under the yoke of
CHRIST: therefore let us consider whether we be fitted or no: this fitness is
first required.

So again, In the Prodigal.
we may take example from the Prodigal son, he was in his Fathers house, but
he would not continue there, when he was there at the first, and lived as the
other son did, because he had not been abroad in the World, to find the
misery of being away from his Father, he was never pinched with affliction,
with want of meat, till he was from his Father, he never knew what it was to
be at his Fathers finding, till he had his stock in his own hand; he was
not fit, and, we see, he continued not there: So, take a man that is brought
up in his Fathers House, as it were, that has tasted nothing but the
sweetness of the promises, and all is well with him, he has drunk in the
truth of the Gospel with his education, Men hold not without sound humiliation.
you shall find that this will not usually hold out: because he has not
found what misery it is to be out of his Fathers House, therefore he prizeth
it not, such a one is not fit to continue, he is unfit for the Kingdom of
GOD. Therefore the first thing that is required to make faith effectual,
wherein the effectualnesse of faith consists, by way of preparation, to make
way for it, is, when a man is soundly humbled and prepared, when it is such as
will make them continue: Reu. 2.25. opened.
you have a phrase used, Reu. 2.25. Hold fast till I come that which thou have
already. As if he should say, Many have hold of the Truth, they have hold of
CHRIST, they have hold of the promises, but they hold them not fast, they hold
them a while, but they hold them not fast till I come: To him that ouercometh,
etc. and, him that continues to the end, will I make ruler over the Nations,
etc. So, I say, till a man be thus made fit, he may take hold for a while, but
he shall not hold fast till CHRIST come, but he will let go his hold, because
he is not prepared with humility. This is that which is required in that place
I formerly named, Matthew. 10.6. Mat. 10.^. opened.
If there be any worthy, (says he) let your peace come upon them. That is, if
there be any, when you come to preach the Gospel, that are so far broken
and humbled, if there be any that are so far convinced of their sins that
they prize me indeed, so that they hold me, and will not let me go for any
thing, but they are content to let all go, rather then me, such a man is
worthy of me, such a man prizeth and esteems me, and your peace shall come
upon him: That is, it shall come effectually upon him, it shall abide with him,
and save his soul for ever. So, I say, when there is so much humiliation
wrought in the heart, when the Spirit so far convinces a man of sin, that
he comes thus to prize CHRIST, this is the first thing wherein effectual
faith consists: for though it be not the very thing wherein believing
consists, yet it is that preparation, without which faith can never be found
sound and effectual.

Secondly, When the understanding is clear.
when this is done, this is not all, when there is such a preparation made,
that a man is willing to take CHRIST upon any conditions, yet now, if he shall
not be well built, if he see not just ground to take him, if his
understanding shall not see the truth of the promise so clearly, that he can
build on it, that he can rest on it, that all the arguments in the World
cannot draw him from it again, his faith will not be effectual. Therefore the
second thing wherein the effectualnesse of faith consists, is to have it well
built in the mind and understanding of a man, when he clearly sees the truth
of the promise, that he can build upon it infallibly. For your better
understanding of this, When a man is said to be well built.
you must know that then a man is said to be well built, to be rooted and
grounded in faith, when he has the first ground right, that so he proceeds
from one to another, that it is not a confused superficial knowledge, to
assent to the truth, and promises that are delivered in the Word, but when he
has a sure ground, the first ground, and the next, and so he proceeds along.
When he believes the Scriptures in general.
As, for example, the first thing that a man must do, is to believe the
Scriptures, to know that they are true and infallible, that they are the sure
Word of GOD, when a man can say, this I know, The promises in particular.
and this I build upon. And besides that, then we look upon the promises
which the Scriptures contain, wherein CHRIST, and forgiveness of sins is
offered. Now if the first ground fail you, that is the bottom upon which the
promises stands; therefore have that sure: when that is sure, you must have the
promises sure, that is, you must consider the promises, and examine them, and
see if this be the sense of the Scriptures; If there be so much light in you,
as to say, I find it so, I find the Scriptures true, I believe them, I find
these promises in the Scriptures, Application of the offer of Christ.
I find CHRIST offered to every creature under heaven, I find that I have a
warrant to take him; when a man, out of himself, out of an inward principle,
out of his own proper judgment sees this, and is convinced of the truth of
this, that the promises are so, and that they belong unto him, that he may
justly, upon good ground, appropriate them to himself; so that when he looks
round about him, and considers all the objections that may be made, yet he can
answer all arguments; when he falls down, and is fully convinced, and perfectly
persuaded in his own mind, when a man thus apprehends the promises, when his
understanding is rooted and grounded in the faith; that is the second thing
wherein the effectualnesse of faith consists: And we see that described Ephesians.
2. Ephesians. 2.19, 20. opened.
Says the Apostle there, You are no longer strangers and forraigners, but
Saints, of the household of God, and are built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone. Mark,
(says he) you are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; that
is, you that are Saints, must consider what ground you have to take that name
to your selves: Says he, you are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets; that is, you are not built upon the foundation, upon the word of a
man, you are not built upon this Doctrine that I teach, merely because I teach
it, but you are built upon the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles: that
is, you see the Prophets and Apostles deliver this Doctrine. I, but one may
seek a further ground then that: What foundation have the Prophets and
Apostles? Says he, Christ is the chief corner stone on which they are built.
So that when you have this tract of consequence, I see the promise is sure,
Why? Because it is built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, they
have affirmed it. But how shall I know that they are sure? Note.
Because Christ himself has spoken by them, he is the chief corner stone,
when faith is thus grounded, then we are truly said to be built, and rooted,
and grounded in faith. Therefore, as the Samaritanes said, Ioh. 4 44. Ioh. 4.44.
We believe, not because thou told^st us, not for thy words, but we have heard
him our selves, and we know that he is the Messiah, and Savior of the World.
Now, Particular knowledge.
if those Samaritanes had only believed because the Woman brought that
relation, their faith might have failed them, but when they heard CHRIST
themselves, when they saw him with their own eyes, when they could say, in
good earnest, out of their own knowledge: we know, that this is CHRIST, the
Savior of the World, that is such a faith as will hold out. So, when a man
does only take a persuasion out of the general preaching of the Word, without
a certain ground, it proves ineffectuall faith; but when men believe, because
themselves have seen, and out of that knowledge can say, they know CHRIST to
be the Messiah, when they know CHRIST to be theirs, when they know CHRIST to
be the Savior of the World; and so, by consequence, of them which are a part
of the World, then they may be truly said to be built, to be rooted and
grounded in faith. This is that that Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 1.19. 1 Ioh.
1.19. opened.
We know that we are of GOD, and that all the World lies in wickedness. We
know that we are of GOD; that is, it is not a thing that we are uncertainly
persuaded of, but it is a thing that we know as certainly as any man knows a
thing that is before his eyes, as a man knows a thing of which he doubts not;
we know that although all the World be against us, though all the World run
another way, though all the World condemn us for vain men, idle men, for
trusting in CHRIST crucified, yet we know that we are of GOD, and that all the
World lies in wickedness. I say, when a man holds out thus, when he is put
to the trial, when a man knows in his own knowledge, that it is so, as Peter
says to CHRIST, Ioh. 6.68. Ioh. 6.68. opened.
many had taken CHRIST, that went away again. Says CHRIST to his Disciples,
Will you also go away? Mark the answer that Peter gives: No: says he,
Whither should we go? thou have the words of eternal life. I know and
believe that thou art Christ, the Son of the living GOD. As if he should say,
It is impossible that I should go away, for I know and believe; that is, I
know upon good ground, I have another manner of ground then they had: If I had
no more ground then the rest, I should go away as well as they, but I know and
believe that thou art CHRIST, the Son of the living GOD, therefore it is
impossible that I should ever forsake thee, although all should forsake thee.
This is to be rooted and grounded in faith, in this second sense, when we see
an infallible ground, a sure Rock, upon which our faith is built, and we are
willing to adventure our selves upon it, to adventure our goods, our name, our
life, our liberty, that if a man be brought to Martyrdom, he can adventure
himself, and put all that he has upon it. This ground will hold out, I say,
when the understanding of a man is thus built upon the Word, when a man is
examined every way, when he is able to answer all arguments, and all
objections that may be brought against it. This is the second thing wherein the
effectualnesse of faith consists. I should add more, but I must defer them
till the afternoon.

FINIS.
OF EFFECTVALL FAITH. The Second Sermon.
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering your effectual Faith, etc.


THe third thing, The third thing, wherein the efficacy of faith consists: to
take Christ.
wherein the efficacy of faith is seen, is when we take CHRIST; this is the
action of the will; when we take him in a right manner, when we take him so as
to hold him, when we take him in such a manner, as that we are knit and united
to him. That this is required:

First, I will show it in the general: it is a point that we have often
mentioned heretofore, but to all that I have said, I will add that in Heb.
10.22. Heb. 10.22. opened.
Let us draw near with a true heart, and assurance of faith. Mark it, first
there must be an assurance of faith, that is in the understanding and mind of
a man, and to that must be added drawing near, and that is an act of the will:
for when we are assured of the truth of the promises, and have appropriated
them to our selves, then follows the act of the will; Verse. 38.
therefore in verse. 38. of that Chap. it is said, The just shall live by faith:
but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. That
Antithesis, that opposition, that is made in that withdrawing of a man's self
from God, is opposed to faith, to drawing near to him; when a man not only
believes the promises, but accepts and receives them. Now to do this in a
right manner, is that wherein the efficacy of faith does principally consist.
Now what is that? It is to take Christ, to draw near to him in a right manner;
and then it is done, when you so take him, that you bring Christ into your
hearts, to dwell there, as it is expressed, Ephesians. 3.17. Ephesians. 3.17.
that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. That is, when there is an union
made between Christ and us, when he comes into the heart, when he dwells in us,
and we in him; when Christ is so brought into our hearts, that he lives there,
and when we are so united to him, that we live in him; when he grows in us,
as the Vine in the branches; and we grow in him, as the branches in the Vine:
when faith has done this, then it is an effectual faith, when it knits and
unites us to CHRIST, as he says, Reu. 3.2^.
I will come in, and sup with him. That is, I will continue with him, I will
live in him, and rule over him.

Now when Christ is in the heart, he is not there to no purpose; What taking of
Christ is effectual.
but, as Paul says, I live in Christ, and he in me. I say, when our taking of
CHRIST shall proceed so far, as to make this union betwixt us, therein this
efficacy lies; when the heart is knit to him, as the soul of Jonathan was to
David, and when CHRIST shall be knit to us again, that we shall be content to
leave Father and Mother, and to become one spirit with him, as it is, Ephesians.
5.23. Ephesians. 5.23. opened.
It is a similitude expressing the union betwixt Christ and the Church: A man
shall forsake Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife. The word in the
Original, (...) signifies to glue: if there be any conjunction that is
nearer then other, it is signified in that word: there is not a word in all the
Greek Language, that signifies a nearer conjunction, then the word there used
for cleaving, or glewing. When a man shall forsake all, even Father and Mother,
the dearest things in the world, and shall cleave to Christ, (it is a
repetition of what is said Genesis 2.24. Genesis 2.24.
concerning Adam and Eve,) when faith has done this work, it is an effectual
faith.

But yet add this again, a man may take Christ, and seem to draw near to
him, when it may be, it is done out of fear, it may be, out of love to his,
and not out of love to him, it may be done out of misinformation, and mistake;
but when we draw near to GOD, and do it out of love, We must draw near out
of love to Christ.
(put these two together) that we so take Christ, as that there is an union
made between us and him, and when it is done out of love; as that condition is
put in, in 1 Timothy, 1.5. 1 Timothy 1.5.
The end of the Commandment is love out of a pure heart and a good conscience,
and faith unfeigned. As if he should say, There is a double kind of faith, a
false faith, and a faith that is not hypocritical, that is the word used in
the Original. Now, says he, the end of the Commandment is love, etc. That
is, all that God looks for, is such a love as comes from a faith that is
unfeigned, that is not counterfeit. Herein is faith seen not to be
counterfeit, if it beget love, and out of that love we cleave to Christ. So
that this is the third thing that makes faith effectual.

Fourthly, faith is then said to be effectual, when it has not only done all
this, Thing wherein the efficacy of faith consists.
when there is not only a good preparation made for it, when it is well built
in the understanding, and when the will has thus taken Christ, but there must
be a further act, and that is the turning of the whole soul, The turning of
the whole soul.
and a seconding of it in our whole lives and practice, a seconding of it in
our executions, and doing the things that Christ commands, as in Gal. 5. Gal. 5.
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but faith that works by love. Such a faith as works, that is effectual
faith. As if he should have said, Many will be ready to believe in CHRIST, but
will do nothing for him, they will not work. (Now working is in doing,
Working in doing and suffering.
or in suffering: for in suffering there is a work as well as in doing, only
it is a work with more difficulty, a work with more impediments.) Again, if
they will do any thing for Christ, it is not out of love, but for other
respects: perhaps out of some flash, or good mood, or some other respects; out
to do it as being rooted and grounded in love, if faith have this work, it is
effectual faith; and therefore when faith has once taken Christ, it must shoot
it self into all the affections: for when they are all set on work, endeavor
will follow. If the will be so set on work indeed, the rest will follow after
it. Love will follow, Desire after Christ will follow, Fear to offend him will
follow, Repentance and turning from Satan will follow, bringing forth fruits
worthy amendment of life, and obedience, etc. will follow. Why the promises are
made promiscuously.
Therefore you shall find, that the promises are made promiscuously, sometimes
to one thing, sometimes to another: sometimes, he that repents shall be
saved: sometimes, he that believes shall be saved: sometimes, he that obeys
shall be saved: you shall find them promiscuously; because that when faith is
effectual, it has all these with it, it purifieth the heart, and brings
forth fruit worthy amendment of life. Therefore this must be added, to show the
efficacy of faith; and, if this be wanting, faith is not effectual; not that
it can be disjoined from the other, but, that it is that wherein it consists
with the rest.

And therefore it is GODS usual manner, when men seem to take CHRIST, and to
believe in him, God tries men's graces.
he puts them to the trial, to see what they will do, whether their faith
will work or no. Thus he did with Abraham, when he would prove him; he was a
faithful man before, God had experience of him before, but yet he would prove
Abraham by offering his son, and when he saw he did it, he concluded that he
had faith: indeed it was a strong faith, for it endured the trial. I say, GOD
will put men to it. So likewise those in Ioh. 12.42. Ioh. 12.42.
Many of the chief Rulers believed in him, but they durst not confess him,
for fear of the Jews, lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue. There
was a faith in them, a taking of Christ, but when it came to the trial, it
held not out, they durst not confess him, because they feared to be cast out
of the Synagogue: that is, when they came to suffer a little for Christ's sake,
when they came to such an action as confessing his Name, when they came to
endure but such a thing as to be cast out of the Synagogue, they forsook him,
which showed that their belief was ineffectuall. So that, let a man seem to
have all the other three, yet when the praise of men shall come in competition
with any command of GOD, when God shall put him to do any thing, to part with
any thing that is dear to him, as he did Abraham, if his faith work not, if
his faith hold not out in the trial, but start aside, like a broken Bow, it is
not effectual faith. So you see the things wherein the efficacy of faith
consists.

First, in the soundness of the preparation.

Secondly, when the mind apprehends the promises, and sees good ground to pitch
upon them.

Thirdly, when the will so takes Christ as to bring Christ into the heart, so
that Christ lives in us, and that out of love.

And fourthly, when faith works, and that in the time of trial, when God
shall put us to it. I say, when you find these four things, you may conclude
that your faith is effectual.

The last thing I propounded, is to show how this is wrought, How effectual
faith is wrought,
how our faith is made effectual. It is made effectual by the Spirit of God,
it is not in our own power, we are not able to believe, nay, we are so far
from it, that we strive against it, the spirit in us resists it; so that, if
GOD himself put not his hand to the work, It is not in man's power to believe.
no man is able to believe.

You may think, when you see such general propositions as these, that Christ
is offered to every creature under heaven, and that whosoever believes shall
be saved, you may think, I say, that it is easy to bring this home in
particular, to say, Surely this pardon belongs to me. My Brethren, it is
another thing for a man indeed to believe, for him to take CHRIST so as to deny
himself for him, to take him so, as to mortify his lusts, so as to take up
his cross, so as to obey CHRIST, to follow him in all things, this is a thing
that no man is able to do, unless GOD enable him to it, with his almighty
power. For the heart of every man, by nature, is so shut up against CHRIST,
that it will give no entrance to him, he may stand and knock long enough;
unless GOD himself shake off the bolts, and open the gates, and break open
these everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may come in, we will not admit
him, but keep him out.

Every man naturally has a hard heart, that cannot repent, that cannot turn
from sin, he will be content perhaps to take Christ for a Savior, but to
take him so as to obey him, and fear him, so as to love him: this no man will
do, or can do, unless the Holy Ghost enable him.

But, Quest.
you will ask, How does the Holy Ghost do it?

The Holy Ghost does it by these three acts. Answ.
First, How the Holy Ghost works faith: by three things.
by putting an efficacy into the Law, and making that powerful, to work on
the heart, to make a man poor in spirit, that so he may be fit to receive the
Gospel. Putting an efficacy in the Law.
For the Law, though it be fit to humble a man, yet it is no work of
sanctification. If a man were able to do any thing, he were able to see the
righteousness the Law requires, and how far he is from it, and to discern the
curse upon the not doing of it, A man cannot see his sins to purpose without
the spirit of bondage.
and yet this he is not able to do, without the spirit of bondage: the spirit
of bondage must make the Law effectual, as well as the spirit of Adoption does
the Gospel. That is, except the LORD himself press the Law on our hearts, so
as to cause it to make sin appear to us, we, that are the Ministers of GOD,
may discover your sins, we may show you the rectitude required in the Law, we
may show you the danger, yet all will be to no purpose, unless God awaken you:
if he will set sin upon the conscience to worry a man, to pluck him down,
when GOD shall charge sin on him, that he shall feel the weight and burden
of it, when he shall sharpen sin, and cause it to use its sting, this makes a
man fit to receive CHRIST: otherwise, if the sons of Thunder should speak to
men, if we should come in the spirit and power of Eliah, nay, if GOD himself
should thunder from heaven, all would not move the heart of a man, all would
not awaken him to see his sins, till God himself shake the heart.

Act. 16.
To convert the Ga^ler, in Acts 16. the foundation of the Prison was shaken;
which was a resemblance of the shaking of his heart: we may as well shake the
Earth, as strike the heart of a sinner without the work of GOD. For, though
the Law be a sword, yet unless GOD take that sword into his hand, and strike
therewithal himself, it shall not be able to wound a sinner. Therefore the
first work of the Holy Ghost is to awaken a sinner, to set sin upon him,
that he may be fit to receive CHRIST.

By showing the excellency and the riches of Christ.
Secondly, when this is done, that the heart is thus prepared by the Spirit,
then the Holy Ghost shows us what we have by CHRIST, he shows the
unsearchable riches of CHRIST, what is the hope of our calling, Ephesians. 1.18.19.
opened.
and the glorious inheritance prepared for the Saints, and what is the
exceeding greatness of his power in them that believe. I say, we need the
Spirit to show these things.

Object.
But, you will say, a man may see these things without the help of the Spirit.
Ans.


No man can so see the riches of Christ, as to be affected with them, without
the help of the Spirit.
It is true, in some manner you may, but not in such a manner as shall affect
you. For there is a manner of seeing proper only to the Saints, and that is
the proper work of the Spirit in them, when we shall so see them, as to be
affected with them. Otherwise, you may read the Scriptures a thousand times
over, you may understand them, yet you shall not be affected with them, till
the Holy Ghost show them unto you. This is the secret of GOD, that he reuealeth
to those whom he means to save; that is, when he presents these spiritual
things prepared for us in Christ, in such a manner, as that we shall love them,
and embrace them; when we shall not only see the truth of them, but the
goodness of them, when GOD shall not only show us the advantages we have by
Christ, but the excellency of Christ, so that we shall be in love with his
person, as well as to be ready to receive the privileges with him.

Now this is done by the Spirit: 1 Cor. 2.12. opened.
1. Cor. 2.12. We have received the Spirit of GOD, by which we know the
things that are given us of GOD, and they are revealed to us by the Spirit.
They are two or three times repeated in that Chapter; as if he should have
said, If you saw them no more then other men do, then natural men do, you
would be no more affected with them, then they are: but when you have the
Spirit of GOD to show you the things that are given you of GOD, that is the
thing that works upon you, and affects you. And so in Ioh. 14.21. Ioh. 14.21.
opened.
says CHRIST, I will come to him, and show my self to him: When CHRIST
shows himself to a man, it is another thing then when the Ministers shall
show him, or the Scriptures nakedly read do show him: for when Christ shall
show himself by his Spirit, that showing draws a man's heart to long after
him, otherwise we may preach long enough, and show you that these spiritual
things, these privileges are prepared for you in Christ, but it is the Holy
Ghost that must write them in your hearts; we can but write them in your heads:
Therefore the Lord takes that as peculiar to himself: Ier. 31 33. opened.
I will write my Law in your hearts. That is, I will make you affected with the
things that I show you, and this is the teaching of GOD. There is a teaching by
men, and a teaching by GOD, that is, when God shall enable a man to see things
in good earnest; otherwise it will be but as a man that sees a thing, when his
mind is upon another matter: so, we shall see, and not see: but when the Holy
Ghost shall show you these things, you shall see indeed, till then, you may
hear often enough of these things, but your hearts will be minding other
matters; some about their profits, and some their pleasures, etc. but when the
Holy Ghost shall show you these things; that is, when he presents them to us,
that draws the heart from minding other things, to seek after CHRIST, to
long after him, and not to content your selves, till you be united to him.

But, besides this, there is a third act of the Holy Ghost, By assuring us that
these things are ours,
by which he works it, and makes this faith effectual, and that is the
testimony that the Spirit gives to our spirits, telling us that these things
are ours: when the heart is prepared by the Law, and when these things are so
showed unto us, that we prize them, and long after them, yet there must be a
third thing, that is, to take them to our selves, to believe that they be ours;
This also must be wrought by the Spirit.
and there needs a work of the Spirit for this too: for, though the promises
be never so clear, yet, having nothing but the promises, you will find that
you will never be able to apply them to your selves: but when the Holy Ghost
shall say, Christ is thine, and these things belong to thee, and GOD is thy
Father; when the Spirit shall bear witness with our spirits, by an immediate
work of his own, then we shall believe. This is necessarily required, The
testimony of the Spirit wrought two ways.
and without this we shall not believe. It is true, the holiest man does it
two ways.

One is by clearing of the promises, By clearing the promises.
shining into our hearts, by such a light as makes us able to discern them,
and to believe them, and to assent to them.

But besides that, By an immediate voice.
he does it by an immediate voice, by which he speaks immediately to our
spirits, that we can say, as they said, Ioh. 16. Ioh. 16.29.
Now thou speak plainly, and speak no parable, we understand thee fully:
so, till the Holy Ghost speak to us, we are in a Cloud, GOD is hid from us,
we cannot see him clearly, but when we have this Spirit of Adoption, to give
us this witness, then we believe plainly indeed. Isa. 57.19. opened.
Therefore in Isay 57.19. says the Lord, I create the fruit of the lips,
Peace, etc. That is, the Ministers may speak peace to you, but unless I go
and join with the Minister, except I add a power of mine own; that is, such
an almighty power as I used in the Creation, it shall never bring peace to you.
I create the fruit of the lips; that is, the words of the Minister to be peace,
otherwise they would be ineffectuall. Therefore, I say, there must be a work
of the Spirit to persuade a man in such a case. And you shall find by
experience, let a Minister come to them that are in despair, they will not
apprehend the promises, All arguments without the Spirit prevail not.
though we use never so clear reasons, though we argue with them never so
long, and never so strongly, we shall find that all will do nothing, it will
be but labor spent in vain, till GOD himself open the Clouds, till he will
smile on a man, and send his Spirit into the heart, to give a secret witness
to him, till there be a work of his own joining with the promises, we find
by experience that our labor is lost.

It is true, we ought to do this, and every man is bound to look to the Word:
for, faith comes by hearing; and to hearken to the Ministry; for it is Gods
ordinance to breed faith in the heart, but yet till there be a work of the
Spirit, a man shall never be so persuaded, as to have any sure and sound
comfort by it.

Now all this is done by the Spirit, it is the wonderful work of GOD: for
when CHRIST is propounded to men, when he is offered, (as we have often offered
him to you, we have showed you what access you have to him, that no man is
excluded, that he is offered to every creature under heaven, we have showed you
the generality of the promise, that it takes in all, that you are contained
under it, that you may apply it to your selves; I say, when all this is done)
yet when a man comes to perform this, to apply it to himself, he is no more
able to do it, then a dead man is able to stir himself. Therefore the same
power that raised CHRIST from the dead, is required to work faith in our
hearts, as it is in Ephesians. 1.19. Ephesians. 1.19. opened.
According to his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead. So that it is as great a work, to move a man's heart to CHRIST,
as to put life into a dead man; we are as unapt and backward to it, as a dead
man is to receive life. For what else is the reason, that when we preach CHRIST
to you, when he is offered to you, that there be so few that are affected
with him, that there be so few that take him? does it not show that you are
dead? yea, so dead, that unless GOD call you, and that there be a mighty work
of the Spirit, the hearts of men will never answer unto us. Therefore that is
required as a condition in all them who will come, Act. 2.39.
Act. 2. So many as the LORD our GOD shall call. That is, when we preach,
except there be a secret voice of the Spirit of CHRIST speaking to your
hearts, as we do to your ears, and saying, Come and take CHRIST, no man will
come. We see, CHRIST said to his Apostles, Follow me, and presently they
followed him; (for it was not the outward voice that did it, there was a secret
voice within) so, when GOD shall call men to take CHRIST, then they do it, but
not before. That word that is used, Luke 14.23. Luke 14.23. opened.
Go and COMPEL them to come in, that my House may be full, it intimates a
great backwardness in us. That men are* compelled to come in, what it implies.
When men are compelled, it shows, that not only the arguments are strong,
and forcible, but that there is a great backwardness in men, that they must
(as it were) be constrained, that they must be put on it by force, and against
their will; such is the unaptness that is in men.

What is employed by drawing: Ioh. 6.44. opened.
So, says CHRIST, no man comes to me, except the Father draw him. That phrase
of the Holy Ghost shows, that there is an extreme backwardness, that, if they
be not forced to come, (as it were) they will not do it: not but that when a
man is once wrought upon by the Holy Ghost, he comes of himself; but that
phrase is used only to show that backwardness that is in man by nature. For,
when the Holy Ghost has wrought upon the will, How the Holy Ghost draws.
and has turned that, then a man comes upon his own legs, and is moved from
an inward principle of his own; therefore men are so drawn, that withal,
they run after him, as it is, Cant. 1. Cant. 1.4.
but it shows this thing, for which I have used it, that there is a wondrous
backwardness in all of us by nature, and that this must be done by a great
work of the Spirit.

Therefore the Apostle Paul, in Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 1.18.
in all the former part of the Chapter, to the 18. Verse, having declared the
great Mystery of salvation, he takes himself upon the sudden, and begins to
think with himself, though I show you all this, it is to no purpose, if GOD
send not the Spirit of revelation, etc. Therefore he lifts up his heart to
GOD, beseeching him to give them the Spirit of revelation, to open the eyes of
their understanding, that they might see the hope of their Calling, and the
riches of their inheritance with the Saints. So should Ministers learn to do,
to pray for the people, that GOD would infuse and send his Spirit into their
hearts, that they may be able to perceive these things effectually, with a
right apprehension, to see the secrets of GOD in them, you also should go to
GOD, and beseech him to help you with his Spirit, that so you may be able to
apprehend these things, and that they may be powerful, to work the same
thing, for which we deliver them to you: and so we have showed you these three
things; First, what effectual faith is: namely, in showing you why it is
called effectual faith.

Secondly, wherein the efficacy of faith consists, and Thirdly, how it is
wrought.

Now, last of all, we are to show you the reason, why GOD accepts no faith,
but that which is effectual. Why God will accept no faith but that which is
effectual.


And there is good reason why no faith should be accepted of GOD, but that
which is effectual.

First, because otherwise it is not faith at all, if it be not effectual;
Because else it is not faith, because it is dead.
and if it be not faith, it is no wonder that he does not accept of it. I say,
it is no more faith, then a dead man is said to be a man: you give the name of
a man to him, yet he is not a man; no more is faith that is not effectual, any
faith; it has only the name of faith, and there is no more in it: but as dead
Drugges, which have no efficacy in them, or as dead Plants, or dead Wine,
which is turned to Vinegar, Similes.
it cease to be Wine, it is no longer Wine, but Vinegar; so it may be said of
ineffectuall faith, it is not faith, it has the name and the shadow of faith
only, and therefore God accepts it not.

Again, Because such faith has no love.

Romans 8.28.


GOD will save none, unless they be reconciled to him, and be such as love
him, for that condition is every where put in. All things shall work together
for good to them that love him: and he has prepared a Crown for them that
love him. Now, if faith be not effectual, there will be no love; and if love
be necessarily required, GOD cannot accept that faith that is ineffectuall.

Again, Because the Devils have such a faith.
if GOD should accept of a faith that is ineffectuall, the Devils have such a
faith, by which they apprehend the Word, and a faith that brings forth effects:
for they fear and tremble; but this is not the faith that purifieth the heart,
it is not an effectual, it is not a purging, lively faith.

Again, Because it works no mortification.
CHRIST receives none but them that deny themselves, and are willing to take up
their cross and to follow him, that mortify the deeds of the body by the
Spirit. Now an ineffectuall faith does none of these, and therefore that faith
that saves, must be a working faith, or else these things should not be
necessarily required.

Again, Because else Christ should lose the end of his coming into the world.
it was Christ's end in coming into the world, that he might destroy the works
of the Devil, and for this end has the grace of God appeared, that men should
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts: and for this end did he give himself, to
purify to himself a people zealous of good works, He comes to be a King, as
well as a Savior, to rule among his people, to have men obey him, which could
not be, if faith were not effectual, if it did not purify the heart, and
enable men to deny all worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world.

Good works are the way to salvation. Ephesians. 2.10.
And last of all, good works are required of necessity, as the way to
salvation; Ephesians. 2.10. We are Gods workmanship, created in Jesus Christ unto
good works, which he has ordained that we should walk in them. Good works
are required of necessity, GOD judges us according to our works, Romans 2. Romans
2.6.
and at the last day, the reward is pronounced, according to that which men
have done: Mat. 26.35, 39.
When I was in prison, you visited me; when I was naked, you clothed me, etc.
And if they be required of necessity, then it is not a dead, liuelesse,
workelesse faith, but a powerful, energeticall faith, a faith that is stirring
and active, a faith that is effectual, which GOD requires, without which we
cannot be saved.

We come now to make some Use of what has been said.

Use 1. To try our faith, whether it be sound.
First, If GOD accept no faith, but that which is effectual, it should teach us
not to be deceived in a matter of so great moment; It should teach us to look
to our faith, to consider whether it be a right faith or no. If a man have
Evidences, upon which his lands, and whole estate depends, if one should
come, and tell him that they were false Evidences, it would affect him; he
would, at the least be ready to look, and to examine them, and yet these are
matters of less moment.

If one be told that his Corn is blasted, Simile.
that all the Trees in his Orchard are dead, that all his money is counterfeit,
a man would look even to these things; a man would have that which he has to
be sound, and not counterfeit: and shall not we then look to the faith that we
have, upon which the salvation of our souls depends? seeing God accepts none
unless it be ^ound, and seeing there is so much counterfeit faith in the
world. It should teach us to look about us, and consider what our faith is:
For, as James says, faith without works cannot save us. Iam. 2.14.
What avails it, my Brethren, if a man say he has faith, and has not
works, can his faith save him? So I say to every man, in such a case, thou
that think thou have faith, if there be not works too, if it be not
effectual, if it be not a lively faith, will such a faith save thee? If a man
should come and say to one that brags of the Balsome or Drugges which he has,
(that are dead, and have lost their efficacy) Will such a Balsome heal thee?
Simile.
If a man have a gilded Target, made of paper, a man may say to him, Will that
Target defend thee? And so I say, when a man has a counterfeit faith, Will
such a faith as this save thee? It will not save you; you may please your
selves in it, as a man is pleased with a false dream, but, when you are
awaked, you will find that you are deceived. Learn therefore to consider of
your faith, to see if it be effectual.

When the LORD proclaimed himself to be a merciful God, Exodus 34.6.7.
forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; yet it is added, he will not
hold the wicked innocent. So, when we have said so much of faith, and that
faith saves; yet know, that it must be a working faith that saves us: It must
be such a faith as purifieth the heart, it must be such a faith that may show
it self in fruits worthy amendment of life. And therefore Saint James takes
so much pains in this case, as you shall find in his first Chapter, and the
beginning of the second; he lays down rules, and tells them, that if they
keep the whole Law, and yet fail in one point, they are guilty of the whole.

Now having dealt so strictly, some might be ready to object: Object.
GOD is merciful, and I shall be saved through faith.

Ans.
It is true, (says he) if you have a right faith, you shall be saved by it;
but yet know this, that unless your faith be such a faith as enableth you to
do what I say, it is a faith that will do you no good, Five arguments of
Saint James against worklesse faith
it will not save you: for, though faith saves you, yet it must be such a
faith as works. And that he proves by many arguments; (it is a place worth
the considering, and fit for this purpose) I say, he uses some arguments to
prove, that that faith which is not effectual will not save us.

As first, Says he, if a man should say to

Secondly, Some man might say, Thou That is, if a man have faith, he will show
it by his works. As if he should have said, Note.
If the Sun be the greatest light, let it give the greatest splendour; If the
Loadstone be of such a virtue, let it show it, by attracting the Iron to it:
So, if thy faith be effectual, show it by thy works: that is, if thy faith be
a true faith, it must be a working faith, or else it is nothing, GOD will not
accept it.

Thirdly, unless it be a working faith, an effectual thou beleeuest that
there is one God; the Devils do the same, and tremble.

Fourthly, If any man could be justified by Abraham might have been so
justified; but Abraham was justified by his works; that is, by such a faith as
had works joined with it. And not Abraham only, but Rahab, (that is another
example: for it might be objected, Abraham indeed believed, and was justified
by works, but Rahab had no works, she was a wicked woman, and therefore was
justified by faith?

To this therefore he answers, that) she had works, or else she could not
have been saved, unless she had such a work as that in sending away the
Messengers, her faith could not have justified her. Indeed, that was a great
work; for she adventured her life in it.

as the body, without the soul, is a dead body, a stinking carrion, there is
no preciousnesse, nor no excellency in it; so faith without works is dead.
Therefore look to your faith; do not think that a faith that merely takes
Christ, and believes in him, that it is a faith that shall justify you. Let
all these arguments persuade you, that if it be not a working faith, it shall
do you no good. Therefore let this be the first Use, to consider your faith,
whether it be effectual or no, by the working of it.

Use. 2. To judge our conditions by the efficacy of* our faith.
The second Use that we may make of it, is this: Hence we should learn to judge
of our estates and conditions, by the efficacy of our faith: for, if no faith
be received, but that which is effectual, then it behooues us to look to the
working of our faith.

Again, if GOD accept no faith but that which is effectual, hence we may
learn also not to believe all that say they have faith, Not to believe all
that say they have faith, nor all that say they have none.
nor to believe all those that say they have none. As for those that say they
have no faith, yet, if we see the fruits of faith in them, that they have
those things that faith brings forth: If you see a man that complains he
believes not, yet if he love the Saints, if he endeavor to keep GODS
Commandments, if he continue not in any known sin, if he do not dare to
omit holy duties, nor to slight them, certainly, this man has faith: for we
find the effects of it there: although he have lost one act of his faith,
which is the comfortable assurance of a good estate; yet if the first act, by
which he rests upon Christ, Act of faith double.
and by which he takes Christ to himself, be there, we may conclude there is
faith. Simile.
When we see smoke, and feel heat, we say, there is fire, though we see no
flame: so, when we see these fruits in a man, we may boldly say, he has faith,
though he has not such a reflect act, A man may have faith, though he want
feeling.
as to know in himself that he has it, and so to have a comfortable assurance
of his condition.

On the other side; Of those that say they have faith, but have not.
if a man says, he knows and is persuaded that his sins are forgiven, his
conscience is at rest, and yet for all this, we find no works, I say, this
man has not faith: for there wants the efficacy of it: So that as the two
sons in the Gospel; one said he would go into the Vineyard, and did not;
the other said he would not go, yet afterward he repented, and went: so it is
with these two; the one says he has not faith, and yet for all that, we see,
he does the things that faith requires, we see the efficacy of faith in him.
Again, the other says he has faith, and yet does not bring forth the
fruits of faith, he does not show the efficacy of faith in his life; the one
shall be justified, the other shall be condemned.

Simile.
As when we take two Drugges, or two Pearls, etc. the one has lost his color,
seems withered and dead, so that to the outward view, it has lost all, yet
it has its efficacy still, that such a thing should have; the other looks
very fair, and has a right color and smell, but it has no efficacy in it;
we say, one is a lively Drug, and a good one, and the other a counterfeit: so,
when one man complains that he has no grace, that he is an hypocrite, and yet
he brings forth fruit worthy amendment of life, and we see the working of
his faith; I say, this is true faith: On the other side, he that makes a show
of faith, and yet wants the efficacy of it, he has no faith. We should
learn thus to judge, when men profess they have faith, and we find it not
by their works. It should teach both civil men and hypocrites to know their
estates: for it discovers both. For when the civil man comes, and sees
that he does much of the second Table, and little of the first; and the
hypocrite again, does much of the first, and little of the second; let them
consider that faith enableth a man to have respect to all Gods Commandments:
Psalm. 119.7.
it works a general change. And as this is true, for the substance, so it is
also for degrees: for, if God accepts only effectual faith, then so much
efficacy, and so much working as you find in any man, so much faith there is.
If there be no works, there is no faith; if the works be few, the faith is a
languishing faith; if the works be many, the faith is great and strong. That
is the second Use we should make, to learn to judge aright of our selves and
others.

Thirdly, Use 3. To justify the Doctrine of good works against the Papists
slanders.
if it be only an effectual faith, which GOD accepts, then this justifies
our Doctrine against the Papists, that say, we teach that only faith
justifies, and require no good works. I say, we teach, that not a naked, but
an effectual faith does it. So that all the difference between them and us,
is this; we agree both in this, that works are necessarily required to
salvation, that no man shall see GOD without them, without pureness of heart,
and integrity of life. We say, Except men mortify the deeds of the body by
the Spirit, they shall dye; and there is no condemnation to them that walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit: That is, there is a necessity put upon
men to walk after the Spirit; in this we agree: Difference between us and
Papists in the Doctrine of justification.
but here is the difference: They say that faith and works both are required
to justify; we say, that nothing is required but faith, and that works follow
faith: we say, faith indeed is working, and produces ^uch effects; so that,
whereas they say faith, and works; we say faith only, but it must be an
effectual faith, a working faith.

Object.
If they object that place of James, we are not justified by faith, but by
works.

Ans.
I answer, that there is a double justification, there is a justification of the
person; Justification double.
so was Abraham justified by faith, as Paul expresses it, Romans 4. Romans 4.
But then there is a second justification, a justification of the faith that
Abraham had, he justified his faith by his works, he showed that he had not a
dead faith, a liuelesse faith, a faith without works, but that he had a lively
effectual faith: for he added works to his faith, his works wrought together
with his faith. So that, if the question be, Whether Abraham was an hypocrite?
his works justified him that he was none. If the question be, Whether Abraham
was a sinner? his faith justifies him, and shows that he was made righteous
through faith. Note.
So, there is a justification of the person, and a justification of the faith
of the person: as when a man is said to justify such an action, Simile.
or such a cause, the meaning is not, that he will make that just which was
unjust before, but he will make it appear to be just; so Abraham was declared
to have a justifying faith, by that power and efficacy it wrought in him, in
offering up his son.

Again, it is objected out of that place, that by works faith is made
perfect; therefore it seems that faith is nothing alone, if works be not
joined with it. Answ.


I answer, Faith made perfect by works, what.
that when it is said that faith is made perfect by works, the meaning is,
that faith is made good by works; the perfection of faith is declared by
works. As one that professes that he has an Art, Simile.
and that he is able to do this and that; if he do the work wherein his Art
is showed, if he make any artificial work, by that he makes good his Art.
Or, as when we say, these Trees are good, because they have sap in them, they
are not dead Trees. Now the Tree is made perfect by the fruit; so faith by
works is made perfect. Not that works put life into faith; the sap must first
be in the Tree, and then it brings forth fruit: so there must first be a life
in faith, and then it brings forth works. So that, when we say that faith is
made perfect by works, the meaning is, that works declare faith to be right,
as the fruit does declare the Tree to have sap.

Again, Object.
if it be objected, (as it is by them) that works, and love, etc. are to
faith, as the soul is to the body: for, as the body, without the soul is
dead, so faith without works is dead: Hence they gather, that faith is as the
body, and that love, and works are as the soul: therefore faith justifies
not but works. Ans.


To this I answer; What meant by these words Faith without works is dead.
They take the comparison amiss: For the scope of it is this; as a soulelesse
body is nothing worth, it is dead, and no man regards it; so is a workelesse
faith: The meaning is not, that works are as the soul, and faith as the body;
but, as a man, when he looks upon a carcass, and sees no life in it, no
pulse, no motion, no sense, such a body is nothing worth; so when we see a
faith without motion, that has no pulses, that has no expression of life in
it, such a faith is of no worth.

Object.
But, you will say, if we be not justified by works, to what end are good
works required?

Ans.
I answer, there is end enough, there are motives enough: Why good works are
required, seeing they justify not.
Is not love a ground strong enough to bring forth good works? When this
objection was made to Paul, Romans 6. If Grace abound, Romans 6.1, 2.
why may we not sin the more; for Grace abounds, as sin abounds? he
might easily have answered, They evidence our right in Christ.
Except you do good works, you cannot be saved; but he says, How can we,
that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? That is, when a man is once in
CHRIST, there will be such a change wrought in him, that he shall find CHRIST
killing sin in him, and he shall be raised again to newness of life,
insomuch that he must of necessity do it; there will be love in his heart,
that will set him aworke, that will constrain him: therefore, says he, are
you not baptized into Christ's death? That is, when a man is in CHRIST, he is
dead to sin, as CHRIST dyed for him: so that, though there be no such motive,
as for a man to get Heaven by his works; yet, upon the taking of Christ, there
is a love planted in the heart, there is a change wrought in the heart, so that
there is an aptness in it to do good works; so that now a man delights in
the Law of God concerning his inward man, he desires nothing more then to be
employed in it, it is his meat and drink to do the will of GOD. Is not this
enough to move us?

Again; God rewards according to our works.
though good works be not required for justification, yet this may be a
motive: GOD rewards us, he chastens and afflicts us according to our works: 1
Pet. 1.15. 1 Pet. 1.15.
We call him Father, that judges every one according to his works: That is,
if our works be good, he is ready to reward us; if we fail, he is ready to
chastise us, as a Father does his children: therefore let us pass the time of
our dwelling here with fear. So that the Saints, after they are in the state
of grace, they may contract a kind of guiltiness unto them, so that they may
make their Father angry, they may feel many effects of his displeasure, though
they shall not lose his favor for ever: and the more our good works are, the
greater is our reward.

Again; Good works necessary, though not to justification.
we require good works of necessity, as well as the Papists: we say, you
must have good works, or else you cannot be saved; so that, except you have
repented, except you have love as well as faith, except there be a change of
heart, Christ is not in you.

Different rise of good works in Papists and us.
We require good works with the same necessity; only they have a different
rise, they rise from different grounds. When the Papists are asked what should
move a man to do good works? They say it is by way of merit, to get heaven;
and that is it that makes all their works to be of no worth. For, take any
natural man, he that has the most impure heart, may not he, to escape Hell,
and to get Heaven, do all the works the Papists require, and for the same end
that they require them? May he not give Alms, etc. An hypocrite cannot do
things out of love to God.
But to do it out of love, that is a thing that no Hypocrite is able to reach
unto: And therefore we say, that the meanest work, even the giving of a Cup
of cold water, is a good work, if it proceed from love: whereas, take the
fairest work, that has the greatest glory, and splendor, though it be
Martyrdom; if it come not from love, 2 Cor. 13.2:
if it be not a fruit of faith, if a man give his body to be burned, and give
all that he has to feed the poor, if it come not from love, GOD accepts it
not. So much for the second Use.

Use. 3. To labor to grow in faith and assurance.
The third Use that we should make of it, is this: If nothing be accepted, but
that faith that is effectual, we should learn hence, that, if we will grow in
ability to work, if we will grow in obedience, we must grow in faith: for all
efficacy must come from faith: for it is only the effectualnesse of faith
that GOD requires. That is, if there be any effectualnesse in man, that comes
not from faith, GOD requires it not: for it is the efficacy of faith which GOD
requires. Therefore, if we will be enabled to do the duties of new
obedience, labor to grow in faith, that must enable us to do what we do: if
we have not the ground, all that we do is in vain. What course to take in
weakness of grace.
Therefore, when we find any coldness, any weakness in the Graces we have,
any languishing; increase faith, and all other Graces will grow. If you find
you cannot pray, when you find your hands weak, and your knees feeble, that
you cannot run the ways of Gods Commandments, strengthen your faith, labor
to increase your assurance. Simile.
When the branches are weak and withering, we use to dung the root; so, in
this case, labor to strengthen your faith: for that will enable you to do
much; it is all in all.

This will be of much use to us in many cases. Laboring to strengthen faith,
of much use.
When a sin is committed, we should labor now to recover our selves out of
that relapse. In getting assurance of pardon after sin is committed.
What is the way? By laboring to get assurance of the forgiveness of it. Go
to GOD to strengthen thy faith, that is the way to get out of sin.

If there be a strong lust, In conflict with strong lusts.
that thou art to grapple withal, and which thou can not get the victory
over, the way is to go and increase faith, to increase assurance: for, the
more faith is increased, the more love, the more the heart is inclined to GOD:
for faith turns the bent of the heart from pleasures, and profits, from a
desire of the praise of men, to GOD: so that, the more faith, the more ability
there is to strive against the corruption that is in you.

In want of graces.
Again; if a man find he wants patience, he wants thankfulness, the way is,
not to look on the Virtues, to read moral Writers, but go and strengthen
thy faith, and that shall enable thee to do wonders: otherwise we water the
branches, and let the root alone.

How Ministers should build.
Thus should we Ministers do, lay this maine foundation, to build up our
hearers in this, and the rest will follow. This Paul did, that was the great
Master Builder, he lays down in all his Epistles, the foundation of faith:
in his Epistles to the Romans, to the Ephesians, to the Colossians, to the
Galatians; and after that he deduceth particulars, and builds on it: so your
maine business is to consider whether you have faith, to get assurance of
that, and when you have that, then strive against particular vices, and adorn
your selves with particular graces: For, because you labor not to have this
maine grace, this root and foundation of all the rest, I say, this is the
reason why those good motions that you have put into you by the Holy Ghost,
those motions that you have in the hearing of the Word, and the good purposes
that you take to your selves, come to nothing, because they have not faith for
their ground.

That general of Faith, Simile.
must go before these particulars: Though the Plants be good, yet, if the
ground be not good, and connaturall, where they are planted, they will not
grow. Therefore we find it ordinarily, that when men have resolutions to give
over such and such sins, to leave such and such vices, their wicked company,
drinking, gaming, and the like; it may be it holds for a day or two, yet this
comes to nothing; because the maine foundation is not laid, they go to work
without faith: when the ground is flesh, and the work spiritual, how can it
live? Simile.
for every thing lives in its own element; and these motions in them, are as
the Fish is out of the water: and as the fire, when it is out of its place,
dies and is extinguished; so these good purposes, when they are not particulars
that arise from that general of faith, they are in the heart as a thing out of
its own element, and therefore they perish. Therefore, when you have these
purposes, know that they will come to nothing, if you take not the right
course. Therefore labor to believe the promises, to be assured of salvation,
that you are translated from death to life, by an effectual faith: when this
is done, you shall find that your purposes will hold, and till then they are
in vain.

Use 4. To look to faith in our search.
And so again, this should teach us, seeing all depends upon faith, when we
come to search, to consider what assurance we have, that so we may go the
right way to work. For commonly, when we consider our estates, we look what
fruits we have, what sincerity has appeared in our life, and if we find
that weak, we commonly conclude, that our faith is weak also, and so the
weakness of our sanctification weakneth our assurance; but we should go
another way to work: When we find a weakness, we should go to the promises,
and strengthen our assurance: for there be two ways to increase assurance. Two
ways to increase assurance.


One is by the promises, the sure Word, on which faith is built.

The second is by the fruits of sanctification in our selves.

Now when we find these languishing, we should go to the first, and the other
will be increased by it. Faith works in you sanctification, and makes you to
believe the promise; as exercise begets health, Simile.
and we are made fit by health for exercise: or as acts beget habits, and
habits are means to exercise those acts: So assurance, grounded upon the
promise, it enableth, and enlarges, and increases sanctification, and
sanctification increases assurance: but first see faith, and then the other as
fruits of it. If you find a weakness in sanctification, labor to strengthen
your faith, and that will increase it: for that is the ground of all.

FINIS.
OF EFFECTVALL FAITH. The third Sermon.
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering your effectual Faith, etc.


IN the fifth place; Use. 5. To learn to judge aright of our works.
If nothing please GOD, if he accepts of nothing but what comes from effectual
faith; then we should learn hence to judge aright of our works: for what
works soever we do, they please GOD no further then he sees and finds
some faith in them. The Use before showed us how to judge aright of our faith;
this teaches you how to judge aright of all the works you do, that you do
not mistake in them. For men are very apt to judge amiss of what they do in
this case.

There be many works that have a specious and fair show in the view of men,
and perhaps in your own opinion: But if there be not faith in those works,
GOD regards them not: as, James 2.22. James 2.22.
when Abraham did that great work, in offering his son, (which was the
greatest work that ever he did, and the greatest work that is recorded in
all the Book of GOD) yet, says the Apostle there, Do ye not observe how faith
wrought with his works? That is to say, If faith had not set him on work to
do this, if faith had not been the Spring to set this wheel on going, GOD
had not accepted this. So, do whatsoever you will, God accepts our works no
further then he finds faith in them.
further then faith works with you in all that you do, GOD regards it not.

Therefore you shall observe in Christ's answer to the Woman of Canaan, in her
earnest prayer, in her coming to Christ, her fighting and striving against the
Devil, her tenderness to her Daughter, her holding out so long as she did;
all this Christ looks over: But when he comes to give his censure of her
work, of her carriage, Oh Woman, great is thy faith, says he. That was it
that set a great price upon her work: Matthew. 15.26, 27. Mat. 15.26, 27.
So, take the most excellent, the greatest work that can be performed, GOD
sets them at no higher a price then he finds faith in them; he weighes them
by that: so much faith as is in them, so far he accepts them, so far he
regards them. Look in Heb. 11. Heb. 11.
you shall find many glorious works set down. All the great works that
Sampson did, all the works that David did, the works that Gedeon did, the
works that Baruc did, the works that Moses did, and so along, you shall see
there, that there was nothing in all these works that was regarded, but their
faith: all is imputed to faith. And therefore, when you go about any thing,
labor to see faith set you aworke; and know, that as much faith as there is in
any work, so much GOD regards it, and no further. Jacob had done many good
things, that pleased GOD, yet GOD, when he would put a mark of his favor upon
him, when he would call him Israel, when he would change his name, it was for
that great work of faith, when he prayed all night, when he would not give
over, when he would not let him go, when he prevailed with God by faith; now,
says God, thy name shall be called Israel. (As if he should say) Now I will
put a name of honor upon thee. Why so? Not because there was more in that
work, simply considered, as it was a work: but because there was more faith
in it. And it must needs be so: for GOD does not as men do, who accept the
giver for the gift. (If a man come to you with a great gift, you will accept
his person for it.) But GOD accepts the gift for the giuers sake: God accepts
the gift for the giver.
though the gift be never so small, if the giver be such as believes in him; if
his affections be right, if he do it out of a right ground; that is, if he do
it out of a ground of faith, he is accepted, whatsoever it be. Indeed,
otherwise, whatsoever we do, we may call it by our own name; we may say, he
is a patient man, or he is a temperate man, or these are works of Justice, or
works of temperance: But we can never call it godliness, except it rise from
faith, except it come from this ground; because indeed it is not done to God.
(Mark it) I say, further then a man does a thing out of faith, he does it not
to GOD. For, to do a thing out of faith, To do a thing by faith, what.
is nothing else, but when out of persuasion of GODS love to me, I do this
thing: merely for his sake whom I have chosen, to whom I give my self; one
that I know loves me; and therefore, though there were no reward for it, I
would serve him. This is a work of faith. Now, I say, this is properly
godliness. And therefore, in 2 Pet. 1. when the Apostle had named Patience and
Temperance, lest we should mistake, (as if he should say, There be many
Virtues of this nature amongst men that belong not to GOD.) Therefore, says
he, Add Godliness; that is, Let it be such as becomes a godly man to do.
Godliness is that which is done to GOD; Godliness what.
such things and such qualities as have an eye and respect to him, such things
please him. What if a man should do never so much, if it please not GOD, it is
lost labor. It is said, Heb. 11.6. Heb. 11.6.
that Henoch pleased God. Mark how the Apostle reasons: (says he) without
faith it is impossible to please God: therefore, in that he is said to please
GOD, it must needs be through faith. You know, it is said, Romans 13. Romans 13.
whatsoever a man does, if it be not of faith, and love, GOD looks not to it;
you know there can be no love without faith.

Consider but how it is with your selves; If a man should do any thing for
you, you know, he may have many other ends, he may do you many a great good
turn; yet, if you be persuaded this comes not out of love to me, nor of true
respect to me, you regard it not, whatsoever it be. If it be but a small
thing, if it be done out of love, you respect it. So it is with GOD; works
that come from faith and love, (for those I reckon to be all one) those he
respects wondrously. Therefore we should learn to judge aright of our works;
it will help us against that position of the Papists, and also against the
common opinion of men.

Every man thinks that Almsdeeds, doing good to the poor, and doing
glorious things, etc. that these are good works, when as common actions they
exclude, We must reckon common actions in our callings to be good works.
as if they were not good works: But it is not so; we may do the greatest
works of this nature, and yet they may have no excellency in them at all.

Again, the very ordinary works of our Calling, ordinary things to men,
ordinary service from day to day, if it come from faith, if it be done as to
the Lord, he accepts them, and they are good works indeed. This use we ought
to make of it: If GOD regard not any thing but faith, we should not be deceived
in our works which we do.

Use 6. To try if we have faith.
Again, if faith be such a thing, that no works are accepted without it, that
no branch will grow except it come from this root; if there be no salvation
without it, if it be a thing that is most profitable for us; If thou say
now, How may I know whether I have faith or no? I may be deceived in it. When
we hang so much upon this peg, we had need be sure that it be strong, and that
it will hold us. I will therefore make this present Use, in showing what the
signs of this faith, and what the characters of it are, that you may learn to
judge aright, whether that faith that sets all the price upon your works, be a
right faith, or no: You may know it by this:

Trial. A secret persuasion of the Spirit.
Where there is a true faith, there is a secret persuasion wrought in the heart,
whereby GOD assures you that he is yours, and you are his; as you have it, Reu.
2.17. Reu. 2 17.
To him that overcomes, will I give that hidden Mannah, and a white stone
with a new name written in it, that he only knows that receives it: (That
is) That is one thing by which ye shall know whether you have true faith or no:
Have you ever had any of that hidden Mannah? (that is) Have you had such a
secret persuasion, which has been as sweet as Mannah to you, which you have
fed on, as they fed on Mannah, Hidden Mannah.
which gives you life, as Mannah gave life to them? Only he says it is a
hidden Mannah, it lies not abroad, others see it not, but it is Mannah that
your hearts secretly feed on. So that, would thou know whether thou have
faith? Has GOD given thee such a stone with a new name written in it, White
stone, what it signifies.
that is the stone of absolution? As the manner was among the Athenians, among
the old Grecians; that the sentence of absolution was given by white stones, as
the sentence of condemnation was black stones: So (says he) GOD will give him
such a secret testimony that he is acquitted, that when he is called in
question, (as they were, that they knew not whether they should dye or live; in
that case, if they had the white stone, such a man was absolved: So, I say)
Has GOD given thee such a stone, with thy name upon it? Has he given you such
a stone, as you know in the secret of your heart, such as none knows, but God
and your self? (that is) Has he ever opened the clouds? has he ever showed
himself to you? has he cast a good look upon you? has he made your hearts
glad with the light of his countenance in his Beloved? (for such a secret work
there is of the Spirit, by which GOD cheereth and comfort the heart of a
man: that is his manner in working faith. After the Law has been a
Schoolmaster to a man, Gods manner of working faith.
after there has been such an indictment, that he has been brought in
question of his life, when there has been a great storm, then he comes into
the heart, as he did into the Ship, and all is quiet. I say, that is his
manner, he comes into the heart after such a manner, and speaks peace to a
man.) Have you ever found this work in your selves, that after much trouble
and disquiet within, GOD has spoken peace to you, that he has said to your
souls, I am thy salvation? Not that that is absolutely required, that there
should be such a trouble going before, For, although it be true, that he never
speaks peace, Alike trouble of Spirit in conversion not necessary to all, and
why.
but when there has gone some trouble, but when there has gone some
conuincing of the spirit before, which conuinceth a man of sin; yet this you
must know, that still the promise is made to the coming, and not to the
preparation. And therefore, if a man be at his journies end, it is no matter
how he came there. If a man find that he be in CHRIST, and has had such a
testimony from his Spirit, though he have not had such a work of humiliation
as perhaps he expects, yet know, that the promise is made to that. And if you
have that which the promise is made unto, is not that sufficient? It is true,
as I said, you must have it really, you must have it in good earnest, there
must go always a work of humiliation before the testimony of the Spirit. But
mistake not: that turbulent sorrow, that violent disquiet of the mind goes not
always before. For example; Take two men, Simile.
the one is arrested, and condemned and brought to the point of death, he makes
account of nothing else; A pardon comes to this man, and he is saved; there
was great trouble went before, and he was wondrously affected when the pardon
came: But now there is another man that is guilty of the same offense, and he
knows certainly that he shall be called in question, and he is sure to lose
his life, unless his peace be made. Now before this be acted, before that
indeed he be put in prison, before that indeed he be condemned, and before his
head be brought to the block, he is certified that a Pardon is come out for
him. This man knows his estate as well as the other, and he knows that he had
perished without a Pardon, as well as the other; and he makes as much account
of his Pardon as the other, and will not let it go for his life as well as the
other.

Now, both these are pardoned, both are sure of life: but there is a different
manner of doing it. The one man was affected and much stirred before, he was
put into a wondrous afright before: The other man is convinced of the danger,
he is in as well as he, although he be not put to that extremity of sorrow,
though he be not brought to so near an exigent as the other: So, if a man be
convinced of sin, if a man know in good earnest, thoroughly, what the danger
is, that he must perish, if he have not this Pardon. Now, I say, if thou have
such a testimony, build upon it: For it is true, that GOD, before he comes in
the soft voice, he sends a Wind before, that rends the Rocks down, that
brings down the Mountains there, so much as makes the way plain, before he
can come within the soft voice. I say, if the Mountains be broken down,
(after what manner soever it be) that is enough; do not stand on that; Be sure
of this, that if there come a soft voice, thou have reason to believe that,
whatsoever preparations were before, which are diverse: for GOD works sometimes
after one manner, sometimes after another.

Soft voice, what.
But now, what is this soft voice? that I may a little further come to explain
that: for certainly, if he come in the soft voice, that is, the voice of the
Gospel, you are sure. But what is it?

Part of the soft voice, a clearing of the promise.
I take it to be this. One thing is, when there is a clearing of the promise,
(for the voice is the very Gospel it self:) Now, when we preach the Gospel
to men, and open the promises of salvation, and of life, if God do not join
with us now, and clear them to you, by kindling a light within, that you see
the meaning of them; except he, I say, do thus join with us, you shall not be
able to build upon these promises. Therefore that is one thing that God must
do: For, though it be true, the Word is near you, that you need not go up
to heaven, Though the promises are near, unless God clear them, we see them
not.
nor down to hell to fetch it, (for says Moses, the Word is near you, the
promises are near, in your mouths, in the midst of you) yet, except God do
show them, as clear as they be, you cannot see them. As when Jesus stood by
Mary Magdalene, he was near enough, but till her eyes were opened, she saw him
not. So Hagar, the Well was near enough to her, but till her eyes were opened,
she could not see it. So, when we preach these promises, when we lay them open
as near as we can, as near as may be, yet it must be the work of the Spirit
to see the promises, Luke 24.
to see them so as to believe them, and to rest on them. Therefore that is one
part of this soft voice, to open the Gospel unto you. Part of the soft voice,
the immediate testimony of Gods Spirit.
There is another, which is the immediate testimony of the Spirit, spoken of in
Romans 8. This Spirit bears witness with our spirits: Romans 8.
when God comes, and by a secret testimony of the Spirit, works such a
persuasion in the heart, that he is a Father, that he is a friend, that he is
reconciled to us.

Object.
But, you will say, this may be a delusion?

Ans.
Therefore you must have both together: know that they are never disjoined: How
to know the testimony of the Spirit from a delusion.
GOD never gives the secret witness of his Spirit, he never works such a
persuasion, such an immediate testimony, but it has always the testimony of
the Word going with it; be sure to join them, be sure thou do not sever them
one from the other. So that, if you would know now whether you have faith or
no, consider whether ever GOD has spoken this to you, or no; whether ever he
has wrought this work in you. How faith is wrought.
For faith, you must know, is wrought in this manner: The Spirit comes, and
shows CHRIST to you, and not only shows you his merits, not only tells you
that he will be a Savior, not only tells you of a Kingdom that you shall have
by him; but shows you the beauty and excellency of CHRIST; it shows you what
grace is, and makes you love it, and then he shows you mercy: Out of this you
come to long after CHRIST, Whence longing after Christ comes.
and to say, I would I had him; a man comes to love him as the Spouse loves her
Husband.

Now to this work he adds a second: CHRIST comes and tells a man, I will have
thee, he comes and shows himself; he discouers himself to a man, and speaks
plainly, (as in that place we have often mentioned, John 19. Ioh. 19.
) and says to him, I am willing to marry thee. When this is done on the Holy
Ghosts part, and we on our part come to resolve to take him, now the match is
made between us, and this is faith indeed; when this work is done, a man may
truly say, This day is salvation come to me. Now thou art sure that all thy
sins are forgiven; now faith is wrought in thy heart. How to know whether
faith be wrought in us.
Therefore if thou would know whether thou have faith or no, look back,
reflect upon thine own heart, consider what actions have passed through there:
for that is the next way to know what faith is, to look what actions have
passed through a man's heart: a man may know what the actions of his soul are,
for that is the benefit of a reasonable soul, that it is able to return upon
it self, to see what it has done, A beast cannot reflect upon his actions, as
a man can.
which the soul of a beast cannot do.

Now let a man consider whether such a thing have passed or no; that is, (mark
it) whether on Christ's part there has been such a clearing of the promise,
that thou art so built, How to know that the promise is cleared to us.
that, if an Angel from Heaven should come and preach another Gospel, if Paul
himself should be living on the earth, and should preach the contrary, thou
would not believe him. Do thou see the Word so clearly, art thou so set
upon the Rock (as it were) that thou can say in good earnest, as the Apostle
said in Romans 8. Romans 8.
I know that neither principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor any thing in the world, shall ever separate me from the love of
God in Christ, and that because I have his sure Word?

Again, when thou have such a secret impression of assurance from his Spirit,
which will not fail thee, when thou find this, on GODS part, and again
when thou find this act on thy own part; The match between Christ and the
soul reciprocal.
when thou say, I have resolved to take him, (for a man may know what he
has done) I have resolved to take him for my husband, I have resolved to
prefer him before all things in the world, to be divorced from all things in
the world, and to cleave to him: This I know, these acts have passed on Gods
part, and this I have done on my part; when thou find this wrought in thy
self, be assured there is faith wrought in thee: when the Law has been a
Schoolmaster to thee, and when CHRIST has spoken peace, and when thou art
built upon him again; consider if this has been wrought.

This is the first means to try thy faith: but, because this may be an
ambiguous means, a man may be deceived in it; therefore faith does show it
self by many other effects. And therefore we will add to this, (which is the
very thing wherein faith consists) other signs; Five signs of effectual
faith.
and they are five in number.

may have great raptures, they may have great joy, as if they were lift up into
the third heaven, they may have a great and strong persuasion that their estate
is good. Satan is very apt to delude us in this kind, to put a counterfeit
upon us in stead of true faith; Therefore we will not content our selves with
this, but give other marks, that will not deceive. At this time you are to
consider, you that come to the Sacrament, Is it not a maine thing to consider
whether you have faith or no? What do you here else, you have nothing to do
with Christ, you have no interest in him; and if you have no interest in him,
what do you with the Elements which represent his body and his blood? And
therefore you have cause to attend to it. First, therefore, if thou find such a
work in thy heart, (for if thou conclude that there is no such work, thou
need not examine further, thou may be sure that thou have not faith, but
if thou have such a work) if thou would know whether it be really and truly,
or whether it be a fancy or delusion, consider:

First, 1. Sign. True faith purifieth the heart.
if it be true, it purifies the heart: in Acts 15.9. says the Apostle Peter
there, God has put no difference between us and them, Acts 15.9.
after that by faith he had purified their hearts. So in Acts 26.18. Acts
26.18.
And thou shall preach forgiveness of sins to those that are sanctified by
faith. So that this you must take as a sure rule: If thy faith be true, it
purifies thy heart, it sanctifies thee. And therefore you see, Faith and
repentance put together in the Scripture, why.
faith and repentance are always put together. Repent and believe: for they
are never disjoined. If thou find the work of repentance be not wrought
thoroughly and soundly in thee, True faith has repentance.
if thou find thy heart not purified, if thou be not sanctified, if there be
not a sanctified disposition in thee, be sure it is a delusion, it is not
faith: or, if faith be (as you heard heretofore) a taking of CHRIST, not as a
Savior only, Faith, what it is.
but as a Priest; and not as a Priest only, but as a King too, it must
Obedience.
thou have not taken him: If there be nothing but a mere assent, as the
Papists affirm in another case; For faith is a taking of Christ, and a giving
of our selves to him again; so that there is a match, there is a bargain, a
Covenant between us, as he says in Heb. 8.8. Heb. 8.8.
I will make a New Covenant with them. A Covenant, what.
Now a Covenant has two parts: If GOD do this for you, you must do somewhat
on your part, you must love him, and obey him. As in a Marriage, the Husband
does not only take the Wife, but the Wife also takes the Husband. If faith be
such a thing as this, there must needs be a general General reformation.


Therefore know, that as there is a lively hope, so there is a lively faith:
And when it is said to be a lively faith, it intimates that there is another,
that is a dead faith; that is, There is a kind of believing, a kind of taking
Christ, a kind of giving a man's self to him: but yet, (mark it) says he, it
is such a one as breeds no life in thee. Mark, if thy faith be such a faith as
has brought Christ to dwell in thy heart, Christ dwells in the heart, as the
soul in the body.
so as the soul dwells in the body, if it be such a dwelling in thy heart that
there be life in thee: for Christ, when he dwells in us, he acts the soul, as
the soul acts the body: As the body now, when the soul is there, is able to
move, is able to stir, is able to do any thing: So the soul of a man, it
falls to the duties of godliness, and new obedience, to all good works; it is
ready (as the Apostle says) to every good work; it is nimble, and ready to
go about them, you are alive to righteousness. Has faith so brought Christ
into thy heart, that he lives in thee, as he did in Paul, that thou can find
and say truly, Gal. 2.20.
I am dead to sin, and live to righteousness? That thou have mortified the
deeds of the body by the Spirit, that thou find another life working in
thee; except thou can find this, it is not true faith: for true faith is
such as brings Christ to dwell in thy heart, and he dwells there when he reviues
thy spirit; as it is, Isay 57.13.14. Isay 57.13.18. opened.
I dwell in the high Heavens, and with him also that is of a contrite spirit,
to reviue the Spirit of the humble; that is, he never dwells, but he gives life.
And, if thou find not such a life in thy self, conclude that thy faith is not
good. And this you ought the more to mark, because many thousands seem to
take CHRIST, and to do much, and yet for all this, they have not life all the
while.

Simile.
Take two grafts, it may be there is incision made in both, both may be planted,
as you often see in Plants, after they be planted, if you would know whether
the grafting be true or no, if you come a while after, and see one of the
grafts dead and withered, you say this grafting was not good, or the stock was
not good, somewhat was amiss: and if you find it to bud, and that there be
life in it, then you say it was grafted indeed, the grafting was good and
right. So when a man comes and takes CHRIST, if thou see thou be grafted, if
thou find thy life to be the same, if thou find thou art no more able to pray,
How to know if Christ dwell in the heart.
nor no more able to do any duty then thou wast before, that thou live in
thy lusts as much as ever thou did, thou have not that new heart, that new
spirit, and that new affection which the Scriptures speak of; be sure then,
that thou art not grafted: for if thou were grafted aright by faith, (for it is
that which grafteth) there would be life.

When as the graft is taken out of the former Tree, it bears no more that
fruit, but it lives, and bears another fruit; Therefore consider if this be
so or no: and that is the reason of that answer of Philip to the Eunuch, in the
8. of the Acts, Acts 8.37. opened.
Verse. 37. The Eunuch professed to believe, and would have been baptized.
Says Philip, thou may, if thou believe with all thine heart. Thou may
think it is nothing; but it is a resolving from time to time to give up thy
self to be Christ's servant, to take his yoke, to wear his Livery and his
Badge. Baptism, what.
Now Baptism is but a seal to confirm and testify this to thy self, and to
the World, that thou have given thy self to CHRIST: says Philip, take heed
to thy self: if it be a false taking, thou may not have him, but if thou
believe with all thy heart, thou may be baptized. So I say to men, Taking
Christ deceitfully.
there is a kind of taking Christ, when a man takes him with some part of his
heart, when he resolves, I confess it is good, I have a present disposition
to it, it will serve me for such a turn; I am afraid of Hell, it will deliver
me from that; in such an exigent, in such a cross, in such a trouble, that
will come upon me, it will free me from that: but this is not enough; but, if
thou believe with all thy heart, that is, when thou have summed and reckoned
all together, all reasons, and all objections to and fro, thou resoluest
altogether to take him in all respects.

Again, To take Christ with the whole heart, what.
when all thy heart shall come in, that is, when the understanding of a man is
fully persuaded of these promises, that they are true, and that it is best for
him to take CHRIST, if the persuasion be good, and the will follow: for that
you may take for a sure rule, there is no man that is fully persuaded, and
convinced every way that such a thing is best, but the will will follow. If the
mind be right, the will will follow, and if the will follow, be sure the
affections will follow. For, if a man wills a thing in good earnest, and
resolve, I would have it indeed, then his desires will come and be earnest; and
if he be in doubt, fear will come; and if any thing hinder, anger will come
and thrust away the impediments: and if he get the thing, there will be
rejoicing; and so all the affections will follow; and then certainly, action
and endeavor will follow. There is no man that desires a thing earnestly, but
where the affections are strong and busy, action and endeavor will be
answerable. Now, if thou take CHRIST with all thy heart, that there is no
reservation, that it is not done by halues, then thou may have him, and the
fruits, and all the privileges by him, so as thou shall be saved by him.
Consider whether this be done, or no.

When we preach faith, you may see what it is in Acts 26.17, 18. Act. 2^.17, 18.
Mark what the message was that CHRIST sends to Paul, nothing but to preach
faith; but what was that? Says he, to turn men from the power of Satan, to
God, to turn men from darkness to light. That is, to cause them to forsake
their former ways of darkness, that they have been led into by the Devil,
and to turn them to GOD, to seek him. So that then a man is said truly to
believe, when his heart is turned to GOD; To turn to God, what.
that is, when a man before was given to this pleasure or to that pleasure and
commodity, his heart was wedded to it, he would have an estate in this world,
and he would have credit in the world, and he would have place with men, and
he would be somebody in the flesh; his heart was set on these things, he would
follow them.

Now faith is nothing but this, we come and tell you that Christ is offered;
if you will be content to let all these things go, and to turn your hearts to
him that the whole bent of a man's mind is turned the contrary way, and set
upon Christ, this is faith indeed, when there is this general turning of a
man's mind from these things. Therefore know, that faith in CHRIST, and
covetousness, cannot stand together. When thy mind goes a whoring after thy
wealth, what have thou to do with CHRIST? That is not to take CHRIST. For, to
take CHRIST, is to turn the mind from these things to seek him.

Again, Faith, and the desire of satisfying lusts, cannot stand together.
if thou will have praise with men, thou can not believe and have that too;
it is impossible. And so for any pleasure, for any lust: do thou think to
follow thy pleasure, to seek that, to satisfy thy flesh, and to have CHRIST?
No, it is another kind of taking; and this is not done with that sleightnesse
as they did, Jeremy 3. Ier. 3.
You turned to me (says the LORD) feignedly, and not with all your hearts: but
it is to turn in good earnest, to turn to GOD upon sound ground. therefore
now let us come to the examination of this.

Men deceived in the definition of faith.
Now, if we were not mistaken in it, there would be no question of this: we
think that faith is nothing but a persuasion that our sins are forgiven, a
persuasion that the promises are true, a persuasion that the Scripture is true,
a persuasion that CHRIST dyed for my sins: And thence it is, that men are apt
to be deceived in it: If they took faith as it is in it self, a marrying of
our selves to CHRIST, with all our heart and affections, when he has given
himself to us, as in marriage, and we are given to him, in doing this we
should never be deceived.

Try faith, as we do other things.
If thou would know now if thy faith be right, examine it as thou would
examine another thing.

Similes.
If you take Wine, if you would know whether it be good Wine, if you find it
flat and dead, if you drink it, and it heates you not, it warmes you not at
the heart, it quickens you not, it reviues not your spirits; you will say, it
is naught, if it were good Wine, it would do this.

If you come to look on Plants, if you find there no fruit, nor no leaves,
you say, this Plant is dead.

So take a Jewel, and when it comes to the Touchstone, or any way that you
try it; you say, it is fair, but it is a counterfeit Jewel, it is a false
Diamond, or whatsoever it be.

If you come to take a dram of Physic, if you take a Drugge, if it do not
work: Take Leaven and put it into your Dough, if it sower not the lump, you
say, it is dead Leaven, it is a counterfeit thing:

So I say, If thou find not in faith this effect, this operation upon thy
heart, that it works not this general change in thee, that it fires not thy
soul with love to CHRIST, if thou find not life in it, and that it bring
forth such fruits, if thou find it not grow, that it put another taste upon
the whole soul, that it leauens it throughout; know that thou art deceived,
rest not in it, cast it away, get a right faith, such as will not deceive thee.
But I cannot stand upon this. This is the first sign of effectual faith.

Before I come to the second thing, Digression for application to the Sacrament.
know this, (by the way) you that receive the Sacrament, That, if you be
unworthy receivers, you cannot do your selves a worse turn, then to offer to
come to the Sacrament without faith, to provoke GOD more, to eat and drink
your own damnation. Now examine your selves by such rules as this: Rules of
examination before and after the Sacrament
If you have changed your life; If you have received it heretofore, and
continue still in your sins; If you say, it is true, I have done it, I have
returned again to my gaming, I have returned again to my swearing, to my
looseness, to my company-keeping; but yet I had a good meaning, I intended it
at that time, well, that is not enough. If thou had faith, thou would do
it indeed; do not say, I had a good meaning: for, if thou had faith, it
would not only work a good meaning in thee, but it would work power in thee
to do this, Where Christ dwells indeed, he gives power against sin.
that thou would be able to mortify these affections, it would work a
real and an effectual change in thee. Consider, how faith does it: faith
takes CHRIST; when you have taken CHRIST, as soon as ever you have him, he
sends his Spirit into your hearts, and the Spirit is able to do all this, and
does as Saint Paul says, when he had CHRIST once, Phil. 4.12.
I am able to do all things, through Christ that strengthens me. So
certainly, when thou have CHRIST, as thou come to take the elements of
Bread and Wine, if thou had taken him indeed, thou would be strengthened to
do all things, thou would find thy heart able to do this, thou should
find a change in thy heart, that thou would do it without difficulty, thou
would find thy self turned and changed, thou would have new affections,
and a new life. And if thou do not find this, know that thou have nothing to
do with the Sacrament, know it beforehand, and know that thou have had
warning given thee, that thou receiuest unworthily, and art guilty of the body
and blood of CHRIST; To be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, what.
that is, thou committest such a sin as those did that killed CHRIST.

What was their sin that killed him? Quest.


They despised him, Answ.
they mocked him, they knew him not to be CHRIST, they made no account of him;
their greatest work in killing him, was, they despised him, they mocked him:
So thou come and art bold with him here, it is a despising of CHRIST: If
thou did reverence him, if thou did fear him, if thou did tremble at
him, if thou did know him to be such a one as he is, thou would not be bold
to do it. And therefore, if thou will venture upon small grounds to go on in
sin, and yet come and receive the Sacrament, the Apostle says, thou art
guilty of the body and blood of Christ: that is, thou committest a sin of
that nature, and therefore look to it.

Secondly, Sign. A Spirit of Prayer.
if thou would know whether thy faith be true or no, consider whether thou
have this consequent of it, the Spirit of Prayer: for wheresoever there is a
Spirit of faith, there is also a Spirit of prayer: that is, (mark it, and you
shall see the reason why I deliver this to be a sign of faith.) Faith, you
know, is wrought in us by the Spirit of Adoption. Now what is the Spirit of
Adoption, Spirit of adoption, what.
but the Spirit that tells you that ye are sons? as in Gal. 4.6. Gal. 4.6.
So many as are sons, receive the Spirit of sons. Now whenever the Spirit
tells a man he is a son; that is, works faith in his heart, the second thing
that the Spirit does, it teaches him to pray: and therefore those words are
added, that you cry Abba Father: that is, the Spirit never does the one, but it
does the other; if it be the testimony of the Spirit. And therefore this is the
second sign: If thou have such a persuasion that the Spirit have spoken to
thee, if thou would know whether this be a delusion or no, thou shall know
it by this: If thou have the Spirit, it will make thee able to cry Abba Father,
The Spirit of adoption makes us,
it will make thee able to do two things.

Earnest in Prayer.
First, it will make thee able to cry; that they shall be earnest prayers which
thou make; thy prayers shall be fervent; they were cold before, thou came
to perform lip-labor, thou came to do the duty, to perform it, perhaps
every day; but alas, what prayer was it? This shall make thee cry.

Bold and confident.
But again, which is the maine, not only so, but thou shall speak to him, as
to a Father: that is, thou shall go to GOD, and look upon him as one does
upon a Father, as one looks upon one whose love he is sure of, of whose favor
he doubts not, one that he knows is ready to hear his requests. It may be
thou have prayed before, but not to him as to a Father all the while, that is
the work of the Spirit; if it ever give thee testimony of thy sonneship, it
will make thee pray fervently, and it will make thee pray to God as to a
Father: that is to be made able to pray.

But, Object.
you will say, every body can pray: Is that such a sign, is that such a
distinguishing mark and character, to be able to pray?

My brethren, Ans.
be not deceived in it: you must know, that prayer is not a work of the
memory, or a work of the wit. A man that has a good wit, or a ready
invention, or a voluble tongue, may make an excellent prayer, in his own
esteem, and in the esteem of others, True Prayer, what.
but this is not to pray. Prayer is the work of a sanctified heart, it it the
work of GODS Spirit: There is a double prayer, Romans 8.
Romans 8. there is one prayer, Prayer double.
which is the voice of our own spirit; there is a second prayer, which is the
voice of Gods Spirit in us: The voice of Gods Spirit in us, what.
that is, when the Holy Ghost has so sanctified the heart, when he has put
it into such a wholeframe of grace, that the heart comes to speak as it is
quickened, as it is acted and moved from GODS Spirit. Now, says the Text there,
God knows the voice of his own Spirit: for that makes requests according to his
will, he hears that prayer: But now the prayers which are made by the voice of
our own spirit, he knows not the meaning of them: that is, he hears them
not, he hearkens not to them. Consider whether thy prayer be such or no;
consider whether thy prayer be the voice of Gods Spirit in thee.

Quest.
But thou will say, How should I know that?

Ans.
Thou shall know it by this, as I said before, Do thou come to him as to a
Father? How to know the voice of Gods Spirit in our prayers. Wicked men come to
God as a stranger, the Saints, as to a friend.
Another man prays to GOD, it may be, all his life, but he comes to him as to
a stranger; yea, sometimes he may be very earnest, when it is no prayer, but
when he is put to an exigent, he may be earnest, as a Thief is earnest with
the Judge to spare him: there may be much earnestness, although this may be
far off from prayer. But can thou come to GOD as to a friend? Can thou
come to him as to one whose favor thou art assured of? Can thou come to him
as to a Father? Except thou can do this, know that he regards not thy
prayers.

And this, me thinks now, when we consider, we should not defer our
repentance, and think with our selves, I will repent when I am sick, I will
go to GOD in the time of extremity. Well, it may be thou may do it; but
alas, can thou come to speak to God now as to a friend, when as thou have
been a stranger to him, and he to thee, all thy life? Certainly thou can
not. And when thou come and prayest earnestly, when some great cross is on
thee, in some great exigent, in the day of death, in the time of thy sickness;
know, that though thou pray never so fervently, although thou add fasting to
quicken it, yet it is doubtful whether it be acceptable prayer at all in that
exigent. The Scripture gives it another term, in Hosea 7.14. Hosea 7.14.
opened.
Says he, You prayed not to me with your hearts, but you howled upon your
beds: it came not out of any love to me, nor from any change of heart, it came
not out of a holy disposition in you. Therefore you prayed not to me, when you
howled upon your beds: that is, as if he should say, they were no more but
howlings. Will not a dog, or a beast, or any other unreasonable creature,
when they are pinched, when they are in extremity, will they not cry, will
they not moan for help? Your prayers were no more, they were but howlings
upon your beds. And what were they for? They were to be delivered from the
present affliction, they were to have Wine and Oil in that great dearth that
was upon them: And so in those cases, your earnest prayers are but howlings
upon your bed. And therefore think not that this is prayer, be not deceived in
it. And therefore it is the manner of the Saints, if you would know it, when
they come to pray, they come boldly to GOD, they come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3 7. Ephesians 3.7.
By faith we have boldness, and entrance with confidence. Another man he
prays earnestly, but examine his heart, and he must needs say, Indeed, GOD
is a stranger to me, I cannot be confident; it may be he hears me, it may be
he hears me not. Whereas we are required to lift up pure hands in every place,
without wrath or doubting; we are required to come with boldness: And know
this, that if otherwise thou pray morning and night, if thou make never so many
prayers, from day to day, if thou be never so constant in them, GOD regards
them not, he takes them by weight, and not by number, not by labor, not by
earnestness, which is a thing that may come from the flesh. If thy prayer come
from his Spirit, he accepts of it; if not, be sure it is no prayer, and if
there be no prayer, there is no faith.

3. Sign of faith: Peace.
Thirdly, if thou would know whether thou have faith or no, consider whether
thou have peace: for faith pacifies the heart as well as purifies it, as the
Apostle says, Romans 5.1. Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. Now, if thou would know
whether thy faith which thou have be right or no, consider if there be peace
there: Have thou that peace that passes al understanding? You know now, if a
man were in debt, and were ready to be cast into prison, and saw not how he
should escape, and one should promise him an hundred pounds, which would
deliver him; if he believe this friend, he is full of peace and quiet: if thou
believe thy pardon to be good, there will be peace.

But, Object.
you will say to me, there is many a man has peace, who has no faith.

It is true: Ans.
But I would ask this Question concerning this peace: Is it a peace that comes
after War? Have thou knowledge of that enmity between GOD and thee? Have
thou had the sense of it, and after this have thou been reconciled again? Is
it such a calm that followed after a storm going before? As I said before,
when it has been always so with thee, when thou have had peace, and there
has been no difference with thee, certainly this is not peace, this is a
blind peace, when a man is at peace, not because he has escaped the danger,
but because he never saw the danger, because he saw not what danger there was.
Hence it is, that many men, yea many thousands of men, live peaceably all their
lives, and dye peaceably. Alas, the reason is, because they were never
acquainted with the Doctrine of Justification, and of Sanctification, they are
strangers to it; and hence it is that they die with as much confidence as the
best Christians, they have no more trouble then holy men: for this is all one,
to be sure that I am free from a danger, and not to know it; both breed alike
confidence.

Again, know that there may be peace built on fancy, such contentments as a
man may find in a pleasant dream, he is as strongly persuaded as the waking
man: So many hypocrites, that have had some trouble before, and come to have
some peace after, they think it sure, when it is built upon a false ground,
and not upon the sure Word. Therefore consider whether it be such a peace as is
well built, whether it be such a Peace indeed that casts out Satan, and thou
find some assaults made by him again. For, be thou assured, if it be true
peace, if Satan be cast out, he will not let thee alone, thou shall be sure
to have thy peace troubled, he will make many rebellions against thee by the
flesh and the world: And therefore if thou find all quiet, that there are no
such assaults in thee, that there are no troubles or attempts made on thee, be
thou assured it is counterfeited peace: But still keep this, that if there be
faith, there will be peace; that is, the heart will be at rest, it will be
quiet, there will be a certain security in GOD.

See it in other things. Take faith in any thing else, and you shall see, so
much faith, so much quiet in you. For example, Hannah, in 1 Samuel 1.18. when her
petition was granted, that she believed it, says the Text, she went away, and
took meat, and looked no more sad. That was an argument that she believed,
she took meat, and looked no more sad. Take Mose^ at the Red Sea, Exodus 14.
Exodus 14.
you shall find that the people were all troubled and disquieted, and that
they knew not what to do: But (mark how Mos^s carries himself) Moses was
quiet, and stood still, he was not troubled: And why? Because he believed, and
they did not; if they had believed as well as he, they would have been at rest
as well as he: (Mark what he says) Stand still, and see the sal^ation of
the Lord: and the Lord will fight for you; and therefore fear not: As if he
should say, If you did but believe, you would be at quiet, you would stand
sti^l, you would not fear, you would not have your souls troubled. So, I say,
so much faith, so much quiet. Look upon David, in Psalm. 3. Psalm. 3.
when he fled before Absolon, says he, Thou art my Buckler, etc. And therefore
I laid me down to rest and sleep: that is, I was as a man that sleeps
quietly. One would think that that was a matter that would break a man's
sleep, when he lay in that danger, that if Achitophel's council had taken
effect, he had been destroyed: and yet now, says he, I laid me down and
slept: as if he should say, This is an argument of my faith, my heart is at
rest and quiet, so that I can sleep quietly without stirring. And ^o Paul, see
how he accounts it, how he behaved himself, when God told him that he should
appear at Rome before Cae^^r he knew that he should be delivered from
Ship-wracke: and though forty men had bound themselves with a curse, that they
would destroy him, and he was told of it, yet he made no great matter of it,
but said, Go and carry this young man to the Captain. So, consider whether
thy heart be quiet, and rest upon God or no: for so much faith, so much peace:
as in particular, so in general, for matter of assurance; know, that there is
a double peace or assurance: A twofold peace.
One peace that arises from the confidence in the creature, when a man thinks
he is strong in his wealth, when he thinks he is at rest. The other is from
assurance in GOD; I know that he will be as good as his word; I know whom I
have trusted: Let security be built on this ground, and the more security, the
more faith. Therefore examine thy faith by peace. I should add somewhat more in
this, and some other signs, which I must reserve until the next time.

FINIS.
OF EFFECTVALL FAITH. The fourth Sermon.
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering your effectual Faith, etc.


THE third Character of Faith, The third mark of faith, it brings peace.
which I named in the morning, but did not fully finish, is this; If we have
justifying faith, then we have peace. In this we should take heed. As it is a
great mercy to have a true and sound peace; so to have a peace not well
bottomed is the greatest judgment in the world; when GOD gives up a man, that
he shall be secure and at rest, that he shall not have his mind occupied about
sin, or about matters of salvation; I say, it is a sign that such a one God
hates: if it continue so with him, it is a sign God will destroy him. But yet
peace of conscience, upon a good ground, is a sign of faith; as I showed in
Moses, Hannah, David, and the rest. So far we went in the morning.

Now you must know, that all those instances that we brought you, that where
there is faith, there is peace and quiet; they were not only for resemblance,
to show you, that as it is in those other things wherein we believe, so it is
in the maine; (as you do not believe any particular promise, except you have
some quiet in your mind after it;) but likewise to show you whether that peace
be good or no, whether that faith be sure or no. For if you believe the maine,
certainly you will believe the less. Therefore consider with your selves,
(we will enlarge this sign so far) If thou would know whether thy faith
be good or no, whether thou have peace indeed concerning the maine; Consider
with thy self, whether thou art able to believe those promises which concern
those particular things which thou have daily use of. For there are many
promises which thou have use of continually in thy course: thou have every day
some occasion or other of trusting GOD: See in these how thou do believe,
whether thou have peace, and know, that if thou have not peace in these, it is
a sign thou have not peace in the maine. I will name but one place for it:
Look in Phil. 4.6. Phil. 4.6. opened.
In nothing be careful, but in all things let your requests be made unto God:
And then, says he, The peace of God which passes all understanding, shall
preserve your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. Mark the opposition; says
he, In nothing be careful, when matters of trouble come, when crosses come,
when great businesses come, wherein thou know not which way to turn thee,
(says he) in such a case be not thou careful; do the thing, thou must have
so much care as to set thy head aworke, as to devise what to do, and to set
thy hand aworke to act it; but let there be no solicitude to disturb and
disquiet thy affections within. Let thy request be made known to GOD; then,
the peace of GOD which passes all understanding, shall keep thy heart and
mind in Christ Jesus. As if he should say, if thou be not able to do this,
it is an interruption of that peace, it is a contradiction to that peace, which
passes all understanding, that keeps thy heart in communion with CHRIST: if
thou be not able to cast thy care on him for other things, that peace belongs
not to thee. Where there is a secret intimation, not but that men may have this
peace, and be inordinately careful, but ordinarily it is not so. He speaks
not of such infirmities as the Saints are subject unto by distemper, but of an
ordinary course.

Consider now, what thou do for the things of this life: Says CHRIST, Math.
6. Mat. 6.
Oh you of little says! Why so? What was the sign of a little faith? Says
CHRIST, Do thou think that he will cloathe the grass of the field, which
to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven? Do thou think that he will
provide for the young Ravens that call upon him, and will thou not believe that
he will do so for thee? If thou do not believe this, thy faith is nothing. If
thou believe little, thy faith is little. Consider that, consider how you carry
your selves for the things of this life: do you think that GOD will do the
maine, and will not do the less? Do you think that he will give you Christ,
and will he not give you other things? The same faith, that takes hold of the
maine promise, is it not ready to take hold of the less, and to depend upon
it? GOD is able to do the greatest, and is he not able to do the less?
Therefore, I say, in such a case, as CHRIST says, Ioh. 3.12. Ioh. 3.12.
to Nichodemus, (...) (says he) I come and tell you of earthly things, and
you believe me not, how would you believe, if I should tell you of heavenly
things? So I say, if you will not believe GOD concerning earthly things, when
he promises these, how will you believe him for the greatest matters of
salvation? How will you believe in him for the giving of CHRIST? How will you
believe in him for the raising of you up at the last day? Therefore, consider
whether you be able to do this or no: and know, that if there be faith, if you
have faith for the maine, you will have faith in particular cases.

As for exmple, to give you some instance, Genesis 24.7. Genesis 24.7.
when Abraham had a particular occasion to send his servant to get a Wife for
Isaac; says the servant, Suppose the woman will not come with me: See now what
Abraham's answer was: That God which took me from my Fathers House, and has
made me many promises before, (that is; GOD, that has done the greatest
matters for me, that has promised me the blessed seed, in which all the
Nations of the World shall be blessed; do thou think he will not help me
in such a particular?) he will send his Angel before thee, and will
certainly give thee good success.

Consider what you do in such cases as these: these are things which you have
continual use of; you are put many times to such exigents, that you shall have
somewhat to trust GOD for, and you will be tried in it.

So likewise Peter, that trusted GOD for the maine, when it comes to the
particular case, that he is bid to lanch out into the deep, when he is
commanded to draw out the Ship and to go a fishing; although he had no hope to
do it, he trusted in those particulars, that CHRIST would not fail him: when
he bade him go upon the water, he trusted that he would support him. Take
David, see how he trusted in GOD, how many occasions had he to trust on him? As
it is true for the maine; so for the particulars. So Paul, did not he trust GOD
for his maintenance? See in his Epistles, how careless he was that way. So it
is with all the Saints. Consider what you do in these things: See whether your
hearts be at peace in these things; whether you trust in GOD, or no, so that
your hearts are at rest, that you can sit still, and commit your care to GOD;
if so, it is a good argument that you rest in him for the maine. So much for
that.

4. Sign of effectual faith, To hold out in cleaving to Christ. To hold out
implies 3. things.
The fourth sign or Character of faith, is, To hold out: and that you shall see
in these three branches.

First, when it shall cleave to CHRIST constantly.

Secondly, when it will take no denial.

To cleave constantly to Christ. which no^e can do, that take Christ,
Thirdly, when it is content to wait in prayer, and not be weary and give over.

I say, if you would know whether your faith be effectual, you shall know it
by your holding out, whether it cleave constantly to Christ. If thy faith be
ineffectuall, (as you have heard the last day) it comes either from
mis-informaton, (you know not what Christ is, nor what it is to take him; you
look for other things from him: when you see what it is, if your faith be not
effectual, you will go back:) or else you take him out of fear, or out of
love to his, and not to him; or else out of false and slender grounds. Now if
you would know whether your faith be such a faith or no, consider if it hold
out, if it cleave to him.

If thy faith come of misinformation, Out of misinformation.
when thou have experience of CHRIST, when thou see what he requires at thy
hands, when thou considerest and understand what he puts thee to, there is
an end, thou give over.

If thy faith come of fear; Out of fear
as soon as the storm is over, as soon as those troubles in mind, those
disquiets in conscience are past, there is an end, thy faith cleaues to CHRIST
no longer.

If faith come out of love to his, Out of love to his, and not to him.
of love to a Kingdom, nothing but Hell and Heaven and some present
commodities that move thee; when better things are offered, that are more
present commodities, there is an end of it.

Again, Out of slender and slight grounds.
if it be out of false, slender, and slight grounds; when stronger reasons and
objections come, that faith cease likewise. But now then, when thou find
that thy faith holds out, when all these are past, when all these are taken
away, when the fear is gone, when such an offer is made, when all the
objections are made that can be, this argues that faith is sound and good.
Consider therefore, whether thy faith cleave fast, and constantly to CHRIST, or
no; whether it hold out, when those flashes and good moodes will not; whether
it overcome, when it is assaulted by the Gates of Hell coming against it. That
is, when a man's faith is good, it is built upon the Rock, upon such a Rock,
that if the Devil himself, and principalities and powers come, with all their
strength, and all their wit, with all their temptations, and devises, if faith
be sound, it will hold out, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.
The Woman of Canaan, she had a shrewd trial, when CHRIST tells her she was a
Dog, in plain terms, and when it came from Christ himself; and yet when her
faith was good indeed, she could not choose but she must cleave to him, she
would not give over, there was a strong faith, that did knit her heart secretly
unto CHRIST, there was the ground that she held out, notwithstanding all
objections; although, it may be, she knew not how to answer them, yet she let
not go, and that was a sign her faith was good: So, consider whether thy
faith hold out when thou art put to such trials as these.

To take no denial.
gain, consider whether thou will receive no denial when thou come and
seek to him; when thou come to seek favor at GODS hands, when thou
come to seek forgiveness of sins, consider whether thou art able to hold
out, though he defer long before he grant it. There is no grace that GOD
gives, but he has trials for it afterward: He gives thee the grace of
Patience, he will put thee to it, thou shall have some cross, some affliction
or other.

If he give thee Love, he will do as he did with David, he will see
whether thou will forsake him, or no; he will make thee an offer of
preferment, an offer of wealth, of praise, of somewhat or other, to see if thou will part with that for his sake, or no.

If he gives us Faith, he often tryes us in this case, he denies us long, he
wrestleth with us, as he did with Jacob, he makes many shows of going away.
Thus, we know, he dealt with Daniel, as soon as he began to pray, the
answer comes, that his request was granted; but GOD would not let him know so
much; he lets him go through with the work, he lets him seek earnestly, and
then he reueales and makes it known unto him. So, perhaps GOD intends thee
good, but he will put thee to the trial, consider therefore if thy faith hold
out in such a case.

Again, To be content to wait.
when thou have gotten an answer, perhaps, after thou have gotten thine
answers, thou must wait long before the thing it self be given thee:
Therefore consider if thou be content to wait for it: for that is the property
of faith, to be willing to wait, as David often repeates it, I waited upon the
Lord. You know, Abraham, how GOD tried him that way, when he made him a
promise of a seed, of a Son, you know how long he waited for the
performance. So Isaac, he waited long, before he had those two sons, Jacob
and Esau. So GOD will put thee to it to wait, it may be, for matter of
justification; that is, he will not show himself, he will not speak peace
unto thee, he will not give thee a good look; but yet he gives thee a secret
strength that thou shall wait, thou shall not give over, thou shall stay till
he speak pe^ce; that is, till (...) comfortable assurance, till thou have the
full testimony of the Spirit, as thou have a secret testimony at the first
working of faith. And so for matter of sanctification; It may be, GOD will
suffer some strong lust to wrestle with thee, to contend with thee, as he
suffered in Paul, he will put thee to wait, before he will give thee victory
over it. If thy faith be good now, thou will consider that he has sworn,
he has made an absolute promise, that he will give the Holy Ghost to those
that are in Christ, that no sin shall overcome them, or have dominion over
them. If once thou come under grace, if thou have faith, thou will never give
over, but wilt be content to wait, and to continue still striving and
wrestling with it, thou will never lay down the wasters, as a man that is
overcome, as a man that is discouraged, as a man that is weary of the fight.

And so for matter of deliverance, perhaps GOD will let a cross lie longer
upon thee: if thou have faith, thou will not make haste, thou will be content
to wait: Habac. 2. Hab. 2.
The vision is for an appointed time, it will not lie: Therefore, says he,
wait, it will come, it will not stay. That is, there is a certain time that
GOD has appointed for thy deliverance, before he will give thee such a
particular mercy; consider whether thou be able to wait in such a case: for, if
there be faith, (mark it) a man will be sure to wait, and not to give over:
as in Iam. 1. Iam. 1.
it is given there as a sign that faith is unsound; they had so much faith as
to come to Christ; but that was a sign that their faith was faulty, and
unsound faith, that it was not able to wait to the end, but gave over.

If a man were sure now, that such a man were in the house, that he must speak
withal, he will wait till he come out, if he be sure he be there. If thou
be sure of GOD, if thy faith be sound, though he do not answer thee presently,
in many particulars, yet thou will be content to wait upon him. Therefore this
will show that many a man's faith is unsound, slight, and ineffectual, that
they have so soon done, that they are ready to do much in flashes, in some
good moodes, on a Sacrament day, it may be, or in the time of sickness, or
when they are affected with some Sermon, or upon such an occasion; but, if thy
faith were right, it would hold out, it would cleave to CHRIST, it would go
through with all trials, thou would receive no denial, it would continue
waiting upon him. This is the fourth sign.

5. Sign of effectual faith, the concomitants of it, which are 4.
Last of all, you shall know faith by the concomitants of it; and they are
four; Love, Hope, Joy, and Humility. If there be Faith, if thy Faith be good,
it will always have Love joined with it; Love.
as the Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.8.
in 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom though you have not seen, yet you love him. And you know
the place in Galath. 5. Gal. 5.
Faith which works by love. That is, Faith which begets Love, and such a Love
as sets a man on work. But it is a thing that needs no proving: you cannot
deny it: you know how they are joined together in the first to the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 13.
chap. 13. Faith, Hope, and Love. And it must needs be so, that, if thy faith
be good, it will have Love joined with it. For, if thy faith be right, thou
look on GOD as upon a friend, as upon a Father; now thou look upon CHRIST
as on one that is married to thee; thou look on him as upon one that loves
thee, and has given himself for thee. Now if thou see this, and art persuaded
of this indeed, if thou think and art persuaded indeed that he loves thee,
love will beget love, as fire begets fire. Therefore, if thou would know
whether thou have taken Christ indeed, consider whether thou love him or no.

But you will say you love CHRIST. Object.
I hope there is no great question of that.

Solomon says, Ans.
Every man will make show for fashions sake, of goodness, but where can you
find a faithful man? So may I say of Love: Every man says, he loves, but
where shall one find one that does love indeed? Therefore consider, do
thou love in good earnest.

You will say, Quest.
How shall I know it?

It is not a place now to stand to give notes of Love: Ans.
we will only show now, that Love is a sure companion of Faith, and that Faith
is not good, if Love be not there, But yet I say, if thou love him, Trials of
love.
thou shall find that in thine own heart, thou need not go far for a
trial of that.

Love is the most sensible, the most quick, and most active affection of all
others. Consider, if thou love any creature, or any thing, any man or woman,
do thou not feel thy affection stirring in thee? do thou not find thy
heart thus longing after them whom thou affectest? thou delightest to be in
their company, in their presence, thou desires to be with them. So that, if a
strangeness grow between you at any time, thy heart is not at ease till all
be right again between you: So, do thou love the Lord Jesus? Do thou
keep his Commandments? Does a man profess to love GOD, and cares not to vex
him, and anger him?

Again, Do thou hate sin? Do thou think to love GOD, and not to hate
that, which he hates? If a man love GOD, he is holy and pure, and there is no
man that loves the one contrary, but he must needs hate the other. There is no
man that loves light, but he must hate darkness. If thou love GOD, in his
person, in his purity, in his holiness, thou must hate sin; and this hatred
is general; thou will hate all sin, if thou hate any, and hatred will breed
the destruction of a thing.

Again, Do thou love GOD? art thou willing to do any thing for his sake?
Do thou reckon matters of greatest difficulty easy to do; as Jacob did
make it a matter of ease because of love?

Again, Do thou love the Saints, those that are like him, those that are of
such a disposition as God is of? Shall a man say he loves the purity and the
holiness of GOD, which he has not seen, which is hidden from his eyes, when
he does not love the holiness and the purity that he sees in his Saints? For
there it is taught in a visible manner in the creature, where you may see it
more proportionable to you. It is a hundred times more easy to love godliness
in the Saints, then in GOD himself, because he is remote far from us, and
they are amongst us, and are visibly seen. Therefore, except thou love the
Saints, which thou see holiness in; except thou see thy heart inwardly, to
love them with a natural affection, as it were, that thou love them whether
thou will or no, thou do but pretend.

Again, Do thou love CHRIST? Art thou willing to part with any thing for
his sake? Love is bountiful: Thou say thou love GOD: What if he will have
some of thy wealth? What if he will have thy credit? What if he will have thy
liberty for his sake? If thou love him, thou will be content to do it.
Therefore, consider if faith have begotten such a love in thee, so that thou
can truly say, though thou have not seen him, yet thou love him.

The second concomitant of Faith, is Hope: Hope.
If thou have Faith, thou have Hope. And this distinguishes a Christians faith
from the faith of Reprobates, from the faith of Devils, from the temporary
faith that others are capable of: you know, the Devils believe and tremble: He
says not, The Devils believe and hope; for that they do not, Hope is a
property of Faith, where there is Faith there is Hope. Now you must know, that
a man has never faith to believe, but he has hope, which makes him expect
what he believes. If a man have a promise of so much money which he needs, he
hopes for the performance of it, and quiets himself, when he casts his
thoughts upon it, he is at rest: when a man believes it, he hopes for it.
Take an Heir that has such possessions, which is yet a Ward, and is young, he
has not the Land in possession; but (mark) what hope he has, it is not a
vain hope, but such a hope as puts other conceits in him then other men have,
puts another fashion upon his actions, it makes him neglect many good things he
would do; he will not be of such a calling, he will not be diligent: for he
hopes, he makes account of it: See how such things work upon a man, which he
is not to have in 7 or 8 years after, perhaps. So thou hopest for Heaven, it
is not a vain hope, but it is a hope that will ma^e thee carry thy self after
another fashion, it will make thee so minded, that thou will have an eye to it,
and every man that looks on ^hee, may see that thou have an eye to it: So that
faith is accompanied by Hope. But now you must not say, that if a man hope,
therefore there is no fear mingled with it: for you must know, that a man may
have Hope that is true and good, and yet may have fear mingled with it. For
this you must know, that if there be nothing but hope, it is a sign that that
Hope is not good. And therefore thou have so little reason to be discouraged,
because thou have some fear mingled with thy hope, that thou have the more
cause to hope, and to think that thy hope is good, because there is fear
mingled with it: for know, that there is a certain sort of men, that have
neither faith, hope, nor fear; as Atheists, that have some hope, but no fear;
as Devils and desperate men, that have some fear, but no hope; as presumptuous
men, which have but a shadow of faith: But those that have hope, and fear
mingled with it; that is, those may rather hope, that that hope which they
have, they may be so much the more confirmed in it, because they have some
fear mingled with it.

Therefore consider, whether thou have hope or no: Consider in what manner it
is joined with faith. When thou beleeuest that CHRIST is thine, that Heaven is
thine, that thy sins are forgiven, and that thou art a son of GOD, but
these things thou have not yet, thou art as any other man, there is no
difference between thee and them, thou have no more in possession then other
men, that walk with thee; now comes in Hope, and that expects that which is
to come, that holds up thy head, as it were, that, though you have nothing at
all for the present, yet that Hope will comfort you, that though you have
troubles, and crosses, and a thousand things more, to obscure and blot your
faith, and the waves go over your head, that you are ready to be drowned, this
hope holds you above the water, and makes you expect with comfort that which is
to come: and not so only, but, I say, it is a lively hope, a hope that sets a
man aworke, a hope that purges him. For, you know, that that a man hopes for,
he will endeavor to bring it to pass, it is such a hope as will not fail you,
but will continue as well as Faith it self.

Joy.
Thirdly, the third concomitant of Faith is Joy: Romans 15.13. Romans 15.13.
The GOD of hope fill you with joy, through believing. If you have believed,
you have Joy. So in the first of Peter, 1 Pet. 1.8.
chap. 1. verse. 8. In whom you have believed: (says he) Whom, though you have
not seen, yet you believe in him, and joy with joy unspeakable and glorious.
(As if he should say) If you believe in him, you shall know it by this,
Whether do you rejoice in him, or no? Consider that, where there is Faith,
there is Joy. And it must needs be so: As, you know, he that had the Pearl
went away rejoicing; and the Kingdom of GOD consists in Joy, and Peace, and
Righteousness. And therefore, where there is Faith, there certainly is Joy.
And therefore consider, and examine thine own case: Have thou this rejoicing
in CHRIST? this rejoicing in the Doctrine of Justification, and forgiveness of
sins. If we should examine men's faith by this, we should find that there is
but a little Faith in the World. Examine your selves, you that now hear me,
that hear this Doctrine of Faith; it may be it has been burdensome unto
you; it may be it is a thing you care not for; To hear of Justification, and
forgiveness of sins, they are things at the least, that, it may be, you take
no great pains for; you do not study them, you do not prize them much: but,
if you were forgiven indeed, you would prefer it before all other joy, it would
comfort you above any thing. If you would say, what you would hear above all
things else, you would hear of matter of forgiveness. A man now that has
known the bitterness of sin, and afterward comes to the assurance of
forgiveness, (that is) to have Faith indeed, I say, he will rejoice in it
above all things else: all worldly joy would be nothing to it. Therefore
consider whether thou have such a Faith or no; if thou have not, certainly
thou have not Faith; and it is a sure sign that will not deceive you; There is
no man that has it, that has not Faith; and wheresoever there is Faith
indeed, there is extraordinary great rejoicing in CHRIST.

But, Object.
you will say, Many a man may have Joy; the second ground received the Word
with joy: and those that followed John the Baptist, rejoiced in his light: and
in Heb. 6. Heb. 6.
the Apostle says, they have tasted of the good Word of God; they have tasted
with sweetness; that is, they have had joy in it.

Ans.
It is true, we confess there is a false joy: and therefore, if thou would
know whether the joy which thou have be good or no, Trials of joy.
consider these three things.

First, consider whether thy faith hold out in tribulation or no. Therefore the
Apostle adds, Romans 5.3. Romans 5.3.
not only so, but we rejoice also in tribulation. As if he should say, those
that are hypocrites, those that have a false faith, there may be much rejoicing
in them for a while, but we rejoice in tribulations; yea, we not only rejoice
in tribulation, but our joy is increased by them, they are as fuel, they add
to our joy: as in Act. 5. the Disciples went away rejoicing, because they were
accounted worthy to suffer for Christ. Whereas the second ground, when
persecution comes, there is an end of their joy. Therefore consider whether thy
joy will hold out or no.

Again, consider the greatness thereof: you know those words are added, 1
Pet. 1.8. 1 Pet. 1.8.
rejoicing with Joy unspeakable and glorious. If it be right Joy, it will be
such a great Joy, it will exceed all other, it will be like to that joy in
Harvest, as Isay speaks, it will be a Joy unspeakable for the greatness of
it; such a Joy, that at the least is so great, that whatsoever comes, yet it
exceedes it. the other temporary Christian may have joy, but it is not so
great, but some other joy will come, and overcome it, and drown it, and put it
out.

Therefore, in the second ground, as their humiliation was slight, so was their
Faith, they had a little humiliation for their sins, and they took CHRIST in
a more remiss manner. And as their Faith was, so was their joy, all slight.
But now, when Faith is sound and good, that Joy is accordingly great; it is a
great Joy, that, at the least, ouercomes all other; that, take what joy you
will, if a man could have an earthly Kingdom here, if a man could have as
great pleasure here as man's nature is capable of, if he had never so much
praise, and glory of men, (these things we naturally rejoice in) a right
Christian, that has Faith indeed, will not so rejoice in these, but that he
will rejoice in CHRIST above them. If thy Joy therefore be so great, that it
overcome and exceed all other, be sure that Joy is good. But yet we must have
one thing more in Joy. In whom, though you have not seen, yet you joy with Joy
unspeakable and glorious. That is, if it be such a Joy as is right indeed,
which is a testimony of faith, that it is a sign thou beleeuest, it is a Joy
that is glorious, it is a Joy that is glorious and spiritual. Now an hypocrite
may rejoice, he may rejoice in Christ, he may rejoice in the Kingdom of GOD,
and the assurance he has of it, and he may rejoice in the hope that he has
that his sins are forgiven; but all this while, he rejoices after a carnal
manner: as, you know, a man may rejoice in spiritual things after a carnal
manner, as a man may rejoice in a carnal thing after a spiritual manner.
Therefore the joy of Hypocrites, when it is at the best, it is but a carnal
joy; there is something there that his flesh is able to rejoice in, it may be
he had some fear and terror in his conscience, and after this comes a
persuasion perhaps that his sins are forgiven him, and that he is in a good
estate, that same fleshly fear and grief before, that worldly fear and
grief will have a Joy answerable to it, a natural joy, and yet it may be
great, it may be a great flash of joy, that may be as a Land-flood, Simile.
make a great show, which because it has no spring, is soon dried up, but it
makes a great flash: and therefore in that, Heb. 6. Heb. 6. opened.
they tasted of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. I
take this to be the meaning of it, (not as it is commonly interpreted, That an
Hypocrite may taste of the good Word of God, and of spiritual privileges, he
may taste of them, but not drink deep of them, but this is certainly the
meaning of the place,) They tasted some things in the good Word of God, which
was sweet to them. Now, in such men there is nothing but flesh. (Mark) If a
temporary Christian believes for a time, he has ineffectuall faith, in such a
man there is nothing but flesh. That conclusion must be set down: and if there
be nothing but flesh, there is nothing can taste but flesh; for there is
nothing else to do it, and the flesh tastes nothing but objects that suit with
it self. What shall we say then? There is somewhat in him that pickes out,
that in these spiritual comforts, in these spiritual blessings, in this good
Word of GOD, he pickes out that which suits with his flesh: That is, such a
carnal man may be able to rejoice in the Word. Do you not think that such a
good Word of GOD may make carnal men rejoice in it? May he not taste such
sweetness, as to take upon him the profession of Religion, and to bring forth
fruit, and to hold out long? No doubt there is. Are there not such things in
that which we propound in the Gospel? To tell men of a Kingdom of salvation,
of the love of GOD, of the precious promises, of an inheritance, of escaping of
Hell; may not a fleshly man, a man unregenerate, may he not see, and rejoice in
these? He may; and has such a taste as is there expressed.

Consider now therefore if thy Joy be right; If it be a sign of faith, if it
be good and sound, if it be a Joy that is spiritual and unspeakable; that is,
if it be a Joy that is so great as that it exceedes all other joys; if this
Joy do but hold out in tribulation, it is a certain sign thy faith is good.

Humility.
Now, last of all, the last concomitant of Faith is Humility. If thy Faith be
right, it will bring that with it, to make thee humble and vile in thine own
eyes: For what is true faith? It is that which brings CHRIST into the heart, as
you have heard oftentimes; that which knits Christ and the soul together, it
is that which causes him to come and dwell with thee. Now wheresoever Christ
comes to dwell, he comes with a light, he shows the creature his vileness,
he makes a man see his sin, he makes him see what creature he is; whereas
another that has great hope, and professes that he has much assurance, his
heart is lifted up, and not cast down. Such are not men which think
themselves vile, and naked, and miserable, but they think themselves better
then other men, they are forwarder then others in any thing, they think other
men are not like them. And therefore they are ready to be more bold and
venterous in any thing, they are ready to take up opinions, they are ready to
strike out this way or that way. But now a true Christian is humbled with it,
because when Christ comes into the heart, he makes a man to see his vileness.
As, you know, when GOD drew near to Job, when he came near him indeed, then
he abhorred himself in dust and ashes, then he saw what a one he was, he saw
not before, he thought the contrary, but when GOD drew near indeed, that made
him manifest.

So it was with Isay, when he saw GOD upon his Throne, and the Angels about
him, when he saw his holiness, Isay. 6.
then, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of polluted lips: He was so
before, but when he drew near to GOD, he saw it.

So Peter said, depart from me, I am a sinful man, when he saw Christ, when
Christ came near him, when he manifested himself in his Divinity, that he saw
GOD in him; for so he did by that Miracle that amazed Peter, and cast him
down, and made him see what he was. So David, when GOD drew near to him, and
promised to build him an House, to give him a House that should be eternal, to
give him the Messiah, whose Kingdom should never end, (for that is included in
the giving him a Kingdom for ever, and a House that should have no end:) when
God vouchsafed him so great a favor, we see, David was never so cast down as
then in the sight of his own vileness, he was never so little in his own eyes,
he never said so much as he said then. Now, (says he) what is David? What am
I, or what is my Fathers house, that thou should regard me thus, that thou
should bring me hitherto? This is Gods manner, when he comes into a man's
heart, when he speaks peace indeed, when Faith is a right Faith, that brings
CHRIST to dwell there; I say, it makes a man exceeding humble. Therefore the
spirit of Christians is a meek spirit, they are humble, and gentle, they are
little in their own eyes. Consider whether thou have such a disposition bred
in thee, or no: it is a sign thy faith is good, if there be; if there be not,
it is a sign thy faith is not true. So much for the signs of faith. I make
haste, because I have one Use more to add. Use.


To act and exercise Faith, or to set it on Work.
If nothing be regarded of GOD but effectual faith; that is, if that be the
virtue of faith to be effectual, or else it is nothing worth, then we should
learn hence, not to let that be wanting to our faith which is the excellency
of it, which is the virtue of it, which is the proper quality of it. As, if it
be the virtue of a Horse to go well; If it be the virtue of a Knife to cut
well; If it be the virtue of a Soldier to fight well; or whatsoever you will
instance in, whatsoever virtue it be, or whatsoever thing, you labor to find
that in it, whatsoever be wanting; (for every thing has some proper
excellency, some special virtue wherein the thing consists.) Now, to be
effectual, to be working, to be operative, If this be the virtue of Faith, (as
it were) if this be the character and excellency of faith; Let not this
therefore be wanting in faith. What is that then thou should do? Use thy
faith, set faith aworke, live by it.

Object.
You will say, This is more then I can do; this is Gods action, he must set
faith aworke, and work this in me.

Ans.
I say, thou art able to do this of thy self, when thou have faith once. I
speak to those that have it, and this exhortation is to you. If you have
faith, use it: many have it, that do not use it. This is a thing that you are
able to do: For though God work in you all the work of faith, as it is
received; yet know, he does not work in you only, but by you; he makes you
instruments: you are not as dead instruments, but as living instruments, to
move of your selves. It is true, that before you have faith you are able to do
nothing; but when you have it once, then you are able to use it. Before a man
has life, Simile.
he is not able to stir, but when he has life once, then he is able to move
and stir himself, for there is life there. when the Lamp is once lighted,
Simile.
you know you may feed it with Oil, and if you put more Oil to it, you shall
have the greater flame: There is light, and you may increase it; indeed the
difficulty is to light it; and that is Gods work; he kindles the first fire,
he works faith in the heart: But now, when thou have it, learn to use it.
Do thou think a necessity lies upon us to use other Talents that GOD has
put into our hands, and will he not require that thou should use the Talent
of Faith? Will thou wrap that in a Napkin, and let it lie dead by thee? Will
not he call thee to an account for it? What folly is it, (my brethren) you have
faith, which is so excellent a Grace, able to do so great things as it is, and
yet you will not use it. There are many Christians that have Faith indeed, and
yet will not set it on work. How great things would it do, what a reward
would it bring? As Aristotle says of habits, That if a man have no more but a
habit, and use it not, there is no difference between the wisest man and a
fool; for what are habits for, but for action? what is the Tree for, but for
fruit? The habit serves but for the act; and this is according to the judgment
of Scripture, in Romans 2. Romans 2.
God rewards not men according to the habits they have, but according to their
works. Therefore think not that thou shall be rewarded according to thy
habits of Faith which thou have, though it be true that that sanctifies thee,
but GOD does reward us according to the use of our faith, according to the
works that our Faith does bring forth, according to the efficacy of our
faith. It is true, the taking of Christ is one work of Faith, thou should
set it aworke to do that; and besides that, all the works of sanctification
are all works of Faith; all thy life long, every hour thou have somewhat for
Faith to do. Set thy faith aworke, and thy reward shall be accordingly.

And again, if thou use not Faith, thou shall have little enough of it; the
using of it is that which strengthens Faith. It is Gods usual manner, when he
gives Faith to a man, to give him exercise, to keep his Faith breathing, as it
were; he will be sure to have somewhat wherein he will put him to it, some
tribulation, he will put fire to it, to cleanse it, And therefore we should
learn to make use of our Faith, to set it on work.

It is a general Rule in all things, and as true in this, If a man have an
estate, what is he the better to have it, if he do not use it? To have a
friend, what is a man the better if he do not use him? Shall a man be a
Favorite of a Prince, and get nothing by it? Faith makes a man a Favorite of
GOD, a friend to GOD; and will you make no use of GOD? It is that which he
expects at your hands; will you have GOD in vain? Shall he be your GOD, and
will you make no use of his power, of his wisdom, of his ability to hold you
up, to help you upon all occasions? You should make use of him; all that is
his, is yours, if you make use of it by faith.

Again, shall men have such privileges as we have by faith, and shall not we
comfort our selves by them? What is it for a man to have great estates, great
Titles of Honor, and Houses, and Lands, if a man do not think upon them, that
these considerations may cheer him? We should do so with faith, this is the
use of faith.

Again, if faith be used, it is able to do much for us, if it lie still, it
will do nothing. You know what they did, Heb. 11. Heb. 11.
They having faith, it made them do that, it was but the use of their faith:
So it is with us; Look how much thou use thy faith, so much thou shall be
able to do. Therefore Christ says, Be it according to thy faith: that is, not
according to the habit of thy faith, that lies dead, as a Talent wrapped up
there; but, be it unto thee according to the use of thy faith. If thou set
faith on work, it will be able to do great things, it will be able to do
wonders, it will be able to overcome the world, it is able to work
righteousness, it is able to prevail with GOD and men, it is able to go
through the greatest matters.

Quest.
But, you will say, How shall I use it?

Ans.
That is the thing indeed which I purposed now to have showed, how faith must be
used, How to use Faith.
how we must live by faith: I should have showed how you should use it.

In comforting our selves
First, in comforting of our selves; for that is one use of Faith, thou should
set it aworke to fill thy heart with joy, out of the assurance of the
forgiveness of sin, and of the privileges which thou have by CHRIST. When a
man has faith, and finds his heart no more affected then other men's, he finds
no rejoicing there more then ordinary; Now set faith on work, learn to believe,
and that thoroughly.

First set faith on work to believe, to trust perfectly, as the Apostle
speaks, Gal. 3. Gal. 3. opened.
In the grace revealed by Jesus Christ: trust perfectly; that is, thou should
believe the full forgiveness of thy sins, thou must not believe it by
halues, so that there should be a distance, as it were, between GOD and thee,
some odd scores vnacquitted, vncrost; but thou should believe so, Ioh. 16.
that thy joy may be full, thou should believe thoroughly, that thy sins
are forgiven, that all are acquitted, thou must not limit God in his mercy at
all, as thou should not limit him in his power. Thus a man should set faith
on work, that he may be able to say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. I know
there is a Match made between us. For unless you lay this ground, a man shall
not rejoice. This is all, therefore now use thy faith. If Satan now come, and
tell thee of some sins, and of some circumstances of those sins, and of
some wants in thy repentance and humiliation, what serves faith for now? What
serves all this for that you have learned here concerning the Doctrine of
Faith, but to teach you that these should be no scruples, you should believe,
and that perfectly? When this is done, that you see there is a Match, a
Covenant made between GOD and you, now you must know, that all that Christ
has is yours; whatsoever he has by Nature, you have it by Grace. If he be a
Son, ye are sons; If he be an Heir, ye are heirs; and when ye have done
this, then consider all the particulars of the wealth of a Christian, that all
is yours, whether it be Paul or Apollos, or the world, etc. These things we
have often spoken of, you should run through and consider of them: If a man
will consider that he is a King, that the world is his, that whatsoever is in
CHRIST belongs to him, and owes him a good turn, and will do it at one time
or other; when he considers all the precious promises. Simile.
A man reckons his wealth not only by his money which he has lying in his
Coffers, that he has present, but by Bills, and Bonds, and Leases, etc. So, how
many promises thou have, there is not a promise in the Book of GOD, but it is
thine; set thy faith on work to consider this, and to rejoice in it; set faith
on work so to see them that thou may rejoice in them, and weyne thee from
the things of this world, not to regard them; for they are small things of no
hold. Shall a King regard Cottages and trifles? No, if thou think in good
earnest that thou art such a man, why do thou regard trifles? Thou should
do this; when other men reckon their Lands, and their Houses, and their
friends, a Christian reckons he has GOD, he has many good works in store,
he has so many precious promises laid up in the Land of the Living. Set thy
faith on work thus, not only to rejoice, but to bring in a holy magnanimity,
answerable to such a condition; and let not Faith give over till it have
brought thee to this. Certainly, a man that believes he is a King, he will
have another spirit: for there is no other reason wherefore it is said Saul had
another spirit, but that when he came to be a King, he had a spirit answerable.
When thou beleeuest these privileges, when thou set thy Faith on work to
believe indeed, to believe them to be real things, and not fancies, and
notions, there will be bred a disposition answerable, a carriage and spirit
suitable; thou will not admit of things that are unfit for such a person, thou
can not do it; but as one that is a Prince, that has those hopes actually,
he cannot admit of thoughts that other men have; no more can a Christian, when
he is borne from above by the immortal seed, there is such a disposition
wrought in him, that, if he will set his faith on work to believe these
things, he shall not be able to admit of those base things which he did
before, and which others do.

Again, if a man set his Faith aworke to believe these things, he would be
able to use the World as if he used it not, he would not care for losses and
crosses, he would not grieve for them, as one that is not able to bear them.
Thus we should learn to set faith on work, in believing these privileges,
that we may be able to walk with God, as Henoch did, and as Paul, and Moses
did; to walk with him in the upper Region, above the storms: There is much
variety of weather when a man is below here, now it is fair, and then it is
foul; if a man were above these, there is a continual serenity; So a man that
has his heart in Heaven, a man that walks with GOD, that has his heart
raised above others; if you would do this, if you would use Faith, if thou
would consider this, it would set thee aloft, above these things; thou
would soar aloft as the Eagle, thou would care no more for these things,
then the Eagle cares for the chirping of Sparrowes: they are trifles, thou
would ouerlooke them all. If we did consider this seriously, how would it
alter our course? It would work another disposition, another affection in us.
A man would consider, that if GOD be sure, what matter is it if a friend die?
If I have GOD, what is the loss of any creature? And so, if a man suffer wrong
in his name, what is it, if he have praise of GOD? If thou believe, and see GOD
in his greatness, to have praise of such a one as he, will make thee to contemn
the rest. And so for wealth: What is poverty? What account did Paul make of it?
It is nothing to one that has Treasure in Heaven, to one that believes
indeed, to one that sees he has all GODS Treasures opened to him. Thou
should learn to do this in good earnest. If a man would set this Faith
aworke to believe it, his heart would be fixed, he would be afraid of no
evil tidings, he would say with himself, if there be no ill tidings from
heaven, it is no matter from whence they come on earth. If a man would build,
through faith, upon the promise, and consider it really. This is the use of
Faith: thus a man's heart should be filled with joy, a man would be able to go
through ill report and good report, through want and through abundance, without
being much troubled with either; the one would not much puff him up, nor the
other would not deject him, but he would go as a Giant, and march through the
variety of conditions; he would pass through them, that neither the one hand
nor the other, the good success nor the ill success should work upon him
much. This is a strong man: and this Faith will make thee able to do, if thou
use Faith, and set it aworke. But I am sorry the time has cut me off: this is
but an entrance, I give you but a little taste: There are many things wherein
Faith stands us in much stead, wherein if we did use Faith, how much service
would it do us? But for that which remains in this Doctrine of Faith, I had
thought to have shut it up at this time, to show you how to use it, how to make
it effectual, how to set it aworke, how to walk by it, how to husband and
improve this Talent for Gods advantage and your own. But I cannot stand on it.
So much for this time.

FINIS.
OF EFFECTVALL FAITH. The fifth Sermon.
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering your effectual Faith, etc.


THE first thing wherein thou should use Faith, Considerations to help
Faith in comforting the Soul.
is to comfort thy self by it. Therefore consider, you that doubt of this, you
that make question, (I speak to those that have the work wrought, whom the
Holy Ghost has made to desire Christ above all things, I say) remember that
God justifies the ungodly, and that you have nothing to do, but to take him.

2. Remember that CHRIST is made righteousness to us, that no flesh might
rejoice in his sight, but he that rejoices might rejoice in the Lord.

3. Remember that the pardon is general. Look to the promises of the Gospel;
you shall find them without all exception. To us a Savior is borne, to take
away the sins of his people; he came to take away sins of all sorts. Now,
when GOD has made no exception, why should we make any?

4. Consider that we have to do with a GOD, who delights to show mercy, it
is a thing that he is not weary of, it is natural to him: And therefore as the
eye is not weary of seeing, nor the ear of hearing, because it is natural to
them, no more is GOD weary of showing mercy. Micha. 7.8.
Nay, he delights in it, Mic. 7.8. Who is a God like unto thee, taking away
iniquities, delighting to show mercy, etc. Why so? Because mercy pleases him.
That is, there is no work that he is so much pleased in, as in showing mercy.

5. Consider thou, that art in such a case, consider that his mercy is as large
as any other attribute. Every man thinks that this is no news; what need you
tell us that GOD is infinite in mercy? I say, this is a thing that thou do
not consider: if thou did, thou would not stick upon it as thou do,
If thou did believe that GOD were as merciful as he is; but we scant GOD
according to our measure; we square Gods mercy according to our own thoughts.
Every man measures Gods mercy, according to that which he can conceive. He
thinks with himself, if a man commit one sin, it might be forgiven, but
when his sins exceed, when they grow out of measure sinful, when they are
sins so circumstantiated, as we say, that they are out of measure sinful,
here a man stands at a stay: What is the reason of this? Because we draw a
scantling of Gods mercy, according to our own conceits. Whereas, if we
considered that his mercy were as large as any other attribute, then we would
consider that it has no limits: and if it have no limits, then whatsoever thy
sins are, it is all one.

6. Do thou think that Christ came from heaven, and took flesh, and
suffered death, to forgive small sins? No, it was to forgive the greatest;
the work is large enough to match with the greatest sins. These, and such
like reasons thou should labor to bring to heart, that thou may believe
perfectly and thoroughly, and give not over till thou have done it. Let not thy
faith trust in Christ by halues, but trust thoroughly. Thou should come to
this disjunction: If I be out of the Covenant, why do I believe at all? why
do I receive any comfort? If I be in the Covenant, why do I not believe
perfectly? I say, give not over till thou have brought thy heart to a full
assurance. Thus a man should do that yet doubts whether his estate be good,
whether CHRIST be his, when he is his. For when a man is once in the Covenant,
that the match is made between him and thee, why do thou doubt? If thou be
in the Covenant once, doubt not then that a sin or two, or daily failings,
shall break the Covenant between GOD and thee, it is impossible. Thou must
know that thou often breakest the Covenant; but except there be a quite turning
back, except thou altogether forsake GOD, except thou leave GOD, and choose
thee a new Master, (this indeed breaks the Covenant) otherwise, if it be but
a failing, if it be but a sin of infirmity, from day to day, when as yet thou
keep GOD in thy heart, thou cleauest fast to him, thou intendest to serve
him, and not to forsake him and give him over; think not that those sins,
although they be great, break the Covenant. And therefore, Psalm. 41.7. said
the People of GOD there: Psalm. 41.7
Although these things be befalne us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt
falsely concerning thy Covenant. Why; We have not turned back; although we
have failed, and done many things amiss, yet have we not dealt falsely
concerning thy Covenant. That is, we are not Hypocrites, our hearts are sincere.

Quest.
How prove they that?

Ans.
We have not turned back from thee, our feet have not gone out of thy ways.
That is, we have not quite given over, as many men do that make their pleasure
their God, when they make their profit their God, when they divorce themselves
from GOD, then they break the Covenant; but else it is not a breaking of the
Covenant. Know therefore for thy comfort, when thou considerest this, sum them
up together, and see now whether thou have put thy seal to the truth of GOD,
that he is true; that is, whether thou believe the promise, whether thou take
and receive CHRIST: for that is it to put thy seal to the truth of GOD: when
thou can conclude that thou have done that, then see if GOD has put his
seal to thee. There is a double seal:

One is, thou art sealed by the Spirit; that is, there is a secret witness of
the Spirit, the sealing of the Spirit to the day of Redemption; the hidden
Mannah, the secret witness that GOD gives to every man's heart, as a privy
Seal that GOD sets on thee, Ephesians. 4.
Grieve not the Spirit, by which ye are sealed to the day of Redemption. Now
there is another seal, which is more manifest then this; as in 2 Timothy 2.19. 2 Timothy 2.19.
The foundation of GOD remains sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows
who are his, and let every one that calls upon the Name of the Lord depart
from iniquity. That is, there is another seal that GOD sets upon you, whereby
he enables you to depart from iniquity: This is a more open seal then the
other. If thou find that thou have put thy seal to GOD, to his promise, and
thou find again that he has sealed thee by the inward witness of his
Spirit, and has sealed thee likewise by the fruit of amendment of life, with
enabling thee to depart from iniquity; now what should thou do then? Make no
more question, take it for granted, that CHRIST belongs to thee, and thou to
him; Trust perfectly to the grace revealed through Jesus Christ: A place that I
have often named, 2 Pet. 1.13.
2 Pet. 1.13. Trust perfectly in the favor; that is, in the free favor, in
the free promise revealed through Jesus Christ; that is, Do not mince the
matter, and say, it may be GOD will forgive me, or it may be he will not; but
do it perfectly, let nothing be wanting, do it perfectly, that thy joy may
be full; if thou do it by halues, if thou do it but in part, thou shall have
but imperfect joy.

The use now that thou should make of Faith, is to see thy joy may be full:
if thou be not certainly persuaded, thou do not use thy Faith as thou
ought. When thou have done this once, when thou have settled upon this
conclusion, to say certainly CHRIST is mine, my sins are forgiven; now come
to the privileges, consider them, and go through them all: (I have named them
heretofore upon another occasion:) and labor to comfort thy self with them;
labor to have thy heart filled with joy; at the least, get so much comfort as
may ouervalue any affliction in the World, that there may be a greater weight
in the other Balance, that though great afflictions do befall thee, yet thou
art not drowned, thou art not swallowed up of affliction, that thy heart faints
not; but set thy faith aworke, that thou may have so much joy, as that thou
may go through it. And again, get so much joy, as at least may ouertoppe
any prosperity outward, any comfort that thou may take in thy friends, or in
thy wealth, or in those things that thou find thy heart too much to cleave
unto, that thou set them at too high a rate; set thy Faith on work, that
thy joy may be full, that thou may not prize those so much, but that thou
may look upon them as trifles, as matters of nothing, in comparison of the
joy that is prepared for thee in Heaven. Thus a man should use faith; that is,
in any affliction, that he do not ouer-grieue; and that no outward comforts,
whatsoever befall him, take not up his joy too much.

Thus our faith should pass through all conditions, to use the World as if we
used it not: So, I say, set thy Faith on work. This is the first work that
faith should do, to comfort a man's heart.

The second use we should make of Faith, Use of faith, to guide and order our
lives.
should be to guide and direct our lives; that is, we should use Faith to be as
the Rudder to the Ship, to turn our courses the right way upon all occasions
in our conversation: For that is the office of Faith, to guide a man's life.
Simile.
For as it is in a way, so it is in our life; there are many turnings, it is
not only a strait way, but there are many turnings, and when a man comes to a
place where there are two ways to turn to, that he knows not which way to
go, now Faith comes and teaches thee what thou should do. That is, there
are many difficult cases wherein a man knows not what to do, he is amazed at
them; It may be GOD will lead thee through the way of the Philistims, through
great persecutions, and troubles, which thou must wrestle with: Now set thy
Faith aworke, fight the good fight of faith; that is, thou must now overcome,
thou must not balke the way of Religion, because of the troubles thou meetest
withal, but pass through the troubles, that thou may keep thy way.

Again, it may be GOD will lead thee through pleasant ways, and not through
the way of the Philistims, (as when the people came out of Egygt, the Lord led
them not by the way of the Philistims.) If GOD give thee peace and prosperity,
now set Faith aworke, that this peace and prosperity that thou have, that it
soften not, that it loosen not the sinews of thy mind, that it dissolve not
thy strength: but keep thy faith, and hold thy strength, that thou be not
drawn to sin against GOD by such a condition. In all the turnings of a man's
life, to be kept straight, a man must set his faith on work. It may be GOD
will give thee peace for a time, take heed thou sit not down now and forget
thy journey. As thou must not turn to the left hand, so thou must not turn to
the right hand, but pass through all, that thou may approve thy self the
servant of CHRIST in straites, in necessity, in tribulation, by the Armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left; through honor and dishonor,
by ill report and good report. That is, set Faith on work, in all the variety
of conditions, to keep thee in the right way, that thou turn not out of it.
It is faith that must do it: For example, put the case thou come to Hesters
condition; there was a turning of her mind, she had peace before, but when it
comes to that, that she must venture her life for the Church, here she had use
of faith. And so for Abraham, God bade him offer his son, he was at rest a
great while before, but now GOD tryes him what he will do; here is a turning
of his life, here was an Exigent, here was use for his faith, he did it, faith
turned him this way; Another man would have turned another way, that has not
faith. So when GOD calls Moses, he was quiet before in Pharoahs Court: now he
must go to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, then what must he do in
such a case? The Text says, he did it by faith; by faith he forsook the glory
of Pharoahs Court, and chose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of
GOD, then to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season. There be many hundreds of
such cases that befall continually. I say, thou should use thy faith now,
that it should lead thee in the right way, in all these difficult cases: for
this is the use of faith. See now another man that has not faith, take a
false-hearted man, and say what you will to him when any such exigent comes,
you shall never draw him from his wealth, from his friends, from his worldly
credit, because he makes that his maine, his heart secretly trusts in that, he
thinks, if that be gone, he is as undone; that is his God, therefore you shall
never draw him from that, for he wants faith to make God his God. Come to
another man, let him come into such an exigent, and you shall not pull him from
God, he is his trust, he is his hope, and if he loses Gods favor, he loses
life and all; and therefore that is the difference in all the passages of
things in their conversation. This then is the second thing we should make of
faith, to guide and direct us in our lives. But because this is general,
Instances of faith guiding a man in difficult cases.
it may be it will not be enough: I will come a little to Instances.

Instance.
Suppose a man come to such a turning as those in John 12.12. Ioh. 12.12.
Many of the chief Rulers believed in him, but they durst not confess him,
lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue. Put the case, that thou be in
such a case, as that thou art brought now to such a trial: Now, if thy faith
be such a faith as they had, that is a sign that thou want faith indeed.
Take two men, the one will be content to be cast out, he will confess Christ,
come what will of it. Another man, when it comes to such a competition, that
either he must be cast out of the Synagogue, or deny Christ, he will rather
leave that then the other, he will rather part with Christ, he will rather
forsake him, and the confession of him, then endure such trouble.

So again, Instance.
come to a matter of praise of men, to a matter of credit, when a man sees that
this is his condition in the place he lives in, and considers, If I serve GOD
indeed, if I go through in my profession, I see I must be contemned, I must
be despised, I must be trampled upon, I see, I must be hated of all men, as our
Savior Christ says, (for to be hated of some men, a man might bear it well
enough) but to have all men's hands against him, to be excluded of all good
company, (as they say) such a thing a man shall have much ado to bear, to
lose all his worldly credit, all his friends; but when it comes to such a case,
one man is willing to bear these, because he trusts in GOD: I know whom I have
trusted, says Paul: Therefore he was willing to undergo all shame, to endure
imprisonment, to do any thing: another man does not trust in God, and therefore
he will not endure he will leave Religion, he will not do the things that may
breed this trouble, he will mince the matter, he will leave that, that he may
secure himself, and keep his credit, that he has amongst men.

Instance.
So again, come to matter of commodity: Let matters of profit, or advantage in
the World for a man's estate be offered, see the different condition now of a
man that has faith, and of a man that wants faith. See Saul, when he saw the
fat Cattle, he took them, his faith was nothing but a notion: If he had
believed in GOD, he would not have thought that the fat Cattle would have made
him more happy, but because he saw them, and thought they would be advantage to
him, he saw them present, that was the thing he felt, he believed not the
other, therefore he did that.

And so for Balaam; when the case comes, that either he must curse the people,
or else forsake the wages of unrighteousness, surely he will have respect to
the wages of unrighteousness: that is, though Balaam made a fair show, he
would do any thing rather then to go against Gods Commandments, and yet he
had an eye to the other all the while, and GOD saw that he secretly looked to
himself. So that, it may be, thou make profession, thou make a fair show,
thou will do much. Remember this, it may be, it is but a high flying: The
Eagle, though she fly high, yet she has an eye to the prey below all the
while: So many men, although they do much, yet they have a secret eye to the
prey; that is, they want faith, and therefore they regard these things too
much. And when the time comes, that they must stoop to it, the time of trial,
when a man wants faith to magnify other things, he ouervalueth those things,
having nothing better to trust unto. In such a case, Judas his 30. pence was a
great matter: Gehezi's change of raiment, and Achans wedge of Gold. I need
name no more examples. But take a man that has faith, and this is no
difficulty to him, he will not only let go that wealth which he has
inordinately gotten, as Zacheus, but he will suffer the spoiling of his goods
with joy, because he believes God, that he has in heaven a more enduring
substance. There is no Christian, no good man, but he would be content to gain
as well as thou; what is the reason he takes it not? He beleues that by
forsaking that, he shall have a more enduring substance in Heaven. There is no
man would forsake any thing but for the better, and that is the reason we
believe, and thou do not.

And so come to matter of safety and danger, Instance.
and there you shall see what difference faith makes between men, how it turns
their course, when they come to such an exigent. See it in Saul, you know, he
was commanded not to offer Sacrifice till Samuel came, GOD did put him to the
trial, The Philistims were upon him, the day of Battle drew near, he saw
the people shrink away, Saul was put to it now, whether he would trust GOD for
his safety or no: If Saul had had faith now, and had thought with himself, If
I keep the Commandment, is not GOD able to help me, what though the people
shrink away; cannot GOD do as much with a few as with many? If he had
believed, he would have done otherwise: But he did not believe, and therefore
you see which way he turned.

Ier. 42.
The like we see in Ioram, Ier. 42. This was his case, he was the Captain of
t^ose that were left behind in Captivity; If he had stayed in Jerusalem, he
had had nothing to defend him, there was poverty and want of all things; if he
went down into Egypt, that was a safe Country, as far as any one could see,
it lay far from all danger of War, there was plenty of all things, and he was
a strong King, able to defend him; There comes Commandment from GOD, that he
should keep himself still in Jerusalem, and should not go down into Egypt:
It is a place worth the reading, Ier. 42 and 43. Ioram, Ier. 42. and 43.
in this case, believed not that God would keep him safe where he saw no
means of ^afety. Therefore, in that turning, you see what choice he made,
which was his utter undoing; he went down into Egypt, and there the Sword and
the Famine followed him, that GOD might make him know, that it was not any
outward condition that could keep him safe, and that he was able to keep him
safe in another place, where there seemed to be more danger,

On the other side, take those that trust in God, in any such case, when they
are brought to any such difficulty, they are willing to venture to put
themselves upon GOD, to go any whither, as Luther went to Worms, they care
not for any danger before them.

But some will say, Object.
it is true, if I had a Prophet sent to me, to tell me in such a case that I
should be safe, I should trust on him.

Certainly, Ans.
if thou have not, yet if the cause be good, if it be a thing that GOD sets
thee aworke on, if thou go by a right rule, know, that in this case thou have
as true a promise of safety, that God will deal well with thee, as if thou
had a Prophet sent immediately from God. Therefore I say to thee in such a
case as Luther said to Melancton, which was a good reason when Melancton began
to faint: Luther being afar off, wrote a Letter unto him, and tells him, says
he, if the Cause be not GODS, why do not we give over? why do we not shrink?
why do we do any thing? And If it be Gods Cause, why do we shrink? why go
we not through? He needed no more but to know that it was Gods Cause: and after
that, see how he exposed himself from time to time: and as no man was bolder
then he, so no man had more comfort. It is with us in this case as it was with
Jeremiah, Ier. 26.
Ier. 26. GOD bids him go and speak his Word to the people, all his words,
and tells him that the people would be ready to put him to death; and so they
were, they said he should die, but yet he obeyed God, because the Lord sent
him; and see what was the issue of it, GOD turned the matter, and saved him.
This is faith, when a man comes in that case to set his faith aworke, that it
may set him the right way that he is to go in, which way he is to turn.

Instance.
And so, put the case that GOD brings thee to such a case, that thou art in
danger of prison in danger of death, in danger of the greatest cross, of the
greatest persecution and trouble, now one man consults with flesh, the other
consults with the spirit, he sets faith awork to work his work for him: you
see what Stephen did in such a case, and the reason of it, Acts 6.
Acts 6. He was a man full of faith, and therefore he feared not what they could
do to him. See what Paul did, in such a case; you see what danger he was
exposed unto, but he consulted not with flesh and blood, but what did he? He
set faith on work, that it might guide him in all the way that he went, in all
the turnings of his life.

Instance.
And so, on the other side, for pleasure, there are two men that have pleasures
propounded, the holiest man has the same nature that others have, they would
take the same delight that others do, as far as they are natural.

What is the reason then they do not? Quest.
why do such men turn from all sinful delights, and run another course?

It is nothing but faith that enableth them to do it. Ans.
By faith Moses left Pharoahs Court, and the pleasures of sin for a season,
and chose adversity with the people of GOD: that is, as if he should say, If
you would know why Moses did this, it was faith that enabled him: that is, he
believed, that if he had enjoyed those pleasures of sin, he should have
been a loser by them, he should have fared the worse for them. Again, he
believed, that by his suffering adversity with the people of God, he should
gain; it was only faith that made him do this. If thou had faith, thou
would forsake thy pleasures, and live a more strict life, as the Saints do.
So that still you must keep that conclusion, that you must set faith aworke in
all the conclusions and passages of your life, for that is it that guides you
in the right way.

Again, Instance.
Take two men that have both children to provide for, they have posterity to
care for; the one man he reasons thus with himself; If I leave them not as
good a stock as I would, yet I shall leave them Gods blessing, which is able to
make them prosper; and though I should leave them abundance, yet all that,
without Gods blessing, will not be able to do it. Therefore such a man will be
indifferent for matter of estate, he will leave a conueniency for them, if he
can, but he takes no great care, he had rather lay up faithful prayers in
heaven, he had rather see them brought up in the fear of GOD, for he trust
GOD, and he thinks that his blessing can do^ it, without means; and he knows
that great means, without Gods blessing, cannot do it. But when another man
is in this case, he looks to that which is represented to his eyes: and
therefore he will not have done till he have provided such a portion for such a
child, till he have built him houses, till he have made them firm on every
side, till he have added house to house; this is out of want of faith, he
believes not: hence it is that these two run a different course.

Instance.
So again, one man looks to his business, he will not spend time to examine
his heart, he will not spend time in prayer from day to day; he says, my
business will go at six and seuens, my business will not be done: when as
another man, that has chosen Mary's portion, is content to lose somewhat, he
is content that many things should go amiss, he is content to lose somewhat
of his estate, he is content to let his business lie undone, or not to be so
well done, because he thinks, to be busy in good works, in prayer, and to
have the favor of GOD, is greater advantage, he thinks he has chosen the
better part. Now it is faith that works this difference. What should I do?
Why should I name any more Instances? You may name more to your selves, as you
have faith, so it will guide you, it will turn you this way and that way in
the turnings and passages of your life.

But now, because I am far in the point, (and I see the time runs fast
away) before I leave, I would not only show you what faith is able to do, but
I would work you to this a little.

You will say then, Quest.
What is it to trust in GOD? Ans.
For that is the reason of all the difference, you see: Therefore, says Paul,
1 Timothy 4.10.
1 Timothy 4.10. We labor, and suffer rebuke, what is the reason? If you would
know the cause, why we lead such a life, why we run another course then
others, why we live a painful life in labor from day to day; but if a man
had good wages, he might well do that, we labor and suffer, and are rebuked,
and have nothing but persecution for our pains; but, says he, we do it,
because we trust in the living God: therefore we labor, and suffer, and are
rebuked, because we trust in the living GOD. I say, do this, and thou shall
be able to do the same that Moses did, thou shall be able to do the same that
Paul did, the same that all the Saints have done. If I could but persuade you
now to trust in God, to set your faith aworke thus far, There is no man that
hears me this day, that is in any other course then in the ways of Religion
and godliness, but he would turn his course: and therefore I will labor in
this a little.

Quest.
You will ask me then what it is to trust GOD?

Ans.
I will show you a little what it is, because every man is ready to say, I trust
in GOD, but I am not able to do this that you say, when I come to such a hard
turning. Deceive not thy self, this is to trust in God, To trust in GOD what.
namely, to be vnbottomed of thy self, and of every creature, and so to lean
upon GOD, that, if he fail thee, thou sinkest. There is many a man, that
pretends he trusts in GOD; but he so trusts GOD, that withal he will provide
for himself: such a man says, GODS blessing is a good addition, but to have
that for all, he will not, he will be sure he will be strong, he will make his
Mountain strong about him, and he will have the blessings of GOD too: for
faith in the promises, he makes them good notions; but for things to trust to,
to rest on, it is a thing he will not be persuaded to. Now this is not to trust
in GOD. But this is to trust in him, when thou do so cast thy self on him,
that, if he should fail thee, thou were undone by it.

To exemplify it to you: There was an action that Alexander the Great did, (I
use it, only to express what I mean by trusting in GOD:) When he was sick,
there comes a friend that was always close with him, that was a Physician, and
he prepared him a Potion; but before the same came to him, there was a Letter
delivered to him, to signify to him, that that very Potion was poison: when
his friend came with his Potion in his hand, he takes the Letter that was sent
to give him notice of the Treason, and drinks off the Cup with one hand, and
reaches the Letter with the other, so he drank off the Cup before he showed
the Letter. Here Alexander trusted him, if he had failed him, he had lost his
life; he did not first show the Letter, and then hear his excuse for himself,
but he showed that he trusted him. In such a case, if thou be able to trust
GOD, if thou can put thy self upon him, if he fail the, thou art undone, in
such a case; this is to trust in GOD.

To use another expression, that you may know what it is.

There was a King of this Land, that sent his servant, a General of his Army,
to spare a City: he had command under the Broad Seal, from the Council, and
from the Kings own hand, to do it: and to disobey this Warrant was death: But
withal, the King sent him a secret message that he should destroy the City,
and to trust him to save his life. The party did so: The Broad-Seale and
Commission was to spare the City, to sorbeare it, The secret charge was to
destroy it: This he did, and trusted the King for his life; if he had failed
him, he had been destroyed. These similitudes show what it is to trust in GOD:
If thou be brought to such an exigent, if thou will trust GOD in such a case,
as wherein if he fail thee, thou art undone; This is to trust GOD, not to seek
his blessing so as to make that an addition, but to put all upon him.
Therefore, that you may know that this is to trust in GOD, know, that except
thou do it thus, GOD is not ready to answer thee. Therefore commonly, he puts
not forth his strength to deliver men, or to bestow upon them any great
blessing, but when he has brought men to such an exigent. And because men
will not trust in him commonly, while other props are taken away, (For we
should trust in GOD in the midst of prosperity and happiness, but because
men will not do it till then,) he strips them of all, that they may do it;
he brings a man to such a case, that he shall have nothing else to trust unto.

Quest.
What is the reason that Paul says, 2 Cor. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 1.10. opened.
We received the sentence of death, that we might learn not to trust in our
selves, but in God that raises the dead?

Answ.
GOD meant to deliver him, when he says he received the the sentence of death;
that is, there was no help in the World, that he could see, in himself, or in
any other creature; Now he was brought to trust in him, and then God answered
him in his trust: so you shall find, Zeph. 3.12.
Zeph. 3.12. I will leave among you men that are humble and poor people, and
they shall trust in the Name of the Lord.

Why did not these trust in the Lord while they were rich? Quest.


Our nature is so backward, and so exceeding deceitful, Answ.
that we cannot till other helps are gone. I will leave among you a sort of
poor people, and they shall trust in my Name. (As if he should say) When men
are brought to that, that all other things are taken away, and till then they
will not trust in him. Indeed, till then it is not trusting. And therefore in
1 Timothy 1.5. 1 Timothy 1.5.
She that is a Widow is left alone, and trusts in GOD. Till she be left alone,
till the other props be taken away, a man cannot trust in GOD. Hence it is,
that commonly when men are brought to the lowest, they are nerest to GOD, they
have best access unto him; because when they are brought to such an exigent,
then a man will pray best; and when he prays best, then he speedes best, then
faith is set on work, and it works best when it is alone, when it is stripped
of all other helps. And therefore you shall find in the Book of GOD, when
men were lowest, 2 Chro. 14.11.
they had nearest access to GOD. ^sa, when he was come against with many
thousands, he trusted upon GOD, though he went against them with half the
number, and God delivered him, because he prayed and sought to GOD, and saw
that he was not able to do any thing, he trusted in GOD. Another time, when
Asa had forgotten GOD, when he was strong, when he thought himself more able,
when he was to deal with one that had a weaker Army a great deal, the King
of Israel, he was overthrown, and shut up that he could not stir, because
he sent to the King of Aram for help. It is GODS manner to defer sending of
help till a man be brought to the Mount, as he did with Abraham; he might
have done it before; but, you know how he did with Abraham, he brought him to
the last cast. And David, he was brought to the very point of perishing by the
hands of Saul, before he delivered him. And so he did with Jacob, Esau comes
against him with four hundred men, (with a full resolution to destroy him)
before he would deliver him. It is GODS manner to do thus. And so he did
with Job, and other servants of his; his fashion is to do so, to bring men
unto the very brow of the hill, till their feet be ready to slip, when they are
even going, and then he delights to appear and deliver them. Therefore, in
such cases, trust GOD, put all upon GOD; that is, when GOD, in any turning of
thy life, brings thee to such an exigent, that thou see all at the point to
be lost, that thou art at the point to be utterly undone, learn to trust in
GOD in good earnest, and that shall guide thee, and turn thee the right way,
when thy flesh is ready to go another way.

What was the reason that CHRIST, Quest.
when he was on earth, would do nothing except they believed in him?

When thou have any thing to do, Ans.
if thou believe in God, that will make him ready to help thee, because then
it is an acknowledging, and an attributing to his power. If he should do it
in another case, he should lose his labor, he should lose his glory, men
would not be built up in him by that which he did. Therefore, make use of
faith, set faith on work, as I said. I should come to this now, to move you to
trust in GOD in all cases. If I could persuade this, men would turn the
courses of their lives, and would trust in him: for know, if thou trust in GOD,
he never fails any that trust in him, as David says, in Psalm. 37. I never saw
the righteous for saken, etc. As if he should say, Ask all his servants, ask
all men that ever have known him, all the men that have lived with him, that
have finished their course with him; ask a servant of GOD, when he comes to
dye, how GOD has dealt with him, whether he has failed him all his life; I
am persuaded that there is not a servant of GOD, but will say that he never
failed him; and, if he were to leave an exhortation behind him, he would
exhort others, from experience of his trust; It cannot be that GOD should fail
thee, if thou rest upon him. Think thou that GOD can fail thee, when he
says himself so often, he will never fail thee, nor those that trust in him?
Will a man fail one that trusts in him? We use to say, Oh I will not fail
him, for he trusts in me; and do thou think that GOD will fail thee in
such a case? If GOD should fail men in such cases* there is no man that would
seek him. But, that men should be encouraged to serve him, he has promised,
not only, not to fail thee, but he is abundant in truth, he will be better
then his word, he does what he says, and more too: If thou would trust
upon him in such a case, thou should find that he will answer thee.

Object.
But thou will say, I see not how he will do it, the case is such a hard and
difficult case.

Answ.
Thou must know that there are strange passages in GODS providence, he is able
to bring things to pass, though thou know not how it should be. See his
providence 2 Kings 5. 2 Kings 5.
The Woman there, the Shunamite, she believed the word that the Prophet had
said, that there should be seven years Famine, she left her Land and
Country, this was an act of Faith, that made her do this; See how this Woman
believed now: she followed the direction of the Prophet, she did that which GOD
appointed her to do: see how GOD brought it to pass, that the servant of
Elisha, Gehezi, should be there with the King, and that he should be telling
the King of Israel of the great act of Elisha, That there should be such a
concurrence of all things, that she should come just at that time, and no
other, when the man of GOD was there, yea, when he was telling of that very
story, that then she should come in, and so she got her Land; or else it is
likely that the Woman, having lived away so many years, it is likely she had
had a hard suite of it; but Gods providence brought these things together.

So again, look on Mordecai: It is a strange case: It was concluded, that he
and all the Jews should be slain: The Decree was gone out, there was nothing
in the World, for ought he saw, that could hinder it; the very night before
Hester was to come to the King to make her request; if it had been but a night
longer, perhaps it had failed: but that there might be a concurrence of all
this, Hester 6.
it is said in Hester 6. The King he could not sleep that night, and when he
could not sleep, he might have called for another Book then the Book of the
Chronicles; and when he had the Book brought, he might have fallen upon
another place, and not upon that where Mordecai's act was record^d, but that
there should be a concurrence of all this in that very time. Is not GOD the
same GOD? why should not we be ready to trust in him still? Do we not see
the same daily? If his Works were recorded and observed in our remembrance,
certainly we should trust in GOD.

Object.
But, you will object, The LORD does every thing by means, he does not work
Wonders, he works not Miracles now a days: And, when I see no means, I hope
you will not have me to expect Miracles at GODS hands, to tempt him.

Answ. 1.
You must remember Ahaz his case, when GOD came to Ahaz, and told him by the
Prophet Esaias; Isay 7.
Isai. chap. 7. That Aram and Remaliah's son, those two smoking Firebrarnds,
should not have their wills, should be disappointed, that he would fight for
him against them: Says the Prophet to him, Ask a sign of the Lord in the
Heaven above, or in the Deep below. No, says he, Ahaz will not tempt GOD.
What is the meaning of that? That is, I will provide for my self, I will not
trust to his Word, I will look unto my self, I will provide an Army, I will
not tempt GOD; That is, I will not go about it without means, I will look
about me; And for such a sign as resting on that promise, If I should do
this, I should tempt GOD.

See here is a fair excuse: Take heed of such excuses, say not, I shall
tempt GOD. And know, that though there be not Miracles, yet GOD he works
wonders now a days, as well as then, his hand is not shortened; now he is the
same GOD, he is as powerful as he was. It is true now as it was in David's
time, that wonderful are thy works. And CHRIST now in the time of the
Gospel, his Name is wonderful. In Isai. 9. Isay 9.
The government is upon his shoulders, and his Name shall be called
wonderful; that is, in the government of his Church he does wonderful
things; that is, when a thing seems to be never so strong and well built,
when the strength of the Enemy seems to be never so great and invincible, he
is wonderful to disappoint them.

Again, when the strength of the Church seems to be little, he can make that
effectual to do great matters, it shall do wonders: and therefore I say, GOD
is able to do wonderful things now.

Now those very things which seem wonders to men, are not Miracles, though
they may be great works.

That Wonder that Elisha said, that the next day things should be so cheap,
you see, that was reckoned so great a matter, yet it was done after an ordinary
manner: There was but a false fear scattered in the Army, and it was done.
Therefore, he that works wonders, he can do the same now.

That deliverance which the Jews had, it was a thing that may be done now.

So those wonders, those great acts which God did when men trusted in him, they
are things which he does daily now.

Therefore to answer punctually, because men do deceive themselves in that,
when we exhort them to trust in GOD, they say still, we must use the means, I
will give a threefold answer to it.

Answ. 2.
It is true that GOD uses means, but they are means of his own providing,
Consisting of 3. parts.
and but a means which thou never thoughtest of.

In such a case, it fares with us as it did with Naaman the Assyrian; when he
comes to the Prophet of GOD, he thought beforehand, that the Prophet would
have spoken some words, and have healed him; but he bids him go and wash,
which was a thing that he never thought of: So thou many times think of
these means, thou preconceiuest things in thine own heart, thou think thou
art right, thou think it must needs be done this way, thou see no other
means; but, it may be, GOD will not do it this way, but he will do it a way
that thou think not of.

So Joseph, when he was in favor with Pharaoh his Steward, one would think,
that this should have been the means of Joseph's advancement, and of bringing
to pass that promise; but this was not the means that GOD used.

Again, when that Pharaoh his chief Butler was delivered, one would think
that that should have been the means to have wrought his exaltation; but yet
these were not, there fell a means that Joseph thought not on* and so GOD does
daily.

Many times, the thing that we most trust unto, and put most confidence in,
does fail and deceive us, GOD dasheth in pieces such means, and uses other
means to help, that never came into our hearts to think of. Do we not see
it oftentimes?

Again, that means which we think will not do, oftentimes does it.
Therefore say not, I trust in GOD, that he will do it by means; for GOD
delights to do it by means.

Men are ready to say, Oh, if had such a Physician, or if I had such air, or
such means, I should do well enough: How do thou know that? It may be, GOD
will not use that.

So, those that are in distress; Oh if I had such a man to comfort me! Why
thou know not whether that be the means that GOD will use, or no. Therefore
say not, because I see not means, therefore I will not trust in GOD. I say,
GOD will do it by means, but he uses means of his own providing, and not
of thy seeking. This is the first answer to it.



Again, If it be weaker, if GOD say to such a thing, go and do this
business, it shall be able to bring it to pass: this is his blessing and his
curse; you should learn to have these words, not only in your mouths, but to
know the meaning of them; and not only so, but to come to the practice; to say
with your selves, when things are fair and probable, Except GOD bid this do
it, it shall not be effectual, if he curse it, it shall wither.

Thirdly, remember this, That his blessing Psalm. 62. Riches belong to the Lord,
they come neither from the North nor from the South: And, when riches increase,
set not your heart upon them: Says he, it is not riches that makes men happy;
for that Objection will come in.

If I had riches, Object.
I should be able to do this or that, they are the means to make a man happy,
though happiness consists not in them?

No, Ans.
(says he) when riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. (As if he
should say) If wealth would do you good, I would give you leave to set your
hearts upon it: but it is not in wealth or riches to make a man poor or rich,
but that comes of the Lord. But now comes in the Objection.

Object.
Yea, but GOD does it by means, the Lord does it by riches.

Answ.
No, GOD rewards men according to their works, not according to their wealth.
So that, when thou trustest to the means, know that GOD blesses thee
according to thy works, not according to the outward condition thou art in.
Thus we should learn to do, when we say GOD does things by means, when a man
sees the fairest means, yet, if thou find that thou have not prayed, thou have
not sought to GOD, thou have no secret assurance of his blessing, think not
that such a business will be done.

Again, when the means are low, mean, and weak, yet, if thou have sought
him earnestly, if thou have had a secret assurance of him, that he will be with
thee, let not thy heart be discouraged; do in this case, as David did, Psalm.
31.
Psalm. 31. (says he) I heard the speaking against of great men, they sat and
conspired against me, but I trusted in thee, I said, my times are in thy hands.
(Mark:) When David saw the greatest means used against him as might be, They
were great men set against him, and many of them, they joined together, they
took council against him, he was not discouraged, but says, my times are in
thy hands. If my times were in their hands, they might make me miserable, I had
reason to be discouraged at that; but my times are in thy hands: See if thou
can say this on both sides. When great men join for thy wealth, say not now,
I shall be made a great man in the World; but say, My time is in Gods hand, it
is not in their power to do it.

Again, when great men seek and consult against thee, say not now, I shall be
miserable, but consider thy times are in GODS hands, it is not in their hands
to do it.

FINIS.
OF EFFECTVALL FAITH. The sixth Sermon.
1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering your effectual Faith, etc.


We have already answered one Objection, that God works by means; we showed
after what manner: Well, if this be so, (before we leave the point) take heed
you deceive not your selves; you commonly say, GOD works things by means: The
saying is true, if thy heart be not false: for it is true, he works things by
means; but if such means come in competition, (as GOD has not appointed,
that which is unlawful for thee to do) if it come in competition with that
which GOD has set apart, in such a case thou must let such means go, else
thou may use that means, but it is the means alone, thou shall have no
encouragement in the use of them. If thou have means, encourage not thy self
so much because of them, but because thou have GOD for thy friend; Let not the
rich man rejoice in his riches, nor the strong man glory in his strength, or
the wise man joy in his wisdom, Ier. 10. but let him that glories and
rejoices, Ier. 10.
rejoice in the Lord. If they could do a man good, we might rejoice in them:
The Lord requires nothing but that which is reasonable; I dare be bold to
declare it, that if the confidence in the strength of a man were able to do
him good, he might rejoice in it. Therefore we see in that place, he says, it
comes of the Lord. As if he should say, We see by experience, when GOD will use
them as instruments, it is otherwise, then they do that which of themselves
they cannot; they do it no farther then GOD blesses them, for else they hurt,
and do no good to a man. Take heed therefore thy heart be not false, and
deceive not thy self, that thou mingle by-respects in the business; but use
the means, and depend and trust in God for the bringing it to pass; which
thou shall know by this, if thou draw near to God; for that is a trial, Ier.
17. Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm: This draws the heart from GOD; 1 Timothy 1.6.
you shall find that noted in 1 Timothy 1.6. The Widow that trusts in God
prays day and night. Therefore when thou have the best means, if thou be not
slack in prayer, it argues thy trust in GOD; when thou go to GOD, and
striuest with him by prayer, and seek not to the creature, to say thy
wealth, or riches, or the like, shall help thee. So much for the answer to the
first Objection.

Another thing that we are ready to object, Object.
is, But what if such a thing should come to pass? what if the evil that I
fear should fall upon me? what if the business I go about proceed not, which
is of that moment, I am undone, if it be not done?

Herein the heart of a man must be quiet. Ans.


First, It may be thou art too hasty in this kind; many times thou think in
such cases, that thou art without help and without hope, when it is not so:
Know therefore, that a man may be under water and rise again, he may sink
twice or thrice before he be drowned; thou may receive many foiles, many
blows, and yet not lose the victory. The best Saints have been under the
cloud for a great while, but they were not destroyed, they perished not: So was
Joseph, so was David* so were all. Therefore put the case that thou fall into
the particular ill, that the evil which thou fear, fall upon thee, cast not
away thy confidence, GOD may help thee, he may come between the cup and the
lip, as often it is seen. It is his usual manner to appear in the Mount, and
not before. It was a Proverb in Israel, The LORD will be seen in the Mount;
not so much because it was a common speech, but because it was commonly done,
it was a thing that GOD used to do. Therefore be not discouraged too soon, GOD
may help thee, as low as thou art. Suppose this do come to pass, as a man's
heart will never be at rest, till he suppose that which he would not be content
should be so: and hence comes disquiet in a man's heart, if it do come, he has
not resolution to bear the perplexity. Therefore in such a case, if thou
suppose it will be so, do as Hester did; resolve, If I perish, I perish. The
meaning is, If I perish, I shall not perish: when she says, If I perish, I
perish, she means not such a matter as we say in our common speech; but, if it
will come to pass, let it come to pass: so Hester, If I perish, I perish: She
knew it was a good work that she went about, and she knew she should have a
reward for it. It is not such a thing to lose the life, as men think it is: If
we look upon it with the eye of faith, it is no such matter. And so the three
Children, they care not what should become of them; They knew not whether GOD
would deliver them, or no; but if he would not, they resolved to bear it, and
so should we do.

But, Object.
you will say, a man is not able to do this.

If thou did know the reason, Ans.
it would move thee. Therefore labor to work thy heart to consider, that all
these worst things that befall thee, may be good enough; and if thou have not
learned before, learn now: Mark what Paul says, We are afflicted, but not
overcome; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but we perish not; ever
dying, but yet behold we live; sorry, and yet we rejoice. That is, there is
somewhat that sustaines us in the worst dangers, somewhat that keeps us from
sinking: And Paul, he is as good as his word; what he says there, we see by
his carriage; we see in what a manner he went through all, all was nothing,
persecution was nothing, but what he did in such a case, he had GOD stood
actually by him, and said, Fear not, Paul, I have much people there, when he
sent him into Macedonia.

But thou say, Object.
thou have nothing to bear it.

Consider, Ans.
whatsoever thy case be, If the thing do so fall out, thou should be ready
to say, this is not so desperate, but it may be helped; it is not so heavy,
but it may be borne; it is not so miserable a case, but it may be happy; and
lastly, it is not so bad, but it may be good for me.

First, There is no case so desperate, but it may be helped* Put the case thy
name, which is so tender a thing, which is like unto glass, which if it be
broke, cannot be made up again; Suppose it be broken all in pieces in the
World, GOD shall make it up. Joseph, his name could not be made up again, and
he cleared as innocent of all; but GOD cleared him. David now by his great
sins, he brake his good name, so that now it was not an easy thing to heal
David's name; yet God did it abundantly, and he dyed full of riches and honor:
It was forgotten as a thing that had never been; when he had gotten credit
with GOD, he got credit with men.

And so for poverty: It is not easy for a man to be rich, riches have wings.
It is true, riches have wings to fly to a man, if God bid them come, as well
as they have wings to fly from a man, if GOD bid them leave him.

Again, what if such a man be thine enemy? There is no man that is such an
enemy but GOD can soon make him a friend, as we see in Jacob and Esau. Let the
case be what it will: you know Jobs case, there was all extremity of misery
upon him, that, if a man should look upon him, he would think it impossible
to help him, yet you see what GOD did.

Again, I say, it is not so heavy but it may be borne: we see how Paul bore
all his afflictions, (we see it in other instances, which before we reckoned
up: 2 Cor. 11.
) in 2 Cor. 11. See how he was stoned, how he was scourged, and imprisoned,
the troubles that he had within him: the care of all the Churches was upon
him, and who was afflicted, and he did not burn? It was to him as a fire to a
man, it scorched him; and yet you shall see, that he bore them in such a
manner, that if a man were to choose Paul's comforts with his afflictions, he
should make a good choice to take the one with the other. Paul, in the presence
of Nero, is not daunted, who was a wicked Tyrant. So David, he was in a
miserable case at Ziglag, he had lost his Wives, and all that he had, he had no
help, but ^ few (600.) men, and yet they would have stoned him too: this was
nothing to him, when God had settled his spirit with comfort, he comforted
himself in the LORD. So in any case, if God keep a whole spirit in thee, it
is no matter.

Take a Plaster that is sharp, Simile.
if you lay it to a sore place, it will smart and grieve it, but lay it to the
whole flesh, it is nothing: So it is with afflictions, when thy soul is whole,
it is like a whole shoulder; lay a heavy burden upon a whole shoulder, and it
goes away with it well enough: But if the soul and spirit be broken, it is not
fit to bear a cross. If GOD enable a man, it is another thing; then, disease
is nothing, imprisonment is nothing, and disgrace is nothing; when GOD enables
a man to bear it, it is nothing: therefore it is not so heavy but it may be
borne.

Again, it is not so miserable, but thou may be happy in it. Why? The
reason is in Romans 8. Romans 8.
Because, whatsoever it be, it shall not separate us from the love of God in
CHRIST: neither principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, neither men, nor devils: In such a case, the Devil, with all his forces
set against thee, shall not be able to make thee miserable, thou art a happy
man notwithstanding, he shall not be able to hurt thee, GOD loves thee still,
and loves thee tenderly, thou art dear to him at all times. Therefore
whatsoever it is, it shall not separate thee from the love of God in Christ:
and when he could name no more, he names in general; says he, neither men,
nor Devils, nor any thing shall do it.

Again, it is not so bad, (I say) but it may be best for thee, it may do thee
good: for our nature is so rebellious, and so set upon things of this world,
that except God should take this course, to work a weariness in the World, to
mortify our lusts, if GOD should not take such courses, our nature would be
ready to rebel: therefore GOD deals so with men. Sometimes he afflicts thee
with sickness, sharp sickness, which is irksome to thee; but know, that if
that disease were taken from thee, thou know not what thy heart would do.
Some men be afflicted with enmity of others; thou know not, if thou were
friends with all men, how thou should be. Thou art afflicted in the world,
in thy wife, in thy children, in thy neighbors, in thy name, in thy estate,
and though thou think with thy self, If I were free from this, I should be
happy, I should be humble, I should serve GOD the better; I say unto thee,
thou know not what thou should be: A man's mind does not know what it
would be in another estate, only he knows the present. If thou had such
and such circumstances, if thou had wealth, if thou had such crosses
removed, if all things should go well with thee, Oh then thou would be
happy: but thou know not what thou should be. You know what the Prophet
said to Hazael: (says he) Do thou know what thou shall be when thou art
King of Aram? Thou know how thou art affected now, but thou know not how
thou shall be then, when thou art a King, then thou will be answerable to thy
state and condition. So much for the second Objection.

Thirdly, Object.
it will be objected; It is true, if GOD did hear my prayers, Concerning Gods
hearing our prayers.
or if he did usually hear the Prayers that the Saints make, that it were no
more but seek and have, we would trust in GOD in difficult cases: But I find
by experience, that I pray, and he does not answer me: and it is not my
experience only, but it is the experience of others likewise; they pray, and
GOD does not hear their prayers; what should sustain me therefore now?

Ans.
To this I answer; It is certain that GOD always hears thy prayers, there is
no doubt to be made of that; he is a God hearing prayers, and has made a
promise, that when they come, he will hear them: Be assured therefore that he
hears. But now to answer thee.

First, there are many cases wherein GOD hears not: Why God hears not
sometimes.
as first, it may be thou ask amiss.

Object.
But thou will say, My heart is right; and therefore I hope I ask not amiss.

Ans.
Yes, though thy heart be right, thou may ask amiss, When we ask amiss.
out of mistake, out of want of judgment; thou must not think with thy self,
because thy affection is strong to such a thing, therefore it is lawful for
thee, and meet for thee to have it. There are many things which a little
child asks, which are not meet for him; a wise Father will not second his
child in all that he affects and desires: thou must think that God will not
do it in these cases. And therefore learn in such a case when thou come to
GOD for outward things, or for the measure of grace, or for the present use of
grace (as you shall hear hereafter) it may be he answers thee not; yet thou
must acknowledge GOD to be only wise. If we could remember that in 1 Timothy
1.19. To the King only wise, be glory and immortality: we think our selves
wise too, we think that we have some part of wisdom; but if we did believe
that he were only wise, that is, if thou did believe that none were wise
but he, thou would be content toresigne thy self unto him, let him do with
thee what he will, although thou see no reason, yet thou would be content.
Therefore when thou come to ask at Gods hands, thou should be ready to
say thus; LORD, I see no reason why this should not be good, and yet I may be
deceived, I may be mistaken: Therefore I will not ask it absolutely; It may be
the want of it is better for me then the enjoying of it; it may be, to be
crossed in it, is better for me then to have success in it: thou art only
wise, I am not able to judge: and therefore when we come to ask any thing of
GOD, thus we should do. Paul, when he comes to ask the mortification of his
fleshly lusts, 2 Cor. 12.
2 Cor. 12. one would think he might have asked that absolutely, we cannot see
how GOD should not hear that prayer, and yet in that case Paul was mistaken,
GOD saw it was best to suffer that lust to continue upon him, and to contend
with him; thou shall not be free from this strong temptation; for, says he, by
this I will humble thee, thou shall have a better grace then thou should
have if that lust were taken away: when Paul saw that the continuance of that
upon him, it humbled him more, that it brought more glory to God, that it
showed Gods power in his weakness, he was content, he saw that he was
deceived before: I say, in such a case a man may be deceived, much more in
outward things. You know, the Disciples, when they came to ask fire to come
down from Heaven, they thought it was a zealous request; but CHRIST tells them
that they were deceived, they knew not from what Spirit that request did come;
If it had come from GODS Spirit, he would have heard it, but they were
deceived: So if thou would have GOD hear thy prayer, know whether they come
from Gods Spirit, whether thy prayers be the voice of thine own spirit, or of
Gods Spirit; if it be the voice of GODS Spirit, he hears it always, because
it asks according to his will; our spirits may ask that which is good, but
not that which is fit at this time.

When we are not fitted for mercies.
Secondly, he will hear thee, but it may be, thou art not yet fit for the
mercy, not because he does not hear thy prayer, and tender thee in that case
thou art in, but thou ar^ not yet fit, herein GOD deals with us as the
Physician deals with his Patient; The Patient earnestly desires such and such
things; The Physician wants not will to give them him, but he resolves to give
them as soon as he is fit: and therefore he makes him stay till he have
purged him, and made him fit for it, till he be fit for such a Cordial, for
such a Medicine, that it may not hurt him: it may be GOD stays thee. So the
men of Benjamin, they were fitted when they had fasted and prayed three times;
when they had fasted once and twice, they adventured, and prevailed not till
the third time. So GOD defers long: What if thou fast and pray, and GOD do not
hear thee, yet conclude not with thy self, that thou art not yet fit. There
is somewhat more that must be done. David, a man would think that he had been
fitted for the Kingdom before that time, but GOD deferred it until David was
humbled enough, till he was broken enough, till GOD had provided a Kingdom, as
he promised.

And so he did with Joseph, and so with the people of Is^ael; they were kept
long in bondage, they were long pressed, before they were fit to be delivered:
GOD tendered his people then, he had no delight in their afflictions. And so we
may see in the whole Book of the Judges, how God suffered his people to be
afflicted, to fit them for deliverance. So think with thy self, thou art not
fitted yet; and if thou would go by a rule, 1 Pet. 5.6.
see the rule, 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your selves under his mighty hand that he may
exalt you in due time. (Mark, whenever God lays any affliction upon any
man, his end is to humble him. And if the work be done, he will perform that
which he has promised, as soon as thou art humbled, he will exalt thee:
therefore that word is added, he will exalt you in due time, not when thou
think he will beforehand, for GOD is wise, and will do it in due time, if
he should defer it beyond the time when thou art fitted, he should not do it
in due time, but beyond the time.

Again, if he should send deliverance before thou art fit, it were not in due
time, it would come too soon: But assure thy self, when thy heart is humbled
and weakened from the world, when thy lusts are mortified, and when thou art
made spiritual and heauenly-minded by such afflictions, be sure, GOD will not
defer one jot, he will come in the exactness of time, that as it is said, in
the fullness of time his Son came, so it is in the fullness of time before he
will save thee, in the fittest time. Therefore I would say to thee, whosoever
thou art, that suest to GOD for pleasure, for honor, it may be, to be relieved
in thy state, for health, for life, or for comfort; I say, GOD has made a
promise, and it is impossible that he should fail in the performance of of it,
Prou. 22.4.
as Solomon says, Prou. 22.4. Riches, and honor, and life shall he give; but
to to whom? to him that is humble, and that fears the Lord. You must put in
both the conditions. Many men fear the LORD, which are not humbled; and some
men are humbled, but they have some secret way of wickedness, wherein they are
induldent to themselves; but they must go both together. Let a man be holy,
that he may have no way of wickedness in himself, and let him be humbled, or
else GOD may bestow wealth on thee, but if thy heart be not holy, thou will
forget GOD in it. And if he give thee health, if thy heart be not humbled, thou will be ready to use it intemperately, thou know not thine own heart: but
be assured, when thou come to God, he hears the requests that are made by
his Spirit, that if thou be prepared, he will not deny thee, the promise is
absolute, let the condition be fulfilled: for those are the words, The reward
of humility, and the fear of God, is riches, and honor, and life: Except not
these, when there is not the precedent preparation: for it is not best for thee.

Thirdly, To make us pray fervently
it may be GOD does it not because there is a defect in thy prayer, he will
have thee pray more fervently, that condition is put in, Iam. 5.
Iam. 5. The prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent. Indeed
GOD might bestow blessings upon us for the mere asking, if we did but make our
requests known; yet he is pleased to require that condition that our prayers
be fervent, and he defers the giving of the blessing until we be quickened: and
therefore he defers oft-times, to inhance, and to cause us to prize his
blessings, (lightly come, lightly gone, as we use to say.) Things that come
easily, we willingly part with, but GOD will have us prize them high: and
therefore we must beg them earnestly, he holds them back to affect our
appetites, to make us contend with him in prayer; or else why did he defer
to grant the Woman of Canaans request, why did he defer to give Jacob
deliverance from his brother Esau? if he had done it in the beginning, Jacob
had not so wrastled, he had not done that excellent duty of prayer all night.
When Hannah comes to ask a son of the Lord, he has given to many with less
ado, but he would not grant it her till her spirit was troubled, till she
prayed earnestly with contention and violence, that Ely thought she was drunk:
No, said she, but I am a woman troubled in spirit: they must be earnest, those
prayers that God will have at thy hands; and if thou be not heard, go and mend
thy prayers that thou may mend thy speeding; quicken thy prayers, as thou
labourest to make thy heart more righteous, that thou may be fit. The
prayers of the righteous prevail much, if they be fervent: so pray more
fervently.

When it crosses Gods providence otherwise.
Fourthly, it may be God hears thee, but it crosses some other secret passage
of his providence. There are many things that GOD the great Governor of the
world must bring together; and though thou see no reason why he should not
hear thee, yet it may be he will discover unto thee, that the sum of all
things being put together, thou shall see that it is not best for thee to be
heard. David now, when he comes to ask a request at Gods hands, that he might
build him a Temple, it was a thing that he desired, and he made no question but
that it was according to Gods will* and Nathan was of that opinion too, Go,
says he, and do all that is in thine heart: David did not know what belonged
to that business, because no man can judge of those things that GOD has
appointed to bring to pass, a man cannot see round about all the corners of
GODS providence, no man is able to see it: we see not the concurrence of
things, how one thing stands with another. And therefore we ought not to look
in such cases to be heard; as the Wisemen, they thought it fit to have returned
by the way they came, but God saw a reason to turn them another way. Therefore
be not hasty in thy requests, but know that GOD is wise, and will work all for
the best, his glory must go in all, and one thing must be done, that his end
may be brought to pass in all.

Again, it may be God will grant thy request; but for the manner, and the
means by which he will do it, and for the time, it is in his own power. But
because these things are known, I will not stand to press them farrher: but
now I come to the last Objection.

Last of all, Object.
you will be ready to say, It is true, I would trust in God, About the
prosperity of wicked men, and the Saints afflictions.
if he did always show mercy for my sake, If I saw the Saints always bring
their enterprises to pass, If I did see it still well with them that trust in
him, but I find it contrary for the most part: It is ill with them that trust
in the Lord, and evil men prosper; and therefore what encouragement have I to
trust in GOD in this manner as you exhort me to do, when I am brought to such
an exigent, to such a case that my life or my goods are in hazard, or my name,
it is not my best way so to do: I see by experience, that those that are wise
men, politic men, and those that have the greatest means, they prosper, when
as other men that fear GOD, do not bring thy devices to pass.

I will answer this, and so will have done with the point.

First, I answer, it is true, that ill men ofttimes do prosper, and that good
men many times do not succeed; I say, we will not deny it: for we see the
Scripture is plentiful, Psalm. 37. Psalm. 37.
Fear not the man that brings his enterprises to pass: where it is supposed
that they do so. Ier. 12.1.
In Ier. 12.1. Why do the wicked prosper? where the Prophet sets out in
particular how they prosper; he says, they grow and take root, they spring,
and bring forth fruit. And you know what Solomon says, who was a wise man, and
looked through many events that fall out under the Sun: Eccles. 8.14.
Eccles. 8.14. I have seen this venity, (says he) that where should have
been Justice, there has been wickedness, and it has come unto the just as
unto the wicked: I have seen the Battle has not been to the strong, nor
bread to the wise. And so he goes along, as you know well. He sets out in that
Book plentifully, that evil men may prosper long, and may exceedingly bring
their enterprises to pass.

Again, on the other side, the Saints may not prosper, and that in those
things which they do according to Gods will. When Christ sent his Disciples
over the Water, and bade them go to the other side, yet they rowed all night,
there was a great storm, that they could do no good, so that they were in
great jeopardy and danger, and yet it was his own appointment: So, I say, thou
may go about a business, and yet find such storms, such contrary winds
and waves, such streams running against thee, that thou may be exceedingly
hazarded, though GOD himself set thee on work. When Paul went to Macedonia,
you see GOD called him from another place, and bade him go thither: you shall
not find that Paul was the better used; nay, you shall find, that for the
time, he seemed to do less good there of any place, there were few that
believed in GOD. And Peter, when he came to CHRIST on the water, he had a
warrant for it, he did that which was a fruit of his faith, yet for all that he
sunk, he began to sink, till CHRIST put forth his hand, and was saine to
help him. Therefore I say, you may go about Gods business, and yet it may
not prosper. Therefore we must set down that conclusion; it is a great light
to know that it is so. The Wiseman gives the reason of it, Eccles. 7.14.
Eccles. 7.14.
(Says he) Thou shall find great variety, thou shall find some times, good
times: and in the day of wealth, when thou have it, rejoice.

Again, another time afflictions will come, know that GOD has done this for
some purpose: He has made this contrary to that, that thou should find
nothing after him. That is, that all the world may see that his ways and his
actions are past finding out. If God should deal always after this manner,
you might know where to have him in his ways: If he should always give
affliction to sinners, a man might say, surely GOD will do this: but it is not
so, he has made this contrary to the other; that is, he takes different
courses with men, he has made this contrary to that, that men should not find
the print of his footsteps: to say that GOD will certainly do this another
time. Therefore he adds those words, which do immediately follow, that none
might find out any thing after him: I have seen the just perish in his
Justice, and I have seen a wicked man go on long in his malice. This God has
done, that men might know to fear before him, that men might learn to cry out
with Paul, Oh the depth of his wisdom, and understanding, and his ways are
past finding out; that men might tremble before GOD, and acknowledge his
wisdom. But I come now to a particular answer: for it is a point worthy the
answering, it is a point that will stand us in much stead, when we meet with
many such objections as man's heart will have in that case. Therefore I answer
particularly and briefly.

First, We must not judge by Gods outward proceedings.
though GOD do so, yet remember that thou must not judge any thing, till thou
see he have finished the work: thou will not judge a man's work till he have
done it: If a man go about to build, judge not his work till it be done,
because thou see not for what end many things are framed and made, will thou
therefore say that he is an unskillful builder? it were folly to do so, but
stay till he have finished work, and then see how one part answers with
another, and in what proportion. So in all the works of GOD, if thou see it
go well with those that are ill, and those that are good are afflicted, stay
till thou see GOD have finished his work.

And therefore I say to thee in this case, as Saint James says; Know ye not
what end the Lord made with Job? So mark what end the Lord makes, as with Job,
so with all the Saints; know what is their ends. And otherwise take all the
evil men, as Jeroboam and Saul, and see what end the LORD made with them;
their prosperity was as a pleasant Dream, which was soon gone; as the flower
of the grass upon the house top, which withers: Look to the end of things.
I cannot stand on it.

Secondly, though the wicked prosper, yet their prosperity hurts them as much
as affliction and adversity does good to the godly, their prosperity slays
them, whereas the afflictions of the other benefits them: if thou find this to
be thy case, that thou prosper, and that thou see thou go on in sin,
thou have no cause to rejoice in this; or if thou see other men prosper,
think them not happy for this, it is out of mistake, It is the miserablest
condition in the world; you know what GOD did to Hophni and Phineas, he did not
afflict them, he let them go long, he sent them no disease, he interrupted
not their course: What was the reason? He had a purpose to destroy them.

So again when thou do not succeed in thy matters, but art crossed, yet so
long as that will do thee good, what need thou care?

Object.
But, you will object, My afflictions are great, and many, and therefore how
shall I bear them?

Answ.
I will instruct thee; I say thou have need of strong afflictions. We have need
of long and strong afflictictions.
Some Colts are so untamed, they must needs be broken so some corruptions are
so unruly, that they will not be wrought out without great afflictions.

Again, thou need many afflictions, because the corruptions of thy heart
are of diverse sorts, and if there were but one affliction, it would not serve
the turn.

Again, thou have need that afflictions should continue long, because sin
is very natural; some are hidden, and long a breeding, and cannot easily be
removed. Therefore what though thy afflictions be so, Dan. 11.7.
as is is said Dan. 11.7. They shall fall by the Sword, by the Famine, by
Captivity many days. These were men of understanding, holy men, yet they had
great afflictions of diverse sorts, Sword and Famine, such as James speaks of,
and long afflictions for many days. Now all this was to do them good, to try
them, to purge them, to make them white. So when those afflictions are to do
thee good, and their prosperity for their hurt, let this satisfy thee.

Thirdly consider, that though they do prosper, and godly men do not so, yet
their low estate, their imprisonment, their poverty, their obscurity, the
disgrace which they are under, this is better to them, then the honor, and the
pomp, the titles and the riches that evil men have. I can but name these
things. Psalm. 37. A little that the righteous has, is better then the riches
of many wicked. What is the meaning of that? That is, they have more comfort in
that little, then the other have in their fair Palaces, in their great
states; thou may have more comfort in a little, then they have in their
abundance; thou may have more comfort in obscurity, as Paul says, as not
known, though a man be obscure, yet if he be known to GOD, and to men's
consciences, he is of greater eminency then those that are in the highest
place. So though thou have poor possessions in outward things, though thou be
melancholique, and always sorry, yet that little, that very condition is
better to thee then the outward condition is to the other.

Fourthly, in perilous times this is a great difference: for though a man have
prosperity, yet certainly, a hard time will come, a time of sickness, and of
temptation, and of death will befall us: Psalm 37.
Psalm. 37. In perrilous times they shall be confounded: here is the difference:
and they shall melt as fat: that is, In such a time their hearts shall faint,
and such men have nothing to sustain them; they shall be confounded in such a
time, they shall not know what to do.

Quest.
But now you will say, What perrilous time is that, when GOD will deal so with
them, you will say, in those perrilous times, for ought we see, the Sword
deuoures one as well as another; certainly, it sweepes away one as well as
another: Sickness, when it comes, it sweepes away one as well as another: And
therefore in the perrilous time, I see no difference between the godly and the
wicked.

Answ.
I answer, There is difference when the same affliction falls upon both. Ier.
24. Difference between the Saints and others in the same afflictions.
Look in Ier. 24. you shall find there, that both were carried away captives,
good men and bad men, the whole Chapter is spent in it; it is but a short
Chapter: See there what is the difference there is in the same afflictions
which fell to both: says he, There were two Baskets, the one was full of good
Figs, the other was full of bad, which could not be eaten for badnesse, look
in the Text, you shall find that both were carried away captive, but here is
the difference, they were carried both in an indifferent manner, (says he) you
shall be carried captive as well as the other, the good Figs in the Basket, but
I will know you, mine eyes shall be upon you to do you good, and I will bring
you back in due season, and I will plant you in captivity, and you shall grow;
and I will build you, and you shall not be destroyed; and I will give you a
heart to know me in that condition; and I will be your GOD, and you shall be my
people: all this will I do to you, although you be in the same affliction. And
what will he do to the other? They shall be carried in a Basket into
captivity, but, says the Lord, I will make you a reproach, I will make you a
curse, I will make you a common talk, I will destroy you when you come into
captivity, with the Sword, with Famine, with Pestilence, mine eyes shall be on
you for ill in such a case. So I say, the same Beesome of destruction may
sweep away both, the same Sword may devour both, the same disease may seize
upon both, there is no great difference outwardly in the same affliction; both
may die, and is there not great difference in their death? both may be sick,
and is there not a great difference? In the one his heart is made glad and
light in Gods countenance, in his Beloved; when as the other has nothing to
hold him up: The one has the consolation of the Spirit, the other wants it.

Again, consider in affliction there is great difference, as you shall find
this difference between the condition of the Saints and others, although their
outward condition seem to be alike; The evil man stands in slippery places,
and his condition is uncertain, and it is a great misery to be uncertain,
for a man's condition to be ready to be blown down with such a wind, he
knows not how long he shall continue and stand; so they stand in slippery
places. The other, those that are built on Christ, are like the house built on
the Rock, they are sure it shall be well with them.

Again, afflictions that come to the wicked, they come suddenly. Therefore it
is a thing proper to the wicked, Prou. 1.27.
Prou. 1.27. Their desolation shall come suddenly, and their destruction as a
whirlewind: Why, is it not so with the godly? do not they often perish by
sudden death? does it not fall on them? do not sudden changes come to them as
well as to the others? No: Things are sudden, not from their suddenness, but
from the want of the preparation of the person that they fall upon: therefore
GOD will not send affliction upon his children till he have prepared them; he
will prepare them, and then it is no matter if they come suddenly, it is no
matter though he strike them suddenly before they be aware; when he has fitted
them, it comes not suddenly, Death comes not upon them as a snare: that is to
be taken in a snare properly, when the Beast is taken in a snare by the
Huntsman, or by the Fowler, who means their destruction; so afflictions come
upon evil men as a snare, when as they are taken in an evil Net, Satan takes
them there to destroy them eternally.

Again, Afflictions easy to the godly.
the afflictions of the godly are not so heavy to them, as the afflictions of
the wicked are; GOD afflicts them in the branches, not in the root; they
drink of the Cup, but not of the dregs; but as for the wicked, he smites them
so, as that he smites them not the second time, that they roar for his wrath:
Psalm. 31.24. Psalm. 21.34.
The godly, though he fall, yet shall he rise again, he shall not be cast
off, the Lord puts under his hand: That is, though the godly fall into
affliction, yet he is not broken in the fall, GOD puts under his hand, he falls
soft, he falls not so as to break his neck, to be undone; so there is that
difference. So that, though GOD do the same act to both, yet he does it to the
one for love, to the other he does the same act for destruction. Simile.
Like to a man that loppes Trees; there is a certain season in the year, when
if he loppe his Trees, they will be the better for it, if they be lopped in due
season, they are the better; loppe them at another time, and they will wither:
So God comes to the wicked man in the unfittest time to him, a time when they
look not for him, a time that the wicked men fear least, then he comes just
as a Thief does in the worst, and most dangerous time of all for the owner of
the house, then comes the Thief, he pickes out that time: So GOD comes upon
the wicked, and afflicts them when they are in peace and prosperity: take heed
that he loppe thee not at that time when thou shall wither to destruction, when
thou art not prepared. So the Scripture says, sudden destruction comes
vpwicked men: So that suddenness is when men are not prepared. And so when God
says, will free the godly from sudden death, his meaning is, he will prepare
him, and fit him for death. Put all these together, That the wicked bring their
enterprises to pass, that the godly are crossed and afflicted, that GOD has a
special end in this, that death, affliction, and sickness come suddenly upon
none but wicked men, and it will give satisfaction to any man. I should come
now to press the point, but the time is past, I cannot do it. So much shall
serve for the second Use, for the answering of the Objections.

Faith must be improued to increase sanctification.
The third thing to set faith on work in, is to sanctify you, to mortify your
lusts, to revive and strengthen you in the inward man, and to make it quick in
every good work. This point I intended to handle at this time. Faith is
exceeding effectual to do this. I will touch it but in one word, I will not
hold you long. Set faith aworke to sanctify thy heart.

Quest.
You will ask me, How shall I do it?

Faith does it diverse ways, Ans.
I cannot go through them: How Faith sanctifies the heart.
Set faith a work, to believe the forgiveness of thy sins, to believe the
love of GOD toward thee, to believe the promises, and thou shall find that
these will sanctify thy heart, this act of faith will purify thy-heart. But
how can that be? Because this shall turn thy heart from thy sins, to GOD:
for there is no way to mortify lusts, and to quicken thy heart, but by causing
thee to delight in GOD. No man can have his heart weaned from sin, divorced
from sin which he has been wedded to all his life, except he find another
Husband, in whom he may delight more. Now the more thou beleeuest that God is
thine, the more thou beleeuest that thy sins are forgiven, the more thou can
set faith on work to do this, the more victory thou shall get over thy
sins, that is the nature of man's disposition, that still it desires that
object that is amiable and pleasant. Now if thou look on GOD as a Judge, that
will turn thee away from him, that makes thee continue still in sin; but when
thou look upon him as upon one that loves thee, as one that favors thee,
as one that is thy friend, that accepts thee, this will win thine heart, this
will cause a man's heart to turn from sin, to turn from darkness to light, it
will make him to leave the ways wherein he delighted before, it will divorce a
man's heart from the sin wherein it has taken pleasure a long time, so that
it shall never get the victory over it. Therefore the best way in such a case,
is to set faith aworke to believe the forgiveness of sins; remember the
promises of GOD, those promises you have heard often, that God will forgive thy
sins, that he will pardon thee, take these promises, and apply them; see GOD
ready to forgive, this will turn thy heart from sin, thou shall find sin
dye and wither in thee, and thy heart to grow and be quickened in grace: you
know, that to get a loving heart, is to believe that GOD loves us, to believe
that our sins are forgiven. Now I say, there is nothing that weakneth sin
indeed, but to love GOD; whatsoever sin is weakened by other means then by
love to GOD, by turning the heart to him by repentance and mortification, that
sin lies hid, though it seem no way to increase: this increases love, when
we believe the promise of GOD, that he is ready to forgive, that is effectual
for this purpose. When CHRIST came to Peter, and said unto him, Love thou me?
then, says he, feed my Sheep. So after this manner, when thou once beleeuest
that GOD loves thee, and can bring thy heart to love him again, if now
CHRIST should come to thee, and say, Love thou me, who loved thee, and gave
my self for thee? If thou do love me, disdain such a thing which I hate,
do not such things as will grieve me; keep my Commandments, keep my
Sabbaths; if thou love me, let not thy conversation be in wantonness, in
strife and envying; it thou love me, labor to bring some glory to my Name, and
to do some good to mankind; if thou love me, be diligent in thy Calling; if
thou love me, honor me, do good to others, do good to thy self with it.
Let a man go through all the particulars of sin, and he would abstain from
it, if he would set faith on work this way to sanctify his heart.

Again, faith does it by ouercomming the World, that when a man is drawn, one
of these two things draws him, Either some offer of some great benefit, or
some great evil which he is put in fear of: now when he looks, and sees
that GOD is able to keep him when men do their worst, and that he can give
him a heavenly Kingdom, when he looks to the promise, he is above the World.

Again, he not only ouercomes riches, but he makes advantage of them; he not
only loves them as a slave, but he gets the victory over them, and he gets
service from them. And so when men can make their recreations to serve their
turns for better purposes, when a man not only ouercomes them, gets the
victory of them, but makes them serviceable, so a man make advantage of the
World.

Again, when thou would have thy sanctification increased, increase thy
faith. The more thou beleeuest, the more the Spirit of Christ is conveyed into
thy heart. The stronger thy faith is, the more the wind of grace, the sap
shall flow from CHRIST into thy heart. As old Adams corruption, it is with the
grace of CHRIST, when thou come near, thou art ingraft into the similitude
of his death; that is, there comes a gift from him, he sends his Spirit into
thy heart, that does make thee joy in him, that causes thee to dye to sin, and
to live to righteousness. This I thought to have opened: But so much shall
serve for this time, and for this Text.

FINIS.
OF LOVE. THE FIRST SERMON.
GALLAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


IN the fourth verse of this chapter the Apostle affirms, that there is no
justification by the law; for, says he, If you be justified by the law, you
are fallen from grace: that is, you cannot be partakers of that justification
which is by grace: Because for to have it by the law, and to have it by grace
are opposite. And he gives a reason for it, because, says he, Through the
Spirit we wait for the hope of that righteousness which is by faith, and not by
the law. When he had expressed himself so far, which is the righteousness
received by faith, that is, that righteousness which is freely given by God,
offered to us, wrought by Christ, but taken by faith on our parts: Thus says
he, you must be justified. Now to confirm this, he gives a reason in this
verse that I have read; for, says he, In Christ Jesus, (that is, to put a man
into Christ Jesus, or to make him acceptable to God through Christ Jesus, to
do this) neither circumcision avails any thing, or uncircumcision: (That is,
neither the keeping of any part of the ceremonial law, or the omission of it,
nor the keeping of the moral law, or the breaking of it will help to ingraffe
a man into Christ, or to make him acceptable to God through Christ: What will
do it then? nothing says he) but only faith. Now lest we should be mistaken
in this, as if he should require nothing at their hands but an empty idle
faith, he adds further, it must be such a faith as is effectual, as is
working: And that is not enough, but it must be such a faith as works by love.
So that you have two parts in this Text: One is a removal or a negation of
that which does not ingraffe us into Christ, or that makes us not acceptable to
God through Christ; it is not being circumcised or uncircumcised, or any thing
of that nature: The other is the affirmative part; What is it that does it,
that makes us in a glorious condition, that makes us sons of God? says he,
it is only faith and love, it is such a faith as is accompanied with love and
good works; so that you see he removes all works of ours, all works of the
ceremonial law, circumcision is nothing, it is as good as if you were not
circumcised, it is all one. And by the same reason that circumcision is
excluded, all other is. And not only works of the ceremonial law, but all
the works of the moral law also considered as the means of justification;
because they are opposite to faith, they exclude faith, and faith excludes
them, so as they are as well to be shut out as the works of the ceremonial
law. None of these says the Apostle, will do it. For you must know the way to
salvation is contrary to that of damnation: Look how you lost the kingdom of
God, so you must get it, look what gate you went out at, by the same gate (as
it were) you must come in at. What was it that lost all mankind the kingdom of
heaven? You know it was not our particular breaches of the moral law, but it
was the fall of Adam, and when the root was dead, you know, all the branches
died with it. Well, what way is there then to regaine this loss? We must go
in again into Paradise by the same way that we went out, that is, by being
borne of the second Adam, and by being made partakers of his righteousness: By
being borne of him, or ingrafted into him. As you communicate of the sin of
the other, because you are his children, so you must partake of his
righteousness. Again, says the Apostle, it is the Lords pleasure that you
should be saved after this manner, because he would have it to be of grace. If
you should have been saved by any works of your own, you would have imputed
it to your selves, and to your own strength: But the Lord would have it to be
of grace, of his free will, and therefore he will have it merely of faith, by
taking the righteousness of the second Adam which he has wrought for you.
Again, he would have it sure to all your seed: if it had been by works, it
would never have been sure unto you, you could never have kept the law so
exactly: But since Christ has wrought righteousness, and you have no more to
do but to take it, now it is sure, or else it would never have been sure.
Again, if it had been by works, the flesh had had wherein to rejoice, it
might have something to boast of: But the Lord will have no man to rejoice in
the flesh; but let him that rejoices, rejoice in the Lord. Now if it had been
by works, if it had been by any inherent righteousness, by any ornament of
grace that the Lord had beautified us with, we had had rejoicing in our selves;
but now that it is by the second Adam, by coming home to him, by taking him,
by applying his righteousness: Now no flesh can rejoice in it self, but now
whosoever rejoices, rejoices in the Lord. Therefore says the Apostle, you
must know this truth, you can never be saved by doing these actions, no nor you
shall not lose salvation by omitting them, for this is not the way that the
Lord has appointed mankind to be saved by: But the way by which mankind must
be saved, is by receiving Jesus Christ and his righteousness. But you must
remember that you must take him so as to love him. And it must be such a love
as is fruitful in good works, and not an empty and idle love, that is, a
love in show only, but it must be a love in deed and in truth. Now in the
handling of these words we will begin with the affirmative part, because though
the other be put first, yet the affirmatio^ you know in order of nature, is
before the negation: therefore I will begin with this, what it is that puts us
into the happy estate of life and salvation, Faith. But it is faith that works
by love.

This is enough to make this clear to you, that these two great radical
virtues faith and love, are the two pillars, as it were, upon which our
salvation is built. The first of them we have handled at large, Faith: and the
efficacy of it in the Text we handled of effectual faith: Now the other
remains, of Love; whence we will deliver this point to you; that,

Whosoever loves not, Doct.
whatsoever else he find in himself, whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus, is
not in Christ, and by consequent, in a cursed and damnable estate.

Because this is necessarily required that you have faith, and love, or else
you can have no salvation; or else you are not in Christ, and cannot be
acceptable of God through Christ. So our business will be to open unto you
this grace of love, that you may know what it is. And that you may know it, we
must first declare unto you a little in general, what this affection of love
is.

Love what.
All affections, as you know, are nothing else but the diverse motions and
turnings of the will, as the will turns it self this way or that way, so a
man is said to be affected to love or to hate, to grieve or to rejoice. Now
love is that act of the will, whereby it turns it self to a thing, as hatred
is that whereby it turns it self from a thing: And that which is the object of
this affection of love is something that is good; for that which is true, and
that which is beautiful is not the proper object of love, that is the object
of the intuitive understanding: but it is no further the object of love than it
is good. For this take for a general rule, We love nothing but as it is good;
And a thing is said to be good, when it is suitable, proportionable and
agreeable to us, for that is the definition of a good thing. There may be many
things that are excellent, that are not good to us, we say not that any thing
is good, but that which suits and is agreeable to us, and convenient for us. So
that if you take the definition of this affection in general of love, Love is
nothing else but a disposition of the will, whereby it cleaves or makes forward
to some good that is agreeable to it self: I say, it is a disposition of the
will whereby it cleaves to, and makes forward to some good thing agreeable to
it self, which you must mark, for we shall have use of all this in the sequel
of this tract.

Now this love shows it self by two effects: it would have the thing it loves
to be preserved.

And secondly, a man that loves, would have it his, and therefore he draws
near to it, or else he draws the thing near to him. For ^ take it not to be
true that is commonly taken for granted, that love is a desire of union, for we
do not always desire, that the thing should be united to us that we love,
(for a thing may be too near us, as letters may be too near the eye, as well
as too far off:) But we would have things in such a distance as is most
agreeable to us, as we love fire for our use, but it may be too near us, and
we love a knife for our use, but it may be too near: So by the way mark it,
It is not always a desire of union, but it is a desire to have the thing it
loves in such a distance, as is most agreeable to us: but still remember this,
that love shows it self by these two effects: It desires the preservation of
the thing: Secondly, he would that what he loves might be his. As when a man
loves an unreasonable creature, when he loves a glass, when he loves a horse,
he preserves the glass, he keeps the horse strong and fair, and if he can he
would have them for his use. So a man that loves riches, or honor, or that
loves a good name, he preserves them, he would have them his: that is, he would
have them at his own arbitrament, for his own turn and service: So a man
that loves his son or his friend, he desires the preservation of them, and
withal he would have them his; that is, he would have them so sure united to
him, as may stand with his conveniencie. This is the nature of love; one thing
more know of it, it is a commanding affection: Love and hatred are as it were
the great Lords and Masters that divide the rest of the affections between
them, as when a man loves, he desires, he goes and makes forward toward the
thing he loves; if he obtain it, he rejoices in it; if he do not obtain it,
yet if there be probability, then he hopes, if there be no probability, then
he despaires; if there be any inconvenience and impediment that hinders him in
his prosecution, he is angry with it, and desires to remove it: thus these
affections hang on love. Again, on the other side, as love desires the
preservation of the thing in a neerenesse and union of it: so hatred desires
the destruction of the thing, and the separation from it. And upon this
affection likewise hang the others, when a man hates a thing, he flies from it;
if it overtakes him, he grieves; if it be likely it will overtake him, though
it be not yet on him, he fears: if he think he is strong enough to resist it,
he is bold and confident. So these two affections (I say) divide the rest.
Now I will add but this further, that I may declare to you the general nature
of this affection, that is, the kinds of love: And you shall find these
kinds of love. I will name them briefly. Five kinds of love.


to remove it: So a father pitties his son when he is sick, when he is
vicious and untoward, he loves him now with a love of pity, he desires to
remove the thing that hurts it.

Secondly, there is a love of concupiscence,

Thirdly, there is a love of complacency, when

Fourthly, there is a love of friendship that

Lastly, there is a love of dependence, when comfort and hope depends. Now, as
you shall see after, with these three last loves, we are said to love the Lord,
we love him with the love of complacence, because he is a full adequate object
to the soul: and we love him with a love of friendship, because there is a
mutual love, he loves us, and we love him; as the spouse says, My Beloved is
mine, and I am his. Again, we love him with a love of dependence, for we hang
and rely upon him for all our happiness and comfort. Now this love wherewith
we love any object that is suitable to us, it has degrees, and that love is
stronger, as the object of that love is more adequate and full. Again, as it
is more free from mixture; for all things that we love in this world, we know
there is some mixture of evil in them, and therefore our love is less.

Again, as the thing we love is more high and supernatural; as we hang and
depend upon it more, so we love it more; and these you shall find in God. Now
lay these general principles, and we will make use of it afterward: Only
this observe more, before I pass from the general description of it, Three
sorts of Love.
That there is a natural love that God has placed in the heart of every man,
and that love wherewith every man loves himself, such a love as every man has
to his children, such a love as wherewith a man loves his wealth, or any thing
by nature that is good to him.

Now this natural love has two other loves hanging on both sides of it:

One is a vicious and sinful love, that carries it the wrong way to love
sinful things.

The second is a spiritual love, which sets limits to this natural love, that
sets banks, as it were, to the stream of natural affection, that suffers it
not to run over, and not so only, but gives a higher rise to this natural
love, and pitcheth it on higher ends, it elevates natural love, and makes it
an holy love. So that all natural love is to be subordinate to this, otherwise
it is not good; for natural love is but given us to help us to go that way
that spiritual love should carry us, even as the wind helps the ship,
whereas otherwise it should have been driven with oars: And therefore the
Lord, to help us to love our selves, and to love our children, and to love
those things that are suitable and convenient to us, he has in mercy, and for
a help to us, put a natural affection into our hearts, which yet is to be
guided by spiritual love, that we are now to speak of.

So the next thing is to show, what is this spiritual love, this love of God,
this love of Christ Jesus. Love of God how wrought in the heart.


And first we will show how it is wrought, and withal what it is. For you must
know, that every man by nature hates God, by reason of that opposition and
contrariety which is between God and every man by nature, for all love comes
from similitude and agreeableness: And therefore where there are two of a
contrary disposition, there must needs be hatred. Now the pure nature of God is
contrary to us, and therefore every man by nature hates God. And therefore that
love may be wrought in the heart of man toward God, this sinful nature of
ours must be broken in pieces, and subdued. And again, it must be new molded
and framed before that can ever be fit to love God. Therefore, if you would
know how this love of God is wrought in us, it is done by these two things:

First, by breaking our nature in pieces as it were, that is, by humiliation,
and by the law.

Again, by moulding it anew, which is done by faith and by the Gospel: For
when we come and propound Christ to men to be taken, and to be received and
loved by them, what is the answer we have from them? Most men, either mind
him not, or regard not at all this invitation to come to Christ, but they deal
with us as those that were invited to the marriage, says the Text, they made
light of it, they cared not for the invitation, it was a thing they looked not
after: or again, if they do, yet they mind them uot enough, because they do
not prize Christ enough. Therefore the first thing the Lord does to prepare
men's hearts to love him, is to send the law to humble them, to discover to men
what need they are in, to make an impression on their hearts of that bond of
damnation that they are subject unto when the law is broken, that men's eyes may
be opened to see their sins; then a man begins to look toward Christ, to look
on him as the captive looks on his Redeemer, as a condemned man looks on him
that brings him a pardon, as a widow that is miserable and poor, indebted and
undone, looks upon her husband that will make her rich and honorable, that
will pay all her debts, I say, when a man's heart is thus humbled and broken by
the law, by sound humiliation, then he begins to look toward Jesus Christ.
But I say men do fail, partly that they have no sense of their sins, or
else they have a sense of their sins, but not enough to bring them home to
Christ, for that was the fault of the second and third ground; there was
impression made in them, that they prized Christ, but there was not so deep a
preparation as to love Christ indeed, so as to prefer him above all things,
so as to cleave to him, so as they will let him go for nothing. And therefore
this is required that our natures be broken all in pieces, that is, that the
humiliation be deep enough, not a little light impression, a little hanging
down of the head, a little sense of sin, but so far as it may be to
purpose, that he looks to Christ as to the greatest good in the world, that he
will rather undergo any thing than miss of him, that he will rather part
with all his pleasure than he will go without him. That is the first thing
that must be done to prepare our hearts, for this love our hearts must be
humbled by the law.

Now when this is done, they must be made up again, as I told you, they must
be molded anew, and that is done by the Gospel and by faith: For when the
heart is thus prepared, now let the Gospel come and welcome: Now a man's heart
is fit to be wrought on: Why? what does the Gospel? The Gospel comes and
tells you, that the Lord Jesus is willing to be your Redeemer, is willing to be
your Lord, he is content to be yours.

If you will take him, you shall have him and all his.

Now when a man's heart is broken, you cannot bring him better news; Indeed
till then you may go and preach the Gospel long enough, you may propound
Christ to men, they will not take him: But when we propound him thus to a heart
prepared, thus to him that is poor in spirit, to him that has his heart
wounded in the sense of his sins and of Gods wrath, now I I say he is
willing to come in, he is willing to take Christ as a Lord, as a husband: when
that is done, that Christ has discovered his will to take them, and they
resolve to take him, then there arises a holy, a constant conjugall love
wherein they are rooted and grounded. This is the love we are now to speak of.
So that to prepare us to love Christ, we must come to look on him as upon
that which is suitable and agreeable to us. And again, as one that is willing
to receive us: And that you must mark diligently. Therefore we will give you
this definition of love out of that which has been said: The love of Christ
what.
It is an holy disposition of the heart rising from faith, whereby we cleave
to the Lord with a purpose of heart to serve him and to please him in all
things.

When these two things are joined, that a man is humbled, and looks on Christ
as one that is now fit for him: And secondly he is persuaded that Christ is
willing to take him, when this is done, a man receives Christ by faith: And
from this faith this love issues. Whence this is specially to be marked, and it
is a matter of much moment, That to love the Lord, it is not only required
that you be persuaded that he is well affected to you, that he is willing to
receive you, (for that men may have, which say that Christ is merciful and
ready to forgive, and so they think; but yet they love him not: Therefore I
say, it is not only required that you look on Christ as upon one that is well
affected and propitious to you) but also that you look on him as one that is
suitable and agreeable to you, for both these must concur to incline your
hearts to love him: you must, I say, both look on him as one that is fit for
you, as a good that is agreeable to you: And also you must be persuaded that he
is willing to receive you. Now the first indeed is the maine. This second, that
Christ is willing to forgive you, and to receive you, though it be weak, it
may be such as is a true faith, and may beget love: when a man looks on any
other men that he loves, if he see so much excellency in them, as that he longs
after them and desires them, though he thinks there be a backwardnes in them to
love him, yet if there be some probability that they are likely to love him, he
may come so far as to embrace them in his affections, and have a desire to
them, though it be true, as that persuasion is stronger, so their love is more
near, for faith and love grow together: Indeed if there were an utter
averseness, if there were enmity, as it were impossible to remove it, then we
could not love, but hate even as Cain and Judas did. But, I say, that is a
thing you must especially mark, that faith does not consist in being persuaded
that Christ, or God through Christ is willing to forgive you your sins, or to
receive you to mercy, but in this your judgment must be rectified, that is, to
know that you are to look on Christ as one that is suitable and agreeable to
you, as one to whom you have an inward inclination, as one that is fit for you.
This is the maine thing, the other easily follows, to be persuaded that he is
willing to forgive us, and that he is willing to love us: therefore whereas, it
may be, you have thought, that to believe that God is willing to forgive you
your sins, is faith: I dare be bold to say, it is not full faith, you may
have it, and yet not savingly believe, you may have it, and yet not be true
believers. This I make clear by this argument: That which begets no love, is
not faith. But you may be persuaded that Christ is willing to forgive you your
sins, and yet not love him, as a prisoner may be persuaded that the Judge is
willing to pardon him, and yet for all this he may not love the Judge; for
love as I told you comes from some sutablenesse, some agreablenesse between
the party that loves, and the party that is loved. Again, you shall find this
by experience. A man may be persuaded that he is in a good estate, that he
shall be saved, and that his sins are forgiven him, and yet for all this, he
may be an unregenerate man, he may be a man that has no life of grace in him:
I say, we see often in experience, many men applaud themselves in their good
persuasion, and they die peaceably and quietly, and all is well, they think
God has forgiven them; and yet we find there is no love in them, nor no
fruit of love. Again, on the other side, a man that has his heart broken
with the sense of his sins, may hunger after righteousness and after Christ,
he may long after the Lord himself, that he desires him more than any thing in
the world; and yet there is but a weak persuasion that the Lord will receive
him, and forgive him his sins: I say, this man may be a true believer, though
he be not yet so fully persuaded that Christ will forgive him, when the other
is no true believer, as I said to you before. As when one loves another man or
woman, if he look on him as one that is suitable to him, if he think it be
but by good probability and likelihood, I shall obtain their love, though I
have not yet a full assurance of it; I say, there may be an affection of love.
And thence I confirm that which I said to you, that faith that has been
joined with it is true; and that faith that is disjoined from love is not true.
So I say, such a disposition of heart as looks on Christ as one whom he longs
after, he looks on him as on a husband, as one whom he is willing to match
with, that he can say truly, This is the best husband for me in all the world,
though yet I have not wooed him, though yet I have not a full assurance of his
affection to me, as I would have; I say, this will certify your judgment,
and withal it will comfort you, that though your faith be weak, yet he
belongs to you, it is a true faith. Again, it shuttes out those that have
false hearts; although thou think thy persuasion be full, that Christ
belongs to thee, yet if thy heart be not thus prepared to seek him, and to
esteem him, thy faith is not true. I can stay no longer in the opening of
this, so much shall serve to show you what this love is: You see what love is
in general, and this love to the Lord, this love to Christ.

Now I come to prosecute the point, having gone thus far in the explication
of it; I say, this love is so necessary to salvation, as that he that has it
not is in a cursed and damnable condition; he is not in Christ, if he do not
love, that as the Apostle says, he that believes not shall be damned: we may
say as well of love, for there is a tie between all these, faith, repentance
and love. And therefore we find these words put promiscuously, sometimes he
that believes not shall not be saved, sometimes he that repents not shall not
be saved, sometimes he that obeyes not, sometimes he that loves not shall not
be saved: and therefore the Scripture is clear in it, and there is good reason
for it.

Reas. 1
First, because if a man love not, there is a curse, there is a woe due to him,
for wheresoever there is not love, a man is an hypocrite, as our Savior says
to the Scribes and Pharisees, Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, that
is because you are hypocrites. Now wheresoever love is not, there is nothing
but hypocrisy in such a man's heart. For what is hypocrisy? Hypocrisy what.
Hypocrisy is nothing but to do the outward action without the inward
sincerity; as we say it is counterfeit gold, when it has the form and
color of gold, but in the inside is base: as we say he is a false Hector,
when he acts the part of Hector, but is not so indeed: So hypocrisy is to do
the outward act without the inward sincerity. Now to do them without inward
sincerity is to do them without love; for to do a thing in love is to do it
in sincerity. And indeed there is no other definition of sincerity, that is the
best way to know it by: A man that does much to God, and not out of love, all
that he does is out of hypocrisy, he is an hypocrite, and there is a woe
belongs to him. So that as we deal with counterfeit wares, we break them in
pieces, or we set marks upon them, as we do with counterfeit pieces of gold
and silver, we bore holes in them, as condemned pieces; so the Lord proposes a
woe to such as love him not, for in that hypocrisy consists, when a man does
much, and does it not out of love.

Again, Reas. 2.
he that breaks the law, you know there is a curse belongs to him: Now there
is a double keeping of the law, a strict and exact keeping of it, and there is
an Evangelicall keeping of it, that is, when you desire and endeavor to
fulfill the law in all things: and accordingly there is a double curse, there
is a curse that follows the breach of the moral law that belongs to all
mankind, till they be in Christ; there is besides an Evangelicall curse that
follows upon the Evangelicall breach of the law. Now when a man loves not, he
breaks the whole law: for as love is the keeping of the whole law, so the want
of love is the breach of the whole law; because though he may do many things
of the law, though he may keep the sabbath, though he may deal justly, though
he may hear the word, and do many things, yet because it is not out of love
he breaks the whole law. When he breaks the law thus, there is a curse
belongs to him, and it is the curse of the Gospel that cannot be repealed, it
is more terrible than the curse of the law. And therefore he that loves not, is
in a cursed and damnable condition.

Reas. 3
Again, you know, in the law of God an Adulterer ought to die, as in the law of
trial, when the woman was to drink the cursed water, if she were an
Adulteress, it was a curse to her, the Lord appointed it to be death to her.
Now he that loves not the Lord is an Adulterer, that is, he is false to the
Lord that should be his husband. And when he loves not the Lord, he does love
somewhat else: And does it not deserve a curse to prefer their pelf before
the Lord? that he should love pleasures more than God? that he should love the
praise of men more tha^ the praise of God? And this is the case of every man
that loves not the Lord, he loves the world: and he that loves the world is
an Adulterer and an Adulteress, says St. James.

Lastly, Reas. 4
when the Lord shall be a suitor to us, when God shall offer his own Son to
us in marriage, and we refuse him; when Christ shall come from heaven to show
us the way to salvation, and to guide our feet into the way of peace, and we
shall either be careless or resist it, do you not think the Lord will be
filled with indignation against such a man? will he not be angry with such a
man? Is not the Son angry when he is not received? Kiss the Son lest he be
angry: Will he not lay the axe to the root of the tree, and cut off such a
man, as men do briers and thorns, whose end is damnation? This is the case of
all those that love not, when they reject the Lord, and the Lord shall come to
be a suitor to them, and they will have none of him. This is enough to clear
this to you, That whosoever loves not, is in an evil condition, in a state of
damnation, he is not in Christ, he is a man without the Covenant. We come to
make some use of this.

If it be of such moment to love the Lord, Use.
then let every man look to himself, and consider whether he have in his
heart this love to the Lord Jesus; for as it is with men, although you may do
them many kindnesses, yet if it proceed not from love, they regard it not: so
it is with the Lord, whatsoever you do, though you may do much, though you
pray never so constantly, though you sanctify the Sabbath never so diligently,
do what you will, yet if you love him not, he regards it not: Neither
circumscision is any thing, nor uncircumcision is any thing, but love. Indeed,
when a man does love him, the Lord bears with much, as you see he did with
David, because he was one that loved him. But when you love him not, perform
never so much, he rejects all, he heedes it not: As you see it was with
Amaziah, you know how much he did, yet it was not accepted, he did it not with
a perfect heart, that is, he did it not out of love. And therefore the Lord
does with us as we do with men, when men have false hearts, we see they love
us not, we say they do but complement. So the Lord Jesus does. This should
help us to discover our selves, there is no way to discover hypocrisy, none
so sure a sign of it, as where love is not.

And therefore learn by this to know your selves, and to judge of your
condition: It may be, when we confess our sins, we have not thought of
this, that we love not Christ, or at the least, we have not considered what a
sin it is, but you may know what a sin it is by the punishment of it: 1
Cor. 16.22. Let him be accursed that loves not the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 16.22.
You may know the greatness of the sin by the greatness of the punishment;
for the punishment is the measure of the sin, and (mark it) he does not say,
if you believe not in the Lord Jesus, or if you do nor obey him; but if you
love not the Lord Jesus: That is, if there be an omission but of this one
thing, that you love not, let such a man be accursed, yea let him be had in
execration to the death. Therefore consider this, how great a sin it is, not
to love the Lord. And when you consider your sins, and make a catalogue of
them, look on this, as that which discovers to us the vileness of our
natures, as Paul says of lust, I knew not that it was sin, but by the law:
but when sin began to live, he died: So I may say of this, it may be men take
not this into consideration, this sin, that they have not loved the Lord; and
therefore learn to know it. When we consider this, that he is accursed who
loves not Christ, it may open a crevise of light unto us, to see what condition
we are in, how cursed our nature is, how heinous this sin is, when a man
sees that there is a cursed man, a man whom the Lord sets himself against, a
man whom the Lord is an enemy to, whom he puts all the strength and power he
has to confound, when he sees there is a man whom the Gospel curses, which
is more terrible than the Law, because the curse of the Law may be repealed,
there is a remedy for that in the Gospel: But the Gospel, if that curse a
man, there is no remedy: This should humble us; for the Gospel should humble
us as well as the Law. And there are sins against the Gospel as well as
against the Law, and whatsoever is sin should humble us, yea the sins
against the Gospel are greater than the sins against the Law: And therefore
in this sense the Gospel is fitter to humble us. Now when a man comes to
consider his sin, it may be possibly, he looks to sins especially against
the moral Law; but you must learn to do more than that: Begin to think,
Have I received the Lord Jesus? Have I believed in Christ? These are great sins
against the Gospel: and these sins should chiefly humble us. If you think I
press this too hard, consider the words of the Apostle I named, Let him be
accursed that loves not the Lord Jesus: Let these words be sounding in your
ears, compare your hearts to them, sometimes cast your eye on the one, and
sometimes on the other, and see if it be not absolutely required to love the
Lord. And again, reflect on your hearts, and see if you be in the number of
those that do love him.

And take heed herein that you deceive not your selves, for it is the manner,
when we press the love of Christ upon them, they are ready to say, I hope I
love the Lord, I hope I am not such a miscreant as not to love him; yea but
consider whether thou do or no: it is true, thou may deceive me or another
man when thou professest love to God, but in this thou can not deceive thy
self; for a man knows what he loves, love is a very sensible and quick
affection. Trial of love by the affections.
When a man loves any thing, when he loves his wife, loves his friend, loves
his son, loves his sport, his recreation, he knows he loves it, he has the
sense of that love in himself. Therefore consider with thy self whether thou
have any such stirring affection toward the Lord Jesus or no; do thou feel
thy heart so possessed with him? By griese.
art thou sick of love, as the Spouse says in the Canticles, I am sick of
love? That is, are you grieved when he is absent? are you glad when you have
him? when you can get into his presence? for there is a kind of painfulnesse
in love: and all painfulnesse is of a quick sense. When it is said, the Church
was sick of love, sickness is painful: And therefore when you want the Lord,
when there is a distance between him and you, when he does not look on you as
he was wont, there will be painfulnesse in it and grief.

Again, By joy.
there will be much joy and gladness when you have him. Therefore let it be
one way to examine your selves, if you feel such a love toward him or no.

Besides that, Trial, by walking with the Lord.
let me ask thee if thou walk with the Lord, if thou converse with him, if
thou be perfect in his presence, if thou do as Enoch did, walk with the Lord
from day to day; as it is an argument of an evil man, that he walks not with
the Lord, that he restraines prayer from the Almighty, that is, that he does
not converse with him: So is it a great argument of love to desire Gods
company, to desire to be with him, to walk with God: (to use that phrase.) You
will say, What is that to walk with him? To walk with God what?
To walk with him is to observe the Lords dealing with you, and to observe
your carriage and dealing to him again, that there may be continual commerce
and intercourse every day, that continually every hour, every moment, you
would consider and think what the Lord does to you, what his carriage is to
you, what passages of his providence concern you. Again consider what you do
to him, what carriage there is between you: I say this conversing is an
argument of love. Shall a wife profess love to her husband, and nenever come
where he is, never be within doors, and never be in his company? So, will you
say you love Christ, and not be frequent in prayer, or neglect and slight that
duty, seldom converse with him, and seldom speak of him? When you love your
friend, you are with him as much as you can, you love to speak with him, and
to speak of him: So it is with the Lord, if you love him, certainly you will
love his company, you will love his presence.

Trial, by the diligence of love.
Besides, if you love the Lord, you know love is a diligent thing: and therefore
it is called d^ligent love, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4.
Effectual faith, and diligent love: that is, when a man loves a thing, he is
diligent to obtain, he spares no labor, no cost, he cares not what he does
so he may get it; much labor seems little to him, many years seem a few
days, he cares not what he does so he obtain it, he is diligent and
laborious. Do you take this pains to draw near to God, to get grace, to
excel in it? Are you willing to put your selves to it, to deny your selves in
your ease, to take some time from other businesses, and to bestow it this way?
are you content to put your selves to a harder task, to forbear things that
are pleasant according to the flesh, to take pains for the Lord? If you love
God, it will make you diligent. A man will take pains to get the thing he
loves.

Besides, Trial, desire of present enioyment of the thing beloved.
love is an affection that would enjoy presently the thing it loves, it cannot
endure deferring. And therefore when a man professes he loves the Lord, and
yet will defer to come in, saying, I will serve the Lord perfectly, but not
yet, not till my youth be a little more over, not till things be thus and thus
with me, then I will; it is certain thou love him not: for it is true of
every affection, that which is a true and right affection, that which is an
hearty affection, it is present. If a man desire any thing, he would have it
presently, hope would be presently satisfied: and therefore hope deferred is
grief, and love deferred is a great grief: So that if you find a disposition
to put it off in your selves, I will do it, but not yet; certainly you love
not the Lord. It may be, if you were sure to die within a week or a month, what
men would you be? how perfectly would you walk with God? how would you have
your hearts weaned from the world more than they be? Well, if you love the
Lord, you will do as much presently, though much of your life remain; for
love is a present affection, it cannot endure deferring, but it would have full
communion, and that speedily and presently: so is it with that affection where
you find it.

Again, Trial of loye, it is its own wages.
if you examine your selves further, if you have this love in you, you may know
it by this, Love is a thing that is well pleased with it self, as we say, Love
desires no wages, that is, it carries meat in the mouth of it, it is wages
enough to it self, it has sweetness enough in it self, it desires no
addition: So it is when a man loves, Love pays it self, I say, it is its own
wages. And therefore if you love the Lord, you shall know it by this; you serve
him, and serve him with all your might, with all your strength, though he
should give you no wages. Jacob, as you know, served for Rachel, the very
having her was wages enough: So if you love the Lord, the very enjoying of the
Lord, the very having communion with the Lord, the very having the assurance of
his favor, that you might say, My Beloved is mine, and I am my Beloveds: this
is wages enough to a man that loves indeed, to such a man, though there were
not heaven to follow, though there were not a present reward, nor a future, yet
he would love the Lord; and if he love him, there will be a delight to serve
him: and enough to him is the Lords favor, as Christ says, It is my meat and
drink to do my Fathers will: that is, though there were no other meat and
drink, though there were no other wages, yet this was as pleasant to him as
eating and drinking. Ask thine own breast, whether in any thing thou love,
if the very enjoying of that, though there were no other wages superadded, if
that were not motive enough, if it were not comfort enough, and wages enough to
you to do it?

Trial of love by its constraining us to please God.
But besides all this, to name one more, if you love the Lord, it will make you,
it will constrain you to please him, it will put such necessity upon you to
obey him in all things, to do what he requires, whatsoever is for his
advantage, that you cannot choose but do it; as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. 2
Cor* 5.
The Love of Christ constraines us: What is the meaning of that? That is, I
cannot choose but do it, it makes a man do it whether he will or no; it is
like fire in his breast, he cares for no shame, it makes him go through thick
and thin, the love of Christ constraines us. It is true, I confess, I may lose
my reputation, you may reckon me a mad man, some men do think me so, but that
is all one, I must do it, the love of Christ constraines me. So that where
love is, it is such a strong impulsive in the heart, it carries one on to serve
and please the Lord in all things, that he cannot choose but do it. As a man
that is carried in a strong stream, or as one that is carried in a crowde, or
as one that is carried in the hands of a strong man, so a man is carried with
this affection that he cannot choose. Object.
You will say, this is strange that love should compel, it does nothing less.
Answ.
It is true: You must know, when the Apostle says, The love of Christ
constraines me, it is a Metonomy from the effect, that is, love makes me do it
in that manner as a man that is compelled, that is the meaning of it: so it
has the same effect that compulsion has, though there be nothing more
different from compulsion than love. And therefore know that of love, that it
is such a change as draws one to serve the Lord out of an inward attractiue,
thence I take that note of love, such a thing as puts it on, such a thing as
rises from an inward inclination of the mind, from an inward principle, so
that there is no other spur, no other attractiue, but the amiablenesse of the
object.

Now when a man shall find this in himself, that he has all these, he
finds that he has such a sensible love, that he knows he loves the Lord
Jesus: Again, he finds an earnest desire to be in company with him, to walk
with the Lord from day to day: Again, he is exceeding laborious and diligent
to get this love, to get this assurance of favor, and to excel in that grace,
without which he knows he cannot please him: Again, when the affection is
present, you would have communion with the Lord, and you would not have it
deferred: Again, when a man shall be well pleased with that he does, it is
enough that he has the Lord himself, though there were no other wages: And
when he finds such a strong impulsive in him, in his own heart, that carries
him on to serve the Lord, that he cannot choose but do it; then you love the
Lord: And if you love the Lord, you are in Christ. But if these things be not
in you, you do not love him: and then, what is your condition? You know what
the Apostle says, He that loves not, let him be accursed, let him be had in
execration to the death. I should prosecute it further, and show the reasons
why we should love the Lord, as there is great reason: But that I must defer
till the afternoon.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON.
GALLAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


THE last trial of our love to Christ was its constraining virtue, love will
constrain you to serve him, you cannot choose but do it, it so constraines a
man, as the weight of a stone compels it to go to the center, as the
lightness of the fire compells it to ascend up: for such a thing is love, a
strong inclination of the heart, when the soul puts it self on any thing from
an inward principle, from a bottom of its own, when it is carried on with no
other motive but the amiablenes of the object.

Now to conclude this, we must beseech you to consider your own condition,
and examine your selves by these rules, that you may be able to say as Peter
said, Lord thou know I love thee: that is, to have such an assurance, that
your hearts may be well affected toward Christ Jesus, that you may love him,
that you may be able to say to God, who knows our hearts, searches our
reins, that knows all the windings and turnings of your souls, Lord thou
know that I love thee. Since it is a matter of such moment, we should be
careful to examine, if we find that we have not yet this love: for we must
know, that all that we have, all that we do, it will nothing avail us, but
faith which works by love. And if you object, why do ye preach damnation to
us? do you tell us we are in an evil condition for want of this love? I
answer, it is profitable for you, while you are in such a condition, to have
it preached, it is good for you to speak this damnation to your selves, that
while yet there is hope you may seek to be healed, that you may be translated
into another condition, that you may not perish in the evil day, when there
shall be neither hope nor help for you. For you must know, that when we deliver
you these signs of examining your selves, our end is not to grieve you, this
doctrine tends not to destruction, but to discover to you your own hearts,
that you may know your own condition, that if you want it, you may seek after
it. If therefore you find a want of this love, that we will do next, shall be
to show you what reason you have to love the Lord Jesus: for there is no better
way to get it in you, than to describe him to you, to show you what cause there
is of loving him: if we were able to present him to you as he is, we should
effect this thing, but that must be the work of the holy Ghost;
notwithstanding we will briefly open to you such reasons as we find used in
the Scriptures. Motives to love Christ.


David speaks, Psalm. 18.3. The Lord is worthy to be praised: so we may say,
the Lord is worthy to be loved: for what is it that makes any thing worthy of
love, it is the excellency that we find there. Now in the Lord there is all
kind of excellency: whatsoever there is that is amiable under the Sun, all
that you shall find in him more abundantly: If ever you see any thing in any
creature, any thing amiable in man, if ever you saw any beauty, any virtue, any
excellency, all these must be more abundant in him that made these creatures.
And therefore if you have a love, as there is no man without some love or
other, some creature seems beautiful to you, think with your selves, this is
more in the Lord. If ever you see excellency in any man, if ever you see any
nobleness, any holiness, any excellency of disposition, know that it is more
abundant in the Lord Jesus: Let these rivers lead you to that Ocean, to that
abundance of excellency that is in the Lord. And if you love any creature, let
it be with a little love, let your affection be proportionable to the object;
as it exceedes in the Lord, so let your love exceed toward him, to love him
with all your soul and all your strength: And know this, that he has not
only that in an omnipotent manner, that is but sprinkled among the creatures,
they have but a spark, but a drop of it; but also there is this in the Lord,
that there is nothing in him but that which is amiable: every creature has
some imperfection in it, there is somewhat in it may cause aversation in you,
there is no man but has some weakness, but has some infirmity, there is no
creature but it has some want, some defect in it: but in the Lord there is no
want, there is nothing to put you off; but as the Church says, Cant. 5. He is
wholly delectable: that is, there is nothing in him but that which is amiable.
That would be a very profitable thing for us in this case often to think on
the Lord Jesus, to present him to our selves in our thoughts, as the Spouse
does, Cant. 5. she considers her wellbeloved is the fairest of ten thousand:
so we should behold the person of our husband. You know it is but a harlottry
love to consider what we have by our husband, to consider what riches he
brings, what honor, and not often to contemplate upon his person, and upon his
virtue and excellency: we should learn to do this with the Lord, that we
may love him. Therefore that we may help you a little in this contemplation,
we will show you how the Lord has described himself: Exodus 34.4. when the
Lord describes himself to Moses, thus he declares his own name, The Lord
Jehovah, strong, merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in kindness and
in truth, reserving mercies for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression
and sin, etc. We will a little open to you this description that the Lord
gives us of himself, that so you may learn to know what he is; for the way
to love the Lord is to know him: and indeed therefore we love him not, because
we know him not; there is no other reason, why in heaven, when we shall come to
be present with him, we shall love him so abundantly, but because we shall
know him face to face; that is the reason the Angels and the Saints love most:
And of every man amongst the Saints he that knows most loves most. Therefore
it should be your labor to know the Lord. But to open, as I say, this
description unto you,

First, he is Jehovah, that is, he is a constant friend to whomsoever he is a
friend, he is always the same; for that is another name, by which the Lord
describes himself to Moses, when he sends him to Egypt, I am that I am, says
he, say, I am has sent me: I take this word, that it comes from the same
root, Jehovah is described by that I am, and by that it is best understood,
when the Lord calls himself I am, whereas every man may say, I was, and I
shall be, this every creature may say; but the Lord says, I am: that is,
whatsoever the Lord was from eternity, the same he is to eternity, there is no
change in him: And that is a great excellency in him that may move us
exceedingly to love him. You know when we meet with a friend that is constant,
that has no alteration in him, that is a sure friend, have him once and have
him for ever, it sets a higher price on him. When we can consider what the Lord
is, that he has dealt thus and thus with us, that he has loved us; and when
we consider he is constant in it, that he embraces them with the sure mercies
of David, as they are called; that is, his compassions fail not, but when he
has once begun to love, he loves for ever: it is not so with men, if they
love us at one time, they forget us again, as the Butler forgot Ios^ph; when
they are in prosperity they forget us, but the Lord knows us in all our
conditions; thou have known my soul in adversity. When we are in a strait,
friends often times are backward to help us, but the Lord in such an exigent he
is the same; he appears in the Mount when there is no help in man; I say,
this constancy, that God is always the same to us, that his mercies are sure,
for they are called the sure mercies of David. He showed mercies to Saul too,
but they were another kind of mercies; Saul was not one that he had chosen to
himself, and therefore his mercies continued not, for indeed he never loved
Saul with that unchangeable love: But when he loves any man as he loved David,
his mercies are sure as they were to David. David was ready to step aside often
as well as Saul, he let Saul go, but he carried David along, they were sure
mercies: and such he shows to all those that he has begun to love. That is
the first, I am, or Jehovah.

Secondly, he is strong, Jehovah, strong, merciful and gracious, etc. that is,
Almighty. What is the meaning of that, that he is almighty? The meaning of it
is this, that the Lord has all the excellencies; those which we call graces
and virtues, and qualities in men, all these abound in the Lord; for what
serves any virtue for, or any quality that you have, but to enable you to do
something: if a man have any science or art, that is but to enable him to do
that which without it he cannot do: if a man has the art of Arithmetique, he
is able to number, or if he have the art of Logic, he is able to dispute:
come to all moral virtues, What is temperance, but that which enableth us to
do such and such things upon such and such occasions? What is patience, but
that which enableth us to endure afflictions? So all that is excellent in man,
all those amiable, those beautiful qualities wherewith the soul is adorned,
are but so far good as they enable a man to do this or that. Now when the
Lord is said to be almighty, the meaning is, he has all excellency in him,
and he has it in the highest degree, for in this sense God is able to do
more than any man, in regard of excellency; whatsoever a man is able to do,
you know how infinitely the Lord has it beyond him, he is able to do so much
more as he is beyond any man: For that power, that attribute, that quality that
is in man, it is not a quality in him, he has it beyond any man. Again, when
a man is able to do one thing, yet he is not able to do another, one creature
is able to do this, another that: But the Lord is Almighty, therefore he is
able to do all things. And therefore this is a kind of excellency, that is
the second description, he is Jehovah, and he is Almighty.

But now when you hear that the Lord is thus constant, and thus exceeding in
excellency, a man will be ready to say, what is this to me? I am a sinful
man, there is nothing in me but that which may turn away the Lord from me, and
cause him to abhor me: Well says he, to comfort you, know that I am
merciful, exceeding pitiful, exceeding ready to forgive, though your sins
be exceeding many, though they be exceeding great, yet the Lord he is
merciful: he is ready to pass by all those infirmities. And that is another
of his excellencies. You know we reckon it a very amiable thing in a man when
we see him pitiful. This does more abound in the Lord, than in any creature,
there is no man in the world so ready to forgive as God. If he were not God, if
he were as man, my brethren, could he bear with us as he does? Let us do to
a man injuries, and injuries again and again, and never give over, what man
can bear it, does he not in the end withdraw himself, and will no more be
reconciled? But it is not so with the Lord, when we have done all, Yet return
to me, says the Lord, Ier. 3.2. Well, but if we have such sins in us,
suppose the Lord is merciful and ready to forgive, but yet there is no goodness
in us, we have nothing in us why he should regard us, and why he should look
after us: To that it is answered, the Lord is gracious, that is, though there
be no worth found in you, yet he is ready to do you good: as grace you know
is proper to a Prince or a great man, that is said to be gracious to his
subject, or to one that is very inferior, because he can do nothing to
deserve it, it is called grace, for grace you know is nothing but freenes, and
to be gracious is to do things freely, when there is no motive, no wages, when
there is nothing to win him, but of free grace he does it. So the Lord does
what he does of his free grace, he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, that
is, when all men did stand before him alike, though there were nothing, when
there was no cause why the Lord should regard them more than an other, yet He
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, that is, he is gracious, though
there be nothing in us to win that love at his hands. Well, but yet we may
be ready to object, it is true, the Lord has been thus to me, he has been
very merciful to forgive me my sins, he has been very gracious to me to
show me favor when I never deserved it, but after, I was put into such a
condition, I provoked him to anger by relapsing into sin again and again
after I have been in a good estate, I have broken the covenant with him, I
continued not in that good estate that out of his mercy he has put me into.

To this he answers, He is long suffering, that is, though you provoke him out
of measure, though you have done it again and again, he continues patient,
you cannot weary him out, but his mercy indures for ever: you know that if
there were an end of his mercy, that on your sinning, he should give over to
be merciful, his mercy did not endure for ever, therefore it is said, He is
long suffering, because though your sins be often repeated, yet the Lord as
often repeates his mercy, therefore there is a multitude of mercyes in him, as
there is a multitude of sins in you, there is a spring of mercy in him, that
is renewed every day, he opens a spring for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, it
is not a Cesterne but a Spring, that is renewed as much as your sins, that as
you are defiled daily, so the Lords mercy is renewed to wash away those sins,
he is long suffering. But besides all this he goes yet one step further; he is
abundant in kindness and in truth, that is, if you would know the Lord yet
further, whereas you may think He is a terrible God, because of his great
Majesty, and power, and therefore that those disharten you, as wheresoever you
find terriblenesse, that (you know) puts off, it is contrary to love: and
therefore the Lord to win us the more, tells us: that though he be so great a
God as he is, yet he is abundant in kindness, that is, He is exceeding ready
to bear with us, that look what you find in a kind Husband, in a kind
Father, or in a kind friend, that you shall find in the Lord, he is exceeding
kind to you, he is not harsh, he is not stiff, he is not ready to observe all
that you do amiss, if you will ask any thing at his hands, if you want it,
(as therein kindness does consist) he is ready to do it, whatsoever it is, he
is a God hearing prayer, he says, whatsoever you ask at his hands he will do
it, can you have a greater kindness than this? if kindness be an attractive
to win love, he is kind, and he is abundant in it. If you will not believe
this assertion, this affirmation, this description of himself, he tells you
he has promised, and he will be as good as his word, he is abundant in truth,
that is as if he should say, I am not only of such a nature and disposition
as I have described my self to be, but besides this I am engaged to you, you
have many promises I have made you, I have sworn I will do thus and thus:
Therefore I will add this to this disposition, I am abundant in truth, that
is, you shall find me as good as my word; and not so only, but I will be
better than my word: I am abundant in truth: that is, his performances exceed,
they run over, whatsoever he has said, he will surely do it. Consider
this, consider how many precious promises you have, consider what the Lord has
said he will do for you, how full is the Scripture of promises every where;
remember this, the Lord is abundant in truth, he will do them and overdoe
them, he will fulfill every word that he has said. And that he may give you
a proof of it, he adds, that he reserves mercy for thousands, that shows he
is abundant in kindness and in truth: as if he should say, when any of you
do me service, when you are faithful as Abraham my servant was, I am bound
no more but to reward your selves, but I am abundant in mercy and forgiveness,
reserving mercy for thousands: The Lord cannot content himself to do good to
a man's own person, but to his children, to his generation. As David when he
loved Barzillay and Jonathan, it extended to their posterity, when his love was
abundant: so the Lord reserves mercy for thousands.

Lastly, because the objection still comes in when you have such a description
of the Lord: I but my sins are still repeated; he adds in the conclusion,
he is a God still forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. Why are those
three words put in? That you may know that he forgives sins of all sorts;
for every man is ready to find some peculiarity in his sins, he thinks
such and such sins cannot be forgiven, sins that I have committed thus and
thus: Nay, says the Lord, what sins soever they are, of what nature soever,
he forgives iniquity, he forgives natural corruption, he forgives less
infirmities, he forgives greater rebellions; and he is still doing it, for so
the word signifies, he is still and still forgiving iniquity, transgression
and sin. So we have showed you what the Lord is, that you may learn to know
him: therefore we will conclude this first, and say to you as the Spouse says,
Cant. 5. Such a one is the Lord, and such a one is our wellbeloved, oh you
daughters of Jerusalem, that is, he is wholly delectable: if we were able to
show him to you, it must be your labor to consider him, that you may learn to
know him, and to love him.

2 Mot.
Secondly, when you know this and consider what the Lord is, and what excellency
is in him, consider in the next place the greatness of the Lord, and know that
this great God is suitor to you for your love, that is, he that makes toward
you: If a great King, or if your potent neighbor should sue to you for love,
would not that move you? You know the weaker should seek to the stronger, men
of meaner condition should seek to him of higher place; when the great God
beseeches us to be reconciled to him, when he desires to be at peace with us,
and to be friends with us, I say, the greatness of God is a great argument to
move us to love him: as you have that Deuteronomy. 10.17. when the Lord reasons there
with the people to persuade them to love him, says he, I am the God of Gods,
the Lord of Lords, mighty and terrible: as if he should say; this great God
has done all this for you: and this he requires at thy hands, that thou
should love him, when he shall desire but this, refuse it not. If one that
we contemn, one that is beneath us should seek our love, we are not so ready
to return love again, for we say he is below: But when we consider God in his
majesty and greatness, that he should seek to be reconciled to us, that
should move us, that should win our hearts to him

3 Mot.
Besides, consider what the Lord might have required of you; you know you are
his creatures, you know what a distance there is between the Lord and you, if
he had put you on a harder task, you ought to have done it, if he had said to
us, you shall offer your children to me in sacrifice, you shall give your own
bodies to be burned, you shall be my slaves, who could have said any thing to
that, for he is the Lord, the great God, our sovereign Creator: But now when
the Lord comes and asks no more at our hands but this, you shall love me,
will you deny it him? This is effectually urged in the same Chapter, Deuteronomy.
10.14. where Moses (mark the manner of urging it) had described to them what
the Lord had done for them, that he had brought them into that good land, etc.
And now, says he, what does the Lord require of thee for all this, but only
this, that thou love the Lord thy God? As if he should say, the Lord might
ask much more at thy hands; if he had, thou had no reason to deny it; but
all that he requires is that thou love him: and will thou deny this unto him?

Besides, 4 Mot.
consider who it is that has planted this love in the heart, is it not the
Lord that gives thee this very affection? And when he calls for this love
again at thy hands, does he call for more than his own? Shall he not gather
the grapes of his own Vineyard? and shall he not eat the fruit of his own
Orchard? Has not he planted in us these affections? and ought they not to be
returned to him, to serve him and to pitch on him?

Besides consider, 5 Mot.
you are engaged to love the Lord, and that should be a great motive to us: in
Josh. 24.12. Josh. 24.
You are witnesses that you have chosen the Lord this day to serve him: And
they said, we are witnesses: that is Iosuahs speech to the people: As if he
should say to them, you are not now to choose, you are now engaged, you cannot
go back, you have professed you have chosen the Lord to serve him, therefore
you are witnesses against your selves. So I may say to every man that hears
me, you are engaged to love the Lord: Why? Because you have chosen him for
your husband, you are baptized in his name, you have taken him for your Master,
and for your Father, therefore he may challenge it at your hands as right, for
he is your Father: and where is his honor then? He is your Master, and where
is his fear then? That is, you are engaged, he may challenge it justly, you
are his, he has bought you, yea he has overbought you, he has paid a price
more worth than we, he has bought us with his blood: And what has he bought
us for but to be his, that is, to love him? Therefore when we love him not, we
rob God of our selves, we do an unnatural thing, it is treachery and
injustice in us. As you know, it is one thing in a woman that is free from an
husband to neglect a man that is a friend, but when she has engaged her self,
and the match is made, now it is adultery: So every one of us that loves not
the Lord, sins the more, because he is engaged to him: Deuteronomy. 32.13, Deuteronomy.
32.13.
Thou forsookest the strong God of thy salvation, thou forsakest him to whom
thou art engaged, he is the strong God of thy salvation, he has done thus and
thus for thee. Therefore consider this, for seeing you have such an affection
as love is, you must bestow it somewhere, somewhat you must love: and you must
know again it is the best thing you have to bestow, for that commands all in
you; and where will you bestow it? Can you find any creature upon whom to
bestow it rather than the Lord? Will you bestow it upon any man? The Lord
exceedes them, as David says, Who among the gods is like thee? That is, take
the most excellent among them, that therefore are reckoned as gods, yet who
among them is like unto thee? or whom will you bestow your love upon, your
wealth, or your pleasures or your fantasies? You must think the Lord will
take this exceeding evil at your hands, that you should bestow this affection
elsewhere than on him whom you are engaged unto, to whom you are bound so much,
who has done so much for you.

But that which moves us most is particulars, 6 Mot.
if a man consider what the Lord has done for him in particular, remember what
passage has been between the Lord and you from the beginning of your youth.
Ier. 2. Ier: 2.
Neither said they where is the Lord that brought you out of the land of Egypt
through the wilderness: I remember thee from the land of Egypt, etc. That is,
let a man consider Gods particular dealing with him, for when the Lord would
stir up David, and melt his heart, and bring it to a kindly sorrow for his
sins, he takes that course: 2 Samuel 12.7. 2 Samuel 12.7.
it is Nathans speech to him, says he, Did not the Lord do thus and thus? Did
he not make thee King of Judah and Israel? Did not he give thy Masters wives
and thy Masters houses into thy bosom? And if that had not been enough, he
would have done thus and thus. So let every man recount the particular
kindnesses and mercies he has received from the Lord; and when we consider
that it is he that does all, that it is he that feeds us, that it is he that
clothes us, we have not a nights sleep but he gives it to us, we have not a
blessing but it is from his hand, there is not a judgment that we escape but
it is through his providence: I say the consideration of these particulars
should be as so many sparks, to breed in us a flame of love toward the Lord,
to think with your selves when you have done all, how unreasonable a thing it
is, how unequal a thing that you should forget this God, that you should never
think on him, that you should not love him, he that has done thus much for
you.

7 Mot.
And last of all consider, that the Lord loves you, for that is the greatest
motive to win us to love him; for as fire begets fire, so love begets love.
This was the cause that Paul loved the Lord, Gal. 2.20. Gal. 2.10.
He that loved me, and gave himself for me, says he, I will not live any
more to my self, but to him, he has loved me, and gave himself for me, he
has loved me: and there was that testimony of his love, he gave himself. I
say consider this love of the Lord, and let this beget in you a reciprocal
affection toward him: Put all together, and consider the Lord is worthy to be
beloved, that he that is so great sues to you for your love, that he that is
God, that planted that love in your hearts, and therefore he does but call for
his own, that he that has done you so many kindnesses, that you are so
engaged to him, that you are now bound unto, you are not now to choose; at the
least come to this, to say he is worthy to be beloved, bring your hearts to
this, to desire to love him.

You will say, Object.
we may desire long enough, but how shall we be able to do it?

I will tell you in a word, Answ.
and so conclude. First, Means to enable us to love God.
you must pray for it, it is a lovely suite, when we come to the Lord and tell
him, that we desire to love him, that we would feign do it if Prayer.
and beseech him not to deny us that request, that we know is according to his
will: do you think that the Lord will refuse you in that case, especially if
you beg it importunately at his hands?

For if you object and say, Object.
we have prayed and have not obtained it; Answ.
know, that to love the Lord is a precious thing: and therefore the Apostle
reckons it so.

You will say, Object.
How does this prayer do it? I say that it does it partly by obtaining at Gods
hands; Answ.
Prayer works love 4 ways.
for when you cry earnestly, he cannot deny you: But as he did with the lame
and the blind when they were importunate, he never neglected any but healed
them. When you cry to the Lord, and say, I would feign love thee, but I
cannot, will he not be as willing to heal thy soul, to give thee legs to
run after him, and eyes to see him, as he was to heal the lame and the
blind, certainly he will not deny thee.



Moses, and to Cornelius and others.

Object.
Why do you put it as a peculiar means to get love?

Answ.
The reason is, because love in an especial manner is a gift of the Spirit, a
fruit of the holy Ghost; and it is true, it must be a peculiar work of the
Spirit to beget love. It is true, faith comes by hearing, and hearing begets
faith, it is done likewise by the Spirit; but love is more peculiarly than
other graces, the gift of the holy Ghost. And therefore 2 Thessalonians. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 4.
says the Apostle, You are taught of God to love one another: That is, it is
such a thing as God teaches, or else our teaching will never do it: that
which he says of love to the brethren, we may say of the love of God; the Lord
has put love into man, man loves many times, and knows not why, many times he
has reason that he should love, and yet he cannot, because it is a peculiar
gift of God. That natural affection for a man to love his children, all the
world cannot do it, all the arguments in the world cannot persuade a man: for
if arguments could do it, we might persuade others to do so; but none can
love so as the father does his child: and why? but because the Lord works
that in men. So the love of God is a peculiar work of the holy Ghost, none are
able to love Jesus, but he in whom the Lord has wrought it, in whom the holy
Ghost has planted this affection: Therefore the way to get it is earnestly to
pray, to acknowledge the power of the holy Ghost, to go to him, and say, Lord
I am not able to do it: this acknowledgement of the power of the holy Ghost is
the way to prevail. Besides, you know the power of God is so transcendent
beyond the pitch of our nature, that except the holy Ghost work more than
nature, we shall never be brought together in agreeableness and sutablenesse,
we are no more able to love the Lord, than cold water is able to heat it
self: there must be somewhat to breed heat in that water, so the holy Ghost
must breed that fire of love in us, it must be kindled from heaven, or else we
shall never have it.

Secondly, another special means to enable you to love the Lord, means to
consider our sins.
is to consider your own condition, to consider your sins, what you are,
what hearts you have, and what lives you have lead?

Object.
You will say, how does this beget love?

Answ.
Yes, this is a great means: Mary loved much, because much was forgiven her,
that is, Mary Magdalen had great sense of her sins, the Lord had opened her
eyes to see what a one she had been, what sins she had committed: And
because she had that sense of her sins, her eyes were open to see her own
vileness: thence it is, says he, she loved much. For when we are humble and
poor in spirit, when we are little in our own eyes, then the Lord will come
and show mercy on us; when a man shall see his sin, and shall think with
himself, I am worthy to be destroyed, I can expect nothing but death, then the
Lord shall come suddenly as it were, and shall tell us you shall live, and
shall reconcile himself to us, this will command love. We shall never receive
the Gospel as to love Christ, till we come to poverty of spirit, till we be
thus humbled: as in the first of Luke, it is the speech of Mary, My soul does
magnify the Lord: and why? because he had respect to the poor estate of his
handmaiden: When she was little in her own eyes, and made no account of her
self, and thought not her self worthy to be looked after, the Lord comes and
takes her, and vouchsafes her such an honor as to cause his own Son to be
borne of her: now she could not hold, but that was it that enflamed her heart
with love to the Lord, my soul does magnify the Lord, because he had respect
to the poor estate of his handmaid: So we see in David, you never find a
greater expression of love in David, than at that time when he was most
humbled, when the Prophet came to him and told him what the Lord would do for
him, that he would build him and house; David begins to consider what he was,
what is David, says he, What am I, or what is my fathers house? That is, I am
but a poor miserable man, I am but thus borne, what have I done that the Lord
should respect me so far? If David had not been so little and so vile in his
own eyes, those great mercies had never so wrought on his heart. And therefore
I say, the way to make us abundant in love is to consider our sins, to be
humbled, to consider what we are, and to conceive from thence the kindness of
the Lord: you know how it affected Saul when he came into the hands of David,
that he had power to kill him, he considered what he had done to David, how he
had used himself to him, and he saw David's kindness again to him, but
unexpected and undeserved it was, it melted his heart, it dissolved him into
tears. So the love of the Lord, when we consider how we have behaved our
selves to him, and yet he has offered us peace, and yet he says, Return and
I will forgive you, I say, this would work on the hardest heart: And therefore
consider your sins, it is not enough to say I am a sinner, perhaps you are
ready to do so: But come to particular sins, consider wherein you have
offended the Lord, say you have done thus and thus, as Paul reasons with
himself, I was a blasphemer, I was a persecuter, an oppressor, and yet the
Lord had mercy on me: so be ready to say, I have committed such and such
sins, it may be uncleanness, it may be Sabbath-breaking and swearing, etc.
yet the Lord has been merciful or willing to receive me to mercy: as that
place, Ier. 3.1. Ier. 3.1.
If a man's wife play the harlot, will he return to her? No, he will put her
away, and give her a Bill of Divorcement: but you have done it, and done it
often, and with many lovers; and yet return again to me, says the Lord: So I
say, when Christ shall come to you, when you have committed such and such
sins, and the Lord shall say to you, though you have done this, though you
have done it often, yet return again to me, and I will receive you to mercy:
I say, this should melt our hearts, and cause us to love the Lord. I should
come to the third, that is, to beseech the Lord to show his own self to you:
Means to beseech the Lord to show himself to us.
for indeed we shall never come to love him till the Lord show himself to
us. It is one thing when we preach him to you, and it is another when the Lord
shows himself: For as the Sun is not seen but by his own light, there is
no way in the world to see the Sun, all the candles, all the torches cannot
do it, except the Sun show it self: So I say of the Lord, all the Preachers
in the world, though they should speak with the tongues of Angels, they were
not able to show the Lord Christ Jesus what he is: but if the Lord show his
own self to you, if he open the cloud and show you his glory, and the light
of his countenance, then you shall know the Lord after another manner than we
can show him to you, with another knowledge more effectually: And when you have
seen him thus, you shall love him, without this you shall not love him. And
therefore pray the Lord to show himself to you, as it was Moses prayer, Exodus
33, Exodus 33.
Show me thy glory. What is that? That is, Lord show me thy excellency which is
exceeding glorious: You must think Moses asked not this in vain, it was for
some purpose, he asked not merely to satisfy his fancy, for the Lord would
not then have heard him: But what did he ask it for? Surely that he might love
the Lord the more, by knowing him better. And when Moses came to ask it at the
hands of the Lord, he did assent, he proclaimed, that is, he revealed himself
more than ever he did before. So I say to every one of you, if you be earnest
with the Lord, desire him to show you his excellency, that you might love him
more, serve him more, and fear him more, he could deny you no more than he did
Moses: for you must think, that this is no extraordinary thing for the Lord to
show himself. That which he did miraculously to Stephen, when he opened the
heavens, and showed himself to the outward view, that he does ordinarily to
the Saints, he shows himself to their minds and inward affections. When we
preach at any time, except the Lord show himself to you at that time, then our
preaching is in vain: for the word that we speak is but a dead letter, it
will work no more upon you, than a dead thing that has no efficacy. But when
the Spirit goes with the word, and he opens to you the thing that we speak,
then it is effectual. Therefore Paul to the Ephesians, when he had opened
those great mysteries, he concludes with this: The Lord give you the Spirit of
wisdom and revelation, to enlighten the eyes of your understanding, that you
may know what the hope of your calling is, and what is the glorious inheritance
of the Saints, etc. As if he should say, when I have said all this, it is
nothing, it will not do it; but he beseeches the Lord to give them the Spirit
of revelation, and then it is done. And so to conclude all, when we have said
all we can to move you to love the Lord, it is all nothing except the Lord give
you that Spirit of wisdom and revelation to open your eyes to see what is the
exceeding greatness and excellency of his power.

FINIS.
THE THIRD SERMON.
GALLAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


OVT of these words we have formerly delivered this point to you, that, Wh^
soever loves not is not in Christ.

The last thing (in the prosecution of this point) was the means whereby this
love is wrought in our hearts, which we did not then finish, notwithstanding we
will not proceed in it at this time, but rather al^^r the matter, and do that
which I did not then intend; because there are many this day that are to
receive the Sacrament, and you know when we come to receive the Sacrament, our
chief business is to examine our selves. Let every man examine himself, and
so let him eat of this bread and drink of this cup.

We have often pressed to you the necessity of these two things:

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not to be omitted.
First, that you may not omit the Sacrament when it is administered in the
Congregation whereof you are members: for if they were to be cut off from the
people that neglected the Passover, Reasons.


The Lords Supper beyond the Passover in two respects
First, because it is more clear, and it is more clear because the doctrine is
more clear; for it does more lively represent Christ now exhibited



Now you see how strictly God lays a charge upon them, that no man should
omit the Passover, unless sickness or a journey hindered him. Now consider
this you that have been negligent in coming to this holy Sacrament, for it is
a great sin, and provokes God to anger when he shall see that this ordinance
which himself has instituted, and which he has laid such a charge upon you
to do is neglected?

Besides, do you think it is a sin to neglect

Besides, do we not need all helps of grace?

Again, Men ought not to come negligently to it.
as you ought not to omit it, so to come negligently to it, to come without
examination, to come without a more solemn and extraordinary renewing of your
repentance is to receive the Sacrament unworthily, to eat and drink judgment
and damnation to your selves. Two sorts receive the Sacramentun^ worthily.
Now there are two sorts that receive the Sacrament unworthily.

First, those that are not yet in Christ.

Secondly, those that are within the covenant, this day, we will therefore
handle that more fully that we touched lightly before, which is this
examination, whether we love the Lord Jesus or no: for if you love not the Lord
Jesus, you are not in him; for whatsoever you do avails not, if you have not
faith and love. Therefore if you find that you have not this love to Christ,
that you are not rooted and grounded in love, you have nothing to do with
Christ, and if you have nothing to do with him, you have nothing to do with
the Sacrament. And therefore we will show you what properties of love we find
in the holy Scriptures. Properties of love.


It is bountiful.

1 Cor. 13.


This is one property of love set down in 1 Cor. 13. Love is bountiful, and
seeks not its own things: that is, it is the nature of love to bestow
readily and freely any thing a man has to the party whom he loves. We see,
Joseph that loved Benjamin, as his love was more to him than to all the rest of
his brethren, so he gave him a greater portion than the rest. It is the nature
of love to be bountiful, what a man loves, he cares not what he parts with
to obtain it. Herod cared not to have parted with half his kingdom, to
please that inordinate affection of his. The Converts in the Apostles time, how
bountiful were they, laying all their goods at the Apostles feet? Zaccheus,
when he was converted, and his heart was inflamed with love to Christ, he
would give half his goods to the poor. But in general, it is a thing that
you all know, that love is of a bountiful disposition. If you would know then
whether you have this love to the Lord Jesus or no, consider whether you be
ready to bestow any thing upon him, whether you be ready to part with any thing
for his sake. David, when he abounded with love to the Lord, you see how he
expressed it in his provision for the Temple, you see how he exceeded in it, An
hundred thousand shekels of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver:
this, says he, I have done according to my poverty: As if he had said, if I
had been able to do more I would have done more, but this was as much as I
could reach unto: herein he showed the greatness of his love to God in the
greatness of his bounty. Take it in the love which we have one to another: where
a man loves, he denies nothing. Sampson, when he loved the harlot, he denied
her nothing that she asked of him. If you love the Lord Jesus, examine your
selves by this, are you ready to bestow any thing for his advantage? are you
ready to take all opportunities to do somewhat for his glory? consider how
many opportunities you have had, and might have had, wherein you might have
expressed and manifested this love to the Lord Jesus. Might you not have done
much to the setting of a powerful Minister here and there? have you not had
ability to do it? would it not much advantage the glory of Jesus Christ to
make bridges (as it were) for men to go to heaven by, and to make the high way
that leads thither? A greater work of mercy than these external works that
appear so glorious in the eyes of men: to have blessed opportunities, and not
to use them, because we have straight hands and narrow hearts, is a sign we
want love to Christ.

In the passages of your life there is many a case, that if you were of a
bountiful disposition, you might do much good in. You know what Paul says,
which was a great testimony of his love, Acts 20.24. Acts 20.24.
My life (says he) is not dear unto me, so I may do any thing for Jesus
Christ, so I may fulfill the course of my Ministry. So examine your selves
whether you can say thus upon any occasion; so that I may do any good, so that
I may help forward any good cause that may tend to the glory of God, my life is
not dear unto me, my liberty is not dear, my estate is not dear, my friends
are not dear to me. You that have to do in government, many cases there are,
wherein if you will do any special good, you must part with something of your
own; God looks to you and sees what you do, and how your hearts stand
affected in all these passages, ask your selves now whether these things be
not dear to you: if there were love in you, it will cause you to do more than
you do. It was David's great wisdom, when water was brought to him that was
purchased at so dear a rate, when so high a price was set upon it, he would
not drink it himself, but powered it forth to the Lord; and therein he showed
the greatness of his love, that he was willing to part with that which he so
exceedingly longed for, which was bought at such a rate.

The like he did when he bought the threshing floor of Araunah the Iebusite,
he might have had it given him for nothing; No, says he, I will not offer to
the Lord of that which cost me nothing: As if he had said, I shall show no
love to the Lord then, and if I show no love to him, what is my sacrifice
worth? For David knew well enough that God observed what he did, he observed
what it cost him. The Lord observes all that you do: Beloved, he knows your
hearts, and sees what motions you have, and prizeth your actions accordingly.
If you do any action for him, that costs you something, he observes that
likewise. In Rev. 2. Revel. 2.
I know thy works and thy patience: so does the Lord say of every man, I know
what such a service cost thee, I know what loss thou sufferedst, when thou
did part with such a thing for my sake. Therefore if you would show your love
to the Lord, and would have a testimony in your hearts, that you have this
love wrought in you, be not backward to bestow any thing upon Christ. The woman
that brake the box of precious ointment, you see how the Lord accepted that
work of hers so much, that he puts it down that it should never be forgotten.
For love wheresoever it is, will open the heart, and open the hand, and bestow
any thing upon Jesus Christ, that is in our power.

Now if we examine whether love be amongst men by this sign, we shall find
but little love, and we may justly take up the complaint of the Apostle, Every
man seeks his own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ: that is, when
any thing is to be done, men are ready to enquire thus, it is the secret
inquisition of their hearts; What is this to me? what profit will it bring
me? wherein will it be to mine advantage? And if they find it is a thing that
will cost them something, and a thing that they shall get nothing by, how cold
and backward are men to do it? It is from this, that men seek their own
things.

Object.
But here every man will be ready to profess, and say that he is not so strait
handed, but he is ready to do many things for Christ, that he is
bountiful, and seeks not his own things?

Answ.
My Beloved, let us try this now a little: thou think thou art so bountiful
for the Lord, I would ask thee this; Do thou do it purely for the Lord in
such a case, when there is no profit nor praise with men, nor advantage
redounding to thy self? art thou as forward then as when there are all those
respects? art thou as abundant in it, as diligent, and as ready to do it? This
discovers the falsehood of men's hearts for the most part.

And besides, take it in the case of self-love, consider what thou do when
thine own self-love shall come in competition with this love to the Lord: for
in that we shall know our love to the Lord, when we deny our selves, when we
cross our self-love, and reject and refuse it: for otherwise it is no thank
to us, when there is no inward crossing in us, no contrary affections drawing
us another way. Therefore if you would know whether you love the Lord or no,
try what you do in the things that are dearest to you, consider what you do
in those things that of all others you are most unwilling to part with: for
indeed herein is the trial, as the Lord said to Abraham, when he would have
offered up his son, Now Abraham I know that thou love me: As if he had
said, this is a sure testimony that thou love me, because thy son is not
dear to thee. So I say, when you are to part with something that is dear to
you, consider what you do in such a case, consider whether you can say
generally, I account all things but as loss and dung for Christ. It may be
thou art willing to part with something that thou carest not much for, but this
is nothing. Some man will not lose his credit, that is dear to him; Examine
thy self now, if thy credit be dear to thee, art thou content to lose the
praise of men for Christ? when thou art put to a hazard art thou content to
suffer the loss of thy estate?

Every man has some particular temptation, young men for the most part are
lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, and old men are lovers of their
own wealth more than of God. Therefore consider what you will do now in your
several cases. Christ, you know, requires this at every man's hands, that his
wife and children, that his father and mother, and whatsoever is dearest to
him, that he should neglect it all for his sake; and herein a man's love is
seen.

And when you have done all this, I will add that further, though you do
bring your hearts to do it, yet are you willing to do it? do you do it
cheerfully and readily? for why does the Lord require that as a necessary
condition, that whatsoever is done to him might be done cheerfully and
willingly? For no other reason than this, but because he regards nothing but
that which comes from love, and if it come from love, we know, we do it
cheerfully. Therefore consider whether thou art willing to do this
cheerfully, and with a full hand, not nigardly and pinchingly; and by this you
shall know whether you have this love to the Lord Jesus or no, whether you be
bountiful, whether you seek the things of the Lord, and not your own things.

It is content with nothing but love again.
In the second place, you shall find this to be one property of love (by which
you may try your selves) it will be content with nothing but with love again
from the party whom we love. If one love another, let him do never so much,
let him be never so kind in his actions toward him, let him be never so
bountiful to him, yet except he have love again, he is content with nothing.
Indeed when we do not love a man, we can be content to receive profit from
him, and it is no matter though his heart go another way so we enjoy it; but
it is the nature of true love to desire to be paid in its own coin. Now if
thou love the Lord Jesus, if thou might have all the blessings that he could
bestow upon thee, if he should open his hand wide, and compass thee about
with abundance, yet if thou love the Lord, thou would not be content with
this, but thou would have assurance of his love, thy heart would be at no
rest else.

And this you may see in David, Psalm. 51.
Psalm. 51. David, you know, was well enough, he had health and wealth, and
abundance of all things, yet you see how miserably he complained, because he
wanted that joy that he was wont to have, because he was not in those terms
with the Lord that he was wont to be; and till he had that, his bones were
broken with sorrow, and he took it so to heart, that nothing in the world
could content him, till he was assured of Gods favor: And it is certain, that
if thou love the Lord, nothing will satisfy thy soul, but the assurance of
his loving countenance to thee again. Therefore that which Absalom did we may
make use of, upon this occasion, he had that wit, to make a right pretense,
whatsoever his intent was: when he was called from banishment where he lived
well enough, and enjoyed all things, he wanted nothing, but had as much as he
could desire, yet, says he, what does all this avail me, so long as I may not
see the Kings face? It was but his craftiness: Yet thus much we may observe
out of it, that this is the property of love, that till a man see the face of
God, that is, till he enjoy a near and close communion with God, until he can
have the love of God witnessed to his soul, he cares for nothing in the world
besides: As you have it in 2 Chronicles. 7.14. you have that condition put in: 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
If my people (says he) when they are in distress, shall humble themselves,
and seek my face, then I will do thus and thus. As if he should say, it may
be they may seek liberty, when they are in captivity; it may be they may
seek health, when they are in sickness; it may be they may seek deliverance
from enemies, under whom they are enthralled; but that is not the condition
that I put them upon, but if they humble themselves, and seek my face, then I
will hear in heaven, etc. So I say now, if you will try whether you love the
Lord Jesus or no, consider whether you seek his face, that is, whether you
seek grace or no, whether nothing in the world can content you but his favor.
For it is the property of one that is truly sanctified, mercy alone will not
content him, but he will have grace as well as mercy: Another man that loves
not the Lord, it is true, it may be he is pinched with the sense of his
sins, but let him have mercy, it is enough he thinks; but now take a man
that has his heart right toward God, except he have grace, it contents him
not; for that is the property and nature of true love, that it cares for no
wages, all that it desires is the love of the party, that what it does may be
acknowledged and accepted; and there is a great difference in that: You know, a
nurse does much unto the child, as well as the mother, and it may be more, but
notwithstanding the nurse never does it but when she is hired; but the mother
does it for nothing, and she does it more abundantly, because she does it out
of love, and it is wages enough to her that she has done it, because she
loves her child: So I say, if you love the Lord Jesus, it is not wages that
you seek, but if you may have the light of his countenance to shine on you, if
you may have his favor, if you may have opportunity to do him service in
your place, it is enough for you, you care not for the present wages, nor for
future. Therefore herein you may know the nature of your love, the rightnesse
and ingenuity of it, if it be so that all that you do is out of love to the
Lord, and if you can content your selves with love again from God, it is a
sign that you love the Lord Jesus.

Again, It desires the second coming of Christ 2 Timothy 4.8.
(to proceed) if you love the Lord Jesus, you will also love his appearance: as
you have it in 2 Timothy 4.8. A crown of righteousness is laid up for me, and as
many as love the appearance of Jesus Christ: Heb. 9. ult.
and in Heb. 9. ult. He was offered for the sins of many, and shall appear
the second time to such as look for him, etc. For whom was he offered? and to
whom shall he appear? To as many as look for his coming again. So in 2 Pet.
3.13. What manner of men (says the Apostle) ought we to be in all godliness
and holy conversation, 2 Pet. 3.13.
looking for and hasting to the appearance of Christ? etc. So that it is
certain, every man that loves the Lord Jesus, he loves his appearance, he
hasteneth to the coming of the Lord, he looks for his coming again: and it
must needs be so in reason. For if you love any, you know, you must needs
love their presence; will you profess that you are loving to any, that when
you hear of their coming toward you, there is no news more unacceptable to
you? If a woman had a husband in the East Indies, and report of his coming
home should be the worst news that she could hear, shall we think that
such a woman loves her husband? So if you did love the Lord Jesus, you would be
glad to have his appearance.

And (Beloved) seeing the Apostle has chosen out this note, why should not we
press it in our examination of our selves, whereby we may know whether we
love the Lord Jesus or no? whether we desire to be with the Lord? whether we
can say, as the Apostle Paul, We desire to be at home, and to be with the
Lord? If we examine the love of men by this rule, we shall find that there is
exceeding little love to the Lord Jesus, men are so exceeding backward in
desiring to be at home, and to be with him; and we may know that by our
backwardness to be in the Lords presence upon earth: Shall we think that men
are desirous to be in his presence in heaven, and yet are so unwilling to draw
near to him upon earth? But you will object,

Object.
Many of those that love the Lord, that are men truly sanctified, yet are afraid
of death, and the news of death is terrible to them: and therefore surely this
is a rare sign, even in those that have faith and love to desire the
appearance of Jesus Christ?

Answ. 1.
I answer, it is true, there may be a backwardness even in the Saints, but you
must know upon what ground it is. A spouse that is to marry a husband, no
question but she would be glad to be handsome, and to be prepared for his
coming, and though she may desire his company exceedingly, yet because
things are not so ready as she would have them, or for fear that he may find
that which may divert and turn away his eyes from delighting in her, perhaps
she desires not his coming at that time. There is a certain negligence and
unpreparednesse in men's hearts, which breeds an unwillingnesse in them
sometimes, and makes them afraid of seeing the Lord, and yet there may be a
true and inward love after him.

Besides, you know, there is flesh as well as spirit, Paul did, to be at home,
and to be with the Lord, and to enjoy his presence, but that flesh that is in
us is always backward to it. Therefore in Revel. 14.13. Revel. 14.13.
Blessed are those that die in the Lord, so says the Spirit, but so says not
the flesh; the voice of the flesh is contrary to it, but it is the voice of the
spirit and the regenerate part that is in us. So that this I may boldly say to
you, that every man that has this faith and love wrought in him by the Spirit
of God, he has that in him which does earnestly desire communion with Christ
to live with him for ever, to be in his presence continually, although there
may be some reluctancie by reason of the flesh that is there. Simile.
Take a man that has sore eyes, you ynow, to the eye the light is exceeding
pleasant, but look how much soreness and defect there is in the eye, so much
the light is burdensome to it; but so far as the eye is right, so far as it
is perfect, so far is the light pleasing and delightful to it; so it is with
the heart of the regenerate man, look how much faith, look how much spirit
there is, so much desire there is of the presence of Christ, and it is most
pleasing and acceptable to him, as the light of the Sun is to the eye; but
look how much soreness, that is, look how much flesh there is in him, so
much reluctancie, so much unwillingnes there is in him: and that he must
strive against: But still the rule holds good, that wheresoever the heart is
right, there is always an earnest desire and longing to be with Christ. And
indeed this is only found in the Saints; for evil me^, if they knew what
heaven were, they would never desire it: for they desire heaven in another
notion, they would be well, they would be freed from misery and discontent
which they met with in the world, they would have whatsoever the flesh
desires, and that is it they look after; but to desire heaven as it is, that
is, to desire an excellency in grace, to be always praising God, to be
continually in his presence, to be freed from the practice of sin, this is a
thing that if men ask their own hearts, they do not desire in this manner;
for they desire it not here upon earth, when they are in the communion of
Saints. When they are in places where there are holy speeches, and holy
exercises, it is burdensome to them, they are out of their element, they are
as men that are not upon their proper center; these men desire to be in heaven,
but they desire another kind of happiness than there is in heaven; the
felicity there is presented unto them under another Idea, they desire no more
than the flesh desires: but to desire heaven indeed, as it is heaven, to desire
God there in his pureness and holiness, to desire it so as thereby to be
sequestered from all worldly, carnal and sensual delights, this a carnal man
desires not. Therefore this is a distinguishing note and sign, that he that
loves the Lord will love his appearance.

Fourthly, It delights to speak of the party beloved.
you shall find this to be the property of love, he that loves is very
ready to speak of the party loved; love is full of loquacitie, it is ready
to fall into the praises of the party beloved, and to keep no measure in it,
to abound in it, that is the disposition of every man that loves. So is it in
this love to the Lord Jesus: You may see it in David, as he abounded in love to
the Lord, so he could never satisfy himself in praising the Lord: in Psalm.
105. Psalm. 105.
which is repeated 2 Chronicles. 15. 2 Chronicles. 15.
you shall find that he has never done with it, but is always singing
praises to the Lord: Sing praise to the Lord, and be always talking of his
wondrous works. And again, Remember his marva^lous works that he has done
of old, and all the wonders, etc. As if he should say, if you love the Lord,
show it in praising of him. Do you profess to love the Lord, and yet never
delight to speak of him? nor delight to hear others speak of him? My
Beloved, this backwardness that is amongst us to holy and gracious speech, to
speeches that tend to the setting forth of the Lords praise, shows that love
to the Lord Jesus is wanting among us.

You know, it is natural for every man to abound in the speeches of the things
they love, of what nature soever they be. Mariners are delighted to talk of
their voyages, and soldiers of their battles, and huntsmen of their games. If
you delight in the Lord, certainly your tongues will be much in speaking of
him, you will be ready to do it upon all occasions. Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks: and if love to the Lord do abound in your
hearts, this love will be expressed in your tongues, upon all occasions: and
therefore, at the least, you may judge of the measure of your love by this. He
that speaks much of loving God, and yet has his speeches, empty, vain, and
unprofitable, surely we may guess that he loves him not at all: and this is a
mark that will not deceive us.

And now what will you say for your selves, that you speak no more upon those
several occasions that you meet withal in the world? is it because you are
ashamed, because you are bashful, and fearful to express your selves, and
to make an open profession of that holiness that is in your hearts? Certainly
it is a sign that you love not the Lord Jesus: for he that loves, is never
ashamed; because, whom a man loves, he magnifieth, he prizeth much, he has
a high esteem of: and therefore that bashfulnesse and fearfulness that you
object, will not keep you back, if you did love the Lord in truth and
sincerity. Or else, why is it that you speak of him no more? is it because you
cannot speak? is it because your understandings are weak and dull? because
you are not able to do it as well as others, and therefore you are loath to
express your selves?

You know, when you love any, that love will teach you to speak, it will
quicken the dullest wit and invention; love sharpeneth, and makes the rudest
tongue eloquent. It is the nature of love to set the heart on work, and when
the heart is set on work, the tongue will be as the pen of a ready writer. You
know how the Apostle setts it forth, Our heart is enlarged to you: love opens
the heart wide, and the heart opens the tongue wide: therefore if you love
the Lord much, you will be much in speaking of him. Consider therefore what
your speeches are concerning God, whether you your selves are ready to speak
much, and to delight to hear others speak also? whether you be glad of any
occasion, as those that love are glad to hear those that they love to be
spoken of?

Fifthly, It will do much and suffer much for the party beloved.
love will do much and suffer much for the party loved: Paul, as he was
abundant in love, so he was abundant in labor likewise; whosoever abounds in
love will abound in works also. Therefore see what you do for the Lord Jesus,
see what you suffer for his sake. When Christ came to Peter, and asked him that
question, Peter l^vest thou me? he puts him upon the try^ll by this fruit of
his love, Feed my Lambs: As if he should say, Peter, if thou will show that
thou love me, express it in doing something for my sake, Feed my Lambs:
herein thy love shall be discerned; do not say thou love me, and yet art
negligent in doing for me, Feed my Lambs. We shall not need to press this
much in this Congregation, because it belongs to the Ministry: Although you
have somewhat to do in it for the Magistracy also, whereby they may express
their love to the Lord Jesus, to help the feeding of Christ Lambs.

It is true, we are as the vines that bring forth the grapes, but you are as
the elmes that hold up those vines: the Magistrates feed the people as well
as the Ministers: therefore that phrase is applied to David, he was a
Shepherd. Therefore in your several occasions, when you meet with that which
may tend to the feeding of the people of God, when you shall labor so far as
may lie within your compass, that the Gospel may have a free passage, that
there may be more faithful and laborious Ministers set up in the several
places of the kingdom, the more you do this, the more you feed Christ's
lambs. And if you will show that love you have to the Lord, show it by feeding
his people, that is, by doing that which lies in your power tending to that
end, by doing of it zealously, with all your might. And as that was the work
that Christ put Peter upon for the trial of his love, so I may say to every
one of you, If you will show that you love the Lord Jesus, do the work that
belongs to your particular place; for every calling has a particular work in
it: if you love the Lord, be diligent in that way, in that calling which Christ
has given you to do him service in: and herein you shall show your love, as
it was Christ's own speech, I have glorified thy Name, that is, in that
particular work, in that charge which thou gave me to perform: so you must
show your love to God in doing the actions of your particular callings
diligently. You know, when that woman's heart abounded in love to Christ, how it
found out a way wherein it would show it self presently in breaking the box
of ointment, etc.

As it is said of faith, It is dead without works, so love is dead without
works, the Lord regards it not, it is a dead carcass, without motion. We
know it is the nature of love to be diligent: if you do love Christ, it will
make you diligent.

And as you will be ready to do much, so you will be ready to suffer much
also: these two I put together, because suffering is a kind of doing, only it
is a doing of things, when there is difficulty and hardness. Now if you love
the Lord Jesus, see what you will suffer for his sake; those that we love, we
are exceeding ready to suffer for. A husband that loves his spouse, is
exceeding ready to suffer any thing to enjoy her love, he is willing to suffer
any displeasure of parents, of friends, to suffer the loss of his estate, he
cares not for discredit in the world, he is ready to break through thick and
thin, and to do any thing, so he may obtain her love at the last: So if you
love the Lord Jesus, you will suffer any thing for his sake. It was an
excellent testimony of David's love, in 2 Samuel 6.21. 2 Samuel 6.21.
when David there dancing before the Arc was scoffed at by Michal his wife,
see what an answer he gives her, It is, says he, before the Lord: as if he
should say, I am willing to bear this at thy hands, for it is to the Lord who
has chosen me rather than thy father and all his house: As if he should say,
seeing it is the Lord, for whose sake I endure this rebuke at thy hands, I care
not for it, I am willing to do it, yea I will do it more, and be more vile in
mine own eyes, and expose my self yet to more scorn and derision, since it
is to the Lord who has chosen me rather than thy fathers house; so I say,
when any thing comes to be suffered for any good action, for any good cause,
(as indeed commonly such actions have sufferings joined with them) if you love
the Lord, you will be ready to go through it, and that with cheerfulness,
because it is to the Lord who has chosen you, and passed by so many thousands.
And therefore it was the commendation of those in Heb. 10. Heb. 10.
it was an argument of their sincerity, that they suffered the spoyl^ng of
their goods with joy. Whence came this, but from their love to the Lord? they
were so far from being backward to suffer, as that they were glad to have the
opportunity to suffer somewhat for his sake.

Object.
But you will say, I am ready to do much for the Lord, and I hope I am not
backward to suffer for him.

It is well if it be so, Answ.
but let me add this to all that I have said, In what manner do thou do
that thou do? You know the caution that the Apostle puts in, in 1 John 5.3.
Herein is love manifested, that we keep his commandments, 1 John 5 3. opened.
and his commandments are not grievous. Indeed herein is the reality of love
seen, that we keep the commandments of God. It is true, a man may do much
for Christ, and yet not love him; an hypocrite may go far in performances,
and yet though he does much, he may not love much: therefore you must examine
your selves by that, in what manner you do that which you do. Therefore it is
added, if we keep his commandments, and they be not grievous: as if he
should say, the manner of your doing is all in all, you must both do much, and
suffer much; but they must both be done willingly. You know, the wife and the
servant, they both serve the husband, and do much for him, both are alike
diligent, yet notwithstandi^g there is this difference, the wife does it out of
love, she does it in another manner, proceeding from another affection, aiming
at another end than the servant does. So two men may be diligent in keeping the
same commandment of the Lord; the one does it as one that loves the Lord
earnestly, being desirous to please him, as one that delights in the Lord,
nothing does more content him, that when he is in an opportunity wherein he may
express his love to the Lord, all his commandments are not grievous to him,
it is not respect to the reward, it is not an eye to the punishment that mooves
him.

A man indeed may do much for the Lord, when it is the respects that he has
to hell and to judgment, to heaven and the reward that moves him: Not but that
these may be motives; but yet you must remember this, that if these be the
principal, and if these only moove you, you do it not out of love, you take
but an aim from your selves. When a man has a business of his own to do,
you know how careful he is in it, and with what diligence he does it, how
often and how seriously he is devising with himself to bring his matters to
pass. Now if you love the Lord, the actions that you do, you will not do
them as those that are his slaves and servants, that do things for other
regards; And indeed such is the love for the most part that is among us now
adays, there is much formality in our actions, we have a form of godliness
without the power of it: even as in our love toward men, there are many
complements, and much profession of love one to another, but we find that
there is little true love: So we may take up a complaint against men in their
love to God, there is much formality, men are much in outward performances,
which is well, I confess, but alas, the power is wanting; it is all but
complementing with God, as it were, when you come and do these duties of Gods
worship, when you keep the Sabbath, and present your selves at prayers and at
Sermons, it is well you do so; but yet when your hearts are going after your
covetousness, and after your pleasures, after this or that particular humor,
the Lord looks upon this as upon a formal performance: it is another kind of
doing that the Lord requires at your hands. It may be you do duties in secret
and private, and it is a good property that you do so, but yet that is not
enough; you may do them as a task, that you are glad when the business is
done, and it is well that is over; but when you will do things out of love,
you must know that you must do it in another manner, not in this formality. If
you will serve the Lord out of love, it is not the praying to him morning and
evening that will content you, but it is the working upon your hearts, it is
the beating upon your affections till you have brought them to a good frame of
grace, till you have wrought upon your selves a sound and through renewing of
your repentance, you will never give over till your hearts be quickened in
prayer, till you have found that God has answered you, till you have had
experience of his mercy and loving kindness toward you.

So when you come to hear, is this all, (think you) that God requires of you,
to sit here, and lend us your ears for a little time? No, my Beloved, unless
you do it from love, unless you be moved to it from an inward principle,
from an entire and holy affection to God, it is nothing. You must labor to
have the word wrought upon your hearts, you must observe how you practice, and
how you bring forth into action that which you hear; for you do not learn a
thing here, when you come to hear the word, till you practice it, till your
hearts be transformed into it: Do not think that you have done the work,
when you have sat here and heard us, when you have gone home and repeated the
Sermon, and understand it: To hear as God would have you hear is another
thing: it is like your lessons in music, you say you have never learned them,
till you be able to practice them; so you never have learned the word of God
aright, till you have an ability in you to practice it.

To show you what love is, and what faith is, and what patience is, to make you
understand and conceive of it, it is nothing; but to have faith, to have
patience, to have love, to have your affections inflamed to the Lord, this is
the right hearing. As it is in physic, the understanding of the Physicians
bill is nothing, it is the taking and applying of that which is there written
that does good to your bodies; so is it with the doctrine that we preach, you
may understand it, and apprehend it, and conceive of it aright; but except you
bring it forth into your lives and actions, you learn it not. Therefore this
slight and overly performance is not a true testimony of your love to the Lord
Jesus, but the doing of it to purpose, so that God who searches the heart may
accept of it; the doing of it thoroughly that your hearts may be wrought upon,
this is a sign that your doing and suffering comes from Love.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
GALLAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


THE last thing that we did was to show you what were the properties of true
love, that by them you might try your selves whether you love the Lord Jesus or
no: we went through five in the morning, we now proceed.

Property of love, it is like fire in 4 things
Another property of love is this, it is full of heat: therefore in Cant. 8. it
is compared to coals of juniper: Cant 8.
and that phrase is used in Mat. 24.5. Mat: 24, 5.
Iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold. That antithesis
shows that love is a hot thing, hot as fire. Therefore if you would know
whether you love the Lord Jesus or no, consider what heat and what fire there
is in you.

Now what are the properties of fire? wherein does love and that agree?

Fire, you know, is the most active of all the

Besides, love as it is very active, so it is very

things, you will look upon them as trifles, you will not put the strength of
your minds to any thing else; this is the nature of love, it is vehement
toward the thing that it loves.

Moreover, it has also this property of fire, Much water cannot quench it, it
is as strong as death: Now death, you know, overcomes all; so will love, it
will break through all impediments. Consider whether you find this
disposition in your selves, that your hearts are still drawing nearer and
nearer the Lord, that they are still aspiring up toward heaven, that you are
still going onward and thriving in the work of grace.

But that which of all other things will manifest most to us this affection of
love, Property of love, it commands the affections, especially anger and
fear.
it is those affections which depend on it; you shall know it, I say, by the
affections that hang upon it. It is true that all the affections depend upon
love, but, for this time, I will instance but in two, namely, Anger, and Fear.


Look whatsoever it is that a man loves, where he finds any impediment in
the prosecution of it, he is angry, he desires with as much earnestness to
remoove that impediment, as he loves the thing.

Take any man even of the mildest disposition, if in any thing that he loves
much, and intends much, there be an intercurrent impediment that shall
interrupt him, he is angry, though otherwise he be of a most meek disposition.
For anger is but earnestness to remove the thing out of the way that hinders
us: whatsoever a man loves, he is angry with the impediments that hinder him
in it. Come now and examine your love to the Lord by your anger: that anger
that proceeds from love to the Lord, we call zeal: will you profess that you
love the Lord, and yet your hearts are not moved when he is dishonored? Think
with thy self when thou art wronged in thy name, or some body miscalleth thee,
misreports of thee, and prosecutes thee with evil speeches and revilings, is
not thy wrath kindled in thee against such a one? Well, if thou love the Lord
Jesus as thy self, as thou ought to love him above thy self, why are not
thy affections stirred in thee, when thou hear him dishonored, when thou
know that his Name is ill spoken of? If a man should take from thee thy
wealth, or any thing that is dear to thee; if a man should come and violate
thee with ill terms, thou would be angry with him, and be ready to fly in
the face of such an one. If you be thus affected to the Lord, and to his glory,
why do you not do the like for him? You know, David did the same: Mine eyes
gush out (says he) with rivers of water because men keep not thy Law.
Therefore know that, if you find not your hearts affected with the things that
belong to God, that there is no anger stirred up, it is a sure argument that
you love him not. It is observable that is said of old Ely, 1 Samuel 4.3. 1 Samuel
4.3.
when news was brought him that the Israelites were fled, that moved him not
so much when it was told him; morever that there was a great slaughter among
the people, that stirred him not neither; when it was told him yet that his
two sons Hophni and Phineas were slain, yet this did not so much affect him;
but when it was told him that the Ark of the Lord was taken, the text notes
something more than ordinary, that he was so stirred with it, that he fell
from his seat, and it cost him his life. Can you find this affection in your
selves, that you are not moved with the death of children so much, or for the
loss of your goods, or for your own particular discontents, as when you shall
hear that the glory is departed from Israel, that religion suffers any eclipse
in any place, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is hindered? This is a thing that
will try your love to the Lord. If you find that you can hear of the
desolation of the Churches, and of the increase and growing of Popery, and yet
you do not take it to heart to be affected with it, you do not grieve for it,
it is a sign that you want love to the Lord. You know what is noted of them in
Ierem. 36.24. when the King had done an abominable action, Ier. 36.24.
that he had cut the roll insunder that Jeremiah gave him, and cast it into
the fire that was upon the hearth before him, it is said that those that were
about him, did not rent their clothes, nor petition to him etc. As if he
should say; in this they discovered a wonderful want of love to the Lord, and
to his cause, that they were not moved with this dishonor, that was offered to
God, and to his servant, and to the cause of Religion at that time. You know
what disposition Paul had in this case Act. 17. He observed that the place,
Act. 17.
where he was, was given to Idolatry, the text says, His spirit was stirred in
him, his zeal and his anger was kindled in his breast. Therefore consider what
your affections to the Lord are by this holy anger that is in you. Moses you
know, was the meekest man upon the earth, and yet you know how he was moved,
how his zeal was kindled in his breast, when he saw the idolatry of the people.

In the next place consider your fear: For if you love the Lord, it will cause
you to fear and tremble at his word, and at his judgments, for whom a man
loves much, he regards much, and when a man regards another much, he is much
affected with what he does; Now when the Lord shall show some tokens of his
wrath, those that love him, and esteem of him, those that prize him, cannot
but be affected. Shall the Lion roar, and shall not the beasts of the field
tremble? Consider, how you are affected therefore, These sermons were preached
in the time of the great pestilence. 1625.
when the Lord shall discover any expression of his wrath, and what does he
else in this stroke, which is now upon this place; is there not wrath gone out
from the Lord? You know the plague is more particularly Gods hand, then any
other affliction: Therefore David says when he chose the plague, that he would
choose to fall into the hands of God, intimating that, in that buysinesse, God
was in a more peculiar manner the doer of it. As the thunder is said to be the
voice of the Lord, so the plague may properly be said to be the stroke of the
Lord, more peculiarly than any other affliction. Consider therefore what your
affections are in this case: for my beloved, let it not be in vain to you,
that the Lord stretches forth his hand as he does now at this time among us.
It is but yet in the beginning, and what is the Lords meaning in it? Is it not
as a messenger sent upon an errand? If it had its answer, if that were done,
for which the Lord had sent it, would he not remove it again? Would he not bid
the destroying Angel to put up his sword into his sheath? Doubtless he would,
if you would do that at the beginning of this sickness that must be done
before the Lord will remoove it from you.

You will say, Quest.
what shall we do then? I beseech you consider what commonly is the cause of a
plague among us. Answ.
Consider what has been the cause of the plague in former times. Causes of the
plague.
You shall find in Numb: 25. Numb. 25.
two causes of the plague. One was the superstition and Idolatry of the
people, they begann to be yokt with Idolatry, They joined themselves to Baal
Peor. I confess that sin was not yet grown to any great height, it was but
yet in the beginning, in the seeds, and yet you know how the Lord was offended
with them.

And the second was fornication, the sin of Idolatry, or into the sin of
Fornication, but yet the Lord was offended with the whole Congregation for
those that did it, as the manner is to be. So here you see two causes of a
plague, Idolatry which was but beginning, and the very admitting it into the
Camp; and the Fornication of the people.

David's numbering the people, it was their security and pride, and trusting to
themselves, and the creatures: for surely it was not David's sin only (who had
somewhat forgotten God, and trusted to his mountain, and thought that that was
strong enough) but it was the sin of the people.

It is good (my beloved) to be secure out of confidence upon God, and therein,
the more security the better; but to be secure for any outward help, either in
the number of men or ships, or strength or policy, or because we are compassed
about with the walls of the Sea, or whatsoeever it is wherein we think our
safety consists, the more confidence in this the worse. The Lord smott the
people for this security in David's time.

Many are sick among you (says the Apostle) and many are dead, because you
receive the Sacrament unworthily. The Lord is pleased to punish that particular
sin of receiving the Sacrament unworthily, with some sickness or other,
whether the plague or no, we cannot say, but this we may be sure of, that this
was the cause why so many were sick and dead. You know that passage in the
book of Chronicles concerning Ezekias, when the people had not prepared
themselves aright as they ought, he prayed to the Lord, and it is said, The
Lord healed the people: we cannot say what the Lord healed them of, but yet it
makes it evident that the Lord had some way smitten the^. Moses for the
omission of the Sacrament the Lord would have slain him, that is, he would
have sent something upon him, whether some disease, as is most probable, or
some other thing which should have taken away his life in the end. The omission
and negligent receiving of the Sacrament I put together, which mooveth God to
anger, and to inflict plagues upon a people.

I will name yet one more besides these, and Phineas stayed the plague? Numb.
25. Numb. 25.
Because his love was hot, and his anger was kindled in a holy manner against
that Israelitish man, and the Mid^anitish woman, that had committed fornication
among the people. If the zeal of Phineas was the cause of staying that plague,
and of withholding the Lords hands, then surely the coldness of those from whom
the Lord looks for much heat, for much fervency of spirit, whom God expects
should stand in the gappe, I say, that is the cause that the Lord goes on in
punishing.

Quest.
But what should we do now to remove it?

Answ.
Amend the things that are amiss, repent and amend, and he will turn from his
fierce wrath, which he not only intends against us, but is also already upon
us; Labor to cleanse your hands from idolatry and superstition, and cleanse
the land from the crying sin of uncleanness and fornication, and every man
labor to cleanse his own heart.

And again, to turn to the Lord, to take heed of security, which is a
forerunner of a ruin, as a great calm is a forerunner of an earthquake.

Again, take heed of receiving the Sacrament unworthily, many of you this day
have received; therefore I should speak something particularly to them, but in
truth this concerns all among us; but chiefly let me speak to those a little
that are able to pray, that have some fire in them, that have had the work of
grace in their hearts wrought by the Spirit of God, that have some sparks if
they were blown up, that are men fit to stand in the gap; It belongs to you,
my brethren to do something that the Lord may stay his hand: and remember that
when the Lord begins to send forth tokens of his wrath and displeasure against
a Nation, it is a time wherein he expects and looks for humiliation and
repentance: Therefore take heed of neglecting that in Isay 22. Isay 22.
In that day (says the Lord) when I called for humiliation, behold killing of
fatlings and oxen, etc. Therefore know what your duty is, and learn now to
see what belongs to you to do, show your love to the Lord in trembling at his
judgments, in being zealous for his Names sake: as indeed where there is
abundance of love there is always exceeding much zeal: So it was with Paul,
so it was with Elias, so it was with Moses, so it has been with all the
Saints. And so much for this.

Another property of love is this, Property of love, it does things freely.
that it does not play the huckster with the Lord (as we say) it does not
bring things to an exact account, but when a man loves, he is willling to do
what offices of love and friendship he can, and he does not stand to look for
an exact recompense; (for that is to play the huckster, to make a bargain with
God) but the nature of love and true friendship, wheresoever it is found, is
this, to be free in doing that it does, and not to stand to examine how much
they shall do, and how much they shall receive for doing of it; but to do it
with liberty and with freedom. And so it will be if your love be right to the
Lord, you will not stand halfepeny-worthing, you will not stand considering
what you are bound to do of necessity, whether you are bound to pray in your
families or no, whether you are bound to keep the Sabbath so exactly and
precisely as is commanded; whether you are bound from giving so much liberty to
your selves in vain speeches, etc. but love will rather say, what shall I do
to recompense the Lord? It will be devising what to do, it will be glad of any
occasion of doing any thing that may be acceptable to God. When you set limits
to your selves, and are afraid of going too far, and doing too much, it is a
sign that what you do comes not from love to the Lord, but from some
natural principle, it comes from your selves, and not from the spirit. For if
you love the Lord Jesus aright, why do you not labor to exceed in the duties
of obedience? why do you blame those that go further than your selves are
willing to do? why do you quarrel with that exactness and preciseness, and
strictness which is required in walking in the ways of God? Love is abundant
in the work it does, and if you love the Lord, you will not set limits to your
selves, you will not have such thoughts as these, I will do as much as may
bring me to heaven, and no more, I will take so much pains as that I may not
be damned, but to exceed, and do more than needs, this I hope may be spared,
and I may go to heaven notwithstanding well enough, though I go not so fast
as other men. No, Beloved, if there be love in you, you will strive to do the
utmost of your power, it is the nature of love so to do.

Again, you will not be so exact, nor indent with the Lord what he will do
to you; but though the Lord be slow and slack in rewarding you, though he stay
long, and suffer you to go on without taking any notice of you, as it were,
nay perhaps he gives you many afflictions and persecutions, poverty, trouble,
sickness, etc. though the Lord does not do what you expect, yet your love
will be free, it will go on, you will be ready to say as Paul did, I know whom
I have trusted: that is, he was resolved to serve the Lord, to do his utmost,
though the Lord did reserve himself and the recompense of reward to a further
time, yet he was content. Such a disposition will be found in those that love
the Lord Jesus.

Again you may judge of your love to the Lord Jesus by another property of
love, Property of love, hatred of sin.
which is a hatred of sin, by your hatred of that which is contrary to him;
for love is not better known by any thing than by hatred; for all hatred is
properly rooted in love: for you hate nothing but because you love the
contrary; therefore if you love the Lord Jesus, you will hate sin. Examine
your selves by this, for it is a sure rule, if you love the Lord, you will hate
that which is evil.

You will say, Object.
I hope I do that.

It is well if you do, Answ.
but let us consider that: it may be you may be angry with sin, but do you
hate sin? That was the commendations that the Lord gives the Church, in Rev.
2. Thou hate the works of the Nicholaitans which I also hate. Rev. 2.
Therefore, if you would know whether you love the Lord Jesus, try it by this,
do you hate sin?

You will say, How shall we know whether we hate it or no?

Answ.
In these three things you shall find wherein hatred differs from anger, Three
differences between hatred and anger.
and thereby you may examine your selves.

First, hatred is more of generals; a man hates

and rooted out of you? to have your lusts thoroughly and perfectly mortified?
are you willing to have sin so clean taken away, that you may have any no
liberty to have dalliance with it in any kind? do you hate it so as that you
cannot endure to come near it, nor to have it within your sight? It is a sign
you hate it indeed.

Lastly, hatred differs from anger in this,

Many a man takes resolutions to himself, I will be drunk no more, I will be
a gamester no more, I will not commit such, and such gross sins, as I have
done any more; perhaps some shame, or some fear has followed him, some deep
apprehension of wrath and judgment, which set him upon this resolution for the
present; but if the heart be right that thou hate sin as thou should, thou will continue hating of it. Therefore consider, whether you love the Lord Jesus
by this trial, whether your hearts hate sin, in your constant resolution or
no. This was the disposition that was in Lot, His righteous soul was vexed
with the unclean conversation of the Sodomits, that is, he did not only
abstain from the acts that they did, but his soul wrought against them, he
was vexed with them, as a man is vexed with a thing that is contrary to his
disposition.

So it is said of Moses, he stood in the door of the Tabernacle, and he wept
as he stood, his heart was moved in him. It is not enough to abstain from
sin, but to hate sin, and that is an argument of our love to the Lord
Jesus: take this therefore for an other trial of your love.

Again, there is one more which we cannot leave out, Property, it loves the
Saints.
though it be a thing known unto you, yet because the Scripture gives it as a
peculiar sign by which we may judge of our love to the Lord, it must not be
passed by, and that is our love to the Saints; and there is good reason given
of it, if we consider it well, 1 Ioh. 4.20. Will thou say thou love God whom
thou have not seen, 1 John 4.20, opened.
and yet love not thy brother whom thou have seen? The meaning is this, for
a man to love the Lord who is immortal, invisible, who dwells in light
inaccessible, is a more difficult thing than to love thy brother whom thou
see. For why do we love the Lord, but because we conceive him under such a
notion? we think of him as such a God having such and such attributes: Now,
says the Apostle, whatsoever thou conceivest of God, that very image and
disposition is stamped on man like thy self, thou shall see the very same
disposition in a holy man that is in the Lord himself. Indeed it differs in
the degree exceedingly, there is but a glimpse of it, yet why is it said that
the Image of God is renewed, but that there is in holy men a disposition like
the nature of God? Now this is in a more remiss degree in man, and therefore
more suitable to our weakness; as you know, difficulty comes from
disproportion, it is a harder thing to love the Lord than a man like our
selves. If therefore we do not love men like our selves, in whom is stamped a
disposition like the nature of God, and his Image, in some degree, surely we
cannot love the Lord who is so far above us.

Again, a man like our selves is visible, we see his actions, we hear him
speak, we know more plainly the frame of his disposition; and therefore it is
more easy to love a holy man than to love the Lord: For so is the Apostles
argument. Do not think that thou love the Lord whom thou never saw, when
thou do not love thy brother whom thou see daily. Therefore we may
conclude thus much, if we love not the Saints and holy men, it is certain we
love not the Lord.

I confess every man is ready to say (in this case) he loves holy men.

I would put you to this trial, Trials of our love to holy men.
and ask you but this question; you shall know it by this: Do you love all
the Saints? You shall find that the Paul still in his Epistles puts in that
caution, Love to all the Saints. If thou love grace and holiness, thou will
love it wheresoever it is. Many men will love some particular grace, especially
when it suteth with their disposition, and is agreeable to them, and to their
constitution, but to love all grace, to love all holiness in all the Saints
wheresoever it is found, it is an infallible sign that thou love the Lord
Jesus.



But, you will say, would you have us to love none but the Saints? I answer, it
is true, we ought to love all others with a love of pity, we should show
abundance of this love to all mankind; but then there is a love of
complacencie and delight, and with this love we ought to love none but the
Saints.



as if you were out of your element, you move as if you were out of your own
center? It is impossible but that those that are moved by the same spirit
should be best pleased when they are in one and the same society. Put all these
things together, and by these you may judge whether you love the Saints or no.

You will object, Object.
I do love the Saints, but who are they? I love not hypocrites, and so it is
made a notable excuse.

I will not wish thee to love hypocrites, Answ.
only take heed thou suffer not the impes and instruments of the Devil to
paint out the true Saints unto thee in the colors of hypocrites: thou must
consider that it has been the usual manner to cast that aspersion upon all
the Saints, upon all holy men in all ages, as the Apostle says in 2 Cor. We
are as deceivers though true: 2 Cor. 6.
that is the common esteem that the world has of the Saints, they judge them
to be deceivers, and to be men that profess themselves to be otherwise than
they are. You know what was said of Jesus Christ, some said of him he was a
good man, others said nay, he was a deceiver of the people. You know what was
said of David, that he was a subtle man, one that went about to deceive others.
Paul, you know, was reckoned the great impostor of the world; this was always
laid upon the Saints: therefore let not the Devils instruments deceive thee in
that.

Besides, why are they hypocrites? Is it because there are some shows of
holiness in them? Surely that is not argument enough.

Thou will say, because they do not answer that which in their profession they
make show to be?

If that be the reason, why do thou not pitch thy hatred upon those that are
found to be so? And to conclude this, you must know, that no man speaks
against religion or hates religion, under its own notions, under its own
name, but something else must be put upon it, the name of hypocrisy, or the
like.

And it is the common condition of men whose hearts are not upright, that they
are not able to judge aright of the ways of God; a man that has not grace
himself cannot possibly judge aright of grace in others: but I hasten. I must
now proceed in the point I formerly began to insist on, namely, in showing you
the means of getting this love, and of increasing it.

I showed formerly somes means to get this love and to increase it.

As first prayer, for it is the gift of the Spirit.

Secondly, to beseech the Lord to show himself to you.

We will add but one now at this time, to show you the way more fully to
obtain this love.

If you would love the Lord, Two impediments of the love of Christ.
remove the impediments.

What are those?

They are two.

Strangenes, and uncircumcision of heart, or worldly mindedness.

First, Strangenes.
strangeness is agreat impediment to love. It is an observation that the
Philosophers has, that strangenes when we do not salute, and converse one
with another, is a means of dissolving friendship; so in this case, when there
grows a strangeness between God and us, it unties and loosens that love and
communion that should be between us. Therefore, if you would preserve your
love to the Lord, suffer not your hearts to sit loose from him, suffer not a
strangenes to grow between God and you. For strangeness breeds fearfulness,
and fearfulness looseneth love, as boldness is the parent and nurse of love,
and that which increases it.

Besides, when there grows a strangeness between God and us, we begin not
to know the Lord, there grows an ignorance, and so there is an intermission of
those reciprocal offices of love between us; that even as it is among the
Saints, the forsaking of their fellowship looseneth their love, and so stops
the intercourse of good duties that should be among them: so it is with the
Lord. And therefore if you would maintain love with the Lord, draw near to
him, and he will draw near to you.

How shall we do that? Quest.


By speaking much to him, Answ.
by hearing him speak to us, by retiring to him upon all occasions for
consolation and comfort.

If thou receive any injury from men, wrangle not with them, but do as David
did, betake thy self to prayer, take heed of sin, for that of all other
things will breed a strangeness between God and thee; and if you do fall
out, seek to be reconciled again as soon as may be, labor to entertain a
continual commerce between God and thy self, observe constantly his dealing
with thee, and observe again thy carriage toward hm, this will breed a
familiarity between God and thee.

And above all, be much in prayer; for that in a special manner maintains and
increases this communion and familiarity between the Lord and thee.

Uncircumcision of heart.
Again, the other thing that hinders is uncircumcision of heart, or
worldly-mindednesse: in Deuteronomy. 30.6. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
I will circumcise your hearts, and you shall love me with all your souls, and
with all your hearts. As if he should say, that which keeps you from loving
me, from delighting in me, is the uncircumcision of your hearts, that is, your
worldly lusts, and worldly cares, and worldly desires, when these abound in our
hearts, they keep us from loving the Lord: Therefore in 1 John 2. 1 John 2.
If you love the world, the love of the Father is not in you. Come to any
particular, and you shall find it so; if you love wealth, you cannot love the
Lord, if you love pleasures, if you love praise with men, if you love honors,
etc. you cannot love the Lord; the love of God, and vain glory, the love of
God and covetousness will not stand together. Therefore if you will love the
Lord, you must have your hearts circumcised, that is, you must have these
sinful lusts cut off; for nothing quenches love so much as these. You know,
the love of an adulterer quenches the conjugall love of the wife to the
husband: your love of the world is adultery, the Scripture calls it so;
therefore if you love that, it will quench your love to the Lord.

You will say, Quest.
May we not love the things of the world?

Yes, my brethren, Answ.
only take heed that it be not an adulterous love.

How shall we know that? Quest.


You shall know it by this, Answ.
if it do lessen your love to God: When love to the creature is adulterous.
You may know whether your love to any creature, to any sport or recreation be
adulterous or no. A chaste wife may love many men besides her husband; but if it
once begin to lessen her love to her husband, that is an adulterous love:
Therefore if you would love the Lord aright, be sure to cut off this, for it
breeds a distance between God and you. As it is said of Absalom, when the
hearts of the people went with Absalom, they fell from David the King; so when
our hearts are stolen away with the love of earthly things, our love to the
Lord is lessened with it. Therefore I say, if you will love the Lord aright,
you must be careful to remove this: for the cares of the world, the lusts and
diverse pleasures, these choke the love of the Lord, they are the greatest
quench-coales of any other.

Love, you know, is of an uniting quality, when any thing lies between God
and us, Note.
that, you may be sure, will hinder our love. Now there are many things that
lie between God and us.

Some things lie in our understandings, temptations to atheism, temptations to
think that the Scriptures are not true, temptations to judge amiss of God in
any thing, temptations to doubt of the favor of God; These lie in the
understanding between God and us, and are contrary to love: for love uniteth.

But in the will there lies much more, sometimes vain hopes, sometimes vain
fears, sometimes one thing, sometimes another. If there be any inordinate lust
after any creature, after any thing in the world, it lies between God and us,
and makes a separation between us; and till that be removed, God and we cannot
come together, till there be an union we cannot fully love. Therefore if you
would love the Lord, have your hearts circumcised, that is, have those things
removed out of your understanding, and out of your will. Take away those
obstacles that lie between God and you: And if you cannot do it your selves,
go to Christ, it is he that circumciseth us with the circumcision made without
hands.

Knowledge of God especial help to make us love him.
Again, when you have done this, that you may grow in love to the Lord, learn
to know the Lord; for the more you know him, the more you will love him. What
is the reason that the Angels in heaven so love him? Because they know him.
What is the reason that we shall love him more in heaven than we do now, but
because we shall know him more? Therefore when you read the Scriptures, and
observe the works of Gods providence in every particular, learn by this to
know God: as you know a man by his actions and carriage, learn to have such an
Idea of God, as he has described himself in his word, that he is true of his
word, that he is full of goodness, that he is abundant in long-suffering and
patience, that he is exceeding merciful beyond measure, etc. labor to see
his wisdom, his goodness, and his mercy, labor to know God: for when you
come to know him aright, by that we come to love him. Why do we love one man
more than another, but because we conceive him under such a notion, we
conceive his heart to be of such and such a frame, we think him to be a man
of such and such a condition? when we thus conceive the Lord, it will teach us
to love him more. Therefore this you must know, that for you only to look
upon things that are beneficial to you, as forgiveness of sins, and adoption,
and an inheritance in heaven, that is not love to the Lord. It is true, you
should do all this, but that which you are principally to do, is to look to
the essence of God, to see such excellencies in him, that thereby you may be
led home to him: and therefore that you may know him the better, you must be
taught of him. Again, you must not only know him, but you must likewise have
assurance of his love to you: for when you know the excellencies of the Lord,
unless you have assurance of his love to you, it is not sufficient. Take a man
of the highest place, and of the most excellent quality; if thou conceive that
he has a hollow heart toward thee, thou can not possibly love him: thou
must be persuaded of the love of the Lord to thee. Therefore in the Text it is
said to be faith which works by love. The increase of the assurance of Gods
love therefore is the means to increase thy love to him.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
GALAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


THE last thing we did was to give you the properties of love to the Lord
Jesus.

Now that which remains to do at this time, is to apply that which has been
said, that is, to bring your hearts and the rule together, and to exhort you,
that what you have heard in this, it may not pass like airy notions, and never
be brought home to your particular practice. For, my beloved, the word that we
deliver to you, should be like nails, driven home to the head, fastened by the
masters of the assembly, as the Wiseman speaks, that they may stick and
abide in the soul, as forked arrows do in the body, that they may not
easily fall out again. Therefore the maine business that we have to do in
preaching the word, is to fasten these words thus upon your hearts. That which
we will do therefore at this time shall be to exhort you to question your own
hearts, and to examine them upon your beds, whether these characters and
properties of love which have been delivered do agree to you or no. For, as
the Apostle says, Unless you be in Christ, that is, unless you be knit to
Christ in love, you are reprobates: it concerns every man therefore that
hears me at this time, to examine this strictly with himself.

We will expostulate the matter a while with you at this time, and you must
expostulate the matter between God and your own consciences, whether this
love be in you or no. And although indeed this needs not any distinct
dividing into branches, yet that we may help your memories we will put it
into a number.

Use, Examination.
And first we will make this expostulation, you that profess you love the Lord,
(as who will not be ready to do that, to say he loves Christ; but yet as the
Apostle John speaks of love to the brethren, that men love them in show, and
not in truth; so it is with most men, they love the Lord in word, and in
profession, but they love him not in deed, and in truth) therefore first let me
ask you this.

You that profess you love the Lord, 1. Trial.
do you not grieve him, and vex him from day to day, and provoke him by your
words, and by your works? If this be your case, it is certain you love him
not indeed. Some there are that profess much love to the Lord Jesus, but yet
spend their time idly, are diligent in no calling, but waste their precious
opportunities in sports, in idle visitations, in gaming, in doing nothing that
is profitable either to themselves or others, but eat and drink, and rise up
to play: It is the case of many of our young Gentlemen; a shameful thing
before men, and abominable in the sight of God, that men should live like
beasts, and make their souls like the souls of swine, serving for nothing but
to keep their bodies from putrefaction, doing so much the less work, because
they have the more wages; burying so many precious talents, whereof their time
is the chief, because it helps to improove all the rest; of which they shall
give an exact account at that day, When God shall judge the secrets of men's
hearts according to our Gospel. Do you profess that you love the Lord Jesus,
and do you neglect him thus?

Besides this mocking of the Lord, and dissembling with him, you deal most
foolishly with your selves: for all the comfort that you shall ever find in
this life, it will be from working, from being serviceable to God, and
profitable to men; empty lives cause but empty joy. Therefore if any man shall
find this to be his case, examine it, it is but a false profession of love.
And as I speak to those that are young, that spend their time, Nihil agendo:
so I may say the same to those that are of more years, that waste their lives
in doing something indeed, but it is not that which they should do, or in
doing it in another manner than they ought; those that are so drowned in
business, so overwhelmed with employment, so occupied with outward things
abroad, that they have no vacancie to feed their souls within, to cloathe
them with graces. For you must know, my brethren, that your souls have need
to be trimmed every morning, as well as the body, they have need of breakfast,
and dinner, and exercise, as well as the body; and as you fail in giving this
due respect to the soul daily, so you shall find that proportionably in that
degree the inward man will languish, and grow faint. But to speak a word unto
you likewise: Do you think that you love the Lord Jesus in good earnest, and
yet have scarce leisure to think of him from morning to night, that you cannot
take time to speak to him, to seek him, nor to prepare your hearts for him?

Besides this general, come to particular sins, sabbath-breaking, neglecting
of private prayer, vain speeches, concupiscence and sinful lusts, secret
courses of uncleanness, swearing, if not by greater, yet by lesser oaths,
which indeed in this exceed the greater; because in the other you swear by
the Creator, in these by the creature. You that do these things, will you say
you love the Lord? You must know that it is a contradiction, it is impossible:
For, if you love me, keep my commandments: if you keep not the commandments
of God, certainly you love him not.

But, Object.
it may be, you will say that your meaning is good, that you are well affected
to Christ, and therefore surely you do not hate him.

My brethren, Answ.
you are deceived in this, thy meaning is not good; for while you cast the
commandments of God behind you, you cast him away: and let me say to you in
this case, as you have it in Ier. 3.4. You profess well in saying, Ier. 3.4.
Thou art my Father, and the guide of my youth, but you do evil more and
more. So I say, when you profess you love the Lord, and that you reckon him
your Father, and your Husband, thus you say indeed, but you do evil more and
more; and that is a certain argument you love not the Lord. Therefore examine
your selves by this rule: For, if you love the Lord, you will reverence him:
You know, whom we love, we reverence, and whom we reverence, we dare not do
any thing unmeete in their sight. Take any one whom we love, whose good opinion
we seek for, we had rather that all the world should see us do an unseemely
thing, than that he should; and certainly if you love the Lord, you would not
dare to provoke him to anger. Therefore this carelessness in serving of him is
a certain sign of want of love to the Lord Jesus, this fearfulness, and
carelessness, when you dare not show your courage for him, when you account it
a small matter to commit a sin against God, this arises from the defect of
your love.

2. Trial.
In the second place, as you may try your love by your taking care not to offend
God, so likewise you may try it by your sorrow and grief after you have
offended him: For you must know this, that love, as it has the greatest joy of
any thing else, when it obtaines that which it would have, so it is attended
with the most exquisite grief, when it is disappointed. As when one loves
another earnestly, if any breach fall out that shall make a separation between
them, if any strangeness grow between them, if they love, they will never be
at rest, it will trouble and disquiet them; but as the Scripture speaks, they
are sick of love, that is, they cannot be quiet while there is such a
condition, while there is any alienation, while there are breaches and offenses
between them. for you know that nothing is so sweet as love; as you have it
in Cant. 1. Cant 1. Psalm. 63.3.
Love is better than wine: and as David expresses it, Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving
kindness is better than life. So sweet (I say) is love, as sweet as wine,
and better than life. Now, by the rule of contraries, then, to have a breach
made, to have a bar, and an interruption in this loving kindness of the Lord
toward us, or in our love toward him, it is bitter as wormwood, and sharp
as death. Therefore you may examine your selves by the offenses you offer to
God, when they are past; if you love him, it is certain they will trouble you
exceedingly; for so much sorrow for sin, so much love. And you may take it
for a sure rule, in what measure any man desires to please the Lord, in that
measure he will be grieved that he has displeased him. Therefore examine thy
self, Have thou sinned against him many times, and do thou look back upon
those sins in a careless manner, be sure that thou love him not. Examine
this by that which passes between man and man: When a father or a husband
has any thing committed against them by a child or a wife, if they shall
withdraw themselves, and profess themselves displeased, and yet the child or
the wife, in the mean time, be never troubled at this, but be at rest, well
enough content it should be so, and are not disquieted for it; will not the
parent or husband take this exceeding ill at their hands, when he sees his
displeasure slighted? For this is much greater than the offense it self. So I
may say, whatsoever the sin be that you have committed, this hardness of
heart, this negligence after the sin is committed, when you are not
disquieted for it, when your hearts are not troubled for it, it is a greater
sign of want of love to the Lord, it is a greater sign of an evil and
untoward disposition, than the sin it self. Therefore this want of sorrow
for sin, is a sure argument that you love not the Lord. You may take that for
one sign of want of love, that we commit sins against God from day to day.
For, do but go to your neighbors, and profess your love to them, and yet
you injure them again and again, you care not what wrong you do them; will
they think that such a profession as you make is true? and will the Lord
regard, when you say that you love him, if you provoke him to anger, and renew
your sins, and relapse into them again and again, and when you have sinned,
take it not to heart? No, my brethren, if you do love him, Zach. 12.
you will do as it is said, Zach. 12. when you have sinned, you will mourn as
he that mourns for his only son, your hearts will melt, as Iosiahs did;
your hearts will smite you, as David's did him: thus it is with all that love
him in deed and in truth. Levit 16.29. and 23.27.
Therefore in Levit. 16.29, and likewise Levit. 23.27. (they are both one and
the same) the Lord appoints a feast and a meeting together for cleansing of
sins, it was the feast of atonement; says he, In that day when you come
together to offer sacrifice unto me, and to make an atonement, you shall
humble your souls, and whosoever does not afflict his soul on that day, he
shall be cut off from his people. As if he should say, At that day you come to
reconcile your selves to the Lord, you make profession of your love to him, and
of the desire you have to be friends with him: Now, if you come and make this
profession, and do not humble your selves, nor afflict your souls on that day
for those breaches that have been between God and you, all your professions
are but dissimulation; and such a man as will thus dissemble with the Lord,
shall be cut off from his people. So I say, when you profess that you love the
Lord, and yet have hard hearts, that there is no softness there, that your
hearts do not melt toward him, but when you have sinned, you can look back
upon your sins without any disturbance at all, know that it is but
dissembling with the Lord, and you are worthy to be cut off from his people.

I come to a third trial: 3. Trial.
If you love the Lord Jesus, have you your hearts after his own heart? that is
the disposition of all those that love him. Acts 13.22. the Lord says of
David,. I have found a man after my own heart, Acts 13.22.
that will do whatsoever I will: That is, look how the Lord himself was
affected in any business, so was David's heart affected, and so it is with all
those that love the Lord: (for this is proper to the Saints) If you love the
Lord, you will be of one heart with him; if we have hearts after his heart, as
every Christian must have in his measure, (though perhaps he reach not David's
measure) in all the turnings of our lives, upon all occasions, in the diverse
disposition of our wills, we will be conformable to the Lords will, we will be
like God, affected in every thing as he is affected.

But, Quest.
you will say, this is a hard thing, how shall we discern it?

You shall discern it by these two things: Answ.
If you be affected as he is, you will do whatsoever he will; as those words
are added concerning David, I have found a man after mine own heart, for he
will do whatsoever I will. You may examine your selves by that; do you do
whatsoever he will? are your affections aright, that you love what he loves,
and hate what he hates? For your actions are the immediate fruits and effects
of your affections, and as every man is affected so he does.

And besides, as that is one way to discern it, so this is another which you
shall likewise find in David, that he loved those that feared the Lord; and
those that love vain inventions, do I not hate them, says he? etc. And that
you may discern this, consider whether you love all those that fear the Lord,
and hate all those that are enemies to the Lord. For while there is nothing but
nature in a man, so long those that are of good natures, that are fair in
their carriages, and kind and loving to us, those we love, and those that are
contrary we hate and dislike; but when you love the Lord, and are after his
heart, and have another nature in you, it raises you above this nature of your
own, and then you will love those that are like the Lord, whosoever they are,
though perhaps they are not so sociable, not of so fair a natural
disposition: but if you have a new nature, and are become new creatures, now
you have common friends, and common enemies.

Object.
Do not object now, that you are willing to do so, if they were sincere and
upright, but they are hypocrites.

I say, Answ.
do not deceive your selves in this: for as they rejected Christ under the
person of a counterfeit, and of a wine-bibber, so thou may persecute Christ
under the person of an hypocrite. Paul; you know, he thought he did God good
service in persecuting those whom he persecuted, yet though he did it
ignorantly, he confessed of himself that he was a blasphemer, and a
persecuter: So I say, though you do it ignorantly, under the person of an
hypocrite, yet that is the judgment, and the censure that will be upon you,
that in so doing you are persecuters.

And if you shall say, Object. 2
that if the Lord himself lived amongst us, if Jesus Christ were here, I hope
I should show that I do not hate him.

You shall see what the Lord himself says, Answ.
In that you have done it to these, you have done it to me. As he speaks
there in the matter of giving, so may I say to you concerning this case, in
that you have despised those that fear his name, in that you have spoken
against such as are his, you have done it against the Lord: in this thing you
have showed your hatred against him. Examine your hearts therefore seriously by
this mark.

Again, 4. Trial.
fourthly, we will bring you to that expostulation which is grounded on 1 Ioh.
2.15. 1 John 2.15.
Love not the world, nor ^he things of the world; for if you love the world,
the love of the Father is not in you. Now question with your own hearts about
this, whether you love the world, and the things of the world; for if you do,
the words are clear, The Love of the Father is not in you.

Quest.
You will say, how shall we know this?

Answ.
You shall know it by these three things.

Three trials of our love to the world.
First, by your delight in the things of the world, and your grief and sorrow
for the loss

Whereas when you love the Lord, you will be indifferent in those things; if a
worldly loss befall you, you will grieve as if you grieved not; if any worldly
advantage happens, you will enjoy it as if you enjoyed it not: A man will be
thus affected, If I have God sure, I reckon him only my portion, all other
things are by accident, he only is essential to my happiness.

We do not deny that a man may grieve upon such occasions, but it is a
lighter kind of grief; and therefore it is expressed well by the former
phrase, As if he grieved not: He knows all this while the maine is sure, and
so long his heart is steadfast within him: but when a man shall fall into
excessive grief, when the affection shall be exceedingly stirred about worldly
things, it is a sign that you reckon not God, and the assurance of his favor
to be the maine thing in your happiness: you should be affected to the world
with a remiss affection. Now when your affections are so much taken up about
them, it is a sign you love the world, and the things of the world. It is
true, you may do the things of the world, and enjoy them, and follow after
them, but in a remiss manner; but when your affections are so much stirred
about them, when you come to excessive love in the having them, and excessive
grief in the losing of them, it is a sign that you love the world, and the
things of the world.

Secondly, you shall know it by this, when Go, (says he) and sell all that
thou have, and come and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. When
it came in competition once, whether he were best to follow Christ, and sell
all that he had, and that he must either forsake Christ, or forsake his riches,
he went away sorrowful, and would not do it. So we shall find it in John
12.42. when the matter came there into competition, Ioh. 12.42.
that if they confessed Christ they should be cast out of the synagogue; says
the text, though they believed, They confessed him not, for they loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God. Their carriage there toward Christ,
when their confessing of him came in competition with their applause and honor
among men, it was an argument that they loved the world, and the things of the
world.

You shall see in Abraham's case, when the Lord would put him to the trial, and
bidds him come from his kindred and from his fathers house, Heb. 11.
and from his Country, this in Heb. 11 is taken as an argument of his love,
that when he was put to do either the one or the other, he made his choice
to obey the Lord, though it stood with the loss of Country and friends. So I
say, consider with your selves, and you shall find many cases wherein your
conscience will dictate to you, this you must do, this you ought to perform,
this you ought not to do. Perhaps it shall be said unto you again, if you do
it, you shall lose such a friend, you shall lose such credit, you shall suffer
such loss in your estate, you shall expose your self to such and such danger,
you shall incur such and such inconveniences to your self; consider what you
do in such a case: Many businesses fall out every day, wherein the like case
is offered to you, many times you think it were best to do so, and if it were
not for the loss of some thing, or for the discredit, you would do it. By
this you may examine your hearts whether you love the world or no.

Lastly, you shall know whether you love the world, and the things of this
world by your actions; for where your love is, there your tongue, and your hand
will be, and all your endeavors: Now try your selves by this, Are you
occupied so abour the world, and the things of it, that all your endeavors and
all your actions are taken up about them? some about matter of pleasure, in
hunting and hawking, in gaming and sporting, your thoughts are there, and your
speeches there; others again in seeking wealth, and worldly greatness: Are
you taken up about these? I say, the actions of a man are a sure sign, for the
Lord judges us by our actions; therefore we may judge our selves by them.
Consider in what element you live, if you be so busied about worldly things,
that you are never well but when you are there, and as for heavenly things, you
do them but by the by, and when you are doing them you are weary; this is an
argument that you love the world, when a man shall turn the stream of his
endeavors all that way, when he shall turn all his projects, all his actions,
all his labors into that. As when the body has a wen or a wolf in it, all
the nourishment is drawn to that, and in the mean time the body is lean and
poor: so is it when a man's heart is taken up with the world, it eats up and
devoures all the thoughts, all the intentions of the mind; all his care, and
endeavor, and striving runs this way; and the hidden man of the heart, in
the mean time, is left starved and pined within: This is a sign that you love
the world, this so much intending the things of the world, as Christ speaks,
The lusts of your Father will you do, John 8. John 8.
What is the meaning of that? That is, look to your actions, to your doings,
to your executions and performances, and you shall find that they are
according to the lusts of your father the Devil; those actions they did were a
sign that they did affect those things that the Devil affected.

But you will object, the holiest man, he that is most regenerate, Object.
yet is inordinately affected to the world, is too ready to grieve, and to
rejoice inordinately, it too ready to fail when these things come in
competition with God. Therefore how should we examine our hearts by this?

Answ.
I answer in a word, that it is true in the Saints, there is something in their
hearts that does all this that I have spoken; but it is not they that do it:
as the Apostle speaks, It is not I, but sin that dwells in me: We cannot
deny but that there is flesh and worldlie-mindednesse even in them; but yet
this they do, these worldly lusts and desires they are still checking them,
and restraining them, and keeping them down, so that though they be there, yet
they do not walk after the vanity of their minds, they are not led by it,
but they are led by the Spirit, and walk by the Spirit. Indeed sometimes they
fall, when they are transported with temptations, and through incogitancie, and
infirmity, yet their constant walking is not after the vanity of their mind,
for that is proper to those that fear not God. Therefore know thus much (my
brethren) that though the Saints do these things sometimes, yet their purpose,
and their desire and care is to cross and resist them as much as they can,
that though they have these inordinate worldly desires in them, yet they are
not midwives to themselves, to bring forth fruit to the flesh, they are not
stewards to provide for these beforehand, Romans 13.
as it is in Romans 13. Put ye on the Lord Jesus, and take no care for the flesh,
to make provision for it: I say, they are not stewards for their lusts, but
they resist them, and strive against them. But to conclude this also, examine
your selves by this rule, whether you love the world, and the things of the
world.

And if we take an examination of men by this, how few are there that love the
Lord? We may truly say as the Apostle says, The love of God is not in them,
for men seek themselves, and their own things, and not the things of Jesus
Christ. One follows this particular, another that, every man fitting and
plotting a garment to himself composed of such vices as do suite every man's
humor. This is a sign that you love not the Lord, when you mind the world,
and go with the world, and let your whole body and soul follow it, with all
the actions, and all the strength and endeavor thereof. The love of many shall
wax cold, because iniquity shall abound. What is the meaning of that? That
is, because the men of the world, those that are in place, because they shall
countenance iniquity, because the stream of the times shall go that way; for
this cause the love of many shall wax cold: that is, because they mind the
world, whereas if they did not love the world, and the things of it, though
iniquity did abound, yet their love would wax hotter. When things are so that
iniquity abounds, some will not take the pains, they love their ease, and
contentment; others want courage to do it, they are faint-hearted, and dare
not adventure. Now whence does this come but from the love of the world? for no
man is fearful, but because there is something that he is in love with, and
is loath to part with. If a man did not love the things of the world, he would
have courage for the truth. This is therefore an argument that men do love the
world, and consequently the love of the Father is not in them.

Trial.
Let us come yet to another expostulation. In the first place therefore, if you
love the Lord, you will find in your selves a readiness to please him in all
things, you will do it naturally: As the Apostle speaks of Timothy, I know
no man like minded, who will naturally care for your matters. So if you love
the Lord aright, you will do it with a natural affection, you will love him
naturally: For what is this love to the Lord, if it be right, but that which
himself has planted in us? we are taught of him to love him. It is like the
natural affection which parents have to their children, such a kind of
affection will it be if you love the Lord, you will do that which is good in
his sight with a kind of naturalnesse and readiness, you will be carried to
the duties of his service as the fire is carried upwards, and not as stones are
carried upwards with the force of another, but you will do them readily, and
cheerfully; you will not do good duties as being haled to them, and put on to
do them, but you will be zealous of good works, that is, you will have a
burning desire in your hearts, longing after them, you shall not need to have
them forced upon you, but you will be forward to do them, you will be affected
to good works as you are out of self-love to your own business. You know
when a man naturally loves himself, when he is to do something that
concerns his own good, how solicitous is he about it, and how provident
forecasting how to bring it to pass, and if any rub be in the way it
troubles him, if there be any fair passage, and likelihood of atchieving it,
he rejoices. Now, if you love the Lord naturally and truly, you will go
about his business as you go about your own, if there be any business to be
done: Magistrates in their place, Ministers in their place, and every man
indeed shall find some business to do, wherein he may bring glory to Gods
name, and advantage to his cause. Consider now how you are stirred about it,
do you go about this business, are you so industrious and laborious, do you
project it, do you mind it as your own? you will not stand expostulating the
matter, to say must I do it? and is it of necessity? But if it be a thing
that tends to the advancing of the glory of God, you will do it with all
readiness, you will not so much stand upon this, what wages shall I have? and
what profit shall I gain? But as a loving woman to her husband, she is glad to
do any thing for her husbands good, she is satisfied with this, that she has
an opportunity to do something; so it will be with you, if your hearts be
rightly affected, you will then do things after this manner.

Quest.
You will say, How shall we know this love? this is a nice and curious point to
love the Lord thus naturally.

Answ.
You shall know it by these two things:

Naturalnesse of love to the Lord is known by two things.
First, by the evennesse of your carriage toward the Lord; for what a man does
naturally, he does with a kind of equality, with a kind

their inconstancy showed that they loved not the Lord with a natural love,
this discontinuing is a sign that your love is not true. I beseech you examine
your selves by these things whether you love the Lord; remember what I said the
last day, do you desire that your sins should be utterlie destroyed? do you
not dally with sin? would you not have some remainders within you? nay, I
will go a step further with you, do you not hate the Lord?

You will say, Object.
God forbid that we should do so, I hope we are not in that condition.

My brethren, Answ.
first you must know that there are many that do hate the Lord: Romans 1.
in Romans 1. amongst others those are reckoned up, Haters of God: Therefore it
is certain that there are many, and many of those that come to Church, many
that think well of themselves, and that others think well of too, that yet
are haters of the Lord. Quest.
You will say, how shall we know that?

I will ask you but this (to bring this likewise into examination, Answ.
and so to conclude) I say, Four signs of hatred of God.
examine your selves by this:

Do you not desire that there were no God? certain, if you would not have the
Lord to be, you hate him; for whomsoever you would have taken out of the way,
such a man you hate.

Ioh. 4. 1 John 4.
If you fear, says he, you love not; for perfect love casts out fear: when
you look upon God as upon a strict judge, and that is it that puts you on to
do all that you do, that is it that makes you keep a good conscience in
secret: for this you may do, and yet look upon God as a judge, to fear with
this kind of fear is a sign you hate the Lord; for whom you fear, you hate.

hearts and them? If there be, it is a certain sign of hatred: for
wheresoever there is contrariety, there is hatred. Examine your selves by this,
and see whether you do not hate the Lord.

And yet, to come to one more, if you love Mat. 6. Mat. 6.
No man can serve two Masters, but either he must hate the one and love the
other, etc. That is, when you love other things, though you think you do not
hate the Lord, yet, I say, in that you love pleasures, and love the world, and
the things of the world, in that you love your lusts, and the objects of them;
in doing this, you hate the Lord. Now if this be your case, if upon these
expostulations that I have propounded, if upon these rules of examining your
selves, you find that you do not love the Lord, if this be your condition,
(as it is your wisdom to deal strictly with your selves; for hence it is,
brethren, that the souls of men perish, because they will not see and search
into their estates, they will not come to this examination of themselves, it is
a painful thing to them, men are backward to examine themselves in private;
what is the reason of that phrase in the Psalm, Examine your selves upon your
beds, but because examination should be when a man is most retired? I say, if
you find it to be so, as it is the case of many) then it should open a window
to you, to see what you have deserved at the Lords hands, how just it were that
the Lord should cast you off: For when you are enemies to the Lord, can you
think much at it? My brethren, what a condition is that man in, that has the
great God of heaven and earth to be his enemy?

And besides this, have you not reason to justify God in his just judgments
upon others, when you shall see God sharply plaguing them? It may seem to you
that it is a hard thing that men should be so punished; but when we consider
that they are haters of God, that they are enemies to him, you may justify God
in that he does.

But, to conclude, you ought to humble your selves, if upon these trials you
find your selves to be lovers of the world, and not lovers of God. And you
that are young, and put off repentance, it should move you to come in betimes:
For if this be required of you to love the Lord, and you shall not be exempted
from death when it comes, though you be never so able, and never so strong and
lustly; what condition do you think you will be in, if you die enemies to
God, and haters of him, as you needs must be, if you love him not. And if you
think you have time enough. hereafter to settle your affections; Consider, is
it in your own power, though you have warning before death, to have this
affection of love? You may do many good duties, you may be sorry and repent
for your sins; but though you do this, and a thousand times more, yet if you
have not this love-wrought in you by God, if it come not from heaven, if it be
not the fruit of his own Spirit, all your repentance, and all your forsaking
of sin, all your doing of duties, the change of your courses is nothing, the
Lord regards it not, unless you have this naturalnesse of love. I have stood
therefore the longer upon it, and upon this part concerning examination,
because it is a matter of great moment. We should have come to the next part
concerning exhortation, which we would not disjoyne, because it is very
useful and profitable; but we cannot do it now, but reserve it for the
afternoon.

FINIS.
THE SIXTH SERMON.
GALAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


AND before we leave this point, one thing I must add For what reason do we
put you upon this disposition, upon this examination, whether the love of God
be in your hearts or no? The reason is not that you should be discouraged, that
(you should be put off from coming to God, that you should be greived with the
sight of the want of your love, but the end of it is to stir you up to get
it, if you want it. You know, we have formerly delivered some means of getting
it, only there is one which we will commend unto you, The last help of the
love of God consisting of three branches.
which we gave a little touch on but could not handle it, and it consists of
these Three branches; if you would love the Lord:

First you must know him, for otherwise you The knowledge of God.
As it is in natural love that is bred between man and man, you say love
arises from sight, they must see before they can love; so you must know the
Lord, there must be a sight of God by faith, before you can love him. And every
man that sees him and knows him as he is will love him, he cannot choose, for
that is the Lords work to all the Saints. Ierem. 31, You shall he taught of
me, and you shall know me from the greatest to the least. It may be in some
manner they knew God before, but although a man have never so exact knowledge
of him, yet till he be a regenerate man, he never knows him indeed it is an
other kind of knowledge that he has, when a man is regenerate; when God
teaches him to know him, he looks on God with an other eye, every thing is
presented to him after an other manner, he sees now an other beauty in God
than ever he saw before, he sees an other excellency in him: for that
knowledge he had of him before bredd not love. But when a man is once within
the Covenant, the Lord will teach him such a knowledge of himself, as withal
will work the love of him. Such a knowledge you must have of the Lord, and you
may help your selves to love him by reasoning, if ever you saw any excellency
in any man, or in any creature, it did help you to love that creature. Think
with your selves there is more in God that made that creature. He that made the
eye shall he not see? So he that wrought that excellency, shall not he have it
in himself in a greater measure? Besides, you may consider how the Lord has
described himself, that he is most wise, most merciful, and full of
kindness, and gentleness, and abundant in truth, as you know that description in
Exodus 34.

Go through all the virtues, and excellencyes that are amiable, if you look in
the Scripture, you shall find them to be in the Lord. This serious
consideration will help you, to increase your knowledge of the Lord, and by
consequent your love of him. So that, if you would come to love a man, what is
it that causes you to love him, but because by his speech, and by his carriage
and behavior, you come to have such an apprehension of his disposition, he
has a mind thus framed, thus qualified, thus beautified? When you conceive
such an Idea of him, you love him. So, when you apprehend the Lord aright, when
you observe him as he is described in his word, when you observe his doings,
when you consider his works, and learn from all these together a right
apprehension of him, I say, when you have such an Idea of him, such an opinion
of him, then the will follows the understanding, and the affections then
follows, then you come to love him, and to delight in him. Therefore learn to
know the Lord by his former carriage toward your selves, how kind he has
been, how exceeding patient, how exceeding ready to forgive, how much
kindness he has showed, how has he in mercy remembered you, though you have
forgotten him; how you have recompensed him evil for good, yet he has not
broaken off the course of his mercy toward you. Consider his dealing with
you, and learn by this to know the Lord, and this will be a means to increase
in you the love of the Lord.

This is not all, A looking upon God as one suitable to us.
there is another thing, which is the second branch that I told you of; that
is, to look upon God as one suitable to you, and to your disposition. For if
you should find never so much excellency in him, if he be not agreeable to
you, you love him not. A woman may see a man that she thinks is very
excellent, in many respects, yet he is not a fit husband for her. It is the
sutablenesse and agreeableness between God and our own condition, that
causes us to love him. Therefore when you put these two together, consider the
Lords mercy, and see that, and look on your selves as sinful men needing
that mercy; when you see the Lord exceeding powerful, and look on your
selves as very weak, needing that power; when you look on him as the Lord of
life, and see your selves subject to death, and needing that life; when you see
your own folly, and his wisdom, (go through all in him, and then again
look upon the contrary weakness in your selves) this is that which will make
you apprehend God as one that is suitable, as one that is agreeable to you; and
till you come to this, you shall never love him, and long after him, till the
heart namely is thus framed, till a man is humbled, till he comes to the sight
of himself: for as you must know God, so you must know your selves before you
can love him. I say, when a man comes to that, he begins to look on God as
upon one agreeable to him: As, take a man, who is touched with the fear of his
sins, whose heart is broken, who has an apprehension of Gods wrath, and of
his own unworthiness, such a man now will be satisfied with nothing in the
world, but the assurance of Gods love and his favor. As you see in natural
things, let a man be very weary, the daintiest meat in the world, whatsoever
you give him, will not heal him; but he must have that which is fit for that
particular defect, nothing will help him but rest. Again, let a man be
hungry, and faint for want of meat; all the music, the best air, or
whatsoever you can give him will do him no good, it must be meat that must
help him. If a man have a disease, it is not sleep, it is not meat and
drink, it must be a medicine that is fit for his disease. So it is with the
heart of man, when his heart is so broken, so humbled and touched with the
sense of his sins, that he longs after nothing but remission, nothing but
the assurance of Gods favor, the assurance of his love and kindness, nothing
will satisfy him but that: it is so in natural defects, and so it is in the
soul, when the heart of a man is so fashioned, that it looks upon God as one
agreeable to him, and there is nothing else suitable but only the Lord, and his
favor, and his love, that is required, to breed this love in you toward him.
What is the reason else, that it is said, Hosea 5. ult. When they are afflicted
they will seek me diligently. But because afflictions teach a man to know
himself, it teaches him to know his own weakness, to see his own sin,
his own impotency, his own unworthiness; and when he has done this, then he
looks upon God as one who only is fit for him, as one who is only able to
help him. Affliction does but discover what was there before: For man is a
weak and impotent creature, made for the Lord, he is nothing without the Lord,
it is the conjunction with God that makes him up, only he knows not this, he
understands not this. Therefore when God opens a man's eyes either by the
immediate work of his Spirit, to teach him to know himself, or by affliction,
then he comes to seek after the Lord, when they are afflicted, they will seek
me diligently. If thou should have such an offer as was made to those, Acts
2. Peter tells them there, they should have remission of sins, they should
receive the gift of the holy Ghost; if this had been offered to them before
they knew themselves, before they had been humbled and pricked at the heart,
as it is said they were, would they have regarded such an offer as this? No
they would not, although they had understood that offer never so well. So I
say, though you know his name and his excellent attributes never so perfectly,
yet till you come to know your selves too, you will never love him, you will
never desire him, you will never long after him: for both these must go
together, the knowledge of God, and the knowledge of our selves, to teach you
to love him. The knowledge of God, without the knowledge of your selves, is a
fruitless speculation: And again the knowledge of your selves, and your own
misery, without the knowledge of him and his mercy, is a miserable vexation.
The knowledge of God, without knowledge of your selves, is, as if a man should
know a medicine, but should not know what defect it were fit to supply: And to
know your selves and your own case, without him, is to have the disease
discovered, and not to know how to help it. And therefore learn to know both
God and your selves: If you will love him, then you must learn to study those
two. We say scholars study books, and Politicians study men; but a
Christian should study God and himself, to learn to know God and himself
better, by this means he comes to know the Lord: as wheresoever you find any
love to the Lord expressed, you shall find these two going together, as David
often, Psalm. 18. and Psalm. 116. I love the Lord, etc. Why? For I was in
distress, I was in grief, the grave overtooke me, and I was compassed about
with death, and I cried to the Lord, and he healed me, and set me at liberty,
he is my fortress, etc. That is, when David saw himself to stand in need,
he saw his weakness, and looked on God again, as one that would help him,
and heal him, as one that could set him at liberty; this caused him to say, I
love the Lord dearly. So Paul, when he saw these two, I was a blasphemer, I
was a persecuter, and looked on Christ, who had been merciful to him, with
faith, this was that which caused Paul so to abound in love toward Christ. And
so Mary, Luke 1. My soul does magnify the Lord: And why? For he had respect
to the low estate of his handmaid: I was poor and mean, and lo he has
raised me to a high degree. This sutablenesse, this knowledge of God and of
our selves is that which breeds in us a love of him. But is this enough now to
know God and our selves? This is a fair step to beget in you this love of him;
for as you heard before, love is an inclination of the heart to some good thing
agreeable to us:

But yet you must have a third, Assurance of the Lords love to us.
or else this will not do, that is, assurance of the Lords love to you: for if
you long after him never so much, if you think him worthy to be desired; on
the other side, yet if for all this you are not persuaded of the Lords love to
you, you cannot be affected toward him. We cannot love any man whom we
conceive to be ill affected to us: And therefore you shall see in the course of
the Scriptures, love proceeds from faith, faith must beget love, that is, the
assurance of Gods love must go in: This is the third ingredient to make it up.

Object.
You will say to me, we doubt not of this, but if we be persuaded of Gods
love, we shall love him; but how shall we come to this persuasion, how shall
we assure our selves of his love?

Answ.
Those to whom I should speak now are of two sorts; either such as are out of
the Covenant, or such as are already within it. For you that are without,
Means whereby men may be assured of Gods love to them.
to you I say, you may, if you will consider it, come to the assurance of his
love toward you.

Such as are without.
For first, the Lord has made known his own willingness to take you to
marriage. There are but two that are to give their consent, the Father to give
his Son, and the Son to give his own consent: The Father, you know, has
given his consent, Isay. 9.6.
Isay 9.6. A Son is given: He so loved the world, that he gave his Son.
Therefore certainly you have the Fathers consent, he has given Christ, as a
father gives his son in marriage. But now whether we have the Sons consent
or no, of that we make question; says the Apostle, He loved us, and gave
himself to us, and for us; yea he not only gives his consent, for his part,
but he has purchased his wife with his own blood. And therefore you cannot
doubt but that he is willing to marry with you, to take you, and to receive
you if you will come in. Why then, what is required now? Nothing at all but thy
consent, if thou give thy consent to the Lord, thou need not to question his
favor, thou may assure thy self of his unchangeable love in Jesus Christ;
for he has revealed it on his part, in his word, you have his sure word for
that, heaven and earth shall pass rather than that word. This is the sound
consolation that will not fail you, when you come to examination, and think
with your selves, upon what ground am I assured of Gods affection toward me,
that he loves me: I have his word for it, he has said it, and he cannot
recall it, yea he has added his oath, that by two immutable witnesses you
might have strong consolation; that is, that you might have the greatest degree
of assurance that can be. Why, now, why do not thou give thy consent? why
do thou no more rest on it? You will say, alas I am willing to give my
consent, if that would do it.

But first, Object. 1.
I am unfit to marry the Lord, I am not prepared for such a match as that is,
my heart is too bad, and my life has been too sinful to think of such
preferment and advancement.

Take thou no care for that, Answ.
the Lord knew thy unfitness, when he made that promise to thee, when he gave
his Son; and the Son gave himself to thee, he was well enough acquainted
with thee, and with thy nature, he had an intention to marry a blackmoore, he
justifies the wicked, he knows thou art so, and yet he will do it, he will
put a fairness, he will put a beauty upon thee, when thou art his wife;
therefore let not that hinder thy unfitness.

You will say again, Object. 2.
it may belong to such and such, it does not belong to me; my case is such, I
have provoked him in this manner, my sins are of such a nature.

Answ.
This shall not shut thee out neither. For why should thou make exceptions
where the Lord makes none. Go, Preach the Gospel to every creature under
heaven. What is the meaning of that? That is, go tell every man, without
exception, whatsoever his sins be, whatsoever his rebellions be, go tell him
this glad tidings; that is to preach the Gospel to him, that if he will come
in, I will accept him, he shall be saved, his sins shall be forgiven him, if
he do no more but come in, and take me and receive me. Therefore to conclude
this, doubt not thou that that shall be a hinderance on Gods part. And for thy
own part, there is no more required of thee but sincerity, that thou take
him, sincerely resolving to thy self I will serve him for the future, I will
be contented to be divorced from all my former loves, from all the sins that
I have delighted in before, I am willing now to take him, and to serve him, and
to love him, and to give my self wholly to him; I say, this sincerity of
resolution is enough, there can be no hindrance if this be found in thee.
Therefore do not think with thy self, I want sorrow for my sins, such a
degree of sorrow, my heart is not broken enough, and therefore I am not fit:
for thou must know thus much, that the promise is made to the coming, and not
to the preparations. If thou can come, and take the Lord, it is enough, if a
man have so much sorrow, so much heartbreaking as brings him home to Christ,
as makes him willing to match with the Lord: if he have that wrought in him,
doubt he not of the other.

But now I come to the other, Such as are within the Covenant.
those that are already within the Covenant, to you I say, you may much more
easily and fully come to this assurance, because ye have the fruits of the
Spirit in you, which are the seals of his love; you have cause to trust
perfectly through the grace that is revealed in Jesus Christ: you know that
exhortation, Trust perfectly to the grace revealed, etc. that is, in the free
offer to every man by Christ; trust not in that by halves, remissively, and
unperfectly, and weakly, but trust perfectly, be confident in that, that the
Lord will thus receive you, trust perfectly in the grace revealed.

But, Object.
you will say, I commit many sins from day to day, I am negligent in many
duties, I find much unevenness in my life, many distempers in my affections,
etc?

What if you find all this in your selves? Answ.
yet so long as your hearts are sincere, you must know this, that every breach,
every offense does not break the band of wedlock between the Lord and you,
you must not think there is a breach of covenant between God and you upon
every ^inne that is committed, but know that the Covenant holds good, till you
come to choose another husband, the Lord continues your husband still.
Therefore when thou art married to the Lord, it is not for thee to think then
of questioning the match, but study to please thy husband, and to do thy
duty. You know, there may be many offenses, and many slight breaches between
a man and his wife, but the bond holds good, there is no bill of divorcement
except it be in case of adultery, that she choose an other husband: so think,
in such a case, the bond is not broken upon every offense, and every sin that
is committed. Learn to know this for thy comfort, for it is a great matter to
have this assurance full.

Answ.
And besides consider this, think not with thy self, because I have not
attained such a degree of holiness as another has, therefore I have none at
all, that is an evil reason that discourageth the Saints, discourageth many
times those that should be encouraged, that are already within the Covenant; he
looks on another, and sees he cannot reach him, he propounds to himself such
a measure of grace and of holiness, and of mortification of his lusts, and he
cannot come near it; and he thinks, because I cannot do this, I have no
sincerity in me. Not so, there are degrees, when a man is within the door,
he may go further and further, and though all may be within, yet one may be
further in than another.

Answ.
Besides all this, know that the Lord is faithful, he cannot deny himself,
though thou fail on thy part, yet he continues the same, and renewes his
mercy to thee, as thou renewest thy repentance. But, to conclude this, if you
would love the Lord, labor to do these three things:

Labor to know him more:

Labor to know your selves more, that so you may long after him as after one
that you need.

And thirdly, labor to get this assurance, for it is this assurance that
breeds the love, that seals it up; when a man shall look on God as one who
may hate him for any thing he knows, who may be an enemy to him one day, he
can never love him heartily: When a man has no ground to set his foot on, he
will do it tenderly and nearely; but when he looks upon God as one whom he
may trust, whose love he is sure of, that he builds on that as a rock, this is
that which makes his heart perfect to him, when he can say, as Paul, I know
whom I have trusted. If a man have never so much excellency in him, if you
conceive him to be hollow-hearted to you, your affections are not perfect
toward him; so is it, if you look on God as one that may be your enemy As
we say, friendship with Princes, it is like that familiarity that those men
have with Lions, that keep them. A Lion, you know, will suffer a man to play
with him as long as he lists, and when he lists, he will rise and devour him,
and rend him in pieces; so I say, the love of a Prince may be, and the love of
men may be: But the love of the Lord is not such, when he loves, he loves
perfectly. It is true, he has the strength of a Lion, he is able to do it,
you are weak creatures subject to him, but he has that constancy in him,
that when he loves once, it is always perfect, and unchangeable. Let all
these be well considered and wrought on your hearts, and it will be a means to
beget this love in you: Even as fire begets fire, so this will beget love in
your hearts toward him again. So much for this.

The second point, which I intend to handle at this time is this; another
consectary, another use we are to draw from this doctrine, He that loves not,
is not in Christ.

The next use is to exhort you to come in, if it be a thing of that moment, now
our business is to exhort to love the Lord Jesus. And is there not much reason
to move you to it? if you had this love in your hearts, would it not be a
ground of much comfort to you? for if you were able to believe in Jesus Christ,
and love him, you should have your salvation sure, if once you could find this
disposition in your selves, as it must be in you, if ever you be saved, that
your hearts long after him, still you are growing toward him, hanging that
way, as a stone to the center, as the iron to the loadstone, there is such a
lingering after him, the heart makes toward him, and will have no denial; but,
as the woman of Canaan, it breaks through all impediments, no bar can keep
it from him: as those that love, they are not easily put off, but are
importunate til they have obtained reciprocal affections of the party beloved.

I say, if thou find this disposition in thy heart, it is the greatest
consolation that thou can have in this world: Mot.
for if this be thy case, thou may boldly look that the gates of hell shall
not prevail against thee; and if thou love the Lord in this manner, heaven and
earth shall pass rather than thy salvation shall be hindered: it is impossible,
because then thou have a good ground of hope, and hope will make thee not
ashamed, but be assured that God is thine, and all that he can do, and all
that is his is thine; as Paul tells us, his power, and his wisdom, and all is
thine: He is a Sun and a shield to thee, thou shall want nothing that is
good, nothing that is evil shall hurt thee, the Lord brings all with him: this
is your case if that you do love him, this is your consolation, this is that
which may inflame your hearts with a desire of this affection. For know this,
that there is scarcely any thing else that we can instance in, but an hypocrite
may go cheek by jowle with a good Christian, in that he may do all outward
duties, he may abstain from sins, there may be a great change in him, (you
know how far the third ground went, and those Heb. 6.) but this they cannot
counterfeit, to love the Lord. Therefore, if thou find that thou love the
Lord, thou have this consolation, that thou art now sure, and indeed thou art
never till then sure. And as reason differenceth a man from a beast, so love
makes the great difference between a Christian and an other. Indeed we say it
is faith, but you know that faith is differenced by love, that is, such a faith
that breeds love, and so love is it that breeds that great consolation. And
therefore this is thy comfort, if thou can once bring thy heart to love the
Lord, he will bear with any thing, he will bear with many infirmities, as,
you know, he did with David when he saw that he loved him. David had many great
infirmities, as we see in the whole story, the whole relation of his life, yet
because he loved the Lord, the Lord passed by all, and in the end he gave him
this testimony, that he was a man after his own heart. So I say, love the
Lord once, and he will bear with much in thee. On the other side, if thou do
not love him, do what thou will, the Lord accepts it not. As we see in the
case of Amaziah, it is said that Amaziah walked in all the ways of his father
David, and of the good Kings, he did as much as they, he was as great an
enemy to idolatry, he did all the duties of religion, only this was wanting,
he did it not with an upright heart, that is, he did it not out of love, and
therefore the Lord regarded it not. And therefore let this move you to get this
affection; there is much, if I could stand to press it, that might inflame
your hearts with a desire of it: only it is this love that sets a price on all
that you do, that makes all that you do current; as this stamp is set on
your actions more or less, so they are more or less acceptable. This was that
which set a price on the widows mite, that set a price on a cup of cold
water; this set a price upon Abels offering, and made it more acceptable than
his brothers: the meanest service when it has this stamp on it is current and
good in Gods sight, he accepts it: again, the greatest performance without
it, is nothing. And if thou give thy body to be burned, if thou suffer
martyrdom, if thou give all thy goods to the poor; do what thou will without
love, it is nothing, thy labor is lost: this love sets a price on all that
thou do.

Besides this, Mot.
consider, this is that that must stir you up above all other arguments, that
if thou love the Lord, thou shall be no looser by it, in all other love a man
seems to be a looser, for, when you love an other, as you know it is no love
except it be fruitful and active, when you bestow on an other your time, and
your pains, and your money, you know, you have so much the less your self:
And therefore it is that men are so full of self love, because that ingrosseth
all, a man in that keeps all to himself, when he comes to love an other, and
parts with something of his own. And thence it is that men are so backward to
love, in truth and in good earnest. They love in show and in complement, that
is easy, but to love indeed is difficult, because it takes somewhat from them.
But in loving the Lord, it is not so, there is a difference between that and
other loves when you give the Lord your hearts, and bestow them on him, he
will give you them every ^ot again, and reserve not any for himself. You will
ask me, what is the meaning of this? My meaning is this, whatsoever you
bestow on the Lord, all the love that you give to him, it reflectes and
redoundes to your advantage, you gain by it all: Isa. 48.17.
as we see, Isai 48.17. I am the Lord that teaches thee to Profit for if thou
keep my commandments, thy reward, thy prosperity should be as a flood, and
thy rejoicing as the waves of the Sea. Mark it well, as if he should say to
them, when I command you to serve me, and to love me with all your soul, and
with all your strength, know, that all this is for your own profit, it shall
all redound to you. For, if you keep my commandments, your prosperity shall
be as a flood, that is, it shall run over the banks, it shall be so large,
and so great, and your righteousness, that is, the reward of your righteousness,
as the waves of the sea, that is, one reward should follow upon the neck of an
other, as one billow follows upon the neck of an other. This should be your
case, says he, if you love me and keep my commandments, and serve me: And
therefore says he, when I require your love and your service, herein there is
a difference between that, and that which any man requires at your hands; all
this is for your own profit, it redounds to your selves, your selves fare the
better for it: as it is said of the Saboth, so I may say of this commandment,
and all the rest, it was made for man, and not man for this, that is, for the
profit of man, for the advancment of man, thy loving the Lord is for thy
advantage, thou gainest by it; as it is, Deuteronomy: 5.29. Oh, Deuteronomy. 5.19.
says he, that there were a heart in this people, to love me, and to fear me,
as they have promised, then it should go wellwith them, and their children
after them. Not that I might be a gainer, and you lose, but that it might go
well with you and your children for ever. So, if you love the Lord, when you
think with your selves, I shall be a loser by it, I shall lose much liberty,
and much contentment and delight, I shall lose the giving satisfaction to many
of my desires and lusts: No, thou shall lose none of this, though a man seem
to lose this when he gives his heart to the Lord, but thou gainest all this,
that is, the Lord gives thee thy heart again, and gives thee leave to dispose
of it, he gives thee leave to love thy friends, to love thy wife and thy
children, and even to love thy recreations; he gives thee leave to dispense and
to distribute thy heart to this or to that, as long as thou do it lawfully,
only thou must do it at his command.

Yea, when we give our hearts to the Lord, he gives us not them again only,
but he gives them much better than he received them, new painted, new
beautified and new furnished, he gives them in a far better condition: there
is no man that loses by giving his heart to the Lord, but he gives it him
again much better. As we say of vapors that arise out of the earth, the
heavens return them again in pure water, much better than they received them,
so will the Lord: if thy heart ascend to him, thy impure, thy sinful heart,
the Lord will give it thee better. As we say of earth, when the earth receives
the sea water, and puddle water, it gives it better than it received it in the
springs and fountains; for it strains the water and purifies it, that whereas
when it came into the bowels of the earth, it was muddy, salt, and brinish, it
returns pure, and clean, and fresh, as, you know, the waters of the springs
and fountains are: so the Lord does with us; if thou would give thy hearts
desire, thy affections to him, thou should have all again, only with this
difference, thy affections should be more pure, thy thoughts, all the faculties
of thy soul should be renewed, and cleansed, and beautified, he would restore
them better to thee, but yet thou should have them; let it be thy comfort.
So that here is all the difference, take a man now that loves himself, and
that thinks with himself, Well, say what you will, I will go mine own
ways, I will provide for mine own contentment in this life, I know not what I
shall have after, I will look to mine own profit: I say, compare this man
with another, that resolves this with himself, Well, from hence I will deny my
self, and cross my self, and will seek no more my own contentment, nor to
satisfy my own desires and lusts, but I will give my heart wholly to the
Lord. The question now is, which of these are gainers? I say, the latter has
as much liberty and as much power of his own heart, he shall have as much use
of all that is within him, as the other has, that ^akes it to himse^fe: all
the difference is, the one ^s an unjust owner, the second the Lord has made
the steward of his own heart; so that the Lord has thy heart, and yet it is
thy own heart, ^hou may dispose of it as a steward under thy Master, thou
have it as before, only now thou do it by his appointment, before it was at
thine own. Let all this therefore stir you up to love the Lord.

You will say, Object.
indeed this is enough to persuade us to come in, to love the Lord, and we
are contented to do so; that is the answer which we shall have from most men.
But now what kind of love is it that we shall have at their hands?

My brethren, Answ.
we must add this for a conclusion, that it is not every kind of love that the
Lord accepts: but your love must have these two conditions in it. Two
Requisites in the love of God.
I will breefely name them and so conclude.

First, It must be with all the heart.
you must love him with all your hearts, and with all your soul, you know that
is every where required in the Scriptures. That is, the Lord will have the
whole stream of your affections, and desires, and intentions, and your
endeavors to run to him; there must not any riveret run out of it, it must
not be drained away, but the whole stream must all be bestowed upon him, there
must be no division there, you must not say here, as he says, My Country, and
my father, and my children, and my friends have a part in my love, but the Lord
must have all, and there is good reason for it, because he bestowed all on you.
It is in this love as it is in marriage, in that there is no corrivall
admitted, but there must be all in all: for the husband must bestow himself
wholly on his wife, and the wife on the husband; so if you love the Lord, if
the match be made between you, there is all in that equality; if the Lord
bestow all on you, and you should bestow but half on him, there would be no
equality, there would be an unennesse. But when you bestow all on him, when
you love him with all your heart, and with all your soul, that makes the match
between you.

Object.
You will say, the Lord does not bestow himself wholly on me, he bestows
himself on many others, on many thousands besides me, and why should not I
bestow my self on an other?

Answ.
I answer, it is not so, the Lord bestows himself wholly on thee. Hosea 3.3.
Hos. 3, 3. it is a borrowed speech, I will be to thee alone, and I will have
thee to be so to me; so the Lord says to every man, I will be alone to thee,
and thou shall be alone to me. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. This
is the match that must be between you. And when you say the Lord is not
wholly yours, I say, he is, though he bestow himself on many thousands
besides. You will ask, how can that be? I say, that may be by reason of his
infiniteness; for that which is infinite has not parts, and therefore he
bestows not himself partly on one, and partly on an other, but he bestows
all upon every one: for he is infinite, and has no parts. To express my self
by a similitude, Simile.
a point has no parts, it is one indivisible, let a thousand lines come to one
point, every one has the whole, and yet there is but one that answers all,
because it is indivisible, and every one has all: So it is with the Lord,
though there be many thousands that God loves, yet every one has the Lord
wholly, he is to them alone, and he looks for and expects this at thy hands,
that thou should be to him alone, that thou bestow thy self wholly on him;
thereupon all those words are put in, Thou shall love thy Lord with all thy
mind, with all thy heart, with all thy soul. The meaning is this, when all
that is in a man is set a work to serve the Lord, when he looks to the Lord,
when he inclines toward the Lord, that is, when the mind is set on work to
think on him, to remember his glorious works, to have a right knowledge and
opinion of him: again, when the memory is set on work to remember him, and
not to forget his benefits, his statutes and his ordinances, and so the rest of
his faculties. And therefore if we love the Lord, we will not do this with
our selves, to think I love him, and yet I will suffer my mind, in the mean
time, to be exercised in contemplating of fornication; not to think, I love
the Lord, and yet will suffer my memory, in the mean time, to be recollecting
injuries and breeding of them, and recalling my pleasant sins that are
formerly past, that I should abhor, thou can not love him and do this.
Again, thou must not say, I love him, and yet let thy affections run after
this and that, but thy whole heart must be bestowed on him: Thou must not
think to love him, and to reserve thy affections for this or that particular
thing that thou love inordinately, but thou must bestow all these on the Lord.

Requisite in love, it must be with all your night.
The second thing required in this love, wherewith I will end, is this, that you
love the Lord with all your might. You will say, what is the meaning of that,
Object.
to love the Lord with all my might, Answ.
and with all my strength? For the understanding of this, you must know that
God has given different might and different strength to men; as a rich man
has more might than another: for he can rule more, and sway more, and command
more than a poor man can. Again, a Magistrate, he can restrain by his power,
and encourage men by his authority, and win them, yea compel them by his
example. Again, a learned man, that is of great parts, that is of a stronger
wit than another, he has more might than another, he is able to do more than
a man of weaker parts. Now to love the Lord with all our might, is to improve
all the means we have, all the strength, all the ability that we have above
others, to improve it so, that we may serve the Lord with it more than others,
that even as thou exceedest any in these abilities, so thou may go beyond
them in serving the Lord: This is to love the Lord with all thy might, that is,
to love him so much more than a poor man, to bestow more on him, to do more
for him, as thy riches make thee more able, and more strong than another. For
thee to love him now as another man does that has less might, the Lord will
not take this love at thy hands; but will say to thee as Landlords say to their
Tenants, when they bring them less rent than they should, less than is due,
they will receive none; for they say, so much is due. The Lord will require
this, that you love him with all your might. If thou be a rich man, if thou be
a Magistrate, if thou be a man of such and such opportunities to serve the
Lord, and do but a little, he will not accept it at all: thou must love the
Lord with all thy might, for God requires this at thy hands, he leaves it not
arbitrary. He says, To whom much is given, of him much shall be required. He
says not, I leave it to him, to do more or less, but I require it, that is,
I will exact it according to the measure he has received. Therefore consider
with thy self, what means thou have, what power God has put into thy hands,
what ability thou have more than others. When you send a servant to market, as
you give him a greater price, as you put more money into his hands, so you
expect he should bring home more than another that has a less price put into
his hands: So the Lord does with men, he sends men into the world, as men are
sent to a market, he gives a larger price to some, to some he gives five
talents, to some three, to some two, the Lord expects that they should bring
home according to the price they have in their hands, that is, according to the
might, according to the strength and opportunity he has given them. For, you
must know, that the Lord observes an exact difference between man and man. It
may be, thou live under better means than another, thou have had better
education than another, thou have more knowledge in the ways of God than
another, the Lord has helped thee more by the inward suggestions of his Spirit
than another, he looks that thou should bring forth more fruit than
another. And so again for all other abilities and advantages: the Lord expects
at our hands that we love him with all our might, otherwise, says he, you
might have given my money to the exchangers, and they would have made use of
it. Mark that in the Parable of the Talents; for a man will be ready to say,
if I bestow some love on the Lord, why should he exact and require the utmost,
why does he require so much at my hands? Yes, says he, if another had this
might, if another had this strength, and this opportunity that thou have, he
would have done as exchangers do, he would have brought it in with profit; so
if that ability were given to another, he would make use of it: And therefore
think not much, if he require it at thy hands, for there is loss if he should
not. Therefore know that the Lord requires this at thy hands, it may be thou
art more composed, and more disposed than another, it is nothing for thee to
abstain from drinking, to abstain from swearing, because thou art framed this
way by natural ingenuity, and natural temper that God has given thee, it is
not that the Lord requires no more, but that thou live soberly, free from
gross sins: No, God looks for more, he requires of every man according to
his strength and ability. As, you know, a child may run, and another man may
walk, the child takes more pains, the man less; it the reward were to be
given according to the endeavor, the child should have it, though he that
walks come to the goal before him.

A man that is weak may not do so much as another that is strong, and able to
do ten times as much work as another man that is weak; though thou do more
work than he, this is not accepted, because he looks that every man should
do his utmost, he requires that you should love him, and serve him, and set
your selves to improve all your ability according to the might, according to
the Talent, according to the price he has distributed and measured to you.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE SEVENTH SERMON.
GALAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


THE last thing that we entered upon was the conditions that God requires in
our love to him, we went through two of them the last time, we come now to
that which remains.

Requisite, to love him above all.
Thirdly, you shall find this to be another condition in our love to the Lord,
to love him above all, that is, incomparably above all: For, my brethren, we
may love many things in the world, we may love our selves, we are commanded
to love our brethen as our selves; but this is peculiarly required to the love
of God, if it be right in us, and such as the Lord expects at our hands, that
we love him above all, for otherwise Else we love him not as God.
for to say we love him as God, and yet not to love him above all, is a
contradiction.

Besides, if we should not reckon him as the Else we should not love him
constantly.
and so prise him above all, some thing would offer it self one time or
another to us, and draw our affections to it, and then we should leave the
Lord, and take that: Therefore I say, it is required that we love the Lord
above all. For every kind of love is not sufficient, as we see it in other
things; that love that will serve a servant, or a common friend, will not serve
for a wife, it is another kind of love; that love that will serve for one will
not serve for another: A Parent, a King, and a Master, as they have different
relations, so they must be love with different kinds of love. Now then
consider what love it is that belongs to the Lord, he must have all, he must
have a love that answers him: otherwise if thou come with a little pittance of
love, and say, Lord, I am willing to bestow this upon thee, the Lord will
refuse it, he will answer, I will take none of these things at your hands:
Even as landlords do with their tenants, Simile.
when they bring not all their rent, they refuse it and reject it, because it
is not that which they require, and which is due. Even so the Lord deals with
us, as he did with the young man in the Gospel, says he, Go and sell all
that thou have: My brethren, it was not the act of selling, but it was the
affection that was required. Therefore Christ did but try his affection by it;
and it was performed by the wise Merchant that sold all, this the Lord
requires that we love him above all.

Why we must love the Lord above all.
And there is good reason for it, for he is most excellent and most amiable of
all.

Besides, I am sure he has done for us more than all, as Paul speaks, Was
Paul crucified for you? has not Christ bought you, has not he redeemed you,
has not he deserved more than all, and should he not therefore be loved above
all?

Again, is he not the uttermost end, are not all natures else subordinate? God
as he is above all, so should we have a love answerable unto him.

Object.
But you will object, What, to love God above my self, how can I do that?

Answ.
Yes my brethren, and there is good reason for that too, Why we must love God
above our selves
beeause in so doing we provide best for our selves; it is not so with the
creature, if you set your love upon it, if you love any creature above your
selves, it may be the destruction of your selves: But the Lord can provide for
you and repair you again when the creature is destroyed for the Lords sake,
when a man is a loser for any thing that he does for the Lord, he is a great
gainer by it; for it is the rule that God has appointed the creature, and the
perfection of every creature is in coming near to the rule. Now when the Lord
has appointed this to love him above our selves, in so doing we cannot choose
but provide best for our selves, because therein lies our excellency and
perfection. This is therefore another property of this love, we must love God
above all, above all riches, above all profits, above all honor and credit,
above all learning and delight, above our selves and our lusts: Therefore you
shall find it in the phrase of Scripture how it runs, those that love
pleasures more than God, those that love the praise of men more than God, those
that love wealth more than God, you see how they are excluded.

You shall see what it is, Not to love pleasures more than God, what.
not to love the praise of men more than God, it is this, when they come
together at some times in competition, as they will ever and anon, still to
prefer God before them. As for example, the Lord has commanded you to
sanctify the Sabbath, to pray continually, the least thou can do is to do
it evening and morning, and to do it diligently. Now when thy profits and thy
business, or thy ease shall come and thrust thee off from such a duty, now
they come together, and here they meet upon a narrow bridge as it were; if
thou shall now prefer thy profits and thy business before the service of the
Lord, thou art a lover of thy wealth more than of him. You may bring it to many
such examples.

So again the Lord has commanded to be diligent in your callings, to improve
the time to the best advantage, for you shall give an account for it is one of
the most precious talents you have: Now if pleasures and sports, and
recreations shall come in and allure you, and call you, to draw you away to
spend time amiss, now they come in competition; if ye do this ordinarily, you
are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God.

So again, God has commanded thee that thou should not commit adultery,
that thou shall not kill, that thou shall forbear to revenge, and the like:
Now if any lust shall come and stand in opposition to such a command, if thou
prefer this before it, thou art a lover of thy self and of thy lusts before
God.

In a word, go through any such thing, wherein God and thy lusts, thy pleasure
or thy profits come in competition, when thou shall in thy ordinary course be
ready to prefer that before him, thou love that before him, thou love
that before the Lord; and though thou think that thou love God, yet
notwithstanding know this, that that is not sufficient, thou must love him
above all.

Quest.
And if you say, who is able to perform this? who is it that does not at some
times prefer his pleasures and profits before the obedience to a command?

Answ.
I answer, it is a thing that has been done and is done by all the Saints:
Therefore if you look into Deuteronomy. 30.6. says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, and thou shall love
me with all thy heart: He speaks it there of a thing that is acted indeed, of
a thing that is to be done by those that are regenerate, I will circumcise you,
and then you shall do it. And, my brethren, a man that has the least measure
of grace, if he be once in Christ, he loves God above all; that is, let a man
be himself at any time, let not his lusts get the upper ground of him, as
sometimes it does, when he is in passion and transported; indeed then fear
may prevail as it did with Peter, and lusts may prevail as it did with David:
But the meaning is, let a man be himself in his ordinary course, and still he
preferres the Lord before any thing in all his actions.

You will say, Object.
this is a thing that no man can do to love God above all.

Yes, Answ.
my beloved, therefore you must understand it thus, that comparatively you may
reach it; all those that are sanctified do love him above all, although there
be many degrees of love you cannot reach unto, yet you love him above all: Even
as it is in marriage, a man may love his wife with such a degree of Jove as is
meet for her, yet there may be a greater degree of love, continuance of time
may increase that love upon further knowledge, etc. So we may love the Lord
above all, and yet come short of that degree that we may have after longer
communion, and greater familiarity. So much for this third condition,
Requisite, to be rooted and grounded in love.
to love him above all.

But yet this is not enough, we find another condition required in this love
in the Ephesians: Ephesians. 3.17
3.17. That ye be rooted and grounded in love, that is, that as ye must not
love the Lord by halues, so ye must not love him by fits and by starts, it must
be a fixed love, a permanent love, you must be rooted and grounded in it,
otherwise as it is said of him that is unstabe in the faith, as Iam. 1.12. Iam*
1.12.
He is as a wave of the Sea, tossed too and froe, the same may be said of him
that wavers in his love, he is tossed too and fro, that is some times he
comes with great purposes, with abundance of promises and resolutions, that
seem as bigg as mountains, but stay a while and they come to nothing, they
vanish away. Suppose it were thy own case, that a man should come to thee,
with an expression of as much love, as that there could be no more for a day or
two, but presently afterward, he is as strange as if he had never seen thee,
would thou regard such a love as this? No surely, but as we use to do with
frantic men, though that they be sober for a while, yet we reckon them
frantic, because they are more constantly frantic, such account does the
Lord make of such, as do love him by fitts and by flashes.

Our love to God not always in the same degree.
But you will say, who is there that is always at the same stay? It is true my
brethren, I deny not but that the best of the Saints have their love some times
in the full tide, and some times in the lowest ebb; but you must know that
there is a great deal of difference between these degrees, and that love,
that is as the morning dew and presently dried up again, therefore you must
always remember, that this must be added to that that formerly has been
spoken, that ye must be rooted and grounded in love.

You will say how shall we do that? How to be rooted in love.


Remember but these two things. Labor to be rooted and grounded in Faith, and
then you shall be rooted and grounded in love, To be rooted in faith.
as in that place I named before in Ephesians. 3.17. he prays that Christ may
dwell in their hearts by Faith, that so being rooted and grounded in love, they
may comprehend etc. Let a man consider well upon what ground he has persuaded
himself of the Lords favor and love to him, let him not build upon a hollow
sandy foundation, but let him build the assurance of his salvation upon a
rock, that is, let him examine his grounds to the bottom, let him search it
well, let him consider all the objections that may be made against his
assurance, and not give over till he be fully convinced, that the Lord his
heart is perfect with him, and when he is thus rooted and grounded in faith, he
will likewise be rooted and grounded in love.

Again, remember to pitch your love upon the person; Pitch your love on his
person.
not to love him for by-respects for other matters, but set your eye upon the
very person of Christ, to behold him in his glory, in his pureness, in his
attributes, in all his excellencies, and so to love him, for that will
continue; for if you love the Lord because he deals well with you, because you
have hope he will save you, because you have escaped such and such judgments
through his providence, if any of these be the ground of your love, these are
mutable; but if you love him for himself, because of that amiablenesse that is
in him; for my brethren, he is the same, there is no shadow of change in him.
Therefore if you love him thus, your love will be constant; this was the case
of Job, his love was right, he loved the very person of God, therefore he was
willing to take good and evil at the hand of God, and yet his love remained
sure: take another man that has not known God, that is not acquainted with
him, it may be when the Lord has brought him into prosperity, he will forget
the Lord, as Demas embraced the present world, the prosperity of such a man
draws him from God. Another man, when persecutions and trialls come, he
forsakes the Lord, because indeed he pitched not his love upon his person,
therefore he loves him not constantly. But to go on.

Requisite, it must be diligent.
The next is that property ye shall find in the 1 Thessalonians 1.3. Diligent love:
that is the last which I will name to you, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
I say, it must be a diligent love wherewith you love the Lord, and not an idle
and negligent love, not a love that is in show only, but a love that is
operative, for that God requires.

You will say, wherein should our love be diligent.

Wherein our love should be diligent.
I answer, you must be diligent in preparing for the Lords coming, that you may
receive the King of glory, In preparing for Christ's coming
that he may enter into your hearts, for there is a diligence of love in that;
to do as John Baptist came to do, to prepare the way of the Lord, what was
that? To bring down the mountains, and to raise up the valleys, that is,
those high thoughts, those high lusts that stand in opposition against the
Lord, that bar the door against him, that will not let him enter into your
hearts, bring down those mountains: again, the valleys must be raised up,
that God may come and dwell in your hearts; the diligence of love is showed in
opening to the Lord when he knockes, that when a thing shall be suggested to
you, it is for the Lords advantage to embrace it, for it is the nature of true
love, it enlarges and wideneth the heart.

Again, love is diligent in adorning it self, In adorning the soul.
and beautifying the soul for the approach of the lover, such is this love
that we speak of, it will make you make your selves new creatures; express
your diligence therefore in laboring to adorn your hearts with graces that
the Lord may take a delight to dwell in you; be diligent also in cleansing your
selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit, that when the Lord comes he
may find no sluttish corner within you, for the Lord hates these: As the
Israelites were to go with a paddle, and cover every filthy thing, because,
says the text, The Lord walks among you, so must we do, keep our hearts
clean if we will have the Lord delight to dwell with us, we must be diligent
to remove out of his sight whatsoever he hates. In keeping his commandments.


Lastly, we must be diligent in keeping his commands; will thou say thou
love God, and yet do disobey him and rebellest against him from day to
day? The Lord cares for no such love, for indeed love cannot be otherwise
judged of than in obeying: to say thou love him, and keep not his
commands, it is but a dead love, and a picture of love, it is not love indeed,
it is but as the Apostle says, to do it in word, and not in truth; for when
you love him in deed, you do the things he would have you to do: Therefore
so much diligence in keeping his commands, so much love, he that does most
loves most. And so you see the conditions that are required in this love, what
a kind of love it is that God will have at your hands, or else he will not
take it of you.

Now my brethren, there remains but one thing more, wherewith we will
conclude this point, that is, now I have been so large in showing you what
this love is, wherein you cannot blame us if we press you to it, because it is
one of the greatest and most radical virtues, faith and love, therefore we
have been the larger in describing it to you; I say now you have heard what it
is, what remains but this, to show you the great danger in not loving? and that
we will make to be the last consectary that we will draw from this doctrine:

I say, consider how dangerous a thing it is to neglect it; the Lord you see
requires it upon pain of damnation, whatsoever you have, yet notwithstanding
if you have not this love, you are not in Christ, God deals not hardly with
us in requiring love: because
and so you shall be excluded. Let no man think that this is exaction, that it
is a hard thing that the Lord requires it with this exaction: for what is it
that he requires? If he had required of you to offer sacrifice, as he did in
the old law, then the poor man might have objected, he had not where withal;
if he had required us to fight battles, It is that which every one may give.
the weak man might have said he could not do it, he was not able: but now
young and old, rich and poor, all can love.

Besides if we consider who it is that requires this love, He that requires
this, might have required harder things.
is it not the great God of heaven and earth? is it not the Son? If he had
commanded thee the hardest thing in the world, if he had said, thou shall cast
thy self into the fire, thou shall sacrifice children to me, you are his
creatures, and you must obey him: But when he requires this only at thy hands,
to love him, is it not equal?

Besides, It is for our own benefit.
when he requires this, it is for your benefit, for when you have given the
Lord your hearts, the Lord gives you them again; even as the earth, the water
it receives from the sea, it returns it better back again in springs and
fountains, and pure streams; so does the Lord give you your hearts back
again, when you have bestowed them upon him, and withal he gives you leave to
b^stow them upon other things, to love all things that you may and ought to
love, and which is good for you to love; therefore the Lord may require it upon
this penalty, for he asks but his own, and what he has deserved at thy
hands, therefore it is a most reasonable and equal request. For what does the
Lord thy God require of thee, says Moses, but only that you love the Lord
your God? So I say to you, what else does the Lord your God require of you?

The danger of not loving the Lord.
But again know this, that as it is a command full of equity and reasonablenes,
so the danger is the greater if you do it it not; and what that is I will show
you but by one place, that is, 1 Cor. 16.22. 1 Cor. 16.22.
Cursed is he that loves not the Lord Jesus, yea let him be had in execration
to the death: That is the place I would have you consider, that now when you
have been acquainted with this whole doctrine of love, you might know the
danger of not performing and doing it; whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus, let
him be Anathema Maranatha, he curses him in two languages, to show that it is
a peremptory curse.

But what is that to be cursed?

To be cursed what.
My brethren, to be cursed is to be separated, to be set apart or appointed unto
evil, so that all that love not the Lord Jesus, they are men separated and set
apart to evil, so that no man may meddle with them, no man may touch them to
do them good, as the Saints and those that love the Lord they are set apart
that no man may touch them for hurt; so it is here, when a man is cursed, the
meaning is this, he is set apart, secluded from all good things, that none are
to meddle with him, he is set apart for evil, all things shall concur
together to do him hurt; this is when the Lord curses any man, and this is
the case of every man that loves not the Lord Jesus.

Our business when we preach the Gospel is but to offer the Lord Jesus to
you, that is all that we have to do; and all that you have to do that hear
us, is to take Jesus Christ, to believe in him, to love him: Now says the
Lord, if you will not do this, if you will not love him, every such one let
him be accursed. Now when the Lord shall curse a man, as Isaac said, I have
blessed him, and he shall be blessed: So whom the Lord curses, he shall be
cursed, and it is a fearful thing if you consider it; and therefore we will
a little open it, and show you wherein this curse consists:

Which I urge the more, because it is an usual thing among men, when they come
to consider their sins in particular, wherewith they have provoked God to
anger, they look upon this or that gross sin, but this defect and omission
of love they scarce put into the number of their sins. But that you may know
now what it is not to love him, you may consider by the greatness of the
punishment, and that you see here is a curse: The curse of God in four things.
Now that you may know what this curse is, know that it consists in these four
things.

First it consists in this, Separate from grace.
he shall be separated from grace and goodness, from holiness; and this is
the curse upon his soul in this respect, in regard of exclusion from grace,
which is to the soul as an obstruction in the liver is to the body, as a
thief in the candle is to the candle, which causes it to waste and consume,
and wear away; so it is in this curse, when God shall lay it upon the soul of
any man, he shall not thrive in grace, his inward man shall not prosper at all,
he shall be still in the wearing hand, and the Lord shall take away from him
that which he seems to have; when the Lord shall say to thee as to the
figtree, Never fruit grow more on thee, that is a fearful curse, when the
Lord shall curse, and say to a man, though thou have some leaves upon thee,
there are some things that seem to be good in thee, yet because thou have not
love, never fruit shall grow upon thee more. What a curse is it think you
that shall make the soul of a man to wither, as the figtree withered after the
speech of Christ, that is, when every thing shall drive a man off from that
which is good, and carry him on to destruction; whatsoever befalls him in
poverty, in prosperity, riches, and friends or enemies, every thing shall breed
his hurt: he shall have riches when he is most ready to abuse them, he shall
have adversity then when it is worst for him to be in adversity, that shall be
to him as the lopping of trees out of season; he shall be as an unthrifty
son, set him to a trade in the City, there he goes down the wind, put him
to husbandry in the Country, that thrives not with him; such is the case of
every one that loves not Christ. So my brethren, when Christ is preached to
you, when you will not receive the doctrine, but refuse it, you see the doom
here, says the Apostle, let him be accursed; this causes men to go away from
the Lord, Because they receive not the love of the truth, therefore he gives
them up to believe lies, because that men receive not Christ in the love of the
Gospel, he gives them up to a reprobate sense, from one degree to another,
till there be no remedy. We see by experience, are there not many that are
given up to the sin of drinking and idleness, and company-keeping, and
others, to other sins; you see many plod on in an old tracke of sin, some
lying a long time in a dead sottish course, so as the most powerful ministry
in the world will not stir them, which is an evidence that the Lord has
cursed such, therefore the ministry can do them no good. And this is the first
curse upon men that love not the Lord Jesus.

But perhaps thou regardest not this curse because thou regardest not grace and
holiness from which it sequestreth thee, Separation from the presence of God.
but yet there is another branch of it, thou shall be separated from the
presence of the Lord, that is, from the joy, from the influence, from the
protection of God; and this is a very fearful curse. You know what it was to
Cain in the fourth of Genesis, Genesis 4.
when the Lord had cursed him, says he, I am hid from thy face: that was the
great curse that was laid upon him, of which he was most sensible that he was
separated from the presence of the Lord. And my brethren, this is no small
thing, because God is the God of all comfort, and to be separated from his
presence is the worst thing that can befall us in this life: It was Saul's case,
when the Lord had once cast him off, he was separate from the presence of God,
so that when he came to ask counsel, the Lord would answer him no more, he
would have no more to do with him: you know how fearful and how bitter this
was to Saul. On the other side, see how much Moses magnifies this presence of
God; Lord, says he, if thou go not with us, carry us not hence: as if the
presence of God were the greatest comfort in the world, as indeed it is. This
is another thing wherein ye shall be cursed.

A curse on the outward estate
Again, there is yet another branch of it, ye shall not only be separated
from grace, and from the presence of the Lord, but there shall be a curse upon
your outward estate. It is said of Cain in the same chapter, Thou shall be
cursed from the earth: it may be many that hear of being cursed from grace,
and of separation from the presence of the Lord, are of that mind that they
care not for it, that they regard it not; it may be you care not to be cursed
from heaven: but to be cursed from the earth is that which goes near to you,
and that is a thing which the most earthly-minded man in the world is sensible
of. Now you must know that whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus shall be cursed
from the earth, that is, there shall be a curse upon you in all earthly things,
in all things that belong to this present life whatsoever they are.

Object.
But you will say, we see it quite otherwise, we see such men as they,
described to be men that abound in outward wealth, in outward blessings.

It may be so in outward show, Answ.
but yet there is a curse upon them notwithstanding. A man may be cursed in
outward things in the midst of plenty.
Abimelech had the kingdom, yet there was a curse that never ceased till he
was rooted out of the kingdom: The Israelites had the quails, but yet there
was a curse with them: Ahab had the vineyard, but it was a curse to him. So all
these things that are of themselves blessings and mercies in their own nature,
yet if the Lord will mingle them with a curse, ye shall find no ease from
them at all: and this is a thing that is well known by experience, if the
hearts of men will speak what they know. This is the case of those that love
not the Lord, The earth shall not give her increase, you shall not have that
sound comfort, that sweetness, that influence of comfort from earthly
blessings, though you have the creatures about you which naturally have
blessings in them, yet they shall not give down that milk for your comfort,
you shall not be satisfied with them, you shall see a constant emptiness in
them, they shall be to you as the shell without the kernel; and so much more
shall ye be miserable, because ye shall find the least comfort in them when
you most expect it: the Lord meets thus with those that love him not in
earthly blessings.

But last of all, The eternal curse at the day of judgment.
there is one branch of this curse which exceedes all the rest, that is the
eternal curse that shall be upon men for ever: while ye live here in this
life there is a certain show, a certain twilight of comfort that the Lord
sometimes affords even to evil men; but then there shall be a perfect
midnight, then the Sun of comfort shall set upon you altogether and rise no
more: in that day, says the Apostle, it shall be the day of the manifestation
of the just wrath of God: in that day when the Lord shall open the treasures of
his wrath, those which have been so long time a gathering. While we live here
the clouds of Gods indignation are but gathering, then they shall grow thick
and black, and fasten upon you to the uttermost, then all the great deepes
shall be broken up, then the floodgates of Gods judgments shall prevail and
overflow you; that case shall be yours at that time, and this is a time which
is to be considered by you now: in Eccles. 1.7. Eccles. 1.7.
Remember the days of darkness, for they are many. My brethren, eternity is
an other thing than we consider it to be while we live in this world. In
Psalm. 78.38. The Lord called back his wrath, Psalm. 78.38.
and stirred not up all his indignation, but at that time the Lord shall stir
up all his wrath; ye do here but sippe of this cup, but then ye shall drink
up the dreggs of it for ever. This shall be the case of those that love not the
Lord.

But you will say, this is afar off, and therefore the less terrible, it is
not near at hand.

Men may be cursed though the curse be not executed.
Well, though this curse in which we have showed these four branches, be not
presently executed, yet remember this, that when we preach the Gospel to you,
as we do from day to day, and are still offering you Christ, beseeching you to
come in, and take him and love him, but yet you will not, know that there is a
thunderbolt always following this lightening: when John Baptist came and
preached the Gospel, he tells them presently of the curse that ws to follow:
You do not know the time when the Lord will execute this curse; Cain was
cursed many years before he died: and so Saul, when the Lord had rejected him,
and had made a separation between God and him, (for a curse is but a
separation, when a man is cast aside and set apart for such a purpose, so Saul
was set apart for evil) yet he reigned many years after, notwithstanding he
was under the curse. So those that the Lord swear in his wrath they should not
enter into his rest, there was a curse upon them, yet they lived many years in
the wilderness: Therefore though the execution be not presently, and though
thou be in prosperity for the present, yet it is but Cains prosperity, though
he had his life continued, yet the curse lay upon him notwithstanding;
therefore I say take heed of refusing and deferring, lest he swear in his
wrath that ye shall not enter into his rest; it is a dangerous thing to refuse
the Lord Jesus when he is offered the first, second, third and fourth time,
and still you will not come in, take heed and remember that speech of the
Apostle that we named to you, Whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus let him be
accursed. When the Apostle looked upon the men to whom he had preached and
written, you Corinthians to whom the Gospel has been plentifully preached
and made known, those among you that have heard me, and have been made
acquainted with this doctrine of the freeness of Gods offering grace to you,
if you will not take Christ in good earnest, if you will not love him, let such
a man be accursed: and brethren S. Paul was stirred up by the Spirit of God to
pronounce this curse. So I say, let these words continue in your minds, that
whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus let him be Anathema Maranatha; and he that
has ears to hear let him hear what the Spirit says: for happy and blessed
are those that love the Lord Jesus, but miserable and cursed are those that do
not love him.

FINIS.
THE EIGHTH SERMON.
GALAT. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love.


HAVING spoken of faith and love, it remains that we add to them good works,
for which we will go no further than this Text, we cannot have a fitter;
for, says the Apostle, when you come to have to do with Christ Jesus, to be
ingrafted into him, to make your selves first acceptable to God through him,
all the works you can do are nothing, they are no more than the omission of
them, circumcision is the same with uncircumcision: But what is of moment then?
Faith (says he:) But what faith must that be? Such a faith as begets love:
And what love must that be? Such a love as sets you on work: so that you have
a chain here consisting of these three linkes; faith which when it is right
will beget love, and love when it is right will set you on work; faith which
works by love. So the point we will deliver to you out of these words shall be
this: Doct.
That we are to be judged not only by our faith and love, We are to be judged
not only by our faith and love, but by our works.
but also by our works, that no man has faith and love, that none are new
creatures, that none have sincerity, but works will follow.

this is a point which I do not mean to handle at large as we have done the
other, but will endeavor to finish it at this time, and it is a very necessary
point, because men are ready to applaud themselves in their knowledge in their
good meaning, in their honest desires, and in the mean time they fail in
their lives and actions: therefore as those are the radical ver^ues which
indeed make up the new creature, Faith and Love, so you must know that good
works are never disjoined from them, wheresoever there is sincerity, and a
new creature, good works will follow.

The Scripture you know is evident in this, A good tree brings forth good
fruit, Matthew. 7. Mat. 7.
that is, it cannot be that a m^n shall have a new heart, it cannot be that a
man should be regenerate, but that his works will be also new; look how far
the heart of any man is holy, look how far his heart is put into a new frame
of grace, in that measure his works will be good, and his life sanctified. In
Acts 14.22. Acts 14.22.
speaking of David, I have found a man after m^ne own heart, who will do
whatsoever I will: and in Mat. 23.26. Mat. 23.26.
Make the inside clean that the outside may be clean also: As if he should
say, if the inside be right, if the heart be set right within, if that be well
molded, the outside will be clean, they cannot be disjoined.

If a man have a treasure within, there will be silver in his speeches and
actions; but if his heart be nothing worth, his words and actions will be but
mere dross: Prove. 10.20.
It is the scope of that, Prove. 10.20. The words of the righteous are as fined
silver, but the heart of the wicked is nothing worth: That is, when his heart
is nothing worth, his speeches and actions are nothing worth too; but the good
man that has his treasure in his heart, there is silver and gold in his
speeches and actions, that is, they are likewise precious. Therefore let no man
say he has faith and love, and as good a heart as the best, though his actions
be not so good, though he be not so strict in his carriage; for it cannot be my
brethren.

For first of all, Reas. 1 Because every Christian has the spirit, and that is
strong. 2 Timothy 1.6.
if a man's heart be good, he has the spirit of God dwelling there: now, says
the Apostle, 2 Timothy* 1.6. The spirit is not a spirit of fear, or a spirit of
weakness, a spirit that only makes attempts, and is not able to bring things
to pass; but it is a spirit of power, a spirit of a sound mind: That is, do
not thou pretend thou meanest well and desire well, and think it is
sufficient, but stir up the gift that is in thee, set thy self on work, do
the actions that belong to thee in thy place, and do not say I am not able to
do it; for we have not received a spirit that is weak, but a spirit of
power: the same I may say to every Christian, If ye be in Christ, ye have the
spirit, which is a spirit of power. So you have it likewise, Gal. 5.25. Gal.
5.25.
If you live in the spirit, walk in the spirit: that is, if you have so much
of the spirit as to make you living men, show it by walking in the spirit, by
following the spirit, by doing that which the spirit guides you to; therefore
it is impossible that a man should have a right mind, but that his works also
will be good, because grace is strong: in 2 Timothy 2.1. 2 Timothy 2.1.
And thou my son be strong in the grace received, etc. As if he should say,
grace is a strong thing, it strengthens every man that has received it; if
thou profess thou have received the grace of Christ to regenerate thee, to
change thee, and to make thee a new creature, let that appear by showing thy
self strong in thy actions, able and ready to do every thing that belongs to
thee in thy place. Indeed flesh is weak, so much flesh, so much weakness,
for that is weak and fading, and withering, and mutable; it is grass, and all
the purposes of it and the desires of it are no better: but the spirit is
strong, and grace is strong, quite contrary to the flesh; as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 31.3. Isay 31.3.
Ye are men and not Gods, flesh and not spirit: when he would show their
weakness, as if weakness were a concomitant of the flesh, and strength a
concomitant of the spirit: Therefore if you have the spirit of Christ in you,
there will be strength to go through good works, not only to intend them,
and purpose them, and resolve on them, but you will put those resolutions and
purposes in execution.

Secondly, Reas. 2. Inward rectitude and good works always go together.
it must needs be so, because there is a chain between good works and the
inward rectitude of the heart, a chain that cannot be disjoined; for ye shall
find that these three things always go together.

First, as that indeed is the beginning of every man's renewing, there must be
a knowledge, a man must be enlightened, he must be renewed in the spirit of
his mind, as the Apostle says. Now if the knowledge be right, if it be a
convicting knowledge, a sanctifying knowledge, a knowledge to purpose, it will
draw on affections, it cannot choose, they are never separated: you are never
truly enlightened by Gods spirit, but affections follow necessarily, and then
if the affections be right, if knowledge draw on holy affections, love, and
fear, and desires, etc. affections are the immediate principles of actions,
there is no man that has right affections, but good works will follow: so
that these three are never disjoined, sanctified knowledge draws on holy
affections, and holy affections draw on good actions: Mat 13.5.
as ye have it in Matthew. 13.5. Their hearts are waxed fat, and their ears are
dull of hearing, and why? you shall see the chain there, lest seeing with
their eyes they should understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I
should heal them: Mark it, if they should see with their eyes, the Lord has
given them up to judge amiss of things, that seeing they do not see, that is,
they see not to purpose, they are not convinced, they do not judge; for if
they did see with their eyes, that is, if they did see indeed, they would have
understood with their hearts, their affections would follow in their hearts,
and if they were set aright, then they would be converted, that is, their lives
would be turned to God; and if these three were done he must needs heal them:
but says God, I am resolved not to heal them: therefore they shall see as if
they did not see, for these will draw on one the other. So I say, if the heart
were right, if there were faith and love, good works would follow: therefore
let no man say he has grace, he has love and faith, except his life also be
holy and good.

Reas. 3. Because there is a new nature.
Lastly, wheresoever there is faith and love, there is a change of nature; for
you know that wheresoever they come, faith that is effectual, and love that
follows from faith it makes a man a new creature, they are the very things
wherein a new ereature consists: Now when a man's nature is changed, it must
needs be active, for that which is natural to a man, he does without
unevenness, there is no inequality in his doing it, he does it constantly,
where there are natural principles of actions, the actions flow like water
from a spring: indeed where the nature of a man is not changed, that is, where
there is only good purposes and good desires, and no alteration of nature,
there actions do not come as water from a spring, but as water from a pomp
that is forced and extorted; but where there is a change of nature, there is no
difficulty, a man does it with facility and with desire, it is his meat and
drink to do the will of God. Therefore I say good works will follow, there
will be the same degree of holiness, of rectitude in your lives, in your
actions, as there is of grace, as there is of faith and love in your hearts.
And this is enough to make the point plain to you, the maine business will be
to make use of it, and to apply it to your selves.

And first let us make this use of it, Use 1. Not to be content only with good
meanings
not to content our selves with good meanings only, as it is the fashion of
men to say, my heart is as good as yours, and my meaning is as good as yours,
though I be subject to infirmities, though I cannot make such a show, though I
cannot do so much as others do; this is the common objection, and though men
say it not constantly, yet they think it, otherwise they would not content
themselves in such a condition as they do. But I say, deceive not your selves
in this, for, my brethren, you must know that you may have good purposes and
good meanings, we will not deny you that you may have these, and yet have no
true grace; for you must know that good purposes and desires may arise from
these two things, Good purposes whenee they arise.
which every unregenerate man is capable of.

Knowledge.
There may be knowledge, as you know an evil man may have knowledge of all the
mysteries of salvation as well as the most holy; I do not say he has the
sanctified knowledge, but the law of God is partly written in his heart, the
Lord has taught every man somewhat.

Approbation of that which is good.
Secondly, in an evil and unregenerate man there may be not only knowledge,
but an approbation of that which is good, they can approove that which is good,
so far they may go; I do not say they can delight in it, for that is
another thing, they do not love and delight in it, that is not suitable to
them, yet they may approove it. Now from these two principles, to know that
which is good, and to approove it, they may go so far as to purpose and
desire to serve God, they may have good meanings, but yet if actions follow
not, if there be not reformation in their lives, if a man deny not himself in
his beloved sin, if he come not to that outward profession of holiness that
is required in Scripture, and is seen in the lives of the Saints, he has
nothing to comfort himself withal; these good meanings will not serve the
turn.

For know this, though it be true as we see there may be actions where there
is no sound heart, as the second and third ground brought forth a kind of
fruit when there was neither of them right; hypocrites you know may go far,
they may make a blaze as your commets do more than the true stars: Though
there may be good works where the heart is unsound, yet wherever the heart is
sound there is good works.
though this be true, that there may be abundance of good works where there is
no rightnesse and soundness, no sincerity, no pureness within; yet again
also on the other side, wheresoever there is sincerity there are good works,
and though many times the outside be clean when the inside is not, yet the
inside is never clean but the outside is clean too: And that is the thing we
must examine our selves by; though it be not a good rule to say I have good
works, therefore my heart is right, yet it is a good rule to say on the other
side, I want good works, therefore my heart is not right; except there be a
general reformation in your lives, except things be reformed that you know to
be amiss. Indeed when it is not revealed to you, then there is something for
you to say, but when you know that such a duty is to be done, that your
speeches should be holy, that they should be seasoned with salt, that you ought
to abstain from sins of all kinds, from all appearance, that you ought not
to admit any kind of dalliance, not the least touch of any sin; now not to
set your selves with all your might to reform this, this is a sure argument
you are not right; for if the general frame of the heart be good, there will
be a general reformation of the life. Therefore let no man say I purpose well,
but in this particular infirmity I must be spared, to such a thing my nature is
prone, and I am given to it, I cannot tell how to refrain it, and I hope it is
not so great a matter; say not so, for if the heart be right, the actions will
be right and unblameable.

Simile.
For though you see sometimes a man may have a good color from flushing and
painting, when the constitution of the body within is but crasie and unsound;
yet again it is true there is never any that has a sound and hail
constitution, there is never a healthful body but the complexion is good; the
heart is never right, but you shall see it without, though you have leaves
without fruit, yet you never have fruit but there are leaves, there are
actions appearing. Therefore learn to judge aright of your selves, content not
your selves with good purposes, only you see the complaint of the Scripture of
the lack of this in people. What is the reason the Lord calls for obedience
rather than sacrifice? because that is the touchstone that every man is tried
by; I am weary, says he, of your fat of rams, I am burdened with your
sacrifices, Esaias 1. Isay 1.
The thing that I desire is that you cease to do evil, and learn to do
well, that is the thing that the Lord looks for at every man's hand, these
outward performances are good, they must be done, and these good meanings must
be had, but yet that is not enough, you are not to judge your selves by that.

Object.
But it will be objected, that the best men have their failings, those that have
a good heart, yet do we not find them subject to infirmities as well as
other men? and if this be the rule we are to be judged by, who shall be saved?

Answ,
To this I answer first, it is true that the most holy men may many times do
that which is ill, Holy men have failings,
but it is by accident, it is when they are transported, when they are carried
besides their purpose: When they are suddenly transported.
As a man that is bound for such a place, sailing such a way, his compass
stands still right, he alters not that, Simile.
though the wind carry him violently another way, yet he looks still to the
right way, that is his intent still; and it is known by this, when the wind
is over, and the gust is past, he returns again and saileth to the haven he
intended to go to at the first: So it is with all the Saints, they sail by a
right compass, their intents are still good, whenever they do otherwise it
is by accident, it is when they are overborne by some temptation, by some
passion, when they are not perfectly themselves.

Again, Holy men have flesh in them as well as spirit
you must know this, that every holy man as he has grace in him, and a
principle of holy actions, so he has also flesh in him, and a principle of
evil actions; now that principle may sometimes prevail and get ground of him,
yea it may prevail mightily sometimes, and make him do as evil actions as
the worst man: For that is a true rule, a man that excels in grace may
sometimes excel in ill doing; you must take me aright, that is, a man that
has a more impetuous spirit than another, so that none excels such a spirit
when it is set aright, he may be as impetuous in evill-doing for a fit, for a
time, when that evil principle within him shall get the better. Therefore
though you see a good man sometime unlike himself for a fit, yet it is at that
time when the flesh prevails; for now grace though it be there, yet sometimes
it is laid asleep, it is not always acted: As the Philosopher was wont to
say, It is one thing to have knowledge, and another thing to use it always; so
it is with grace, sometimes the Saints do not use that grace and holiness,
and hence it is that they are subject to great failings; but I say it is by
fits and by accident, the constant course of their life is right, because the
constant frame of their heart is right.

Object.
But again there is another objection on the other side, that evil men
sometimes do well as well as good men do sometimes ill.

Answ.
To this I answer, that it is true they do so, but yet we must know that it is
not they that do it, The good that evil men do it cannot be said that they
do it.
but the good that dwells in them, as the Apostle speaks in Romans 7. which
may be employed on the contrary; when any regenerate man finneth, it is not he
that does it, Romans 7.
but the sin that is there; that is, it is not the master of the house, but a
rebel that is crept in by accident: so I say of every evil man that does that
which is good and right, it is not he that does it, but some good that is
there. For it is one thing for a man to have good things in him, A man may do
good, and not be good.
and another thing to be a good man, he may do some things sometimes for a
fit that are good, Gods Spirit may be there to help him to do much; I say not
that the Spirit dwells there, but he may take up his lodging for a time, and
from him he may have common assistance, common gifts that may enable him to do
much: Therefore I deny not but those may have many good flashings of lightning
that may enable them to do much; only this we say, The Dayspring from on
high never visited them, that is, the morning never rises upon them, to guide
their feet in the way of peace, for that is proper to the Saints; they never
have any constant light that leads them so far as to bring them in: they
have some lightenings indeed that guide them in this or that particular, to
help them in a step or two, to enable them to do many good actions by fits,
but not to bring them to perfection.

Secondly, Use 2. Christians better taught than great learned men without grace.
if this be so that we are to be judged by our actions, then this will follow
from it, that poor Christians are better taught than the greatest Clerks,
they are better taught I say, because they do more, therefore indeed they
know more; for all the knowledge we have, all the sincerity, whatsoever is
right within us, if it be to be judged by the actions, then he that does most
he knows most; for no man knows more than he practices, because what
knowledge soever a man has that he practices not, mark it, it is a dead
knowledge, it is an inefficacious knowledge. When things are dead and
inefficacious, we say they are not; as leaven that does not leaven the dough,
it has but the name of leaven and no more, the thing it self is wanting; it
is not knowledge if it bring not forth practice. As we say of of drugges, they
are not true when they do not work, but they are false and counterfeit. Every
man is to be judged by what he does: Therefore I say those that do most, those
are knowing men, Those that seem to know, as the Apostle says, know nothing
as they ought: a man may know much, a man may have a large extent of knowledge,
yet this is true of him, if his life be barren, if he bring forth nothing into
action all the while, he knows nothing as he ought to know, though he know
much: On the other side, the other sort though their extent be never so small,
yet what they know they know as they ought. Therefore when you look upon men
in the world, when you would make a judgment of them, I say those that know
most they are not the best, you must not put them in the highest degree, when
you come to matters of religion, but men are to be judged by their actions;
when men have knowledge only to know, as they have money to account with, and
not to buy and sell with it, it is but dead, a man has no good by it, that
money makes him not the richer; so men that have knowledge only to know with,
not to make them more useful in their lives, more serviceable to God, and
profitable to man, it is unprofitable knowledge: therefore those are the wisest
men, let them seem never such fools, though they are not able to speak so
much as others, yet they know most that practice most. For there is that
difference between art and wisdom; indeed it is true in matter of art, he
that omitteth wilfully may be the best artist, because there is no more
required of him but skill, and it is but some error in him, it is the
commendation of his art that he erreth willingly: But now in matter of
holiness and sanctity, there he that knows and does not is the greatest
fool: For wisdom consists most in that. Wisdom in three things.
Wisdom comprehends indeed these three: First, to invent, to see, to know and
understand things. Secondly, to judge aright of things you know. Thirdly, to
put in practice that which you have concluded to be the best, and this latter
is the greatest part of prudence: Therefore those men that know, that can
dispute well, that have clear understanding, and yet do nothing, they are the
unwisest; again, those that can speak little, and perhaps have not such a
treasure of knowledge as others, and yet can do more, they know more than the
wisest. Therefore let us not misesteeme those that are good Christians, and
holy men, and set too high a price upon others; for there is an error under
that, and it has an ill consequent to judge of religion by the opinion of
those that are only knowing men in religion: No, beloved, religion is the art
of holy men, Religion an art of holymen not of learned men.
and not of learned men, and it was the custom of former times to judge of
heresies not so much by disputes, as by the lives of those that have been the
professors of them: and that Christ directs us to, You shall know them by
their fruits: and what are those fruits? their fruits are their actions.


We learn at schools what to say in such a controversy, how to dispute
rather than how to live: and that is the complaint we may take up in these
knowing times, where knowledge (I confess) abounds as water in the sea, but
practice is thin and rare, like grass upon the house top, of which the mower
cannot fill his hand: and that is the burden of us that are Ministers, that we
teach much, and see little fruit, we see no amendment of men's lives, men do
the same things that they were wont to do, the duties they were wont to be
defective in, they are defective in still. Alas my brethren, the end of our
preaching is not that you should know, but that you should do and practice: as
it is not the desire of the shepherd that his sheep should return their
meat in hay again, but he would have it in their milk and fleece; so it is
not our desire that you should only know, though indeed many come short of
that, but that you should show it in your fleece and milk, show it in your
lives, that all the world may see it there. It is not enough for him that
desires to write, to see the copy, and to know it, and the fashion of the
letters, but then he has learned it when he can write after it: so you must
know sciences are of two sorts, Sciences of two sorts.
indeed some there are the end of which is only contemplation and knowledge,
but some there are the end whereof is action, and they are no further good than
we practice them. What is music, but the practice of it? what is physic?
the knowledge of all will not heal a man, but the taking of it: so it is with
Divinity, the knowledge that we teach is nothing worth, if you know as much as
could be known, it were all nothing worth without practice, practice is all in
all; so much as ye practice, so much you know. It is a great matter to have
your judgment true in this case, for when men shall applaud themselves merely
in this, that they know and have right purposes and honest desires, and shall
esteem their estates by this, it causes men to content themselves with a
loose and a negligent life; but we must know that God judges us by our
actions, and that is our best rule to judge by too, therefore we should learn
thus to judge our selves.

If you object, Object.
but it is a rule that we have heard often, that the will is often taken for
the deed, and if the will be present with us, though the action do not follow,
yet we are accepted according the will.

To this I answer in brief, Answ.
first, it holds only then where there is some impediment which you cannot
remove: The will taken for the deed:
as for example, a man has a desire to do good to such poor people, When the
impediment cannot be removed.
he has a compassionate heart, he is willing to be bountiful, but he wants
means to do it, in this case the Lord accepts the will for the deed; for upon
that occasion is this delivered in this place by S. Paul: so it is in every
thing else, when you have a desire, and there comes some impediment that it
is not in your power to remove, then the will is accepted for the deed. As when
a man has a desire to move his hands, his legs or arms, but because of a
palsy that hangs upon him, he is not able to stir them, here the will is for
the deed, he is not able to do it, though the mind be right and the desire
good; so when you come to such duties that are not in your power to do, when
there are some impediments that you are not able to remove, here the will is
accepted for the deed.

When a man is ignorant of somethings, and yet his desires are right.
Sometimes a man is ignorant of some particulars, and he has a desire to obey
God in all things, here the will is accepted for the deed, though he be not
come to that degree of perfection as others are: but as men apply it commonly
it is amiss, for when a man thinks I have a good purpose to do this, but I
cannot pray, I cannot be so strict in looking to my actions and speeches, here
the complaint is not right: for if ye stir up your selves, and do the
utmost you can do, the deed will follow the will, there is no such impediment
here but that you may remove. Therefore our answer is, that the reason why you
cannot do, is not because of such impediments that you cannot remove, but
because your will is not yet right, which the Schoolmen call an imperfect
will; it is but such a will as the Wiseman speaks of concerning the sluggard,
he wills and lusts, and has not: and what is the reason? If it were a
full, a complete and perfect will, it would draw action with it, he would not
be a sluggard any longer, but he would draw forth his hands to do somewhat to
bring his desires to pass, but indeed he has but light wishings and no more.
And so it is with men in christianity, they are as Salomons sluggard, they wish
they had such sins mortified, that they had such graces, they wish they could
attain such a measure of faith and love, but they take no pains: No man has
a great measure of grace without pains.
no man has height of grace without pains; do you think to get the greatest
excellency in the world without pains? It is true, the Lord must do it, but
yet he does it by your selves, you are agents in the business: Therefore do
not say I wish well and desire well, for if you would do your uttermost that
you ought to do, if your will were full and complete, and desires right and
strong, you would do more, you would excel more in grace, you would amend
your lives more, you would have your lusts more mortified: therefore let not
this deceive you. I should press this further, but we will come to the last
thing, because I would conclude this point with this time, and that is,

To exhort you to be doers, Use 3. An exhortation to doing.
that your faith may be effectual faith, and that your love may be diligent
love: This is the great business which we have to do, and the thing which for
the most part we all fail in, that there is no doing, no acting, no working
of our faith; be exhorted now therefore to add to your faith diligent love,
especially you that profess your selves to be grown Christians, look you to
it, and know that as in nature every thing when it is ripe brings seed and
fruit, if not it is but a dead thing, a dead plant that keeps the room
idle; if there be that ripeness and maturity in you, Motives to be workers.
show it by bringing forth seed and fruit, show it by doing something. For,
my brethren, we are called into the Lords vineyard for the same purpose; it is
not for you now to stand idle, the time of your standing still is past, it is
for you now to work, for ye are now come into the day. That exhortation is
excellent, 1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 7, 8.
1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 7, 8. Let not us sleep (says he) as do others, we are come
out of the night: those that are still in the night, it better beseemes them to
sleep, and to sit still and do nothing, but let not us sleep as do others,
for we are of the day; let it not be so with you as with others, to be much in
speech only, but labor to be much in actions. As it was said of Gideon, Up
and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee, so I say to every one, up and be
doing, and the Lord shall be with you; that is, though perhaps you do not
find that vigor, that fervencie and liveliness of spirit, yet be doing
notwithstanding, it is your wisest way, for that doing will increase the grace
within you: exercise increases health, as well as health enables to exercise,
The use of grace increases it.
so the use of grace will increase grace and other abilities; motion causes
heat, as well as all motion comes from heat, so every good action
proceeds from grace, and good actions intend grace: and therefore be still
acting, and judge of your selves by that, for what is grace, what is that you
call Christianity else, but to do that which another man cannot do? Therefore
if there be such a difference between you and others as you profess there is,
show it by doing that which another man cannot do, by exposing your selves to
that danger, to those losses for any good cause, which another would not do;
by spending more time in prayer, by taking more pains with your hearts from
day to day than others do, by keeping the sabbath better than others do, by
being more exact in looking to your ways, that you may be holy in all manner
of conversation, that other men will not do: I say show your grace, show your
regeneration, by being new creatures, by doing more than others, this is that
which will make the world believe that you are Christians in good earnest, and
not in show only, that your profession is in deed and in truth: and truly
there is no other way, this doing is that which makes a man excellent. You
hear men complain of the barrenness of their grounds many times, we may
likewise justly take up the complaint against the barrenness of the lives of
men.

How goodly a sight is it when a man looks into the husbandry, to see the vine
full of clusters, to see the furrows full of corn, to see the trees laden
with fruit; when we look upon men, A goodly sight when men's lives abound with
good works.
it is the goodliest sight we can behold in Gods husbandry, to see men full of
actions and good works; I beseech you consider of it seriously, and now set
upon the doing of it while there is sand in the houre-glasse, your life will
not last long, the day does not continue always, the night will come when no
man can work. When a candle is put out, you may kindle it again, when the
Sun is set, it rises again; but when our life is past, when the glass is
run, it arises no more, it is turned no more, It is appointed to all men
once to die: if ye might die twice or thrice, it were another case; but now it
is your wisdom therefore while it is time, while this short day, lasts, to
do that you have to do concerning your salvation with all your might, because
the time is short.

A true property of wisdom.
There is nothing that is a truer property of wisdom than for a man to take
hold of opportunities, not to lose the day, nay not an hour in the day;
Simile.
for time is most precious, it is like gold of which every shred is worth
somewhat: it is your wisdom therefore to be often sowing seed to the spirit,
there is none of those good works, not the least of them but will do you good
in the latter end; for alas what are your lives but your actions? so much as
you do, so much you live, your lives are short of themselves, why do you make
them shorter by doing nothing? for as we have said heretofore, one man may
live more in a day than another in twenty, because he does more, you live more
as you act more.

Pleasure and contentment is in action.
Besides, what is it a man serves for in all his labor under the Sun? what is
it that he desires but pleasure, comfort and contentment? Now, my brethren,
this consists in doing, in working, for all pleasure follows upon operation,
and further than there is working there is no delight. Therefore it was a wise
saying in that Philosopher, that the happiness and comfort that a man has in
this life consists not in abundance of wealth, in swimming in delights, but it
consists in doing the actions of a living man, which is the greatest comfort
you can find here in this life: Do the exercises and actions of holiness,
and the more ye do, the more comfort ye shall have; for even as light
follows the flame, so pleasure and contentment follows action.

And besides (my brethren) what do you live for, The end of our life.
is it not to glorify God? To glorify God.
You profess so much, and how is it done? Not by your desires or good
meanings, but by your actions, those are the things that men see and feel, and
glorify your heavenly Father: for when your actions shine before men, Herein
is my Father glorified, says Christ, that ye bring forth much fruit: the
doing of much is that which brings glory to God, the more you do this, the
more glory you bring to him.

Again, To do good to men.
another end of your life is to do good to mankind; shall they be able to
fare the better for your purposes, for your good resolutions? no, they fare the
better only for that you do for them and to them, it is your actions that
benefit men.

Lastly for your selves, what is it that helps you and does you good? only
your good deeds and your actions, it is that which furthers your reckoning and
account: That place is much to this purpose, Phil. 4.17. Phil. 4.17.
I care not for a gift, but I desire fruit, because it will further your
account: mark the phrase, the meaning is this, every good work that a holy
man does from the time of his regeneration, (for till then no actions are
spiritually good) it is put upon his score, it stands upon his reckoning, there
is not a penny nor a half penny lost, that is, the least good work is not
done to no purpose, but the Lord will repay him again every penny and
farthing: this (says he) will further your account. And when will the Lord
pay? Not only in the day of judgment, then indeed you shall be paid to the
uttermost, but you shall be paid even in this life; mark that too, You shall
have an hundredfold here, says Christ, They that forsake father, or mother, or
wife, or children, shall have an hundredfold in this life. Therefore brethren
if there be any wisdom in the world, this is the only wisdom, to be still
doing, to be much in actions; Why do you trifle out your time therefore to no
purpose? Why sit ye idle here? why do you not rise up and bestirre your
selves? why do you not fill your lives with many actions? You have good
purposes in you, why do you not stir them up? It is true indeed we are
becalmed many times because the Spirit does not blow upon us, but yet
notwithstanding if we would pray for the Spirit, the Lord would quicken us.

Object.
But you will say, alas what shall we do, it may be our callings give us no
opportunity to do that which other men's callings do: if we might be
Preachers, and have such and such business wherein we might only mind the
things that belong to salvation, then it were easy.

Answ.
My brethren, you must know that you shall find continual occasions of doing
good actions every day, In every calling men have occasion of dong good.
whatsoever your callings are. It is an error among the Papists, to think
that to give alms, to crucify the flesh and to use that hardly, to fast, and
the like, that these are the only and the most glorious actions: they are
exceeding wide; Good actions, what.
good actions are nothing else but to do the will of the Lord, and to bring
forth fruit; the fruit of every tree in the orchard is but as the actions of
every man; and then are the trees good to the husbandman, when they are full of
fruit. Every action that you do is that fruit which God looks for, now that
fruit is good works, that is pleasing to the gardener, to the husbandman:
Therefore to do the Lords will is to do a good work. Now by this you may see
what a large field you have for good works, in what calling soever you are
set, though it be never so mean a place you have.

To suffer imprisonment and disgraces for good causes, Good works. In
suffering.
this is a good work, for it is a great work to suffer, and in that you do
the will of the Lord. In sickness.
When a man is sick, and lies in his chamber upon his bed, sick of a
consumption or a fever, that he is not able to stir; yet to do this with
obedience, to submit then to the will of the Lord, is a good work: for to
bear a burden is a work, to bear sickness and calamity after this manner,
is a work, to think the Lord has put me into this condition; he might have
given me strength to go abroad as others do, but he has laid sickness upon
me, I say the right bearing this burden is a good work.

Again, In mastering our lusts.
to take pains with our hearts, to master our unruly lusts and affections is a
good work. Do not you reckon it a work to break horses, to master coltes?
It is the trade of some men to do so: and is it not a good work for you to
get victory over your lusts, to tame your unbridled natures, to curb your
unruly hearts and affections in all the variety of occasions that ye pass
through? It is a work to behave our selves as becomes Christians decently and
comely, and holily, in poverty, in riches, in honor, and disgraces; to behave
our selves under these things in a right manner, to carry our selves patiently
and holily through them as becomes good Christians, this is a good work, and
this belongs to every one, though his calling be never so mean.

When Paul stood at the bar, and Festus reviled him, and said he was a mad
fellow, the suffering of this was a work in Paul: Mark his manner of carriage
in it, I am not mad most noble Festus: there was a work in that. So I may
instance in the things wherein you may seem to do the least; the standing
still in some cases is a work the Apostle makes among the great works that
are to be done by Christians, this to be the chief, To keep our selves pure
and unspotted of the world, to pass through all occasions, and to be never the
worse for them, to go through all defilements of this present life, and not be
tainted: and if this be a work, how much more is it then to be still doing, to
be in act and operation always? Therefore do not say you want when you shall
always have occasion enough of that.

But you will say, Quest.
these generals are good to exhort us to be doing, but yet in particular what
would you have us to do now?

I will instance in some few things, Answ.
there are certain times of working; Our works must be suitable to the season.
as husbandmen, some times they have times of harvest, and some times they have
seed times, wherein it is required, that they work more then at other times:
so the Church of God has times and seasons, and the common wealth has some
seasons and times when men should be set aworke to do more then ordinary, to
do more then at other times; and you all know this is such a season, wherein
there should be working of every one in their several places, I say it is time
now for men to be working more then ordinary.

But you will say, Quest.
what is it you would have us to do?

My brethren, Answ.
Contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Duties suting the present
times.
mark it, the work must be to contend for it, you must be men of contention,
let the world say what they will of you, Contend for the faith.
it is a duty that lies on you, it is that which the Spirit calls for from
you, that ye be men that should contend; you must not do it coldly, and
remissely, but earnestly to strive for it, let not pretense of indiscretion
hinder you, Discretion.
for discretion when it is right, teaches a man not to do less but more, and
better then an other man, discretion we say does not take metal from Horses,
but guides those horses and puts them in a righter way, disc^etion makes no man
less active, but it gives his actions a better tincture.

So again, let us not say we must be moderate, for what is that moderation?
Indeed the moderation that keeps from actions, Moderation.
wherein is excess, is good; but if you mean by moderation to go a slow and
easy pace in the ways of God, that is coldness, idleness, carelessness, there
is no excess in any good way. Therefore that is your work now to contend for
the Faith, that is, for all the points of faith, for every jott of that is
precious: The faith once delivered.
says the Apostle Jude, it is but once delivered to the Saints, as if he
should say, it is too precious a treasure often to be despenced, it was but once
delivered to the world: if Christ did mean to come again, and renew the
Articles of our faith, we might be more remiss and negligent, for if we did
loose them he might restore them again, but they are but once delivered,
therefore your care must be to keep them the better.

Besides, it is the common faith, therefore every man has interest in it;
Common faith
do not say therefore, what have I to do, it belongs to these and these men to
look after it: it is the common faith, and every man has part in it, and
should contend according to his place and power, and within his spheere; and
remember it is a matter of much moment, for every part of the fath or little
matter of faith (I speak now of the whole doctrine of faith) that you should
be exceeding exact in keeping of it, that it receive no detriment, especially
in matter of opinion. Error in opinion worse then errors in practice.
For my brethren, you must know, that it were better there should be great
offenses committed in the land, great and notorious crimes, then that there
should be any loss in the matter of faith, because where the opinions of men
are set wrong, that is a principle that carries them still on. Great finnes
come from great passions, and men are able to see them, and when the passion is
gone over, These sermons were preached in the Parliament time in 1625. where
diverse of the Parliament were present. Opportunities not to be slipped.
they are easily recalled again; but errors in opinion are matters of great
moment, therefore it belongs to every one to look to it, to us that are
Preachers in our places, to Magistrates in their places, to every man to
contend for the common Faith: and know this my brethren, that their are
certain opportunities which the Lord gives you, and you must take heed of
neglecting them, it may be to let a thing go some times, it will never be
recovered again. Therefore look that you be diligent in it, stir up your
selves to do it, while there is occasion offered. In other things, men are apt
to be men of action, they would have employment, and work that they may be
some body in the world, and it is very well, there is something in that, it is
a nobleness of disposition so to do; but alas, what poor and weak reward
have you for that? it may be a little vaineglory, it may be some applause from
Princes or people, it may be some empty airie preferment. To do the will of
the Lord, the work he has given you to do, it is no matter what it is for, a
servant must not choose his work; I say whatsoever it is, though in never so
mean a thing, the greatest excellency is to do his will that makes us Kings
and Princes to him that makes us partakers of the Royal blood, as Christ
says, These are my brothers, and Sister, and Mother, that do the will of my
Father. It is this doing of his will, this action that puts you into a high
condition: I see not that Paul was ambitious of any thing but of this, that he
might be doing, that he might live a useful, a profitable life, in the 15.
Romans 20. Romans 15.20.
I was ambitious says Paul, to Preach the Gospel, even where it had never
been preached, this is all my ambition to put my self upon the hardest taskes:
so it should be your ambition to do some thing for the Church. When you read
the story of Moses, that He was mighty in word and deed; of David, of the
Judges, and the Worthies of the Church, they should be so many incentives to
you, to stir you up to be doing in your place.

Duty, Fast and pray.
But this is not all that we would commend to you at this time, to be men of
action, and to observe the opportunities, but there is an other thing, and that
is this, that likewise the season co^mends to you, that is, to fast and pray:
as in husbandry, so in the Church, there are certain seasons of actions, and
those seasons must not be omitted. Mark what the course of the Scripture was
in every calamity, in Joel when there was a famine begune, Sanctify a fast,
says the Lord, call a solemn Assembly: when their is a plague coming, when
there are great enterprises in hand, when there is any thing plotting for the
advancement of the good of the Church, do you not think now, that the omission
of opportunities are sins, for you to neglect this duty, do you not think
the Lord will require it? It is true indeed, it is a business that is not
ordinary, it is extraordinary: but do not extraordinary times and occasions
call for it?

Again, is it not evil in such extraordinary cases to omit such an
extraordinary duty? As we find in Scripture, when the Lord would call for
fasting, and they did it not: Indeed to turn it to jollity and feasting is
another thing, a sin of a greater nature; but now the very standing still and
omitting of this duty is disobedience to the Lord, and to be guilty of the
judgments that are upon a people, I say the standing still and not hastening
to the gappe: What shall we say then of those that resist this course, and
thrust men out of the gappe? Consider it therefore seriously, this is a
special duty required, the season looks for it that we should humble our
selves before God.

Again, there is one thing more that we will speak of, Duty, Renew our
Covenants
but in a word; that is, that every man for his own particular renew his
special Covenant with God concerning the amendment of his life in particular:
for I find that in all times when the Lord has stretched forth his hand
against a Church and Nation, that this has been required, that they should
come and enter into a Covenant with God: You shall find that Asa did it, 2 Chronicles. 16.
2 Chronicles. 16. that Nehemiah did it, that it was done in Ieremiahs time, when
they had wars in hand: We have many examples of it in Scripture, every man
did it; and because every man could not come to do it personally, the head did
it for the rest. I say the Lord looks for this from every man in private, that
he should do this in a particular manner, to consider what have I done amiss
in my life? what have I done to provoke the Lord? What sins of commission,
and what of omission? Have I been cold and lukewarm? Have I been too much
conformable to the times? For this is it that brings judgment upon a people:
The sins of Gods children help to bring judgments.
the Saints when they are not zealous, when they fall from their first love,
may help forward a judgment as well as gross sinners, yea and more too: let
every man therefore stir up himself to do his duty. In a word, we should
strive and contend for the advancing of Christ's kingdom, for the furtherance
of the Gospel, for the good of mankind, for the flourishing of the Church,
wherein our own good consists; and we should do it earnestly, we should
contend for it, contend with God in prayer, contend with our Superiors by
entreaty, with our adversaries by resistance, with cold and lukewarm men by
stirring them up, by provoking one another to good works. These are the works
that we exhort you to, and thus you shall be assured you have faith that works
by love. Learn this, to join these together.

And so much shall serve for this time, and this Text.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
Part. Page.
Absolute.
COvenant absolute. Part. 1. Page 38
Acquaintance.
How to draw near in acquaintance with God. Part. 3. Page 105.
Act, Active, Action.
Act of faith double. Part 2. Page 64 Habit serves for act. p. 2. p. 140 Love
active. 3.85. Pleasure in action. 3.206. See Faith.
ADAM.
A parallel between the two ADAMS. 1.5.
Adoption.
Spirit of Adoption, what. 2.104
Adulterer, Adulterous.
He that loves not God is an Adulterer. 1.20 Love to the creature when it is
adulterous 3.107
Affections.
Affections follow the understanding. 2.98 Affections all hang upon love and
hatred. 3.8 Affections, how our love is tried by them. 3.24
Affliction.
Afflictions, how made easy. 2.146 Christians happy in afflictions. 2.192 We
need afflictions. 2.206 Afflictions good to the godly. 2.207 Difference
between Saints and others in afflictions. 2.208
All.
Christ offered to all in 4 respects. 1.10 All must be parted with for Christ.
1.23 Christ all in all. 1 78 Trial of love by loving all Saints. 3.101 Love
God with all the heart. 3.157 Why God is to be loved above all. 3.164 166 Love
is that may be given by all. 3.175
Alexander.
Alexander an example of trust. 2.168
Almighty.
God is Almighty. 3.38. Almighty what. Ibid.
Alone.
Faith works best alone. 1.68 How God is to us alone. 3.158
Amiss.
God hears not when we ask amiss. 2.194
Anger.
Trial of our love by anger. 3.87 Anger what. 3.88 Many men are but angry with
sin. 3.97 See hate.
Application, see Offer.
Approbation.
There may be approbation of that which is good in an evillman. 3.192
Argument, see Spirit.
Ashamed.
Love is not ashamed. 3.76
Assaults.
We meet with new assaults daily. 1.135 True peace has assaults. 2.110
Assent.
Assent of three sorts. 1.47
Assurance.
We should labor to grow in assurance. 1.129.2.72 Two ways to increase
assurance. 2.76 Assurance of Gods love begets love. 3.110, 143. Meane^ to
get assurance. 3.144
B.
Baptize.
Baptising, what meant by it in Mark 16. 1.54 Baptism what. 2.97
Believe.
It is not in man's power to believe. 2.48 If ^e believe, God is ready to help,
and why. 2.173 See Spirit.
Benefit.
Benefit in taking Christ. 1.33 Benefits by Christ may be looked to. 1.54 91,
97.2.14 Benefits by Christ draw the will. 1.106 Benefits by Christ must not
only be looked to. 2.119 Benefit to cross our selves in it a sign of love.
3.64 Benefit to us that we love Christ. 3.175
Best.
Best thing in man is love. 3.47
Blessing.
Blessing of God. 2.180
Blood.
Blood of Christ not shed in vain. 1.111 Blood of Christ to be guilty of it.
2.103
Boast.
Salvation is of gift that none might boast. 1.8, 45
Boldness.
We should apply the promises with boldness. 1.86 Gods free promise should
give us boldness. 1.88 Boldness in prayer from the spirit of adoption. 2.104
Boldness the parent of love. 3.105
Bondage.
The spirit of bondage requi^ite. 2.49
Bounty.
Love is bountiful. 2.127, 3 60 Trials of the bounty of love. 3.64
Busy.
Being over busy in worldly things, a sign of too much love to them 3.124
Build, Built.
When a man is said to be well built. 2.34 How Ministers should build. 2.74
C.
Calling, see Diligent. Care.
Care required and forbidden, what. 2.115
Carnal.
Joy of an hypocrite carnal. 2.134
Certainty.
Certainty of obtaining Christ if we seek him. 1.33, 109 See Promise.
Change.
Change, the necessity of it. 1.58
Cheerful.
Cheerful service an argument of love. 3.66 Chearfullnesse, why God requires
it. Ibid.
Christ.
Christ, the rejecting of him. 1, 28 Christ, what we have with him. 1, 31
Christ, 3 considerations to move men to take him. 1, 33 Christ his willingness
to receive sinners. 1, 110 Christ his riches and excellency. 2, 50 Christ, the
end of his coming into the world. 2, 57 Christ, good works evidence our right
in him. 2, 70 Christ, he that loves not is not in him. 3, 5 Christ, two things
to make us love him. 3, 15
Clear.
The righteousness of Christ manifested more clearly in the Gospel than
formerly. 1, 4
Coldness.
Coldness in Christian profession a cause of the plague. 3, 93
Command.
Love, an affection that commands the rest. 3.8, 87 He that neglects Gods
commands loves him not. 3, 115 Keeping Gods commands a sign our love is
diligent. 3, 173
Comfort.
We should set faith on work to comfort us. 2, 142 Considerations to help
faith in comforting. 2, 149
Company.
To company with the Saints a sign of love to Christ. 3, 102
Complacency.
Love of complacency. 3, 9 Love of complacency only to Saints. 3, 102
Compel.
To compel men to come in, what. 1, 114 2, 56
Communion.
Prayer brings to communion with God. 3, 50
Competition.
Trial of love in case of competition. 3, 123
Coming.
The end of Christ's coming. 2, 59 Desire of Christ's second coming a trial of
love. 3.71 Coming of Christ how to know we desire it. 3, 72 Preparation for
Christ's coming. 3, 172
Complaint.
Complaint double. 1, 74
Complete.
Complete will in taking Christ. 1, 22
Concupiscence.
Love of concupiscence. 3, 9
Condition, Conditional.
Conditional covenant. 1, 38 Condition required by God easy. 3, 44
Confess.
Confessing of Christ. 2, 158
Constant.
Constant cleaving to Christ. 2, 118 Constant good carriage a sign of love. 3,
130 Constant love to God must be love above all other things. 3, 165
Content.
The nature of holy men apt to take content in outward things 2, 161 Love
content with nothing but love. 3, 66
Constrain.
How love constrai^eth. 3, 29
Cost.
God observes what cost we are at in his service. 3, 63
Covenant.
Covenant (...). 1, 38 Covenant not broken by infirmities. 1, 131 2, 152. 3,
147 Covenant ought to be renewed. 3, 215
Cross.
Cross* may meet a man in Gods work. 2, 201
Cruel.
Hatred more cruel than anger. 3, 98
Curse.
Curse upon him that loves not Christ. 3, 18 To be cursed what. 3, 176 Curse of
God in four things. 3, 177
D.
Damnation.
Damnation to be preached to men out of Christ. 3, 33
Danger.
Danger in not taking Christ. 1, 33 Danger, how faith guides in it. 2, 161
Danger in not loving the Lord. 3, 176
Dear.
We must part with that which is dear for Christ. 1.115, 117
Deceive.
Men apt to deceive themselves. 2, 4 See Taking.
Defer.
We must not defer to take Christ. 1, 31
Degree.
Faith admits degrees in ^oure respects. 1, 117 We must grow in the degrees of
^aith. ^ 127 Our love to God not always in the same degree. 3, 170
Delight.
Delight in worldly things a sign of love to them. 3, 122
Deliverance, Delivered.
Deliverance, Gods children put to wait for it. 2, 123 Deliverance, instances
of Gods deferring it. 2, 172 Faith once delivered. 3, 210
Deliberate.
Deliberate will in taking Christ. 1, 22
Deny, Denial.
By denying our selves we enjoy our selves. 1, 116 Faith will take no denial.
2, 120
Dependence.
Love of dependence. 3, 9
Desire.
Desire after Christ. 1, 30 Desire, the strength of it how tried. Ibid. Desire,
trial of love by it. 3, 27 Desire, when it is right, God takes the will for
the deed. 3, 202
Death, Dead, Die.
Death of Christ the end of it. 1, 36 As great a work to move the heart to
Christ, as to raise the dead. 2* 55 Faith ineffectuall is dead. 2, 58 Faith
without works dead. 2, 64, 69 Backwardness in the Saints to die. 3, 72
Difficulties.
Faith admits degrees in regard of difficulties. 1* 123 Difficulties, we must
labor to believe notwithstanding them. 1, 128 Difficulties, how faith guides
in them. 2, 158 Difficulties God can help in them. 2, 174
Diligence.
Diligence a trial of love. 3, 26 Diligence in our calling an argument of
love. 3, 77 Diligence of love. 3, 172 Diligence of love wherein it is. Ibid.
Direct.
Direct and reflect act of faith, the difference between them. 1, 63
Discourage.
Those that have weak faith should not be discouraged. 1.130 The Devil
labors to discourage. 1, 133 See God.
Disease.
A man's carnal self is his disease* 1, 116
Discretion.
Discretion. 3, 209
Devil.
What faith the devil, has. 2. 59, 63
Do, Done.
What is to be done by those that have Christ's righteousness. 1, 15
Readiness to do for Christ. 1, 24 That the Lord has done for us a motive to
love him. 3, 47 Love, ready to do for them it loves 3, 77 Evil men are not
said to do the good they do. 3, 196 Exhortation to doing. 3, 203
Dominion, see Lust.
Double.
Double-minded man who. 2, 23
Doubting.
Doubting overcome by faith. 1, 120 Doubting may be mingled with true faith 2*
22, 25 Doubting, Papists tenent touching it. 2, 24 Doubting how tried. Ibid.
Draw.
Drawing what it implies. 2, 56 How the holy Ghost draws. 2, 57
Due-time.
God delivers his in ^u^-time. 2, 198
E
Easy.
Afflictions easy to the Saints. 2, 211
Effectual, Efficacy.
Effectual faith only saves. 2, 3 Efficacy of faith wherein. 2, 20 Things
effectual in 4. respects. 2, 21 Faith effectual in 4 things. 2, 29 Effectual
faith how wrought. 2, 47 Why God will accept no faith but that which is
effectual. 2, 58 To try our state by the effica^y of faith. 2, 64 Effectual
faith 5 signs of it. 2, 92
Elect.
Though Christ be offered to all, he is only intended to the Elect. 1, 11
Elias.
Spirit of Elias what. 2, 16
Eloquent.
Love makes eloquent. 3, 77
Empty.
Faith empties a man of himself, ^, 70 Things effectual opposed to empty. ^,
27
Essence, see Faith.
Eternal.
Eternal separation from God. 3, 181
Even.
An even carriage a sign of love. 3, 130
Evil.
Christ delivers from the least evil. 1, 46 Evil, freedom from it to the
Saints, whence it is. Ibid. Evil we fear not so bad as we think. 2, ^87
Good in the evil we suffer. 2, 189 See humil^ation.
Example.
Example of others should encourage us. 1, 112
Exclude.
No sin can exclude from the offer of Christ. 1, 13.3, 146
Excel, Excellency.
All excellency in God. 3, 34* The excellency of God set forth. 3, 36 If love
be right, it is to them that excel in grace. 3, 102 God must be loved for his
excellencies. 3, 109
Executed.
Though the curse be not executed, it may be on a man: 3, 182
Exercise.
Prayer exercises our love. 3, 50
Extent.
Faith admits degrees in regard of extent. 1, 125
Extremity.
Why God does not deliver till extremity. 2, 170
F.
Faith.
Faith what. 1, 16, 48 Faith, why God will have men saved by it only. 1, 42
Faith in general what. 1, 47 Faith justifying vuhat. 1, 48 Faith justifying
how it differs from general faith. Ibid. Faith justifying a definition of
it. 1, 49 Faith, how it takes Christ. Ibid. Faith the essence of it. 1, 52
Faith, the object of it. Ibid. Faith, the subject of it. 1, 55 Faith, a twofold
consideration of it. 1, 59 Faith, the acts of it three. 1, 62 Faith, a double
q^ality in it: 1, 69 Faith, to be labored for above all, 1, 81 Faith, the
least degree what: 1, 121 Faith, an exhortation to grow in it. 1, 134 Faith, 6
motives to grow in it. 1, 135 Faith of many false. 2, 4 Faith, the proper work
of it what. 2, 21 Faith, we should try it. 2, 60, 84 Faith, many say they have
it, and have not. 2, 65 Faith, to do a thing by it what. 2, 82 Faith, how God
works it. 2, 86, 90 Faith, how to know if it be wrought. 2, 91 Faith, a false
definition of it. 2, 100 Faith makes a man neglect other things. 2, 144 Faith
that puts a man into Christ what. 3, 2 Faith, to be rooted in it. 3, 171 Faith,
to contend for it. 3, 209
Faithful.
The Lord is faithful. 3, 148
Failing.
Failings of holy men. 3, 195
Fancy.
Fancy, the ground of unsound peace. 2, 110
Father, see Offer.
Favor.
Favor of God how to grow in it. 1, 136 Favor of God only desired by a man
sensible of sin: 3, 140
Fear.
Fear; the ground why many men take Christ: 2, 10 Faith that comes from fear
holds not out: 2, 119 Fears, how faith guides in them: 2, 164 Fear, a trial
of our love. 3, 92
Feeling.
Feeling may be wanting where faith is: 2, 61
Fit.
When we are not fit for mercies God denies us: 2, 196 Unwillingness to die
in the Saints is that they may be more fit. 3, 73 We should not be discouraged
from coming to God because we are not fit: 3, 145
Fire.
Love compared to fire in four things: 3, 84
Flesh.
Flesh in the Saints makes them loath to die: 3, 73 Flesh transports holy men
to sin: 3, 195
Follow.
What Christ looks for of those that follow him.
Forgive.
A man may be persuaded of forgivenes without faith: 3, 16 None so ready to
forgive as God: 3, 39
Form.
Form must be observed in taking Christ: 1, 19
Fornication.
Fornication a cause of the pestilence: 3, 92
Foundation.
Foundation of Prophets and Apostles: 2, 36
Fortitude.
Fortitude false, the cause of it: 2, 8
Free.
The will must be free in taking Christ: 1, 22 One property of love to be free:
^, 95
Friend, Friendship.
Love of friendship: 3, 9 God a constant friend: 3, 37 Friendship with great
men what: 3, 149
G.
Garment.
Wedding garment what: 2, 5
Gift.
Righteousness by gift for three reasons: 1, 8 Gift accepted for the give^. 2,
82
Glass, see Name.
Glory, Glorify.
Growing in faith brings glory to God: 1, 137 Glory of God why Moses desired to
see it. 3, 55 Glorifying of God is the end why we live. 3, 207
God.
God boweth the will: 1, 57, 102 God, we must not be discouraged from coming
to him. 1, 67 God, by what way we come again to him. 3, 3 God, why we love
him: 3, 10^ God must be loved above all, else we love him not as God: 3, 165
Godliness.
Godliness what: 2, 83
Good.
Without humiliation Christ is not accounted the chief good: 2, 16 Afflictions
good for us: 2, 192 A man may do good, and not be good: 3, 196 To do good to
men is one end why we live: 3, 207 In every calling we have occasion to do
good: 3, 208
Gospel.
Sins against the Gospel aggravated: 1, 27 Love of GOD wrought by the
Gospel: 3, 13 Curse of the Gospel: 3, 20
Grace, Gracious.
Righteousness of Christ is of grace: 1, 8, 43 Grace, GOD tries it: 2, 46
Grace, when it is weak what to do 2, 73 GOD is gracious: 3, 40 Grace sought
by Christians as well as mercy. 3, 68 Grace, to be separate from it a curse. 3,
177
Great.
True joy is great: 2, 132 Greatness of GOD. 3, 44
Grieve.
If we grieve GOD we love him not: 3, 113
Grounded.
Faith not well grounded proves false: 2, 17 Faith ill grounded holds not out:
2, 119 Our love must be rooted and grounded: 3, 169
H.
Habits.
Habits. 1, 41 God rewards not according to our habits. 2, 140 See act.
Happy.
Riches make not happy. 2, 181
Hardly.
God deals not hardly with us, why. 3, 175
Harlot, see Love.
Hate, Hating.
Hating of sin a sign of love. 2, 126 Naturally we hate God. 3, 11 Hatred of
sin a property of love. 3, 97 Three differences between hatred and anger. 3,
98 To return again to sin a sign we hate it not. 3, 99 Hating that which
God hates is a sign of love. 3, 120 Four signs of hating GOD. 3, 131
Hear.
GOD hears some sooner, some later. 1, 90 Why God hears not sometimes. 2,
194
Hearers, Hearing.
Hearers of two sorts. 1, 28 What hearing of the word God requires. 3, 81
Heart.
Doubting a sign of a good heart. 2, 26 Christ dwells in the heart, how. 2, 95
How to know whether Christ dwell in the heart. 2, 96 To take Christ with the
whole heart 2, 97 Uncircumcision of heart. 3, 106 A heart after Gods heart is a
sign of love. 3, 119 When we give our hearts to God, he gives us them
again. 3, 155
Heaven.
Heaven, how desired by wicked men 3, 74
Help.
God can help in desperate cases. 2, 189
Hypocrites, Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy what. 3, 19 The Saints hated under the name of hypocrites. 3, 103
Christ persecuted under the person of an hypocrite. 3, 121
Holy Ghost.
How the holy Ghost works faith. 2, 49 Love, a peculiar gift of the holy
Ghost. 3, 50
Holiness.
Holiness wrought by God. 1, 40 Holiness easier loved in the Saints, than in God.
2, 127 Holiness required in coming to God. 2, 199
Hope.
Hope ill grounded fails. 2, 19 Hope distinguishes the faith of Christians
from others. 2, 127 Hope mingled with fear. 2, 128 Hope, the property of it.
2, 129
Hold out.
To hold out what it implies. 2, 118
Howling.
The prayers of wicked men are howlings. 2, 107
Humbled, Humiliation, Humility.
Humiliation, how it is required before we come to Christ. 1, 14 None can take
Christ till they be humbled* 1, 24 Want of humiliation causes faith to be
vain* 2, 15 Without sound humiliation sin is not accounted the greatest
evil. 2, 16 Sound humiliation fits men for Christ. 2, 30 Without sound
humiliation men hold not out 2, 32 Humility a concomitant of faith. 2, 136
Humility required in coming to God. 2, 199
I.
Idolatry.
Idolatry a cause of the pestilence. 3, 91
Jehovah.
Jehovah. 3, 36
Ignorance.
Ignorance, what breeds it. 3, 105
Employment.
How faith guides a man in his employment. 2, 166
Imperfection.
Imperfection in every creature. 3, 35
Impediment.
Two impediments of love to Christ. 3, 104 When the impediment cannot be
removed, God accepts the will for the deed. 3, 201
Implacable.
Hatred is implacable. 3, 101
Infinite.
Gods mercy is infinite. 2, 150
Infirmity.
Love to God makes him bear with many infirmities. 3, 152 See Covenant.
Engage.
We are engaged to love the Lord. 3, 45
Interest.
Faith gives us interest in all Gods riches. 2, 141
Intention.
A man may pray amiss though his intention be right. 2, ^95
Joy.
Joy, increase of faith increases it. 1, 135 Joy may be in hypocrites. 2, 93
Joy, a concomitant of ^aith. 2, 130 Joy, trials of it. 2, 132
Judge, Judgments.
What God looks for when he sends Judgments. 3, 94 To look on God as a Judge
a sign of hatred. 3, 132 The sins of Gods children help forward Judgments.
3 216
Justify, Justification.
Faith how it justifies. 1, 59 Pharise not justified why. 1, 72 Justification,
difference between Papists and us in the doctrine of it. 2, 67 Justification
double. 2, 68 Good works justify not. 2, 71 Waiting in justification. 2, 122
Works and faith exclude each other in justification. 3, 3
K
Kindness.
God abundant in kindness. 3, 41 Kindness, wherein it consists. Ibid.
Killing.
The great sin of killing Christ. 2, 103
Know, Knowledge.
Particular knowledge. 2, 36 Knowledge of God a means to love him. 2, 108
Afflictions teach a man to know himself. 3, 141 Knowledge of God and our
selves must go together 3, 142 Knowledge in wicked me^. 3, 192
L.
Law.
Law, how it drives men to Christ. 1, 105 Law, an efficacy put into it to work
faith. 2, 49 Law breaks the heart. 3, 12 Law of the Gospel who break it. 3,
19
Liberty.
Liberty in giving our hearts to God. 3, 156
Life.
How to use faith in guiding our life. 2, 154 Life the end of it. 3, 207
Limit.
Love does not limit it self in duty. 3, 95 Limiting in Gods service shows
want of love. 3, 96
Longing.
Longing after Christ whence it is. 2, 90
Long-suffering.
Long-suffering in God. 3, 40
Lose.
We lose not by ourlove to God. 3, 1^3 God loses when we employ not our
talents. 3, 162
Lord.
Christ must be taken as a Lord. 1, 50
Love.
Love to Christ when we have taken him. 1, 23 Men in extremity would have
Christ, but not out of love. 2, 11 Love of harlots. 2, 14 Love of virgins.
Ibid. Love must make us come to Christ. 2, 44 Ineffectual faith works no
love. 2, 59 Love cannot be counterfeited by hypocrites. 2, 72, 151 Love, a
concomitant of faith. 2, 124 Love, trials of it. 2, 125 Love to Saints. 2, 126
Love to God weakeneth sin. 2, 214 Love, what. 3, 6 Definition of love in
general. Ibid. Love, two effects of it. 3, 7 Love* five kinds of it. 3, 8
Love to God threefold. 3, 10 Love of three sorts. Ibid. Love to God wrought by
two things. 3, 12 Love to Christ what. 3, 14 Motives to love Christ. 3, 34 Why
we love the Lord no more. 3, 36 Love why it is planted in us. 3, 45 Love of God
to us a motive to love him. 3, 48. Love to God, means to beget it. 3, 49 Love,
the properties of it. 3, 60, 157 Love, the trials of it. 3, 113 Love, an
exhortation to it. 3, 150 Love, motives to it. 3, 152
Lust.
Thraldom to lusts shows a desire not to part with them. 1, 93 Faith
conflicts with lust. 2, 75 Satisfying of lusts cannot stand with faith 2, 99
Lusts, the best way to mortify them. 2, 213 Lusts, the mortifying of them a
good work. 3, 207 See Liberty.
M.
Manna.
Manna hidden. 2, 85
Means.
Means, of the use of them. 2, 176 Means that we use must be Gods. 2, 178
Means particular not to be pitched on much. Ibid. Means, caution in using
them. 2* 186 Means, how to know we trust God in using them. Ibid.
Meaning.
We must not content our selves only with good meanings. 3, 191
Melancthon. 2, 163
Measure.
Punishment the measure of sin. 3, 22
Mercy.
Mercy of God infinite, and therefore should encourage us. 1, 114 Mercy sought
of many and not grace 2, 13 Mercy, God delights in it. 2, 150 Mercy of God. 3,
39 Mercy remembered in the Lords Supper great. 3, 58
Might.
We must love God with all our might. 3, 160
Misinformation.
Misinformation, the ground why many take Christ. 2, 6 Fait^ that comes from
misinformation lasts not. 2, 119
Moderation. 3, 210
Mortify.
Ineffectual faith does not mortify sin. 2, 59
Motions.
The affections are the several motions of the will. 3, 6
Misery.
We must see our misery before we apply the promises. 1, 59 The consideration
of our misery draws the will. 1, 104 Misery at the last befalls evil men. 2,
208
N.
Name.
Good name like a glass. 2, 190
Nature, Natural.
Righteousness of the Gospel not in men by nature. 1, 4 Na^urall love why it
is planted in us. 3, 11 Naturalnesse of our love to God. 3, 130 Good works
come from a new nature. 3, 190
Neglect.
Men ought not to neglect the Sacrament. 3, 59
Not.
If we desire God were not, we hate him 3, 131
O.
Oaths.
Wherein lesser oaths exceed greater. 3, 114
Obedience. 2, 94
Object.
Justifying faith differs from general faith in the object. 1, 48 Object of
faith. 1, 52 Faith and opinion differ in the object. 1, 120
Offer.
Errors touching the general offer of Christ. 1, 11 Who slight Gods offer.
3, 21 God offers his love to us. 3, 144
Office.
Things are effectual when they do their proper office. 2, 21
Only.
Christ must be taken only. 1, 19
Opinion.
Opinion. 1, 47 Opinion variable. 1, 98 Opinion, wherein it differs from
faith. 1, 120 Errors in opinion the worst errors. 3, 210
Opportunities.
Opportunities neglected show want of love 3, 62 Opportunities not to be
slipped. 3, 211
Outward.
Outward things whence it is that we overvalue them. 2, 161 In outward things
God deals promiscuously. 2, 204 Not to judge by Gods outward dealing. 2, 205
Gods curse in outward estate. 3, 180
P.
Pacify.
To pacify the heart an act of faith. 1, 62
Pardon.
We should labor for assurance of pardon. 2, 73 Pardon propounded generally.
2, 150
Passover.
The Lords Supper beyond the Passover in two respects. 2, 58
Pains.
Measure of grace not gotten without pains. 3, 203
Peace.
Peace a sign of faith. 2, 108 Peace, wicked men may live and die in it, and
why. 2, 209 Peace twofold. 2, 112 Peace unsound a great judgment. 2, 114
Person.
We must take heed of error concerning Christ's Person 1, 18 True love looks
to the Person. 1, 53 Many take Christ, but love not his Person. 2.12 Love must
be pitched on Christ's Person. 3, 171
Perfect.
Faith made perfect by works what. 2, 69
Persuasion.
Persuasion of forgiveness on what ground to build it. 1, 99 Persuasion,
degrees in it. 1, 118 Persuasion, to grow in it. 1, 127 Persuasion false what.
2, 17 Persuasion secret of the Spirit. 2, 84 Persuasion may be in men that
believe not* 3, 16 Persuasion may be weak in a true believer. 3, 17
Persecute.
They that persecute Christians persecute Christ. 3, 121
Pity.
A love of pity. 3, 8
Plague.
Plague, causes of it. 3, 91 Plague, how to remove it. 3, 94
Pleasures.
Pleasures, how faith guides in them. 2, 164 Pleasures of sin fors^ken of
good men, why. 2, 165 Pleasures, to love them more than God, is to hate him.
3.133 Pleasures, not to love them more than God what. 3, 107
Plenty.
Plenty, a man may be cursed in it. 3.181
Poor.
We cannot love Christ till we be spiritually poor. 3, 52
Posterity.
How faith guides a man's care for posterity. 2, 165
Power.
Power to receive Christ is of God. 1, 11 Power given by God when we resolve
to take Christ. 1, 26 Power against sin where Christ dwells: 2, 102 Powers
of the world to come what meant by tasting them: 2, 134 Love powerful as fire:
3, 87
Praise.
Praising God, the ground of it: 1, 80 Praise with men: 2, 159
Practice.
Practice of Christ when he was on earth: 1, 111
Prayer.
Prayer, how to prevail in it: 1, 13^ Spirit of prayer a sign of faith: 2,
103 Prayer, what makes earnest and bold in it: 2, 104 Prayer what: 2, 105
Prayer double: Ibid: Prayer a means to love God: 3, ^9 Prayer works love 4
ways: Ibid. What kind of prayer comes from love: 3, 81 Prayer needful in
times of judgment. 3, 212
Preaching.
Preaching of Christ and his Apostles, the sum of it: 1, 84
Presence.
Presence of Christ desired according to the measure of faith: 3, 74 Presence
of God, separation from it a curse: 3, 179
Preparation.
Good preparation makes faith effectual: 2, 29
Pride.
Pride, a cause of the pestilence: 3, 92
Privileges.
Privileges spiritual why they affect us not: 1, 108
Prize.
That we may prize blessings GOD defers the giving them: 2, 199 Love sets a
price on all we do: 3, 151
Private.
Private duties performed without love: 3, 8^
Profit.
How faith guides in case of profit: 2, 160
Promise.
Promises, the certainty of them: 1, 34 Promises, two things in laying hold of
them: 1, 94 Promises made in sickness^ seldom performed: 2, 11 Promises, the
believing of them in particular. 2, 34 Promises made promiscuously: 2, 4^
Promises, the application of them wrought by the Spirit: 2, 53 Promises
cleared: 2, 88 Promises, not seen without the Spirit. 2, 89 Promises, how to
know they are cleared. 2, 91 Promises, how to try our faith in them, 2, 114
Prosperity.
Prosperity of wicked men. 2, 200 Prosperity hurts wicked men. 2, 205
Prosperity in sin a miserable condition, 2, 206
Providence.
Providence of God crossed by our prayers, 2* 200
Purposes.
Purposes of good why they come to nothing in many, 2, 74 Purposes good whence
they arise. 3, 192
Purify.
To purify the heart an act of faith, 1, 165 True faith purifieth the heart, 2,
93
Q.
Qualification.
Upon what qualification Christ's righteousness is given, 1, 12 See Exclude.
Quality, see Faith.
Quick.
Love of a quick nature, 2, 125 Love quick, like fire, 3, 85
R.
Reason.
Faith a new addition to the light of reason. ^, 55
Received, Receiving.
Righteou^nesse of Christ must be received as well as offered. 1, 15 In
receiving of Christ 3 things must concur. 1, 28 We must not only belee^e
in, but receive Christ. 1, 51 None have benefit by Christ but th^se that
receive him. Ibid.
Reconcile.
To reconcile us to God an act of faith. 1, 62
Reciprocal.
Reciprocal match between Christ and us. 2, 92
Reflect.
Reflect act of faith admits degrees. 1, 126 A beast cannot reflect on his
actions. 2, 91
Rejoice.
Rejoice we should in GOD. 1, 76 Rejoice in our selves we are prone to it. 1,
77
Religion.
Religion hated under other notions. 3, 104 Religion what. 3, 199
Remedy.
The curse of the Gospel without remedy. 3, 23
Repentance.
Repentance required when we have taken Christ. 1, 23 Repentance joined with
faith. 2, 94 Repentance not to be deferred. 2, 106 Repentance removes a plague.
3, 94
Revealed.
Why Christ's righteousness is said to be revealed. 1, 4 We should labor to
have more truths revealed. 1, 129
Respect.
GODS respect to Christians in affliction. 2, 209
Reward.
Reward according to our works 2, 71, 182 Reward, we may use motives from it
3, 80 Reward, love bargains not for it. 3, 96
Riches, see Happy.
Righteousness.
Righteousness, why revealed in the Gospel. 1, 2 Righteousness in the
Gospel commended. 1, 3 Righteousness, 6 questions about it 1, 5
Righteousness of Christ how we come by it. 1, 7 Righteousness, to whom it is
given. 1, 9 Righteousness, what required of us when we have it. 1, 23 Christ
our righteousness. 2, 150
Rob.
If we love not GOD we rob him. 3, 46
Rooted.
How to be rooted in love. 3, 171
S.
Sacrament.
Sacraments preach faith. 1, 87 Sacrament, rules of examination touching it. 2,
202 Sacrament not to be omitted, why. 3, 58 Sacrament unworthily received, a
cause of the plague. 3, 92
Saints.
Saints, love to them a sign we love God. 3, 100, 120 Saints, four trials of
our love to them. 3, 101
Sanctification.
Sanctification, God puts his children to wait in it. 2, 122 Sanctification,
we must set faith on work to increase it. 2, 212 How faith sanctifyeth the
heart. 2, 213
Saved.
If Christ should not receive sinners, none should be saved 1, 113
Scriptures.
Scriptures believed in general. 2, 34
Science.
Science. 1, 47 Sciences of two sorts 3, 200
Seal.
Seal double. 2, 153
Security.
Security a cause of the pestilence. 3, 92 Security double. Ibid.
Seed.
How salvation is sure to all the seed. 1, 44
Season.
Season, our works must suit with it. 3, 209 Season, what duties befit us in
it. Ibid.
Self.
Self-crossing a sign of love to God 3, 64 Why we must love God above our
selves. 3, 166
Service.
Service to God and men different. 3, 154
Show.
Difference between faith and a show of holiness. 1, 85 In prayer God shows
himself to us. 3, 50 Gods showing himself begets love. 3, 54
Shepherd.
Magistrates shepherds. 3, 78
Sign.
Sign, in what cases God will give it. 1, 124
Sin, Sinful.
Sin, the greatness of it. 1, 26 Sin, the nature of it not altered by faith.
1, 59 Sin, the efficacy of it taken away by faith. 1, 60 Sins most heinous
Christ came to pardon. 2, 151 Sinful love. 3, 10 Sin, the consideration of it
makes us love God. 3, 52 Sin, delight in it, and love of GOD cannot stand
together. 3, 159 See Exelude.
Slippery.
Slippery places wicked men stand in. 2, 210
Son.
Son of GOD offers his love to us. 3 144
Soul.
Soul turned to GOD by faith. 2 44 Soul needs refreshing. 3, 114. Soul,
the adorning of it. 3, 173
Sound.
Sound heart has good works. 3, 193
Sorrow.
Sorrow for offending God a sign of love 3, 116 Sorrow, the want of it worse
than the sin it self. 3, 117
Speak.
Love delights to speak of the party loved 3, 75
Spirit, Spiritual.
Spirit given more largely now than before. 1, 4 Spirit makes us love Christ.
2, 50 Spirits testimony wrought two ways. 2, 53 Spirit, all arguments without
it prevail not. 2, 54 Spirits of men not alike troubled in conversion. 2, 86
Spirits immediate testimony. 2, 89 Spirits testimony how to know it. 2, 90
Spiritual joy. 2, 133 Spirit sound will bear affliction. 2, 191 Spirit, the
more we believe, the more we have of it. 2, 215 Spiritual love. 3, 11 Spirit
is strong. 3, 187
Stranger, Strangeness.
Wicked men come to God as a stranger 2, 106 Strangenes dissolveth love. 3, 105
Strength.
Faith takes away opinion of our own strength. 1, 72 We daily want new
strength. 1, 135 Strengthening of faith useful. 2, 73.
Study.
Study of a Christian. 3, 142
Stone.
White stone what it signifies. 2, 85
Success.
Success promised to good causes. 2, 163
Sudden.
Miseries come suddenly on the wicked. 2, 210 How things are said to be
sudden. Ibid. Holy men may be suddenly transported to sin. 3, 195
Sure.
How righteousness becomes sure. 1, 8, 43
Suitable.
Looking on GOD as suitable to us breeds love. 3, 139
Suffering.
Suffering for Christ. 1, 24 Suffering, a fruit of love. 3, 77 Suffering a
kind of doing. 3, 77 Suffering a good work. 3, 209
T.
Taking.
Taking of Christ what. 1, 16 When we come to take Christ. 1, 96 The efficacy
of faith in taking Christ 2, 41 What taking of Christ is effectual. 2, 43
Taking Christ deceitfully. 2, 97 Taking Christ the way to salvation. 3, 5
Taught.
A Christian better taught than learned men wanting grace. 3, 197
Teaching.
Teaching of GOD what. 2, 12
Temptation.
Some cleave to Christ ^or want of temptations. 2, 25 Every man has some
particular temptation. 2, 65
Testimony, see Spirit.
Time.
Our time in GODS hands. 2, 182 GOD meets with evil men in the worst time. 2,
211 Time a precious talent. 3, 113
Trial.
GOD puts men to trial that they may hold out. 1, 9^ GOD gives no grace, but
he has trials for it. 2, 121
Trouble.
True joy holds out in trouble. 2, 132
Trust.
Trusting GOD. 2, 116 Trusting GOD instances of it. 2, 117 Trusting in GOD
what. 2, 168 When we are said to trust in GOD: 2, 171 Trusting GOD ingageth him
to help us: 2, 17^ See Means.
Truth.
GOD abundant in truth: 3, 42
Turn, Turning.
To turn to GOD what* 2, 99 How to use faith in the turnings of our life: 2,
156
V.
Vain.
Faith without works is vain: 2, 63
Vehement.
Love vehement as fire: 3, 89
Virtues.
Moral virtues GOD regards not without faith: 1, 82 Difference between faith
and moral virtues: 1, 83
Virgins, see Love.
Understanding.
Faith wrought in the understanding: 1, 16 Understanding, what required in it
touching faith: 1, 55 Understanding, 4 things in it touching the promise: 1, 95
Understanding clear makes faith effectual: 2, ^3 Understanding, what in it
hinders love: 3, 108
Ineffectual.
5. Causes why faith is uneffectuall. 2, 6.
Ungodly.
God justifies the ungod^y. 2, 149
Unworthily.
To receive the Sacrament unworthily what. 1, 87 Two sorts receive the
Sacrament unworthily. 3, 59
Voice.
Voice immediate. 2, 53 Voice soft what. 2, 88 Voice of the Spirit in us. 2,
105 Voice of Gods Spirit how to know it. 2, 106
Vprightnes.
Gods blessing according to our uprightnes. 2, 181
Use.
Those that have faith are able to use it. 2, 139 How to use faith. 2, 142 Use
of grace increases it. 3, 204
Vile.
When a man is vile in his own eyes. 2, 136
W.
Wages.
Love desires no wages. 3, 27
Walk.
To walk with GOD what. 3, 25
War.
True peace comes after war. 2, 109
Way.
When we look on Gods ways as contrary to us, we hate him. 3, 132 See Good
works, see Taking.
Wait.
True faith is content to wait. 2, 121 Instances of waiting. 2, 122
Weak.
Faith is weak for want of using. 2, 140 Love to God weakeneth sin. 2, 214
Weak grace is grace. 3, 148
Will, Willing.
Will, faith wrought in it. 1, 16 Will must take Christ. 1, 21 Will, three
things in it in taking Christ. 1, 22 Those that are willing to take Christ, how
they are affected. 1, 32 Justifying faith differs from general faith in the
act of the will. 1, 49 Will, what required in it touching faith. 1, 56 We must
be willing to kill our lusts. 1, 92 Will, the drawing of it to take the
promises. 1, 101 Will how drawn. 1, 103 Will drawn by three means. 1, 104
Will, what in it hinders love. 3, 108 Will taken for the deed when. 3, 201 We
must be willing to suffer for Christ. 3, 99
Wisdom.
Wisdom in three things. 2, 199 Property of wisdom. 3, 206
Wonders.
Wonders wrought now though no miracles. 2, 177
Worth, Worthy.
To be worthy of Christ, what. 1.29, 75 Faith take from a man all opinion of
worth. 1, 71 Christ worthy of our love. 3, 34
Worship.
If Christ were not ready to pardon, he should not be worshipped. 1, 113
Work, Working.
Faith and opinion differ in their working. 1, 120 Working shows a thing to
be effectual. 2, 27 Working in doing and suffering. 2, 45 Good works the way
to salvation. 2, 60 Worke-lesse faith five arguments against it. 2, 62 True
faith is working. 2, 63 Works, without them none justified Ibid. Doctrine of
good works justified. 2, 67 Works why required. 2, 70 Good works their
different rise in Papists and us. 2, 72 Works, to judge aright of them. 2, 79
Works how accepted. 2, 80 Works of our calling good works. 2, 84 Faith must
be set on work. 2, 138 Motives to set faith on work. 2, 139 Faith inableth us
to work. 2, 141 We shall be judged by our works. 3, 186 A good heart and good
works go together. 3, 189 Motives to working. 3, 203 A beauty in good works.
3, 205
World.
World overcome by faith. 2, 215 World, the love of God and it cannot be
together. 3, 121 World, trials of love to it. 3, 122 World, how minded by
Saints. 3, 126
Word.
As great a sin to neglect the Lords Supper as to neglect the Word. 3, 59
Wrestling.
Wrestling with God. 1, 89
Y.
Yoke.
Yoke of Satan easy to many that wear it. 2, 31
Z.
Zeal is where there is love. 3, 95
FINIS.
CHristian Reader,
the Book being divided into three parts, being upon three several Texts, and
each part beginning with Fol. 1. know that always the first figure in the Table
shows the part, the other the page, as will easily appear by the beginning
of the Table.

ERRATA.
Part. 1.
Page 31 line 10 for If say, read I say, page 55* line 4 for justification,
read testification p 59, l. 12, for the thing, r. the next thing. p. 75, l.
27, for yeranes, r yearnes p. 76, l. 6, for the use, r. that use. p. 109, l.
25, for hear^ of in, r. heard in. p. 113, l. 23, for to serve, r: to serve him.
p: 113, l: 26, for have no hope, r: they have no hope. p: 125, l: 8, for
believe this, r: believe for this. p: 130, l: 25, for best bud, r: least bud.
p: 136, l. 20, for either thy soul, r: either for thy soul.

Part 2.
Page 23, line ult. blot out his* p. 25, l. 7, blot out for. p. 49, l. 9, for
work, r. worker. p 72, l 28. for 3 use, r. 4 use. p. 76. in the margin, blot
out Use 4. p. 85, l. 22, for was, r. was by. p ^6, l. 1, for self, r. selves.
p. 88, l. 18. for within, r. in p. 132, 9, for faith, r. joy. p. 144, l: 8, for
so, r: see p. 158, l: 25, for thing, r: use. p: 160, l: 30, blot out that p:
165, l: 20, for conclusions, r: turnings. p: 197, l: 2, 3, r: God stays thee
for this end p: 197, l: 9, blot out not p. 198, l: 10, for weakne^, r. weaned*
p: 198, l: 31, for indulde^s, r: indulgent^ p: 199, l: 14, for except r:
expect. p: ^02, l: 10, for thy r: their. p: 208, l: 19, for certainly, r.
captivity. p: 212, l: 11, for says will, r: says he will.

Part 3.
Page 74, l: 15, for they would, r: they would not. p: 99 l: 4, blot out any.
p: 99, l: 12, for beauty, r: bent. p: 140, l: 9, for fear, r: sense p: 149, l:
12, for nearely, r: warily.

A brief Collection of the principal heads in the ensuing Treatises.
PART 1.
DOCTRINE.
That righteousness by which alone we are saved, is revealed in the Gospel.
page 3 Six Questions about this righteousness. 5
Use.
To see the justice of God in condemning men who neglect this righteousness.
26
Use 2.
Not to defer the taking of Christ. 31
Doct. 2.
Faith is that whereby the righteousness of God is made ours to salvation. 37
Reasons.
1. That it might be of grace. 43 2. That it might be sure. Ibid. 3. That it
might be to all the seed. 44 4. That no flesh should rejoice in it self. 45
Definition of justifying faith. 49 The object of faith. 52 The subject of it.
55 How faith justifies. 59 The acts of faith. 62
Use 1.
Not to be discouraged from coming to God. 67
Use 2.
To rejoice in God. 76
Use 3.
To labor for faith. 81
Use 4.
To apply the promises with boldness. 86 Four things in the understanding
touching the promises. 95 Three means to draw the will. 104 Seven arguments to
persuade us of Christ's willingness to receive us. 110
Doct. 3.
Faith admits degrees, and we ought to grow from degree to degree. 117 Faith
admits degrees in four respects. Ibid.
Use 1.
To comfort those that have faith, though in a less degree. 130
Use 2.
An exhortation to grow in faith. 134 Six motives to grow in faith. 135
PART. 2.
DOCTRINE.
That faith that saves us must be effectual. page 3 Five causes of
ineffectuall faith. 6 Three things wherein the efficacy of faith consists. 20
How effectual faith is wrought. 47
Six reasons why God will accept no other faith. 58
Uses.
First, To try our faith whether it be sound. 60 Secondly, To judge our
conditions by the efficacy of our faith. 64 Thirdly, To justify the doctrine
of good works against the Papists. 67 Fourthly, To labor to grow in faith and
assurance. 72 Fifthly, To learn to judge aright of our works. 79 Sixthly, To
try if we have faith. 84 Five signs of effectual faith. 92 The concomitants
of faith. 124
Use 7.
To set faith on work. 138 Three ways how to use faith. 142 Six
considerations to help faith to comfort us. 149 Eight instances wherein faith
should guide us. 158 Concerning using means. 176 Concerning evils feared. 187
Concerning God hearing our prayers. 193 Concerning the prosperity of the
wicked, and affliction of the Saints. 201
PART 3.
DOCTRINE.
HE that loves not is not in Christ. page 5 Five kinds of love. 8 How the
love of God is wrought in us. 12
Reasons.
First, If a man love not, there is a curse on him. 18 Secondly, He breaks the
Evangelicall law. 19 Thirdly, it is adultery. 20 Fourthly, he slights Gods
offer. 21
Uses.
First, To examine if we love Christ. 21 Six trials of our love to Christ. 24
Seven motives to love Christ. 34 Means to enable us to love God. 49.106.138.
Ten properties of love. 60 Two impediments of our love to Christ. 106 Five
trials whether we love God or no. 115 Four signs of hatred of God. 133
Means whereby we may be assured of Gods love to us. 146 Five things requisite
in our love to God. 159 The danger of not loving the Lord. 178 ^oure things in
the curse of God. 179
Doct. 2.
We are to be judged not only by our faith, but by our works. 188
Reasons.
First, Because every Christian has the Spirit. 189 Secondly, Inward rectitude
is never disjoined from good works. 191 Thirdly, Because every Christian has
a new nature. 192
Uses.
First, Not to content our selves with good meanings only. 193 Secondly,
Christians are better taught than learned men without grace. 199 Thirdly, An
exhortation to doing. 205 Three duties suting the season. 211

