THE DEFORMED FORM OF A FORMAL PROFESSION. OR, The description of a true and
false christian, either excusing, or accusing him, for his pious, or pretended
conversation.

Showing that there is a powerful godlynes necessary to salvation, and that
many have but the form, but not the power thereof.

In handling whereof These three things are plainly and powerfully explained
and applied. what godliness is* what the power of it* what the reasons why some
have but the form thereof. together with the means, and marks, both how to
attain, and to try our selves whether we have the power thereof or not.



By that late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ. JOHN PRESTON.

Doctor in divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel
College in Cambridge, and sometimes preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven,

Math. 7.21, Pure religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father is this,
to visit the Fatherles, and Widows in their afflictions, and to keep himself
unspotted of the World.

James. 1.27. EDINBVRGH Printed by John Wreittoun. 1632.

2. Timothy. 3. Chap. 5. verse. Having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof.


OUR Apostle Saint Paul does in these words give us a part of a description of
wicked men in the latter times, and he brings them in by way of prevention
or objection or answer to an objection, as if some should wonder that there
should be such kind of persons in the Church, as he in the former verses had
described, Covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, etc. do these live as the Church do? Do these retain
the Sacraments, and the like. Yes says the Apostle, they do, we cannot deny
it, only this, they have a form of godliness, but etc. So that the point of
doctrine arising from hence, does plainly appear even at the first sight to
be this, viz.

That there is a powerful godliness necessary to salvation, and that many
have but ^^e form, but not the power thereof. Now there be three things to
be explained in opening of this doctrine, to show -- what godliness is, what
the power thereof is, the reasons why many have no more but the form thereof.



For the first that you may the better conceave what Godliness is, I will
first show you what it is not.

First then it is not bare nature, but that godliness which God requires of
all men is more then so, God indeed has commanded nature, yea even corrupt
nature to bring forth many fruits of godliness, as much abstinence from
pleasure, much patience, much temperance, and such like, which are all very
beautiful in their own Spheres, but because they come not from GOD, nor his
Spirit of sanctifying, or because they have no respect of God, therefore they
are not godlynes, neither does God regard them.

Secondly, it is not the act of religion proceeding from self love, though
offered to God in regard that men see that God is the governor of the world,
that he has the keys of heaven, and earth, and men may do much to God for
such respects, using him as a bridge to get to heaven by making themselves the
utmost ends, and therefore this is not godliness, but what is it then you will
say? why.

What godlynes is.
Thirdly it is a divine grace infused into the soul by God, whereby a man
follows God, loves him, magnyfies him, sets him up in his heart above all, and
manifests this in his life, and the whole course of it, doing all for him and
to him, and it is thus wrought when the creature comes to see no beauty in
himself, and no help in himself, and since God is full of all beauty, and all
excellency, and all power, able to answer our desires, in every thing, when he
comes to see, and consider this, then he begins to set up God in his heart, as
the Ivy having no root cleaves faster to the tree, so likewise does he only to
God, seeing that he cannot subsist of himself, and when he comes to see that he
depends on him for all things, he will do all things for him, because that all
are from him. whereas before seeing some thing in himself, he magnified
himself, and so withdrew himself, and his heart from GOD.

And so I come to the next particular.

Secondly what is meant by the power of Godliness, and for that you shall know
there is a Godlynes, which is not only in words and complements, but in deed
and truth, for it not only ^u^ts upon a man a washie color of perfection, but
dies his heart in grai^e in holiness, and it differs from the other in five
things.

Five differences between the form and power of Godlynes.
First. It is done in the Power, when it is not the bare picture, where there
are not only the outward lineaments of nature, but when there is life in it,
and that you shall know when a man needs not to be called on to goood
duties, but there is a natural principle of life in him, whereby he does
them with facility, and constancy, as natural actions of life, when likewise
he does grow in them, for where their is life, there is also growth, and when
he does likewise desire that which may feed it, as the other means, which
may strengthen him in the doing of it, as if a man have life he desires meat
and sleep, and when as there is life, then the works that come from a man are
not dead works, and then you have the power of godliness, it is not a fashion
only.

Secondly it is not true but counterfeit, when it is like the true but not the
same, but wants some particular property, that is to be found in the true, as
that which is counterfeit balsame, which is like the true, but wants the power
of healing, and so likewise a counterfeit drug, and a counterfeit jewel which
wants that property, which the true has, and the want of this you shall find
in the use, and in the wearing, as a rotten bow is found to be rotten when the
arrow is drawn to the head, and so if a man's godlynes be counterfeit, and he
unsound, it will be discovered in the wearing or in some particular case, when
he is put to it, or tried, a Ieweller will find out the property of a Jewel,
but an ordinary man can not do it, but by use and the wearing, to instance in
some particular parts of godlynes, the love of God if it be true, it has these
properties, that a man loves the brethren, for how can thou love an
immateriall holiness in God, which is stamped upon the creature like thy self,
so likewise rectitude, and uprightness of heart, try it by this property,
which our Savior Christ makes of it, gracious speeches; Christ says that that
which is predominant in the heart, the mouth will be full of: so for keeping of
the commandments, if in truth they have this properly, that they will not be
grievous, they will do them with a natural delight, and inward willingness. so
for taking of Christ by faith, every man believes he does so, but our Savior
Christ tries it by this, Go sell all that thou have, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and so may thou try thy self when thou art put to it
by loss of goods, or credit or otherwise.

Thirdly, It is in the power when it is strong, and not weak, when a man has
power and strength in doing good duties, and hereby many are discovered, who
have good purposes only, which though they be hearty in them for a time, yet
they want power and strength, and this is the case of many which be in the
Church, who though they have the knowledge of the word of God, and approve the
truth in their consciences, desiring to be saved by the practice of it, and so
take up many good purposes, which yet come to nothing, because they want power
and strength, consider therefore if thou have power and strength to perform
thy purposes, and then thou have the power of Godlynes, but not else.

Many will say, I am but flesh and blood, and what will you have me to do? now
here wants the power, as you may see in the fifth chapter of Moses called Deuteronomy,
from the 7. ve. to the 29. the people there said to Moses that what the Lord
should speak to him they would do it, they said then what they thought, and
what they meant and minded, and the Lord says of them, O that there were such
an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my commandments. etc.
they wanted the power though they made good purposes.

Fourthly, If thou would know whether thy godliness be in the power or
no, see whether thou have not only the shadow of it but the substance, for
their is a shadow with the substance as if thou pray there is a formal doing
of it, which is as the shadow, but to pray in the holy Ghost, not in the voice
of thy own spirit but out of Gods own spirit, but of Gods, not out of memory
or wit, but out of thy heart, and that an heart sanctified by the Spirit of
adoption, this is the substance, and so for to hear for knowledge only that is
the shadow, but to hear for practice that is the substance, and so again for
us to preach the Gospel, for to do it, because necessity is laid upon us,
and there is a woe denounced against us if we do it not, as says our Apostle
of himself, there is the shadow, but to preach with power, and authority, and
not as the Scribes and Pharisees with the enticing words of man's wisdom, this
is the substance.

Fifthly and finally, It is in the power when as a man goes thorough the work,
a thing is said to be in the power when it is effectual, when a man brings
it to an end, and does it not by halfes* so some begin indeed, but then they
leave the work in the rudiments, but if a man have the power he will break
through all difficulties, he will leap over all till he has wrought out his
salvation with fear and trembling.

And thus having dispatched the two former particulars, I hasten to the third,
and last of the premises.

Thirdly, the reasons why some have but the form? and not the power and they
are especially these.

Reasons why many men have but the form.
First, because it is most easy, but the power is a matter of more difficulty,
for the former, it does not call upon a man to cut off his right hand, to pluck
out his right eye* and to deny himself in things nearest, and dearest unto
him* as the power does, for it requyres a man should take pains in good
duties, and go throughout in them, not to omit or slight the least of them, in
the least measure that may be, or tolye in known sins, and farther it
requires a man should do this from day to day, and that when it crosses the
flesh most, this is an hard saying, and caused many, that they would no longer
abide with Christ, they were willing to obey the form but not the power.

Secondly, because this power breeds hatred, and opposition in the world, and
the world will cross it again, now then when a man may retain the former, and
hold in with the world, a man may be of the world still, and the world will
love his own, whereas the power maks them Antipodes to all the world, this
makes many care for no more but the form: fit for this purpose is that place
Wil'd 2.12. where the ungodly say of the righteous on this wise, these men's
lives are contrary to ours, and their doings reprove our thoughts, therefore
let us oppress them: and Christ tells us we must look for no other, saying, we
shall be hated of all men for his names sake, and it is no easy matter to
have all men in contention with us, this then is another reason hereof.

Thirdly, because it is enough to serve a man's turns, for his unregenerate
ends, for men having a natural conscience, whereof they must stop the mouth,
and it being injudicious, and not able to judge of the power of godlynes, they
are satisfied with the form, as now when Children are wayward and wrangling,
because we know they are not judicious, we give them Nutts, not gold or silver
to still them, and it serves their turns as well. so is it here in the
natural conscience. it does judge the form to be enough to carry a man to
heaven; and who would do more then he needs must.

Fourthly because if men have but the form of godlynes, Satan troubls the^ not,
nor the flesh, but Satan, (for he knows it will bring them to heaven) when men
labor for the power of godlynes, and go on any further than the form, then
he has the power of hell against them, and he keeps a great busseling with
them to hinder them what he can, and so does the flesh too, but it will not
resist the form, for that will stand with a man's lusts, but if he be divided
against himself he cannot endure it, as to deny a friend or a stranger if he
be importunate is a hard matter, but to deny a man's wife that lies in his
bosom, if she be earnest is more difficult, but to deny a man's self when he
is importunate with himself is most difficult, and yet this you must do, if
you have the power of it. Now to deny the power of it, is when it is laid open
to men and offered, they with stubbornenesse of will resist and deny it.

And so much for the opening of the words, now for the solding of them up
again, and from the first what godliness is:

Let us learn not to deceave our selves, for it is not (as I told you)
natural or moral virtues only, no nor the doing of the actions of religion,
a man making himself his utmost ends therein, content not your selves therefore
with any thing that is not godliness, let me speak unto you as Peter to the
dispersed brethren, whereafter that he had reckoned up many virtues, patience,
knowledge, temperance. etc. he bids them add to all these godlynes, as if he
had said all the rest are not availeable unless you have godlynes also, see
therefore that all these be godlynes, that is that they all come from him, and
look to him, for this is the nature of godlynes to come to the wells head. and
to search higher then nature. to have another Alpha, and Omega, of all that is
within us, or that comes from us, than what is within us of our selves. And
then again if we be to preach to others, we should learn to preach Christ
and God, that is to enforce all as from them and to them, not only to exhort to
moral virtues, with such instructions as may be taken out of Seneca or
Plutarch (though these have their use and place) but as out of the Scriptures,
let Christ and God come in, and show you how all do come from God, and look
to God and so all you that are hearers, be sure all you do be godlynes, that
is coming from God, and tending to him, for motions have their denominations
from their terminus a quo, and from their ends as that is called calefaction,
that tends to heat, so is that truly godlynes that tends to God, and has
respect unto him, as now a student, when he studies and takes pains in his
books see whether thou do it for thy self or for thy creddit, or do thou
make God thy utmost end, examine thy heart, and examine it narowly: and see
likewise you are exercised in other callings, do you do them that you may do
good to mankind in them, as a servant that uses his talent to his masters
service, then is this godlynes, so if you eat or drink, or recreat yourselves,
do you do it that you may do good better, as men whet their sythes that they
may mow the better, then this is also godlynes, for it tends to God and
godlynes.

But you will say, do you altogether condemn natural, and moral virtues?
must they do nothing, yes you shall have this use of them, that they will help
as wind to drive the ship, only it is godlynes is the rudder guides it, and
aims at the right haven, as for example, you are commanded to love your
children, and your wives, you are bound to do this, if you had no natural
affections in you, only having these affections in you, you do it with more
ease, else you must drive the ship with oars, whereas now the wind fills the
sails and you do it with more facility, and ease, and so likewise you are bound
to be patient and meek and you must be so, though your natures be not so, but
if your natures be so, you may the more easily be so, yet so as godlienes must
set the compass, and steer the ship, morrall virtues are like good horses,
that draw the Chariot, but godlynes is the Auriga, the Coachman without which
take the most excellent things, that nature is capable of, if it be not guided
by it, the Lord regards them not, for God regards nothing but that which draws
the creatures unto him, but now moral virtues makes us rest upon our own
bottoms, and so likewise all things whatsoever they be that beautyfie the
flesh, for God will have no flesh to glorify in it self, Cor 1, 29, 3^
but let him that glories glory in the Lord, Nay I add more, take the graces of
the spirit, wherewith God adornes his saints, as an husband does his wife with
jewels, if you magnyfie them you do so much withdraw your hearts from God,
therefore in heaven it is said there is neither, Sun, nor Moon, now what is
that? there is no excellency in any creature that is magnified there, but God
is All in all, he is Sun and Moon, and therefore in the Revelation of Saint
John it is said, and said to their honor, it is made their worth that they
give all to God glory and power be to our God for ever, Cap 7.
they fall on their faces, throw down their crowns, though created glorious
creatures, yet when the evil Angels began to reflect upon themselves, it was
their ruin, they fell from GOD, for the creature of it self is like a glass
without a bottom, if it comes to stand upon its own bottom, it falls, and
breaks, and so the Angels when they would stand of themselves, they fell
down to the lowest pit, and therefore of all graces labor for emptying
graces, as faith and love, for these give all unto God, nothing to man's self,
and therefore they are the great graces in religion which you must chiefly
labor for.

Secondly, from that there is a power in godliness, if it be such a powerful
a thing (as you have heard it is) then this may serve to comfort us, in the
ways of it. Wheresoever it is in truth, there it is in power, say that thou
have such a light that thou can not believe, that be such roades as that
thou can not walk by them, 1 Cor, 2^,
yet if thou have godliness thou shall be able to overcome. for the kingdom
of God consistes in power, as it is said, when GOD comes to dwell in any
man's heart, he sends Godliness into it, which rules in it as a KING in his
Kingdom, think therefore of it as of Monarchs as Alexander was, or those
which Daniel speaks of, which carry all before it, it brings in every
thought into subjection, and therefore also the spirit is called a spirit of
power, 1 Timothy, 1, ^
and if you have godliness, it comes from the spirit, and therefore is
accompanied with power, and therefore Christ is said to be full of the Holy
Ghost, and of power, and so Steven, and John the Baptist, and grace is said to
be a powerful thing: Be strong in the grace of GOD, and in the Power of his
might.

Now the reason why godliness has power is, because GOD has put virtue into
it, as when you see such and such an herb, have such a virtue in it to do
such and such a thing, it is because God has endued it with such a power, and
so has he done with godliness, if therefore thou have any thing to do in
religion, set on it, Have thou any lust to overcome? set on it, and let me
speak to thee as he spoke to Gideon, Go on thou valiant man in the might of
the Lord. The people of Israel traveling to the land of Canaan, they saw the
Cities walled to heaven, and that the Giants were there, the sons of Anax,
yet Joshua bids them be of good comfort, and fear not, for the Lord would
fight for them, and deliver their adversaries into their hands, so though you
see difficulties in the way to heaven, yet godlynes is a powerful thing that
will carry you through all, therefore likewise the Apostle having prayed for
the Ephesians that they might not faint at his tribulations for them, which was
their glory, but that they might be strengthened with might by his Spirit in
the inner man, to comprehend with all Saints the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge,
which because they might think they should never be able to do, he adds
to him that is able to do above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians, 3, 13 to
the end,
according to the power that works in us, to him be all glory, as if he
should have said, GOD is able to do it, and that by the power, which works
in him: so suppose it be to subdue some lusts of a flesh, a thing so hard as
you think it will never be done, nay you conceive it to be a thing so
improbable, as that you are ashamd to ask it, yet according to that power,
which works in you, he is able to do above all we ask or think, Ephesians 1, ^.
and therefore he prays, that their eyes may be opened, that they may see
the greatness of the power that wrought in them, and it was not that they
might see and look at it idly, but for the use to serve their turns, that
they laying hold of it, and using of it, might be able to do these things,
which they desire should be done, even such things to which a man's nature is
as untoward, as water is to heat when their is none in it, only as Christ
said to Marie, Believe and you shall see the power of God, thou must go to God
for it by faith, and God will show it forth unto you, and you shall have
fruits of it, the end of faith is not only to apply the promises of
Justification but for Sanctification also, as for example he has promised to
baptize you with the Holy Ghost as with fire, that is, with zeal and other
graces of the spirit, which must give them power and strength, and all that
sin might not reign in their mortal bodies, go to God then and urge him of
his promise, and he cannot deny you: When men therefore think to excuse
them-selves by saying, I am not able to do such a thing, what will you have
me to do? it is no excuse, for if they were but willing, it is all he
requires of them, the power, that belongs to God, which if men would but
believe, and go to him, he would undoubtedly give it them.

I therefore now ask thee, would thou turn to God? if thou would overcome
such and such a lust of uncleanness, drunkenness, etc. be it what it will
be, if thou answer no, then thou art justly condemned, thy blood be upon thy
own head, but if thou say yes, thou would, then come but to GOD, be
resolute to be religious in good earnest, and I will assure thee he will
vouchsafe thee power to do it. 1 Cor 8,
The Apostle says that GOD would confirm them unto the end, that they might
be blameless in the day of the Lord JESUS, for says he, GOD is faithful,
he has said, he has promised it, he shall break his word if he do not,
let me reason it a ^ittle with you, Is it not an acceptable request to go to
GOD with all thy heart? and to say, Lord, I desire but the power and strengeh
to go through with thy own work? Do thou think he will not hear thee?
Remember Christ, the only Physician, how ready he was to heal men of their
bodily diseases when they came unto him, and he has not put off his nature
now: Do thou think the power of death and resurrection were but fancies, or a
notion? If not go on, and fear not, for as GOD said to Joshua, so shall thou
find him to deal with thee, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, and so
leaving what I have said to your further consideration, I come to a third: that
seeing godlynes is such a powerful thing, as you have seen, that therefore
you take heed how you deceave your selves with fond desires and purposes, that
have no power, no force in them, so as to think that they will serve the
turn, no yet a few, feeble, faint endeavors. I say to men that set on
religious courses without having their hearts changed, as Christ said unto his
Disciples, tarry ye in the City, till ye be endued with power from on
high, Luk 24, 49,
as if our Savior Christ should have said, if ye go presently into the
world, ye will not be able to go through with your works: stay therefore with
fasting and prayer till you have received power from on high to carry you
through, for new purposes in a man that returns to old nature, is like new
wine in old vessels, they will break the vessels and be too big for your
hearts: it is therefore enough to take up now a purpose, and begin to be
diligent in your calling or sanctifying the Sabbath, for it is impossible that
purposes should live in an heart that is carnal, for as the soil must be
suitable to every creature, or else it will not live so likewise you will never
be able to perform these purposes,

How to get the power of godlynes
In the first place therefore labor to get new hearts, as the bottom to these
purposes, which may be as the root to give sap to the^, for then they will live
and grow in you, when there is a soil to suite with them.

Secondly, get power in believing Christ our Savior, when he came unto his
country, it is said, he would not put forth his power to work many miracles
there, why so? one would have thought he should rather have wrought them there
then any where else, both for his own honor, and the good of his country men.
no place then was fitter for that then it, yet there he works few or none,
and the reason was, because of their unbelief, they believed not, so that it
is the want of faith that holds Gods hands from strengthening you, you will not
I say believe God, he has sworn (and it is not an old oath) that he would
grant that we should serve him in godlynes, and holiness, all the days of our
life, when the widow came to Christ to be healed of the issue which she had had
many years, it is said, that virtue went out of him to heal her because she
believed, and though it have been a disease of never so many years, yet if he
say be ye whole, it is not matter what the disease is, so God be the Physician,
and therefore, believe.

Thirdly, pray and furnish yourselves with all the graces of the spirit, not
only go about things, but maintain a stock, fill the cisterne every day,
within whet and point the graces of God in you, for the inward man every day is
subject to decay, as well as the outward man, and do not take aim at
yourselves, or at your strength when you are in a good mood, or by the present
temper, for it vanishes if there be not a supply from day to day, from grace
within, if you do not whet your souls every day.

Fourthly, in the last place is this true, that many are partakers of the
form, that have not the power of godlynes, that when we come to look on the
faces of our churches, we find the form in many. but if we come unto their
dealings, and cariages in private, ye shall scarce find the power, its as rare
as the other are frequent, in their profession indeed there is a form, but yet
ye shall find religious servants, as idle as others, and wives as stubborn as
others, husbands, and masters, as like lions in their families, and as false in
their dealings as others, if this be true (I say) as it is too true it is so,
then be not deceaved God is not mocked, but try and examine your selfs
herein, for the kingdom of God consists not in word but in power, the Lord
will not judge you according to your intentions and purposes, Rom, 2
but according to your works, and its not he that says Lord, Lord, shall
inherit the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father. etc. be
not then children in understanding for to take counters for gold, lay not out
your money for counterfeit things, be not fools to take pains, and yet not
have your turns served, let me speak unto you as James does, if you say ye
have faith, and not works, can your faith save you? I say if you have the
form of godlynes and not the power, will that save you? if you would not be
deceaved then examine your selves:

Five marks whereby to know whether we have the power of godlynes or no
First of all, if thou do more than nature, see that thou be not the same
man thou wast, that thou stand not up in the same troop thou did, if thou
do thou have no more but the form of godliness in thee, for if thou had, it
would turn thy nature, and add wings unto thee, making thee soar higher then
nature* I am able through Christ that ste^gthens me. and that not to do some
things but all things, he says not I do purpose or desire, but I am able to
do all things, etc. those therefore that are able to stand against some lusts
that are against their dispositions, but not against all are weak, and have
not this power in them, it may be thou art able to serve God when thou art
poor, but what art thou when the world comes in upon thee? thou art able to
obstaine from sins by nature, but godlynes as we say of Physic, helps when
nature fails, and as although a natural man with his sight see far, but with
an optic glass sees further, so when nature falls short, Art helps, as
though by nature a man may measure or count, yet if he comes to a large piece
of ground, or a great sum, Art is required, so though thou may do many
things by nature, yet when godliness comes, it helps out in things wherein
nature fails, as Sampson could do many ordinary things by his own strength,
but when he came to take down or carry away the gates of a city, and to pull
down an house, it is still said, the spirit of the Lord came upon him, the
Lord went with him, and even so it is here.

Secondly, examine whether ye be in truth or no, for in Christ there are said
to be dead branches, as well as living, that is those have the form as well as
those that have the power, Ioh, 5,
but how are they distinguished? the dead bear no fruit, and therefore as John
said, every tree that brings not forth good fruit, God puts the axe to it,
and so the three grounds they did not bring forth fruit, examine therefore
your selves whether ye be full of fruit or no, whether ye abound in good
duties or no, and do them with an honest heart, for thereby the fourth ground
is distinguished from all the rest.

Thirdly examine whether ye hold out in time of trial or not, whether you are
able to approve your selves with joy as the Apostle says of himself that he
did when he was in trouble on every side, on the right hand, (...) ^n the
left hand, in prosperity, and in adversity, the third gro^^d (...) not out in
temptation and the reason was, because they had not depth of earth, that is
they wanted power, and an inward stock of grace f^^ ^h^t is depth of earth, as
a man that keeps a great house, if he have ^ot ^ st^ckable to supply him, he
will soon prove bankrupt, and for a tradesman. as ye say, if he be not
diligent in his trade, and follow it well, and make his returns he will soon
break, so also when a man wants inward power, and an inward stock of graces to
bear his daily expenses out, he will soon become bankerupt.

Fourthly, every grace has some property annexed to it, which does
distinguish, and difference it from counterfeit, as in faith unfeigned,
laborious love patient hope, and the like.

Thirdly, take heed least some lust overcome all, and so lust overtop all, and
be predominant, as the praise of men, or a respect of pleasure, as an halke
(you see) though she may soar and fly high yet she will have an eye to the
prey below, and so have hypocrites, see therefore that ye serve God in
singlenes of heart, and not with eye service, that you do not harbor any last
within, for that will spoil all at last, as weeds in a garden, if they be let
alone, and not plucked up, they will overrun the whole herbs, so is it with
sin, if it be but suffered, though it be but a little one at first, yet it will
like a leprosy overspread the whole man, and therefore look to that, that
some lust do not overcome all in the end, and so I end for this text and time.

FINIS.
AMEN.

