GRACE TO THE HVMBLE. AS Preparations to Receive the SACRAMENT. Preached by the
Late famous Preacher JOHN PRESTON, Doctor of Divinity, and Chaplen in Ordinary
to his Mtie. Master of Immanuel College, and sometimes Preacher in
Lincolnes-Inne.

LONDON Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Michael Spark Junior, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1639.

GRACE TO THE HVMBLE. The fourth SERMON.
LVKE 9.23. And he said to them all, if any will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross daily and follow me.


IN the receiving of the Sacrament, our choice business is, to remember the
Covenant between God and us, and that has two Parts:













Now there is a Condition required at our hands, and it is expressed by diverse
words in the Scriptures, sometimes Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Sometimes Believe me; and you shall be saved. And here it following of
Christ. All these are joined together, for if you Repent, you Believe, and
follow Christ, and none can follow Christ, without Faith and Repentance.

Now the occasion of these words, is this: Our Savior had told them a little
before, That he must suffer many things; he must die, and rise again; and
then tells them the consequent of this, that they must not look for a
temporal kingdom, my Disciples follow me, and I go rough ways: So that the
maine duty that he gives them here, is to follow him; to this he adds two
Conditions, or two causes, without the which we cannot by any means follow
him.

He must deny himself, that is, If a man will come to follow me; the flesh
will propound to him many things that are pleasing and profitable; it will be
as a rough byas to turn him aside, and therefore he must deny himself, and he
will meet with many afflictions; and for those he must not look out of the
way, but he must go through these crosses, he must take up his cross daily.
The Doctrine is this,

That no man can have interest in Christ, Doct.
without self-denial: If any man will will be my disciple, let him deny
himself. Although before you come to Christ, there is nothing required, but a
simple and bare desire. It is no matter for Sanctification; yet when we do
come, he must then be our Lord and Master, and we must follow him, denying our
own lusts; and this cannot be without self-denial; and therefore it is that,
that those that have failed in this point have not followed him. Demas followed
him a great way, but when he came to this self denial, then he left him, and
embraced this present world, and this was the reason why Paul followed him,
because he was willing to deny himself; What was the reason that Caleb
followed God so constantly, because he denied himself, and resolved
whatsoever he saw, to stick close to God, and his Commandments; and so
Abraham, he left his country and friends cleaving to God.

Indeed if our will and Christ's Will were coincident, then this might be
without self-denial, but being at odds, we cannot go together, for we
cannot walk together, not being agreed, and therefore we must conform our
selves unto Christ, his Will must not be brought down to ours, but our will is
out often, and therefore it must be wound up to his.

Now the Question will be what self-denial is. Quest.


To deny a man's self, Answ.
is not to make himself his end, but God only, and to renounce himself as
sorry, he is opposite to God and his ways; So that to deny himself 'is to
deny the aversement the corruption and illness of nature, which is called the
flesh, the body of death, and the old man, and the old leaven, which are a man's
self; and this the Apostle means, We preach not our selves, 2 Cor. 4.5.
but Jesus Christ; that is, I preach not for applause and vainglory, to
please my self by my self, here he means his flesh, which he will not
satisfy; for when the Apostle had told them of his Vision and Revelation, 2
Cor. 12.5.
of such a man, said he, I would rejoice, of my self I would not rejoice. Why
should he not rejoice of himself? Because himself was nothing but a bundle
of corruption in himself was no good but of such a man so renewed he would
rejoice.

But why is flesh called a man's self? Quest.


Because it is so spread over all the faculties and powers of a man, Answ.
and is predominant as the form over the matter, for a man loves it as
himself and fights against all things that oppose it, and nourishes all that
nourishes it.

But how is it possible that a man can deny himself, Quest.
for in denial there must be one to ask, and another to deny, there must be
one denying, and one denied; himself must be denied? how can himself deny
himself?

Answ.
To this I answer, that there is in every man that is in Christ a double self,
and the regenerate man and this is that, that every man must do if he will be
saved and there is not only necessity but much reason why we should deny our
selves, as in every command of God there is much reason if we could see it, so
here is great reason for this.

First in regard of God, Reas. 1.
God has no causes, therefore he may think himself the end: but every
creature has an efficient and final cause: therefore it must not make it
self its order, it is against the order of nature, and rule of things that the
creature which is not of it self should make it self its end, being man's
efficient cause is out of himself, therefore his end must needs be out of
himself, he should make himself God, and God an Idol: For if a man will set
up himself, that is, will not deny himself, he sets himself above God, and
makes a God of himself. We do not worship God as we as we ought without we
deny our selves.

Reas. 2.
In regard of our selves, because if we do not deny our selves we destroy our
selves, because when we yield to our selves we yield to the disease, and when
we yield to the disease, we destroy our selves; this disease is the flesh,
every man is aeger inter morbum and medicum; now which is better for a a man to
hearken to the Spirit, the Physician, or to the flesh the disease. This reason
is taken out of the sixth of the Galatians, Gal. 6.6.
he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. He that yeeds
to his flesh does destroy himself, for all the ways of sin lead down to
the chambers of death, that is, they bring death at the latter end, that is the
fruit and wages of it at the last, but he that does deny himself, does best
provide for himself, for he has not only the general promise, Mar. 10.3^
but also the particular promise; Mark. 10.30.
there is noe man that has left house or brethren, etc. Both in regard of our
selves, and in regard of God there is equity for it: nothing is hard to a
reasonable man, when he sees a reason that it is best for him to do it, he
is easily persuaded to it; besides it is the greatest folly in the world, to
go about to join God and our selves together, God and sin, God and other
respects, for you loose both by this: for God hates such an one, and you find
no content in mind, neither can you serve your selves perfectly if you join
your selves with God, and therefore you can have no absolute content, and there
will be a reluctance which way so ever you turn. Again suppose they should
both be joined, yet the more you gain in the flesh, the more you loose of God
and the Spirit. Now he that has any union, desires more union with God, and
this cannot be unless you have less union with the flesh Again it is
needelesse to join God and your selves together, you may have enough in God;
you add but a candle to the Sun and water to the Ocean, and then you go
about an impossible thing for you cannot serve two masters, Matthew. 6.24.
all your labor will be lost. Mat. 6.24.
Amaziah walked in the ways of God; but he lost all his labor because his
heart was not perfect with the Lord.

Object.
But now it will be objected, how is it possible that a man should deny
himself! In shunning sin may he not have an eye unto hell; and in walking the
ways of God, may he have an eye to heaven? To this I answer that we deny not
but that a man may love himself, Answ.
for a man to kill himself, and every hurt is a degree to that, and God would
not command that which is sinful, Matthew 3.2.
and again uses those as motives to seek salvation. Repent for the kingdom
of God is at hand; If you will come in behold here is a kingdom for you,
Matthew. 10 28.
fear not him that kills the body, etc. The ways of wisdom are ways of
pleasure: Prove. 3.17.
And lastly it Matthew. 15.13.
and such plants as our heavenly father has planted, no man ought to pluck
up. This is the work of nature, and that which is opus naturae est opus
authoris, naturae. And grace does not take away nature, gratia non tollit
naturam, sed attollit, it does not take it away but it reformes it; it does not
extinguish it, but sets it in order, it does not dry up this stream, but
turns it into the right channel, it does not extirpate these plants, but as
the horse rider takes not away the nature from the horse, but does guide him:
so it takes not the desire of nature away, but guides it aright; and if we do
it in all desires of nature, we must needs do it in the chiefest desire, in
the desire of salvation; but we would have a man to deny himself no further
then the want thereof does hurt him. Now the way to hurt your selves, is to
make your selves the end, but the way for a man to do good to himself, is not
to follow his own will, nor to seek himself, but to seek God, when his will
comes in opposition with any command of Gods: for that is the difference
between a regenerate and an unregenerate man, the unregenerate man thinks his
best way to get comfort, is to rely on himself and the creatures, not to seek
it from God: but the regenerate man seeing the vanity of the creature, and the
fullness of God, rejects these things and only follows God, and serves with a
willing heart and mind: Both seek their own good but a diverse way.

Use 1.
Is it so then, that none can have interest in Christ without selfe-denyall:
then first we make this use of this. Hence we see that both cannot stand
together, seeking a man's self and following Jesus Christ. He that will follow
me must deny himself, there is an necessity, choose you which you will have,
if you will follow me you must you must deny your selves, and if you will
follow your selves you must not have me; the words are put in a necessary
disjunction: therefore deceive not your selves in this, to think you may
follow your selves, and yet follow Christ. To deny a man's self, is if there
be any thing pleasing to him to part with it, for Christ; if there be any
thing pleasing, if a man be not willing to part with it for Christ, he cannot
have Christ and salvation: If any thing be evil and hurtful which he most
shunnes and avoydes, if he cannot undergo it, he must go without Christ.

But if you ask what need there shall be of so general denial. Quest.


I answer, these very words to deny a man's self shows us so much: Answ.
for to deny himself, is to deny the whole body of himself: we must not deny
some part of our selves, as pleasure and profit, which are but some branches,
but we must deny all. And therefore you see in Peter, that was the profession
that he made. Lord we have forsaken all and followed thee: Mark. 10.28.
If we hold any thing between our teeth, we must let go our hold of Christ.
He that will seek praise and credit among men, must not have interest in
Christ. How can ye believe which seek honor of one another, and seek not
the honor that comes from God; Ioh. 5.44.
only it will make him st^ll be out of the way, when any such thing comes in
competition. So the rich man in the Gospel, because he had set his heart upon
his wealth, Christ told him that time that he could not follow him. The light
of the body is the eye, if the eye be single the whole body is light, Matthew.
6.22.
but if the eye shall be dark, mark what is said there of a single eye, and
what opposition is made; An eye is said to be single in respect of the object,
that is, if the eye be single and look only on God, then all the body is
light, that is, all his life is good, God counts his sins but infirmities.
But if a man have a wicked eye, the opposition is if the eye be double, but it
is put in wicked, because a double eye is a wicked eye, that is, looking partly
upon God and partly upon himself, then the body is dark; and there is good
reason for this: For it is impossible if a man do not make God his utmost end
to be saved, if he make himself his coordinate end, he then makes himself
joint God, besides this man will be constant in all his ways, and therefore
is not pleasing to God. The reason why God regards them not is because they are
not constant: Iam. 1.8.
A double minded man is unstable in all his ways: who will regard him that is
a friend to day and none to morrow? God loves not such whose hearts are not
perfect with him; now no man is such that does not deny himself perfectly, if
there be any sweet morsel that he keeps under his tongue and will not part
with it.

If we have not interest in Christ without self-denial, Use 2.
then this should teach us to judge of things aright: it may seem to rectify
our opinions; it should teach us what to think when we begin to give up our
names to Christ: we must not think to go to heaven in a Feather bed, where
we may have elbow room enough as it was our Saviors precept we must lay the
foundation before we begin to build. So it was his practice, if any man came
to him to tell him before what he should suffer afterward: So when any one
comes to him saying, good master I will follow thee, he presently answers him,
Matthew. 8.19, 20.
the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of
man has not whereon to lay his head: Mark. 10.2.
And when the young man came so prepared that Christ began to love him. I but
mistake me not says Christ, if you come to me you must deny your self, and
that which is most precious to you which was his wealth: you must prepare your
self for crossses, and not for crosses which should come now and then, but for
daily crosses; you must keep your self for a rough way, that is, you must be
ready to go up the hill; you must be busy when your flesh would be at ease,
you must endure infamy and reproach when your flesh would have an applause, we
must be contented to be hated among all men: A course of Godliness is
nothing but a continaull opposition of the flesh to do something contrary to
our selves. To think upon this aforehand will help us much, we are to resolve
and say in the morning this flesh will put many sins against the Spirit, but
we must resolve to cross our selves* and at night let a man examine himself
and say, what is it that my flesh did desire, and how have I denied my self.
This should be the course of a Christian: If you will do no more then that
you are willing to do its no thanks: Such as serve God with their ease so
long as it stands with their flesh, what thanks have they? but we must deny
our selves and cross the flesh, neither must we do this of necessity, but
chearefully: but we must be content to part withal, and think we have a
good bargain too: as the Mercant man sold all his possessions and went away
rejoicing: that is, we must not only do a thing for Christ for necessity,
because we cannot otherwise have salvation, but also we must think we have
got a good purchase; many will say, rather then I will go to hell I will deny
my self: But we must labor to see an amiablenesse in Christ, a worth in
Christ to draw us along, or else we shall faint, and count it an hard way, we
must think the gain of Christ with the loss of all a good bargain.

But how shall a man bring his heart to this hard Quest.
thing? it seems almost impossible, but if we were enlightened and could see
things as they are, we should do it willingly, for that amiablenesse that is
in Christ.

Answ.
There are four considerations why we should do this and think it a good
bargain.

2 Cor. 6.16.
we are the temples of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them,
and I will walk in them, and they shall be my people, and I will be their
God: If a man will go and sell himself to another man he must not do his
own work, for then he shall wrong him that bought him.

But I make no such bargain with Christ you will say? Object.


You have, Answ.
or ought to do it, you have done as much in effect: for Christ has shed his
blood for every man in this sense; so that it is propounded before all; and
every man shall answer for the neglect of it: as it is, 2 Pet. 2. there shall
be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
Romans 14.15.
Destroy not thy brother with thy meat for whom Christ dyed: So for every man
that it lies exposed to him, and he commits a double sin that does not
receive him, etc.

1. He does neglect him.

2. He does not as he is commanded. In the Leviticall Law if one bought a
servant, and he in punishi^g him dyed under his hands, there was no Law against
him, for he was his money. So we may say of every man to whom the Gospel is
revealed, that he is Christ's money; yea Christ's blood; for that is the price
that has been paid for him, and laid out for him, and it is his fault that
he takes it not; and he shall be accused one day for one that took such a
great price, and yet would not serve the Lord Jesus Christ: For as much as ye
know ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and Gold from
your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers, but with the
precious blood of Christ. When Christ saw you walking idle in vanity he comes
and buys you to his service not with silver and gold, but with his own blood,
and this he has done to redeem you from your vain conversation; but if any
man walk vainly still, and does not follow Christ, he rejects Christ's price,
and at the last day it will be objected against him, that he did not serve
God for the price that he had received. Therefore let this move you to serve
Christ.

Object.
But you will say, I see there is reason and necessity for this, but I will not
do it yet, I will do it hereafter.

Answ.
But consider Christ has paid the price for you, and he has bought all your
life, not some one part, and as a man hired for a day does not begin it til
noone, he does the man wrong that hired him: So every man that does not serve
God in his youth wrongs God, let us not therefore defer it, but do it as
suddenly as we can.

It is good for a man to deny himself, for his life is loss of goods and
loss of life, yea of life eternal; for yet man's happiness consists in the
attaining of God his end, and so those places of Moses and Paul are to be
expounded; Exodus 32.32.
If thou willt not forgive them blot me out of the book of life, so it may
be to Gods glory. So Paul, Romans 9.3.
I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my
kinsmen in the flesh, so long as any advantage would come to God, they cared
not what became of themselves, and besides if a man should seek his good in
himself, he could not get it, for there is no bottom. And again besides
th^se reasons the Scripture is plain for it; if a man would loose his life for
me he shall find it. This is the best way to provide for himself: the best
way for a man to do good to himself is by way of reflection to serve God and
man with his fatnes, so he shall have a full recompense, a measure pressed
down and running over; so that if a man would think with himself, what shall
I do now to get happiness in this world, the way is not to get honor and
riches, but to learn to deny my self, and how I may honor God, and how I may
spend my life for his glory and his service, this is the wisest way to make our
selves happy; labor therefore to be persuaded of this, and you will easily be
persuaded to do it.

pleasures, and honors, therefore we must seek something above ourselves and
that is God, those things are called vanity and empty things that seem to
promise something and perform nothing, as those things are said to be empty
which promise some satisfaction but deceive us, as an empty well, and empty
clouds that seem to promise rain but there comes none: so it is with the
creatures; all the world look for some thing from the creatures, but that
which we seek for is not in them, and God calls them empty. So the multitudes
of them will show that there can be no perfection in them, for if they had any
perfection, they need not be so many, and though they would have contentment
in them, yet they are but brittle as glass, holding some comfort in them,
which is quickly broken, and then our comfort falls like water upon the ground,
which cannot be gathered up again. Now if we would bring our hearts to be
persuaded of the emptiness of these things, then surely we should do it with
ease: it was easy with Solomon to deny himself in repenting, for he saw the
vanity of all things, no argument will make us do this, but only the Spirit
of God when we are convinced by it, and then we shall do it with ease.

By denying your selves

I but what motive is this? Object.
what though the flesh do get the superiority and the Spirit decay?

O but if you had eyes of judgment to see the excellency of grace and renewed
nature, Answ.
and the baseness of the flesh, it would be a very good argument. Paul
thought he had said enough to enforce the Galatians, when he had told them
that the works of the flesh were adultery, Gal. 5.9.22.
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, etc. This is enough to make
a man strive against the flesh for the works of it are vile, not worth a man,
but the work of the Spirit it is love, joy, peace, etc. Some men seek
excellency in health, wealth, earthly wisdom, but yours lies in the Spirit,
the more you enlarge the health of your soul, and the more you deny your
flesh, the more you weaken your disease, for the flesh is but a disease, and
therefore Christ is said to come and heal the sick, and the word of God is
called balm: now where there is mention made of a Physician and a remedy there
must be a disease, and that disease is this flesh.

And the more you begin to deny this flesh, the more you escape that which you
most abhor and are ashamed of, namely death and sin, first sin, what
fruit have you then of those things whereof you are ashamed: Romans 6.24.
for the end of those things is death. Shame indeed is the correllative of
sin, and where sin is there is shame, and no where else: the second is death
and sickness, and death and trouble, and all steps and degrees thereto, but if
you walk in the Spirit you have glory and life eternal, and all the comforts
of this life, as steps and degrees thereto, to conclude all therefore resolve
to deny your flesh and all his requests. And know thus much, that it is a very
difficult thing, for the flesh is very near and dear to us: Its hard to deny
a stranger or a friend, harder to deny a child or a wife, and therefore much
more hard to deny our selves: Again the flesh is importunate, and comes with a
bribe in his hand, as ease, or profit, or pleasure or such like, and our hearts
are quickly drawn to such; as Iron to the loadstone; again its cunningly
helped by the slight and policy of the devil, and therefore it is that S.
James calls sensual wisdom, Iam. 3.15.
devilish wisdom, because the devil joins his wisdom with it. Therefore
go about this as an hard work, deal hardly with it: as the Prophet bids them
with the messenger that came from Ahab, shut the dooers on him, admit no
conference with him, shut thy ears against the persuasion of the flesh, and
wicked men, give it no hearing. The flesh is ready to suggest reasons, but we
must not hearken to it: So Paul when he was to go about a hard matter, I did
not confer with my flesh says he: we see that it was his practice when his
friends entreated him not to go up to Jerusalem, what mean you to weep, and
to break my heart, for I am ready not to be bound only, Act. 21.13.
but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus: he would admit of
no conference with them. So David when Ioab and Abishas would have taken off
Shimeihs head for cursing him, what have I to do with you ye sons of
Zerviah says he: 2 Samuel 16.9, 10.
And so did Jesus Christ when Peter came to him Master pity thy self, Mark
8.32. Matthew. 16.23.
what have I to do with thee says he? thou know not the things that belong
to God, he would admit of no conference with him, the best is to deny our
selves, to give peremptory denial, have no more strength then our Mother Eve,
she was tempted by admitting plea wih the devil and the flesh: If we think
of our sins Satan will be ready to suggest reasons, distinctions and
evasions to make us walk upon the brinke side, and then we fall unawares into
the pit. 1 King. 13.1.
So the Prophet which God sent to Bethel, when he had conferred with the old
Prophet, he was enticed to come back and eat with him, which was his
destruction; when as indeed he should not have conferred with him, kept
himself close to the commandment of God: nothing is worse then a peremptory
will in a bad cause, and nothing better in a good cause. Casta est quam nemo
rogavit, she is a chaste woman that carries herself so, as that she admits of
no man to solicit her. So we should carry of selves so that the devil dare
not to attempt us. Think that you shall be overcome it is hard and difficult,
it is good to be jealous over our selves in doubtful things.

Use 3.
If all that are Christ's disciples must deny themselves, hence then this will
follow that our selves are prone exceedingly to evil: we are ready in every
thing to act our selves, we are ready to preach our selves; our flesh will
have one hand in every thing, it will have an Oaer in every Boat. There is
nothing to do but the flesh will put it self forth; what the Apostle says of
envy the flesh lusts after envy; we may say of every sin that the flesh
lusts after it. Take heed therefore to your selves; Iam. 4.5.
as our Savior bids us take heed of men. So we must take heed of our selves,
nothing will ^eceive us so soon as our own hearts. Ier. 17.19.


The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can know? look on
the most deceitful thing that is, the heart is more deceitful then that. If
you have a servant that will deceive you, you have an eye continually upon him.
If there be any thing, wherein you may get applause and credit; how ready are
we to do it, but if there be any things that appertain to the glory of God,
how backward are we, how ready to find out excuses, twenty Lions are in the
way in such a case; if we have a mind to do any thing though the lawfulness
be doubtful, yet we have distinctions and evasions for it, otherwise Christ
would not command us here to deny our selves; Object.
I but you will say, how shall I come to discern this meddling of the flesh?
Answ.
It is true some things are evidently good, and some things evidently bad, but
in things ambiguous it is hard to discern the flesh, a man may desire such a
preferment, and think he does well, but yet this desire may be from the flesh,
and therefore there are some rules whereby we may discern whether our desires
come from the flesh, or no, and how we may do them.

If you find the desires like them that come from pure nature; Gen, 30.1.
as Rachels desire, give me children or else I dye: The vehemence shows it
came from the flesh.

Solomon that ponders his ways: we cannot go about that which is good,
without consideration. Psalm. 119, 59.
I considered my ways says David, and turned my feet into thy testimonies,
If our nature were good, the more hasty it is to any thing the better it would
be, but being our nature is bad it is likely the hastier it is to any thing the
worse the things.

If you find the thing desired to strengthen the

Consider what you do Iehu was zealous enough for God, so long as he expected
a kingdom, that pricked, but when it was gotten he fell to Idolatry. And so
those they were ready to fast and pray, but there was self respect in it: Hos.
7.14.
They assemble themselves together, but the Prophet says it was for corn and
wine: and so they were ready to follow Christ, but it was because they eat of
the loaves and were filled, Ioh. 6.26.
many in sickness and trouble are ready to pray and to seek God, but when the
storm is blown over, what do they then? by this we may learn somewhat to
judge whether the desires come from the flesh or no.

Hence learn how to judge of your condition, Use 4.
whether you are in Christ or not. Christ puts it as a necessary condition to
deny your selves. It is a sure rule if you deny your selves you are in Christ,
if not you have no part in him, but here every man (as it is the part of the
most unsound to flatter themselves) will say he does not profess himself, no
body will grant that he does please himself. Therefore for the trial of
this, take these rules. If you will know whether you deny your selves or not,
first such a man is not angry because he has no more grace but wonders he
has so much. He lets God deal with him as he lists, if he will have him to
be disgraced willing to be shifted from vessel to vessel, from condition to
condition, so he have God in heaven, what becomes of him he cares not. He
counts Christ his greatest good, and sin his greatest evil; He cares not
what he loses so he can get God, such a man will deny himself, and no man
else; we may see this disposition in Paul, if God will not have him preach in
Bithinia, what desire soever he has, he will not do it; if God will have him
shut up in prison he is content, whatsoever it was he would do it. So in
David we shall find the same disposition; if God will take away his kingdom
from him let him do what seems good in his sight: If God send Shimeah to
curse him, 2 Samuel 16.10.
God the Lord has bidden him curse David and let him do it: and when he was
laden with reproaches, he was a dumb man because God did it. And his words
to M^chal show the reason of it, I will be more vile then this, and will be
low in mine own eyes and sight: 2 Samuel 6.22.
This shows he thought himself vile before, but yet because God called him to
it he will be more vile, but take a man of a contrary disposition, that has
a proud heart, that will have such a thing or else all is marred, such a man
will not deny himself; if God come to him ask his credit or riches or any
thing else, he will not do it, he resists God, and God resists him. But God
gives grace to the humble, that is, he shows favor to him, 1 Pet. 5.5.
and whatsoever he asks he will grant him.

Pilots skill is in time of tempest, and a soldiers valor is in the heat of a
battle, when you have no occasion to be intemperate it is nothing, but when a
fair way is laid open to you, and you can deny your lust his opportunity, it
shows you deny your selve. To profess Christ in a wicked and adulterous
generation, when he has some opposition to the contrary, is a trial to a man.
If a man can hate all sins, so as he would not commit any for the greatest
gain; As David would not touch the Lords anointed for a kingdom: 1 Samuel 24.7.
when he would not omit the least good to avoid the greatest evil; as Daniel
would not omit prayer for the saving of his honor and of his life. Dan.
6.10.11.
See what you would do when the Lord and your flesh stand in competition; when
the conscience shall bring you a message, the Lord has need of such a thing,
and the flesh shall say, I have need of such a thing contrary to it, what
should we do in such cases? Indeed it is no trial else except a man be
earnest with himself, when he importunes himself, when a man is easy to
deny himself i^s no trial, set your particular humors, your personal sins;
if you set your selves to deny them; when God would try Abraham whether he
preferred his will, before his own will, he tries him in that whereon his
affections were most set, the offering of his son Isaac and thereupon God
pronounces the sentence I know that thou love me seeing for my sake thou
have not with held thy only son. Genesis 22.12.
If there be any thing on which our hear^s are more set, God tries us there,
if we deny our selv^s there, then we have the self denial.

Consider whether you when he has secret whisperings in his conscience, and
yet will shut his eyes, will not see to and fro, this man whatsoever he
pretends he sins against his conscience: Number. ^2.23.
therefore consider this in Balaams case, if we look upon Balaams carriage he
seemed to deny himself as much as a man could do, if thou would give me
this house full of gold and silver, I could not do except God commanded me:
but he would not seek this out, he sought the wages of Iniquity, there was a
crevis of light, but he would not search out the truth, such a case was that
of Iohanan, he came to Jeremiah and said unto him according to all things for
which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us, whether it be good or evil, we
will obey the voice of the Lord God: Ier. 42.5.6. Ver. 20.
Jeremiah comes and tells him again, this is the business, but withal I must
tell thee you dissembled in your hearts when you sent me to the Lord your God,
he discovers his hypocrisy to him. To be thoroughly informed, to sift the
things before you do it is a sign of self denial, it is ill halting before
men, but God he knows the Spirit, so the meaning of the flesh and man's
conscience, 2 Cor. 4.2,
Gods witness will find us out. Therefore of the Ministers of the Word says
Saint Paul, we approve our selves to the consciences of men, not to the wits,
humors, and wills, but to the consciences, and the truth will always join
together.

Let us not shut up this truth in darkness, he that does truth says our
Savior comes to the light that his deeds might be manifest. Ioh. 3.21.
It is a Metaphor taken from such who when they would thoroughly know what cloth
it is they hold it up against the Sun, to see if it be moth eaten or not, or
whether it have any other fault, therefore take heed of false pretenses. A man
if he were convinced of them he would be more careful and religious in his
ways, but he thinks it superstitious, he would be more wary of his company
but he ^akes it, for morosity and niceness, but if you would sift your selves
there would be some sign of self denial; but now for what end is all this?
it is not to discourage any, it is not for the end that any should be dejected
in the ways of God, it is not for destruction, but for instruction; It is for
this that you may judge aright of your selves, Quest.
but now at last you will begin to s^y, I would do this duty if I knew how
to perform, and therefore I will show you how to deny your selves.

be sure to keep sin off, for that is it which destroys him, he will be
sure to maintain a good conscience. But now take another man a common man,
that has nothing given him but the bulk of the body, that is satisfied with
meat, drink, and clothing, and house and friends, and the flesh and sin,
he will let all go that destroys himself, God, Christ, faith, and a good
conscience, and all, and therefore we are to judge aright of ourselves, as the
Apostle, It is no more I that do it but sin that dwells in me: Romans 7.17.
The Apostle counts the flesh a troubleblesome guest, he would gladly be rid
of him: 2 Cor. 5 1.
and so we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we
have a building given us of God, that is, an house not made with hands but
eternal in the heavens, That is the regenerate part so long as that is going
up it makes no matter, though the outward man suffer much: So long as this new
building is goeing up it makes no matter though the old one be pulled down,
but when a man has no such new building going up, he has reason to keep up
the old, let a man's judgment be right, let him conceive that to be himself
which is in himself, and then it is easy to deny himself.

You never deny your Matthew. 19.39.
Matthew. 16.25.
he that will save any of those he shall quickly loose them, God will so bring
it to pass in the end, if you would consider that promise, Mark. 10.30.
whosoever shall forsake houses or brethren, Matthew. 19.29.
or sisters, or fathers, or mothers, or wives, or lands for my sake shall
receive an hundred fold and shall inherit life everlasting, there would be no
difficulty in this thing.

Object.
But you will say we see such as wal^e most perfectly most deny themselves, a^e
most despised, most trampled on, but this is no good argument. Answ.
For as in the midst of all contents God can fill our hearts with bittern^sse,
so in the midst of all wants God can fill our hearts with all comforts, as
tribulations abound so comfort abounds, the Apostle Paul found this so, he had
his consolations abounding when his afflictions increased. Consider with your
selves whether any man lost any thing by denying himself to honor God. Did
Abraham loose by it, by denying himself in his son Isaac? no his son was
given him; was Solomon a looser by denying himself in riches and honor, when
he asked wisdom to govern the commonwealth? 1 King. 3.9.
No, he gained all; did Joseph loose by denying himself in his lust. Genesis
39.20.
Though for the present to lose by it being cast into the prison, yet that was
but a step to his honors. None ever gained by yielding to the flesh: Genesis
49.3.4.
As Ruben by yielding to his lust, his father tells him, Rueben thou art my
might, and the beginning of my strength. Thou shall not be excellent because
thou wentest up to thy fathers bed, thy excellency is gone: He should have had
a Priesthood because he was the first borne, but he lost it, for Levi had it:
he should have had the kingdom but lost it, for Judah had it: He being the
first borne should have had a double portion, but he lost it, for Joseph had
it; thus he was a loser in it, though at first he seemed to gain. Now if these
things be settled in us we shall come easily to deny our selves; now that you may
be persuaded to this, consider two things.

Consider all these creatures, wherein you see Ier. 4.24.
I am the Lord who show mercy, judgment and righteousness, he shows mercy
not the creatures, Therefore we had need to deny our selves in any thing that
is contrary to him. The creatures are but instruments, and you know all
instruments work by some efficacy, which they receive from their efficient
cause, they comfort with borrowed comfort, as the air inlightens with borrowed
light, and the water heats with borrowed heat.

If you get your requests, riches and honors, and pleasures to you, either
they will be snares to you, or crosses to you, we cannot promise our selves
good from them as they come from Gods promise, but only from his mercy. So on
the other side, when we deny our selves, we can have no hurt by them, unless
God bids them hurt us: let the Axe be never so keen, yet it will never do any
thing, except the carpenter takes it in his hand and sets to the work, so the
tongues of men, though they be as sharp as a sword, yet Shimei cannot curse
David till God bids him curse him.

Put case that they will is, had I committed the Kings favor to Gods keeping I
should not have lost it: There is no change here upon earth but there is first
a change in heaven: except there be an eclipse first there, you shall find
none here to help you to deny your selves, labor to act these three graces.


a friend that has done much for him, that has ventured his life for him, if
that friend should come to him, and ask him any thing, if he have any
ingenuity in him, he will say let him have it, for he is worthy of it, so must
we do with Christ. 1 Cor. 1.12
Thus Paul argues this, I says that every one of you says, I am Paul, I am
Apollo, I am Cephas, and I am Christ: is Christ divided? was Paul circumcised
for you, that is, those men are not to be named with Christ, has not he
been crucified for you? is not worthy to be looked after before other men: So
David when he offered a mass of Gold to the building of the temple, out of my
poverty says he I have offered unto thee. Why, because he thought God worthy
of all, and more then he had, therefore he thought himself poor.

Secondly Faith, labor to act that, consider the reasons of those great
denyers of themselves, they did so more then we because they believed more;
what was the reason of Moses self denial; He feared not the fierceness of
the cross, because he saw him which was invisible; that is, he believed the
anger of God was greater then the anger of, Pharaoh. And that the love of God
was greater then the love of Pharaoh, and therefore he had an eye unto the
recompense of reward; Go and sell all that thou have, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven; Christ bids the young man in the Gospel, if he had
believed he would have done it, Matthew. 19.21.
for the Saints they suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves how they have a better and more enduring substance: Heb. 10.34
So Paul they wondered that he had endured so much, but he says therefore we
labor, and are rebuked because we trust in the living God, which is the
Savior of all men, especially of such as believe.

Let a man stir up his love, that will make him move him to deny himself, we
know what is said of love there. 1 Cor. 13.4.5.
Love suffers long, it is bountiful it seeks not her self, it will deny her
self for Christ's sake as Paul did. The love of Christ carried him thorough all
bonds; Act. 21.33.
and afflictions were nothing to him; if a man would labor to increase his
love, the more love the more self denial, and the more knowledge the readier
we are to deny our selves. Lastly, when you come to any particular case
wherein you come to deny your selves, bring arguments, give not over till you
have brought your selves to some conclusion. For this consider these things.

First, put case you deny

Secondly, consider if you

Thirdly if you give way he meets as little as he can, but to stand on his own
bottom.

Paul said, you will not be brought under the power of any thing by denying
your lusts, 1 Cor. 6.12
you gain the greatest freedom that can be.

Ammons cross was in his Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 2 Samuel 18.33.
Absoloms in his kingdom, David in his Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.
strong affections bring strong afflictions.

Last of all consider, if you

FINIS.
GRACE TO THE HVMBLE. The fifth SERMON.
LVK. 9.23. And he said to them all, if any will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross daily and follow me.


A Second doctrine is this, Doct. 2.
that the ways of God are full of crosses and difficulties, for Christ would
not give them a warning to no purpose: he would not tell men that they that
come to him, must take up their cross daily and follow him, unless his ways
were full of difficulties.

Doct. 3.
The third Doctrine is, That notwithstanding this difficulty we must go
thorough the ways of God though they be never so full of difficulty and
crosses.

Reas. 1.
They are full of crosses and that in four respects.

It must needs be so from Gods providence he has ordained so, it is his will
that all those that are members of his son, and have interest in him, should
be made conformable to his son: And he through many tribulations entered
into the kingdom, so should they, and if there were no other reason we should
rest in this: for in many things we have no reason but Gods will: As thou have
hid these from the wise and men of understanding, and have revealed to fools;
Matthew. 11.25, 26.
even so Father for thy good pleasure was such: and partly he does it that
there may be a witness borne to the truth: Now there is a twofold witness.

First, a witness in words which may be done without crosses.

Secondly, a witness in deeds, when with man's blood there is a witness borne
to the truth, and this is called a good witness; Christ's witness is a good
witness, 2 Timothy 6.13.
before Pontius Pilate, for it is better then that which is in word only And
to this end God sends crosses, that he might give witness to the truth. And
again that those that are appointed, might be tried, that those that are good
might be known: As it is said of heresies, there must be heresies even among
you, 1 Cor. 11.19.
that they which are approved among you might be known: So it may be said of
crosses, there must be crosses, that the true members might be distinguished
from the worldlings, the Gold from the Copper.

It must needs be so if John Baptist: It cost him his life; Matthew. 14.10.
we must preach and profess Christ, which will bring trouble, ignominy, and
persecution, as it did Paul, as it did Christ, as it did Daniel, we must keep
the Commandments and walk down right with God, and yet this will breed us
much trouble, this will cause us to be loosers, when others are gainers: it
will cause us to loose many advantages, which we might gain with wicked
consciences.

Luke 2.35.
is come then the thoughts of many hearts shall be opened, that is, to oppose;
for before Christ came they thought no hurt, and so it is with the Saints that
are the Image of Christ, that have the same spirit with Christ, that do the
same things for kind, though not for degree with Christ.

It must needs be so in David, Also to keep them from future sins, that
they might keep the flesh low; for God does with his Saints as Shepherds do
with their sheep, the Shepherd sometimes sends his dog only to bark at his
sheep, if that would do it, but afterward he sends his dog to bite them
too, only to keep them in the right way. So does God with the Saints to keep
the right way, so that if you join all these together, the providence of God,
he will have it so, the nature of the thing, scarce any thing but is hard, the
hatred of the world, and the condition of the Saints, that they are to be kept
in the way, from straying out of it, we shall find that the ways of God are
full of crosses.

I add they are full of take up your cross daily and follow, show they are
full of crosses, so these words, you must deny your self, show they are full
of difficulty. They are full difficulty in these respects.

First, because the Law of God is a pure Law and straight, Reas. 1.
but our natures are corrupt and sold under sin; now when such a nature is to
be brought to such a Law, then there is a difficulty: If the Law were a
leaden rule to be bent to our disposition, then it were not hard, but it is a
strait rule and we must be conformable to it in all things, and therefore it
is difficult.

that you draw out of it will be thick, and taste naughtily, because it was
stirred; so it is with a man's affections, they are ready to be distempered
upon every occasion, and then his speech and all his actions are out of order.

In respect of our nature; difficult: and again they are contrary to corrupt
nature, and where contrariety is there must needs be reluctance, and where
that is, there must needs be grief, and all grief is but a certain
revitency to the will, and where this is there must needs be difficulty.

is a difficult thing, there is much labor to get much wisdom in these
arts, there is much trouble and grief of the flesh: Now Religion is an art
above all, much more harder then all these, and much more difficult.

The variety of employments when he has riches, but when riches do increase
he sets his mind upon them readily: Its hard for him to resist, the world
coming upon him, and though he can do this let pass riches too, yet it may
be in a matter of praise, he can be content to have praise, and seek it where
he should not, and if not so, yet disgrace again and an ill report that is a
hard thing to bear, or again it may be he can bear ill report, yet he has
some thing which he does desire much, and he cannot leave that, some delight
that is connaturall to him, some lust that is dear to him, therefore to keep
a man's heart aright in all must needs be difficult.

And again the paucity

Quest.
whereas the ways of wisdom are pleasure and all her paths prosperity,
Prove. 3.17.
that is, a man takes not a step in the ways to godliness, but there is some
delight in them, there is prosperity that attends upon the ways of godliness*
So again Christ tells them his yoke in as easy yoke, Mat. 11.30
and his burden is a light burden, and the reward of such as fear the Lord is
life, honor and riches.

Answ.
For answer to this the ways of God are pleasant in themselves, and the reason
why we find them not so, is from the distemper of our nature, we find them
so distastefull, because of the badnesse of our nature even as you say of meat
and drink, if any man ask you what, is not the meat sweet, yes, but to a
weak and sick stomach they are most unsavory a sick man cannot endure meat
and drink, and he takes it for the greatest injury you can do him to set them
before him. And dowe not say of light it is most pleasant? as it is indeed,
but if a man have sore eyes, nothing is so unpleasant to him as light: So it is
in the ways of God, they are light they are most pleasant in themselves, but
to those that have sore consciences they are the worst of any things. But are
there none that find this pleasure? yes, there are some that are removed out
of their sickness, those that have a desire to keep the Law of God find this
pleasure and content as the Apostle speaks of wisdom, we speak among you
that are perfect: So we may say of all the ways of God, 1 Cor. 2.6.
though to carnal men, to sick men, to wounded men, to those that have a sore
conscience, they are not pleasant, yet to the perfect they are pleasant, that
is to those that have attained to the highest pitch of a godly life, but those
that are sincere and upright, for so (perfect) is taken in that place.

If the ways of God be so full of difficulty and crosses, Quest.
how can a man undergo them? this is the way to make men afraid of the ways
of God; it is a hard thing for flesh and blood to do all this, and who shall
be religious, and who shall be saved, if all this be true.

For answer to this as Christ said to his Disciples, Answ.
A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven, that is, a man that
sets his heart upon riches, whose heart is not in his own hands should turn
when he would; for to do this to walk in these ways of God, with man it is
impossible while he is left to his own strength, yet it is most possible with
God, but how is it possible? for answer to this, four things there are which
makes it easy.

It is possible if God give

alone, and it does make them of all men most miserable, as the Apostle says,
if we have our reward here we are of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.17.
yet if you put into the other end of the balance, that which we have for
reward, that which. accompanies the pains, they are made sweet. As it is with
the Merchant man, tell him of the danger he must undergo, then it is difficult
for him to undertake, but he considering the gain he shall get by his
travail undertakes it: And so the covetous man greeves to break his ease, but
the gain sweetens all the toil, for we say, Finis dat amabilitatem medijs,
let a man look to the end, and it will sweeten the whole labor: So Physic
though it be bitter, yet considering it procures our health, it is easily
taken of us. Though the ways of God are odious to the flesh, yet if we look
to the crop, the gains, the victory that follows, then we may walk in them
with ease.

then it is hard to be done; but if he have skill and the art, then he does it
with ease, so if God give strength equal to the burden, which he lays on
us, then we do it with ease: if God give new habits, new graces, which
abilitate us and make us to bear the burden.

For a man to part with them as vanity he will despise them; and therefore
the Scripture calls them (...); no man grieves at the flowers which are within
his hand; or for the loss of some counters, or false treasure, or that the
shadow perishes. Now the things of the world are like to these as Saint James
says, Iam. 1.10.
The rich shall vanish away as the flower of the grass, that is, though he be
glorious for a time in the sight of all men, and in his own conceit, yet this
beauty presently perishes, and so a man must reckon of his treasure, but as
some counter or counterfeit treasure, as that place declares. If Luke 16.11
we have not been faithful in the unrighteous Ma^mon, who will trust us in the
true treasure? intimating that the other is but a false treasure, that is, that
it is but Copper, that is, but a counter, it is but a counterfeit thing: So
again the things of this world are but shadows, the best of the wicked are
but as a shadow; now when one comes home to Christ he sends his Spirit into
his heart, to inlighten him, which shows him the vanity of these earthly
things, and then he is willing to part with them.

Now we come to the use of it; Use. 1.
first then learn hence to prepare for crosses make account of them, that is
we must not look for pleasure here, seek for great things here, our great
things are laid up in heaven. Ioh. 16.33.
In the world says Christ ye shall have trouble, that is, here you shall have
crosses, if you will be down right in your profession, and walk in the
straight way of the Gospel; you must resolve to part with those things that are
most pleasant to you, and to undergo those things which are most unpleasant to
you, when you resolve to serve God with a perfect heart, you must make account
to bear whatsoever crosses shall come; and if any better thing come you must
count that as gain; look about and consider what is dear to you and resolve
to leave it: And know that when the knot is tied between God and you and the
band be made, then you are engaged to this; it may be God will not bring you to
it, but you must howsoever prepare for it; shall a soldier go to war and not
make account of enemies? he is no good soldier that resolves not to dye in
battle: shall a Pilote go to Sea and not resolve for a tempest? Aristotle
speaks of a fortitude which comes from ignorance when they see the thing more
difficult, and their strength less then they thought of, they presently
desist; and so we find it with many Christians because they considered not
before of the danger, they leave off the good way that they began to walk in;
many a man goes out of Egypt, leaves the flesh, and resolves to take a new
course but he dies by the way, and never arriveth at heaven, by reason of the
difficulty he meets with never expected, therefore say with your selves
though Summer be now, yet Winter may come, though it be fair to day, yet we
know not but a storm may come before night, prepare therefore for a storm in
a fair day.

We should learn hence not to mistake the ways of God, Use. 2.
for though the ways of God be full of crosses, then certainly that is not
the way to heaven, which most men go; Luke 6.25.
it is not for naught that our Savior says, cursed be you that have your
heaven here, and that laugh here, the meaning of those words is this, as if he
should say, it is impossible to be a true Christian indeed, and enjoy that
carnal pleasure, wealth, and ease that others do, otherwise there were no end
of those words if they might be joined together: The rich men are blamed for
that they lived in pleasure on the earth, ye have lived in pleasure upon the
earth: and in wantonness you have nourished your hearts as in a day of
slaughter, that is, you may look for pleasure in heaven, but if you look for
pleasure here on earth you shall never go to heaven. And if you go to a
place, and if it should be told you that the way is full of danger, of narrow
bridges and styles, full of thieves and sirens, baytes to entice you away, if
you meet with none of all these, you may justly suspect you are put out of
your way; so it is here, for if the way of God be such a way, a way full of
difficulties and full of crosses, and you enjoy pleasure and ease, you may
conclude you are out of the way.

I but this is to such as are indiscreet, Object.
that know not when to speak, and when to hold their peace? but will not
discretion help me? and yet if not that? will not a man's innocence and good
parts help him out?

I answer, none of all those will do it: Answ.
If you look upon David, he was a man of as great wisdom and discretion as
men are usually capeable of, and it is said of him that David behaved himself
wisely, 1 Samuel 18.5.
and was accepted in the sight of all the people, and he was a man of
excellent parts, 1 Samuel 18.5.
an excellent soldier, an excellent musician and he had honor enough too.
David has slain his 10000. and yet for all this, he was subject to the
obloquies of men. And if this example will not serve the turn, then look to
Jesus Christ, in him there was no want of wisdom, in him there was no want of
goodness, and yet he was thus opposed: therefore you must be so far from
thinking your selves freed from troubles, and crosses by your discretion,
innocence and good parts, that you must be resolved on the contrary, that the
more you have of these, the more you are liable to the cross, and there is
good reason for it, for if the object be greater the more the faculty is
exercised above it. Now goodness and holiness is the object of the worlds
hatred, the more of this goodness and holiness you have, the more the world
hates you: And the more you grow in grace, the more opposition you will have.
The world loves her own, therefore in what measure a man is not the worlds, in
that measure the world hates him: and therefore take heed of mistaking the
ways of God; and you have more reason to look to it now at the receiving of
the Sacrament: for if you be in this way, many think if they sin and ask
God forgiveness they may come to the Sacrament; but that is not enough; you
must remember that whosoever takes Christ as a Savior, must take him as a Lord
too: you find these two words joined together, the Lord our Savior; and what
God has joined let no man separate; that is, he that will have Christ as a
Savior, Matthew. 10.5.
must have him as a Lord too: many will serve Christ as retainers do; they
will attend on their Master on Sabbath days, and Holy Days, and wear their
Liveries, but will not do any other service all the week, so we would take
Christ for our Savior, to have the use and benefit of him, but we are not
willing to serve him, we are loath to take him as an husband, for better for
worse to subject our wills to his: some come to the feast without their wedding
garments of their conjugall love. There are two things in that wedding garment.
First, she that 1 Cor. 16.22.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be an Anathema, Maran-atha;
we must love him indeed down right, we must love him in good earnest; as a
chaste wife loves her hu^band; we must not part with him; where there is error
personae there is no marriage: so many men marry themselves to an imaginary
Christ, they mistake Christ, and therefore the marriage hold not; except your
righteosnesse, that is, you that are in Christ, and are justified by him,
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees you cannot be saved. There must be Paul's disposition in us, Lord
what will thou that I do? what should I suffer for thee.

Use 3.
Hence we learn not to be discouraged from any exercise, for any cross that
follows it, or difficulty that is in it, because these are necessary
companions of doing good, they will not be separated: for it may be many a man
has a good meaning; he would do such and such a thing, but he shall loose
such and such an advantage, he shall suffer such and such a disgrace; but this
you must not do, for these are knit together; duties, crosses, and
difficulties: we find it in the Scriptures said of good Kings, that they
turned not to the right hand nor to the left, that is, a man must walk in a
straight course, he shall meet with Lions, and with storms, but he must not
bawke them, but he must grapple with the Lion, if he withdraws himself, as
the Apostle speaks in the name of God, Heb. 10.29
my soul shall have no pleasure in him; simple doing is not worth the doing,
but the cross has the blessing. Again to what end have we grace and the
Spirit, but to raise us up to higher degrees of parts, we hear of men that
shall seek out adventures: Soldiers are glad when they have occasions who
shall scale the walls, who shall first set upon the breach. For ought I see
Luther was so far from fearing disgrace, as that he rejoiced in it, and the
Apostle not to be excepted against; thus Saint Paul counted it a great grace,
and counted the Philippians happy that they had occasion to exercise this
grace. Let us not draw our selves into difficult matters, for Christ knows our
work, and our opportunity. And you know this you shall be punished, as well
for omission as for commission; for sinful silence, as well as for corrupt
talk. There is a prize in the hand of a fool and he knows not how to use it;
for every opportunity to do good is as a particular talent, as a prize for the
use of which we must be countable: such as fought not the Lords battles were
accursed as well as such as fought amiss, and the fearful and unbeleeving
are shut out from heaven: And remember this, that barren trees shall be cut
down as well as thorns and briars, Reve. 21.8.
for the Text says, they keep the ground idle: Many a man set in a great
place does nothing, but another in his place having his opportunity would have
done much, why hinders he the good. It was the Prophets complaint, no man is
bold for the truth. Many have good opportunities, but no courage. As we say of
Hearts they have great horns, but they do nothing, quia deest annimus,
because they want courage. And remember when you have taken such a person as
Christ upon you, you must do the things beseeming such a great person. Thus a
man should be ready to say as Saint Paul says: It is better for me to dye,
then to hinder the Gospel of Christ any way. The keeping of a good conscience
is our treasure, the best flower in our garden, we had better loose all then
this: let a man so reckon of it, let a man consider what is every man that is a
Christian, he is a pearl among common stones; his works and actions must not
be the same with theirs. As we say a mud wall might be made of any thing, of
any rubbish, but if a man will make a palace he must take the best and finest
stones; so to make a temple for the holy Ghost, there must be holy affections,
a new frame and temperature, your words must be changed with your behavior,
if you be of Christ you must set upon greater things, then others do.

Object.
But it will be objected, I shall do no good by doing of this; if I should do
any good by it, I would willingly do it.

Answ.
But to this I answer that it is nothing howsoever; whether you do good by it
or no, you must do it, for it is your dear friend, and besides witness must
be borne to the truth: which you may do, though you attain not to your end;
and again consider though you do me no good, yet you have your reward; as
the Physi^ian loses not his reward though the patient dye. The Lawyer is not
deprived of his fee, however the case go. So let a man endeavor and though
the success answer not his intent, yet he has reward.

But you will say the times are so evil, Object.
that it is not to no end to go about such a thing now.

Answ.
But this must be quite otherwise, for in coldest weather the fire is hottest;
now in such a time God has need of some to stand for him. The more evil the
times are the more courageous you should show your selves in Gods causes.
Object.
I but I am alone. Answ.
So was Luther, when he began he was alone, and Elias he was alone, and though
you be alone, you know not what good you may do, you ^e on^ cole kindles
another, and that another, and you know not how far it may go. And again
consider the Prophet complains of these, there Ezekiel. 22.30.
is not any that could (...) most pitch you can, for if you do otherwise, your
labor will be to short for the work.

If Religion be so cross and opposite to our nature, Use 5.
learn hence to humble our selves; if Religion be good, then the contrary to
it must needs be bad, which is our nature, we must not run out as a man's
heart would do, to say they are straight Laws, Laws made with blood, and God
is a hard God, a hard Master, but learn on the other side to return to our
selves, and say, what natures have we, that we cannot walk in the ways of
God, without this difficulty, say with Saint Paul, the Law is spiritual, but
I am carnal and sold under sin; we must humble our selves, and not exalt our
selves as many do, and say we are but flesh and blood, we do as much as we
can, our mind and intention is good: but we must humble our selves, when you
find Religion opposite to you, and you opposite to Religion and God, think
that out of this contrariety must needs come Gods hatred, look to his pure
nature, and your impure affections, and sure they must needs breed an
Antypathie between him and us; therefore we cannot but be loathsome to God,
and he must needs hate us; now we should confirm our judgments to God, and
loathe, hate, and abhor our selves, for the evil disposition that is in us,
and every time that you come to an holy duty, as to pray, and you find
backwardness in your selves, when you come to speak profitably, and you find
a contrariety in you, when you come to hear the word, and you find a
lumpishnesse in your hearts, this should humble you, this should open as it
goes a new crevice of light to you, which makes us to see our misery, and long
after Christ and prize him: we should humble our selves that God may lift us
up; for God gives grace to the humble, this advantage we may get by the sight
of our own vileness.

Use 6.
Hence we may learn to justify the truth of our Religion; if it had been the
device of Politicians they would have had one of these two ends, either to
please themselves, or else to get a multitude of followers; so to make
something of themselves: but you shall find Religion to have in it that which
is contrary to a man's desire; it crosses his will, it crosses his opinion, it
crosses his affections and intentions; and takes his ends, his profit his
credit, and his pleasure. And besides, there is nothing in it to draw our
nature after it, but it is contrary to it. Take them that are fishers and
fowlers, they always use baits that are agreeable to the Fish, and the Foul.
This is not the way that Christ has taken. In his Word there is nothing to
draw our nature, but quite opposite to it: we must deny our selves, we must
be ready to part with all, and become other men, and we shall mee^e with
crosses every day and he that follows Christ must look for them: This
purity in the whole book of God contrary to man, and these infinite crosses
here foretold may help us to make an argument to confirm us in the present
truth.

Doct. 4.
The last Doctrine that these words afford us is this, that all that are Christ's
Disciples must follow him, that is, although this be required that you must
deny your selves, and take up your cross, though difficulty hang upon
Religion, yet you must go through all: All that are Christians, all that will
have any benefit by Christ, must tread in his steps, must be made like Christ.
Romans 8.29.
God has predestined them which he knew to be conformed to the image of
his Son, that he might be the first borne among many brethren; that is, God
will have all his Sons of one fashion; as parents will put their children in
one fashion, masters their servants in one livery, so God will have you like
his eldest Son, he will have no iniquality: Indeed there is inequality for
degrees, but God will have an equality for fashion, he will have a perfection
for parts, though not for degrees that he may be the first borne among many
brethren; that is, every man that will be saved, must look what Christ did,
that must he do. As Gideon said to his Soldiers, Judge. 8.17.
look what ye see me do, do ye likewise: for I am your guide and captain
whom you must follow, when you see me blow the trumpets, and when ye see me
break the pitchers do you so. So when Abimelech cut down bows, Judge. 9.48.
all his people did do the like, so says Christ, whatsoever you see me do
that do ye, for he is our Captain, he is our Prince, he is the General of
the Army, and all that will be victors must be obedient unto him, as
Soldiers are unto their General, which is the strictest obedience that is,
they must keep their watch and stations, oppose all dangers, fight when he
will have them, turn this or that way as he commands, and every relation that
replies, following is found in him; he is the guide, the guide of our feet,
our Lord, our Master, our Captain, our Father, our Husband. He says this to
all his Disciples follow me; that is, as if he should say, there are two
sorts of men in the world, some straggling people, as sheep without Shepherds:
Malantes milites, as Soldiers without a Captain, Masterlesse servants, as
wandering beggars, of which not only our high ways, but also our cities and
streets are full; that is, they are idle persons that make a conscience of
nothing, that swear, that break the Lords day: They are privileged persons,
they may do what they will, I have nothing to do with them. But there are
another sort of men, that have given up their names to Christ to be his
servants, such as you are must follow me, you have a rule to go by, that is
Christ.

Quest.
But is Christ our rule? the Law is our rule; have we two rules?

Answ.
It is true the Law is our rule? but Christ is the rule of that rule: Christ and
that Law differ, as Christ and the example, as in our Grammar and Logic, you
have the rule and the example: So it is here, the Law is the rule, and Christ
is the example.

But Christ is an high example, he is to high for us, Object.
we can never attain to him, and take away the hope and take away the the
endeavor; Toll spem and toll conatum.

To this I answer, Answ.
that though it be so that we shall never attain to him, yet it is best that
there should be an high example; for the best copy is the best help: And so
those that learn to write, we set the best copy to them that begin to write,
and there is reason for it; because a man cannot hit the mark, therefore shall
I set him a wrong mark: so because a man could not do according to the rule,
therefore shall I set him a false rule? And again it is necessary that we
should have him for an example, though he be so high that we may be still on
progress, go on further still in godliness, and it is not expected that we
should do all at the present, but that we should be still mending and turn to
the right rule, and last of all it is needful you should have such an example
set you, that you may be kept humble, it will show us our defects when we
compare our selves with our selves, or other men we think somewhat of our
selves: But when we compare our selves with Christ, then we are humbled, as
Peter when he once saw him in his purity, and his majesty that confounded him,
Lord I am a sinful man, I am not worthy that thou should come to me.

But you will object it is ^^ue indeed; Object.
if Christ had ^ived among us as among ^he Apostles, if he would ^ead us by
his hand, but he is taken from us and how should we do?

But to answer to this, Answ.
know that though he be gone, he has left his Spirit and that Spirit is put
into your hearts, and that Spirit will guide you, that is, it will be as a
monitour behind your backs to tell you this is the way, walk in it, when we
are straggling out of it, it lusts against the flesh: this Spirit all those
that are in Christ have, because you are sons God has sent the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts: Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.9.
If any man has not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his: that is, every
man that comes to him, though he be taken from him, yet he sends his Spirit
into his heart, and tells him the way, the Spirit shall lea^ you into all
truth. Though in special it led the Apostles, yet in fundamental points it
shall lead them all that are the servants of Christ.

Object.
But this is an uncertain rule, I may be deceived in it; I may take the
suggestion of the Devil for the evidence of the Spirit.

But to try you have the word for a rule, Answ.
the Spirit dictates nothing but agreeing to the word; if it agree with the
word it is from the Spirit.

But yet you will say the words of the Spirit are but remote guides, Object.
they are but intellectual things: Therefore there are more sensible guides,
Answ.
the lives of the Saints which are written for our instruction; and we have
many living Saints, the present Saints that live among these are helps to you,
these are companions in your ways these are good lights to follow: God has
not left himself destitute, but he has Saints in every nation, where the
Gospel is preached: But this caution you must take, that the Saints may err
from the way and straggle a little from it Therefore you must follow them as
that you must fix your eyes upon Christ, because he only is the Author and
finisher of your faith, that is, as he began the doctrine of faith, and taught
us the rules of it, so he has consummated it, and left us examples to follow:
it is not so with men, for that rule is most true. Non est ejusdem and inv^nire
and preficere artem. Take the most learned man though he found out an art, yet
he never finished it, yet Christ has done this: Therefore look to him; though
there be a cloud of witnesses as a cloud went before the Egyptians, yet Christ
is the surest guide: But further to explain this I will show you two things.

First, what it is to follow?

Secondly, whom you

First what it is to follow, A description of following.
To follow Christ is nothing but to resolve, to do and suffer willingly, and
withal our heart what he commands, etc. There are four difficult things put
together in this description, which are to be handled severally.

I say to follow Christ, is nothing but to resolve, that is, when you come to
Christ once, you must have a mind to go which way soever he will lead you:
we must not reason with flesh and blood, but be obedient to him, not knowing
whether we go, as a man that goes into a strange county, he puts himself
into another man's hands, saying I will follow thee; be the ways what they
will he is resolved to go through rough and plain, thick and thin,
whether his place be dangerous or safe, hard or easy, such a resolution must
they have that follow Christ, there must be no mincing, no excepted place, I
will follow thee but not in this path, but not in this place, as the Apostle
speaks you have obeyed from the heart to the whole form of doctrine
whereunto you have been delivered; Romans 6.17.
that is, there is a whole form of doctrine, every jot of this must be obeyed,
Christ has delivered you to obey it, that is, to this end Christ has redeemed
you from hell and death, that you may obey the whole passage of it; not pick
and choose, but whatsoever he does command we must resolve to obey, whatsoever
way he lead to follow him, may be he will lead through poverty and infamy,
and disgrace, and hatred of all men, and imprisonment. Therefore I say we must
resolve to do and suffer, for indeed suffering is but a higher degree of
doing, as the Philosopher well said, bare suffering is not laudable, but so
far as a man acts in his suffering, that is, some actions there are that
require but simple obedience, but in some actions you must suffer if you will
do them, the good ground brings forth fru^te with patience, that is, many
duties have crosses joined with them, with patient bearing they bring forth
fruit. Heb. 12.1.
Run with patience the race that is set before you; Romans 2.7.
so we render it continuance, the original is by patience in well doing. So
God sent Annanias to tell Paul, Act. 9.16.
what he must suffer at Damascus, I will show how many things he must suffer
for my names sake. So it is with every one that is called home to Christ. There
are certain things that he must do and suffer, that he must resolve to do
and suffer. Secondly he must resolve to do and suffer willingly and with all
his heart: There is a kind of following which proceeds from a natural
inclination, as the leaf the bow, the Iron, the loadstone, they can do no
otherwise: thus must you follow Christ.

But you will say have we flesh in us which is backward and untoward, and
therefore we cannot follow Christ so willingly. But as we say a Bear
follows to the stake obtorto collo, against his will, and this is found in the
Saints as it is said of Peter, when thou art old another shall stretch forth
thine hand, Ioh. 21.18.
and another shall gird thee, and lead thee whether thou would not. Christ
tells him there of his death, and that he should lead him whether he would
not, now Peter was a Martyr, and we cannot think but that he dyed and
suffered Martyrdom willingly: Answ.
but yet he should be led whether he would not, that is, whether his flesh
would not: it is true the flesh cannot thus willingly follow Christ: therefore
you must if you would follow Christ aright, find something in you, that you
should follow Christ, with propensivenesse and willingly: to express this I
have added these other words, with all your heart, we find expressed in the
old Testament by three phrases, love the Lord with all your mind, with all
your heart, and with all Aristotle and Ramus: So some are said to follow Paul,
some Apollos, but we must follow Christ: thus we must follow his opinions his
tenants, keep close to his word, that is, we should consider what Christ
said, what the Scripture says, for otherwise it is no faith, for is fides
fundatur in ore Dei; we must not take things on trust, we must not receive
such a truth, because such a writer set it down; but we must see what warrant
it has in the word of God, otherwise we are not rooted in the faith, we are to
have an estimation of orthodoxall fathers, but we are to fix our eyes on
Christ. As for example the doctrine of justification, this you may learn out
of writings, but you must see what footing it has in the Scriptures, or else
when our strong adversaries set upon us we shall quickly be convinced: And
again you must do it that when you preach the Word of God, you may have more
authority: when one creature has to deal with another it has no authority,
but when God has to deal with the creature, he does much prevail.

we see of him in his servants, that is, we must so imitate them as that our
imitation may be referred to Christ, when we see the image of Christ in them,
we must take heed that we adhere not to the creature, but say it is a spark
and glympse of Christ; I will follow him: But above all take heed of the
contrary, when we see something of Christ rising in their conversation, that
we do not despise and contemn him: It is the world that hates the godly. We
are to follow him with we take in hand, we must follow him, when a man
follows another man's counsel, he will follow that and nothing but that, as
courtiers follow the King, when any one ask us a thing we must pause upon it,
to see whether it be Gods will or not: As it is said of David, I have a man
after mine own heart, etc. on this manner we should follow Christ; we must
follow him at all times, for there are uncertain times, when it is easy to
follow Christ; but there are some difficult when you are put to an exigent,
when there is some difficulty in following Christ, now you must not pick and
choose, but you must take him for better and worse, there are some brunts as we
may see, shun not them. If Daniel might have spared himself, in such a brunt
as this, he might have spared himself in all, but we see it might not do it:
If Mordicai could have bowed to the Kings favorite which doubtless he could
not do, then he he need not have procured that displeasure. Moses might have
enjoyed Pharaohs pleasure, if in some particulars he might have granted to
him, but he might not: we must not do as many servants do with their masters,
run from them when harvest comes in, when labor begins; for if we do we may
fear Christ will say to us, as such masters say to such servants. If you will
stay from me when I most need you, I will not keep you all the year besides
when I have no need of you, and therefore take heed of it. If a man out of
fearfulness in such times shall not follow Christ, he shall receive no
reward. A soldier when the battle comes flees from his colors, but he can
be content to take his wages and lie in quietness and peace: take heed of
forsaking Christ when the battle comes, that is, when there comes something
dangerous to the flesh: you must resolve to follow Christ thus. Christ tells
you that if you follow him, that he has no houses, no lodging, no earthly
content, neither must you look for any, your will and advantage must be
spiritual. In the world you shall have trouble: He deals with man in this
case as Naomi dealt with Ruth; Ruth 1.
we see how she dealt with her, she bids her go to return again, and
tells her she was too old to bear children, etc. and then she sets upon her
again; Behold thy sister is gone back, and will thou go alone? At length
Ruth gives her this answer, that nothing but death should part, I will go,
etc. and there she rests: After this manner Christ deals with us, when men
come to follow him, he tells them they must look for no Riches, as to the
young man in the Gospel, go and sell all that thou have and then come to me,
you must look for no ease. The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his head, you must
look for many crosses; but if he meet with such a one that says, naught but
death shall part thee and me, such an one Christ receives, such an one God
accepts. So that it is as it was with the Israelites, if any one were faint
hearted, he should not go up to battle, for they would do no good, and then
also they weakened others: So we say to all men we tell you now what it is to
follow Christ, you must go to war with him, and we tell you, if you be faint
hearted, you must not come under the banner, if you will not follow Christ
through the love and hatred of all men, through poverty and riches, you will
do no good, but discourage others.

We must follow Christ and there is difficulty Paul, that is, I do not only
do the outward work, but I serve him with my Spirit, it is a hard thing to
do so, it were nothing, if we were only to do the outward work, but we
must do it with our spirits, that is, when your conscience shall tell you
within you, such a duty you must not omit, such vain glory you must not seek,
such pleasure you must part with: then so to do that duty is to follow Christ
inwardly; to approve all the inward affections of your hearts to God, who
searches the inmost windings of the Spirit, that is difficult, many might go
well away were it not for the inward lust.

You must do it outwardly, that is, you must profess his name, and that you
must do before a wicked and adulterous generation, when there is difficulty,
shame and disgrace, then we must follow Christ: so this was the occasion of
these words, If you will venture to follow me, know this, that I must suffer
many things at Jerusalem; therefore deny your selves and take up your cross
daily and follow me. Many a man will follow Christ, but he will follow him a
far off, he will follow him without his livery, that men should not know whose
servant he is, but he that will follow Christ must follow his colors before
all men openly: he that will be ashamed of me, says Christ, I will be
ashamed of him before my father which is in heaven; we are fallen into such
times as it is easier to follow Christ inwardly then outwardly, when men are
ashamed to make show of so much as is within them, whereas heretofore times
were such as men should make a show of more then he had. So we see what it is
to follow Christ, consisting in these four things. First, to do whatsoever he

The second thing is what is to be followed, and that is Christ, that is, to
follow his example, and to follow his p^ecep^s, but this in the general is to
little purpose, therefore I will pick some special examples, and some
special precepts wherein we are to follow Christ, therefore you shall find
these things in Christ example.

First, he was abundant in love which he showed many ways, he showed it by
giving a life for us, no greater love then to give himself for us, when we
were his enemies, when there was no worth nor goodness in us, he shed his
blood for us. Romans 5.
So it was showed partly in his aptness to giving. Acts 20.35
Paul relates this as a love saying of our Savior: It is better to give then
to receive. And what he said no doubt he preached: again another fruit of his
love was to forgive, no disgrace no contumely so great, but he easily passed
it by: So in the greatest despite of all his crucifying he easily forgave them
that crucified him. And another thing wherein his greatest love was seen, was
his great compassion, his bowels rolled in him. He was compassionate both to
men's souls and bodies: So on other bodies, Matthew. 9.36.
he took compassion on them as sheep having no shepherd: So when he saw the
people fainting after they had followed three days, Mark 6.38
he had compassion on their bodies; he wrought a miracle to help them, Col.
3.12, 13.
he fed five thousand with five loaves and two fishes* And this is that that is
commended to us in Christ, Put on therefore as the elect of God, holy and
beloved bowels, etc. And so I say to you labor to abound in love, in love to
God, and in love to one another, be ready to do any kindness, and forgive
any unkindnesse, let your bowels melt over other men's miseries, have a tender
compassion for other men's sins especially in ministers labor to have a love to
all mankind, for it is love that edifies, knowledge that puffs up, and it is
that which Saint John moves us unto in his Epistles; love one another, yea
transgressions and any offenses we must forgive them even as Christ forgave us
our sins; If there be any infirmities we must pass by them as Christ passed
by ours, that is, your failings toward Christ are ten times more then men's
failings toward you, he forgave you, therefore do you forgive them, and this
love must be renewed at the Sacrament, etc.

He was one that sought no praise of men, no applause, it; so should we
despise the shame, mark the word despised the shame, endured the Cross,
because that was a heavy burden, and he endured the shame. There will still be
Ishmaels that will mock the Isaacks of God, false nicknames and approbrious
speeches will be cast on such as make profession of Religion: But despise the
shame, alas shame is but a chip of the Cross; Object.
but why did Christ despise it? he had an eye to the recompense of reward,
that is, when a man beholds God, and looks upon heaven having such great
things in his eyes, he cares not what men say, and if you despise you w^ll
despise credit as Christ did, as that deed of his shows more pl^inely. Luke
23.8.11.
Herod desires to see him, Pilate sent him to him, and so expected some miracle
of him but Christ would do no miracle, so that Herod his men of war despised
him: Now here a man is more put to it, when men expect something from him, when
he is engaged for his credit to do something then to despise this, and omit
this opportunity is a great thing. He was despised of Herod, and of his men of
war, he despised obloquies and the reproach of men, and also praise of men;
for it was but an empty thing; but let the praise of God be great in your eyes.

when he had sent forth his Disciples, when they brought in poor fellows he
thanked God for it; of which there could be no other reason rendered but his
Fathers will.

FINIS.

