THE LAW OVT LAVVED OR, The Charter of the Gospel showing the privilege and
prerogative of the Saints by virtue of the Covenant.

Wherein these four points of doctrine are properly observed, Plainly proved,
both by Scripture and reason: and pithily applied. VIZ:

Doctrine
1 That he that is in the state of grace lies in no known sin, no sin
has dominion over him. 2 That sin though it does not reign in the Saints,
yet it does remain and dwell in them. 3 That the way to overcome sin, is to
get assurance of the Love, and grace, and favor of God, whereby it is forgiven
them. 4 That whosoever is under the Law, sin has dominion over him.
By that late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ. JOHN PRESTON.

Doctor in divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel
College in Cambridge, and sometimes preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that you should obey
the lusts thereof,

Romans 6. 12. EDINBVRGH Printed by John Wreittoun. 1633.

Romans. 6. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not
under the law, but under grace.
THese words are brought in thus, the Apostle exhortes them not to sin, but
to give their members as instruments unto righteousness, and to move them to
this, he tells them that sin was not their Lord now as it was heretofore, and
that it shall have no more dominion over them, and therefore he bids them
strive against it: and then he adds a reason of this, because they were not
under the law, but under grace, now Christ has changed their hearts, for while
a man is under the Law, sin has dominion over him, it tells him what to do,
but gives him no power to do it, but you have the grace of sanctification to
change your hearts, and enable you to every good word and work, so that you
delight in the Law, after the inner man, albeit you see another law in your
members roaring against the Law in your mind, and bringing you into captivity
to the law of sin, which is your members, as it is said, in the 7. chapter, and
the 23. verse.

Whence we may learn?

That he that is in the state of grace, lies in no known sin, no sin
has dominion over him.

Now sin is said to have no Dominion over a man, three manner of ways, viz.
in regard

Q It has no right to rule over him, it is no more our Lord, but is as a
servant that has no dominion, but is said to offer violence to us, as if the
King of Spain should rule over us, he has no dominion over us.

Secondly, In regard its not obeyed, for there it has dominion, as a Prince
may have right to a kingdom, yet he be not obeyed, he has no dominion.

Thirdly in regard though it strive against us, yet it never gets the victory,
for though it a^ us, yet if it g^t not the victory it has no dominion over us,
this is proved by their similitudes which must be explained. viz.

First it was our Master and we its servants, but n^w we have changed our
Masters, and are become the servants of righteousness.

Secondly it is said that we were married to sin, and it had dominion

Thirdly it is said we were dead to sin and alive to God, and therefore

Quest. Now the reasons of the point be these* the is taken from Christ, all
we are ingrafted into Christ, and

Again whosoever is in Christ has received of his fullnes grace for grace, in
him we are able to do all things, and therefore if we cannot strive against
old sins, we are not in Christ, and therefore we must strive to be
complete.

Secondly because we have the Spirit of God ruling in us, and therefore

Thirdly, he is borne of God, now ^ee that is borne of God sins not* that
is, it rules not over him, for a man is said to sin that favors wickedness,
and sets his heart to sin, he sins not, because he is like God, as a
son is like his father, and therefore a wicked man is like the devil,
because he is his Father, and his wickedness is in him, and therefore the
devil is called the ^ather of the wicked: and so every regenerat man has all
the righteousness of Christ, though not in the same degree, he has perfective
holiness of parts, though not of degrees, now then he has no member of Satan in
him, that is, no known sin which he loves.

Fourthly, because he has the whole law written in his heart, and

Fifthly because he is wholly changed and translated to another man

Quest The whole drift of his mind is changed, as suppose the earth were made
fire, the whole vent of it were to go upward, so a man is wholly bent toward
heaven, or else his heart is not changed, and if so, he can lie in no known
sin.

Sixthly, he is changed in his taste, S. Paul says they that are in Christ

Seventhly, Because they know God, Ier. 33. The Lord says by his

Eighthly, because he has faith, which will make us not lie in any known
sin, for all sins are either of the temptation of the devil, the flesh, or
the world, now faith overcomes all these,

1 It overcommeth the world; This is the victory that overcomes the world,
even your says, but if the world could overcome the regenerate in any
temptation, then this were not true, that faith overcommeth the world, but he
shall not be overcome, by the glory and riches of the world.

Secondly, the flesh, the just walks in his integrity, to this added that
blessings are every where annexed to the keeping of the commandments, blessed
are they that have respect unto the com^ments, if you lean to the right ^a^d,
or to the left y^^ s(...)sured, again if you keep the whole law and off(...)
are guilty of the whole law.

But, besides these scriptures there be other reasons to prove that the
regenerat man cannot lie in any known sin,

First, because he that lies in any known sin: has another for his

Secondly because he lies in any known sin, will be unconstan^

Thirdly, because he that lies in any known sin, will if he had

Fourthly because if a man have a good hear^, no sin can grow there* because it
is out of its proper place, and therefore cannot prosper as plants that grow in
India if they be ^^tt here wither, so every sin i^ a good heart is out of
its proper place and will not grow but wither every day more and more, but he
that finds sin growing in his heart, his heart is not regenerat.

Fifthly because he m^st hate the word of God and g^dly men* for John is Her^ds
friend a great while, till ^^ tells him of his beloved si^, and then ^^f goes
head, so they hate God and wish that ^^^re were none, because he resolves to
sin, and God reproves him* and so h^^ cannot ^ee in a good estate:

Sixthly and lastly, because all his actions will have an evil tincture
affects such persons that may further that his intent so that ^^rr^ caveneth
every action of his, and whenever any act of religion opposes him, he then
forsakes all, as if a man have a project to get a harvest that is not yet
come, all that he does is for that end* he ploweth, sows, and the like, so
it is with a man that has a sin and resolves ^o f^llow it, he by-useth all
his actions by that, therefore God abhorres him: and all that he does.

First this is to try us, every man may know if he be in the state o^

But there were many which seemed religious men which had these

True, and many therefore not truly regenerated but seeming only

Now the signs whereby we may know, whether we^ live in known sins or not,
are these,

Quest. Living in a known sin is of two sorts, first known, when me^ ^ell
themselves to commit wickedness before the Lord as Ahab did, when he pours out
himself to vanity, as when a man shall give up himself to drink or to
company, or to commit any sin of uncleannes, or gives himself to spend any of
his time in recreations, this is evident to the world and to his own
conscience. Again when he plainly forsakes God and good courses which he
took before, as Demas did, this is plain, he lies in a known sin.

Secondly the secret lying in sin, the signs whereof are these.

Quest When a man commits it ordinarily, this is that Paul says that the
saints fall upon occasions, as if a man be sailing into France, a tempest
drives him into Spain, so the Saints face is toward heaven but a sudden
passion may drive them another way: to commit sin ordinarily, is to commit it
when temptation assaileth, and occasion is offered, and impediments removed,
then he commits the sin ordinarily, for if there were such temptations
always, he would commit the sin always, as Pharaoh was good by fits, he was
often restored, and desired them to pray for him, yet when temptation came he
would not let the people go, though before he had intended to do it. So Saul
when opportunity was offered, would have killed David, though he swore not to
do it, and so Hazael, this is committing of sins ordinarily. Kings ^. 12


Secondly, When a man rejects admonitions, and the reprover, a poor Child is
better* then a foolish (that is a rich) King that will no longer be
admonished, for then his heart is evil, for if a man be willing to have his
lust mortified, he is well pleased with him that brings him a knife to cut it
off, because he does as he would have him to do but when they are purposed to
ly in sin, they do as a man does with Physic that he loatheth, he hates
even the very pot it self, wherein it was, so they hate them that admonish
them even as dogs, but if they can endure the company of good men it is a sign
his heart is good.

Thirdly Abstinence from occasions, for many say their infirmities make them
run into such and such sins, but if they were minded to leave their sins,
they may leave their evil company and all occasions* to this add the use of
the means, for he that purposes to fors^ke his sins will use the means,
as if a man that is a drunkard, will keep drunkards company, he has purposed
to forsake his sins, for then he would forsake and leave his evil company,
but if he use the mea^es for mortyfying his sinne^, he loves, then it is a
sig^e, he is willing to leave sin.

Now the means for mortifying sinful lusts in us, are these. Viz.

First to make a vow not to commit that sin, nor touch the occasions, for
then it is a sign his heart is sincere, this is a comfort to these that have
made vows, which should be more used, not to make perpetual vows, but for
some short time.

Secondly to fast, and pray, for some Vows lusts are not cast out by these
three, to use godly means company, for their practice and example helps them
to forsake their sins, to fast and pray.

Thirdly another sign of lying in known sin, is when a man prays for
admonitions that God would stir up some to admonish him, and can be content
to search out reasons out of the Scripture against it, and is glad when he
hears it reproved in the public ministry.

Fourthly, when he can be content to be deprived of many things which might
further our lusts, and to loath what sweetness which might increase them, that
is a sure sign that sin rules not in us.

Fifthly when a man con^esseth his sins particularly, and plainly* for this
is a sign he would forsake them, this reason the Scripture does show, because
then the conscience makes such a noise, that he cannot deny it, for when a
man is purposed to continue in sin, he will not confess his sins, no not
to GOD, it is said when they came to Math, 3, ^ Psalm, 23, ^
John Baptist, they con^essed their sins. So David says, when I said I will
confess my sin, the Lord forgiveth the wickedness of my sin.

Sixthly, When he is easily convicted, but when men will not be convicted but
seek out distinctions to maintain their sin, it is a sign it is prevalent
in them. Again when they will not examine both sides, but run to commit it,
and stop their ears like the dea^e adder, which refuses to hear the voice of
the Charmer, charm he never so wisely, and will not hear the reasons against
that sin, least he should be restrained, therefore the righteous are said to
ponder their ways, and consider their paths, and to try every thing, and to
take that which is good, now he that will but hear reasons against the sin he
does, he is none of these, but when he will not be convinced, which is the
first work of the spirit, it is a sign he is under the dominion of sin.

Seventhly, when a man abstaineth from sin not only out of a natu^^ll
conscience, but of a spiritual, for a natural conscience may deceave him, for
there be three degrees of conscience.

Yet are natural,
First, a prophaine man has some conscience, Secondly a civil man has more
conscience, Thirdly a godly man has most conscience
Paul speaks of the heathen, that they had a conscience that did accuse
excuse them, but when a man does not commit sin, being enlightened by a
spiritual conscience, which is when a man has a love to the contrary grace,
and is carried with a certain desire to do it (as men ^ate) though there were
no reward, and hate the sin and will not commit it, but a man may have a
restraint from a natural conscience, yet it may have dominion over him,
because it is as a barking dog, that keeps the thee^e robbing.

When a man
First does not purpose to commit the sin, Secondly has reluctance in the
committing of it* Thirdly grieveth afterward, and rises with a bette^
resolution not to do it.
But if this proceeded from a natural conscience it is nothing, but if it
proceed from a spiritual conscience and ha^red of sin, this is a good sign.

Nintly, when after striving we have the victory, for we shall have the victory
if we strive aright, this taks way their excuse, that say its their
infirmities, but if they lie not in sin, they will have the victory over it, else
thou art not a King, for a King is victorious, yet a King may have rebels, yea
he may be wounded yet he keeps his power. So the saints may have many
infirmities, yea they may have sound fails, yet in the end they have the
victory. God shall tread Satan under their feere wherefore the Godly man's heart
though he fails sometimes is like a troubled fountain, which though it be
muddy, yet because their is a spring of grace in his heart, it works it self
pure again, and works out all the mud, therefore content not your selves with
dislike of sin but leave not till you have got the victory.

Tenthly, Observe whether thou delightest in those, commit the same sins, if
you do you ly in sin whatsoever you pretend, they do not only (...) ^ last,
these things, but have pleasure in those do them which is a sign of a
desperate heart, for a man may be drawn to sin by passion, yet his heart may
be upright, but when he allows, and loves it another, then there is no
passion to lead him, but its a sign his heart is bent to it, for its a sign
of grace, when you love those excel in grace, its a sign your hearts are
good, so on the contrary its a sign of a corrupt and rotten heart, when we
rejoice in iniquity, as for example, suppose a man have a lust of uncleannes*
yet disliketh it on another, and likes these that excel in the contrary
virtue, and grace, its a sign he is in a good estate, and this is true,
because in another a man has no passion to lead him away.

Eleventhly, when a man shall commit a sin, clean to the contrary after
persuasion, and long deliberation, that i^ taken from Jeroboam example Saul and
Ahab, these committed their sins but once or twice as Saul had a commandment
from Samuel not to do it, he had many days d^liberation upon it, yet he did
which lost him his soul. David committed greater sins, yet God counted them
nothing, because he did not cast God away but Saul had cast off, so Jeroboam
s^t up the calfe on deliberation and contrary to the persuasion of the prophet,
therefore God cast him off. This was Balams sin who deliberated what he should
do, yet having a secret desire of reward, did curse Israel which made God cast
him off, this was the sin of Francis Spira who was smitten for committing of a
sin of deliberation.

Thirteenely and lastly, when a man shall make no conscience of small particular
sins, wherein his Judgment is convicted that they are sins, its a sign sin
has dominion over him, this is plain by scripture, he that is not faithful
in the greatest, he may do it, yet not be faithful. Again by reason, if a
small sin be a sin against God, then why make you conscience of the least, for
God is offended with these as well as with the greatest, so if ye make
conscience of the greatest of the duties of Gods worship, why do you not also
of the least duties? for God is Luke ^^,
pleased with these, as well as with the other, some say they will be
religious, but they need not be so prease as some scrupulous men are, but let
them examine themselves, if the least sins be sins, they must also make
conscience of them, so if we must keep an hour of the Sabbath, there is the
same reason of the rest of the hours, so for idle speeches, and fashioning of
themselves to the world, so if we seek for preferment or riches, it is
contrary to the commandment of God* seek not to be rich, for they drown
themselves in perdition and destruction, so we must not keep company with
evil and unsanctified men, examine how we practice this in all duties
commanded, let us try our selves by abstaining from occasions* whether we
re^raine our selves from the temptations of objects* for our speech must be
gracious, not by fits, but always, so we must be diligent in our callings, if
cut of conscience 1 Pet ^.
we do this we are faithful, otherwise we are not, for the same God which
commanded not us to kill, commanded us not to commit adultery, if then thou
committest adultery thou offendest God, so Mo^^s would not leave an hoo^e
behind him in Egypt, because God commanded him so to do, know you not that no
unrighteous man shall inherit the Kingdom of God, so if we abstain from soul
sins, yet i^ 1 Cor, 9, 4,
we commit the least, we shall never go to heaven*

It serves for in couragement for fearful christians, for if it shall not

Thirdly we have here privilege of christians, for though they be servants,
while other be Princes, yet they are free in regard of their lusts, to see a
man lead to his execution, we would not think it were for his honor, so when
ungodly men thrive in their worldly lusts, then they lead his soul to his
destruction, when sin shall have no dominion over the godly, but the
ambitious and voluptuous men do what soever their lusts commands them with a
miserable bondage, but the godly are free from sin.

It is not enough for men to see their sins, or to blame them in themselves,

Pharaoh was a wicked man, yet with heart he purposed to let the children of
Israel go, but when some temptation assaulted him, then he would not let them
go, so Saul purposed in his heart not to kill David insomuch that he swear to
Jonathan he would not do it, yet afterward he attempted it upon another
temptation, but we must come to feel that sin has no dominion over us,
otherwise we shall hear that sentence, Depart from m^e ye wicked into
everlasting fire, and out of thy own mouth I will adjudge thee, ^ thou wicked
servant.

And so much may be sufficient for the unfolding the first point of doctrine,
proceed we to a second which flows from hence also, and that is this, viz.

That sin although it do not reign in the saints, yet does (...)
r^mayne, and dwell in them, for proof whereof see these places of scripture,
if any man thinks (says Saint John) that he has no sin, he is a liar, and
there is no truth in him, the truth whereof will be seen in these things
clearly.

1. Beeause its knowledge is impersect, and therefore every grace as faith is
imper^ect, and so our love, and therefore so much sin must be in a man, in as
much as his grace is not perfect.

2 The flesh lusts after the spirit, therefore it is plain there is sin in
us, yea so much that often times it even captivateth us.

3. We have in this life but the first fruits of the spirit, now when we
shall have it in fullness, we shall have no more than enough, therefore having
now but the first fruits of the spirit, Mortification, and Sanctitication,
sin is not wholly abolished in the Saints in this life, but does dwell in
them.

To humble us, and to make us see what is our hearts, and to Hezechiah to know
what was in his heart, and so he sent a Messinger of Satan to buffet S. Paul,
least he should be exalted above measure through abundance of Revelations,
and so the Lord does deal with every Saint.

That Christ may be acknowledged, for if we had no sin in us, Rom, 3, 9,
all, Romans 3. 9. that is, that it might be manifested and declared, that they
are saved merely by the mercy of God in Christ, as is said afterward, verse
the 26. otherwise we should not rightly value our justification, and
sanctification, but seeing him subduing, pardoning our sins, we see what
need we have of him, how that we are lost without him.

That we might exercise our faith. 1. John, 3. we are the sons

1. This should teach us not to be discouraged for those infirmities that

2. We must not censure men for these slippes and falls we see in not
presently judge them to be hypocrites: Be not many masters, says S. James*
that is censure him not, for he stands or falls to his own conscience.

3. This should teach us to be watchful, and not to think our labor Rom, 4,
4.
is at an end when we are in the state of grace, for sin still dwells in
us, and though we have the victory over sin one day, it will fight against
us the next day, as in a garden the weeds will grow, because the roots are
not quite plucked up, and taken away, so sin is in us* and therefore we must
think it will fight against us and vex us, and therefore I say, let us renew
our strength.

Now for this we must do these two things.
First weaken sin. Secondly pray to God to make us watchful.
And so I have also done with the second doctrine, again from the latter part
of these words, or reason of the promise made unto them in in the former part
of this verse, that sin shall not have dominion over them, because they are not
under the Law, but under grace, I gather this conclusion, viz.

That the way to overcome sin, is to get assurance of the love and

Now the reasons hereof are th^se four especially, (...), 2


Q. Because it is the means to get the spirit, without which no sin is
forgiven, which comes by says, for it is not received by the law, for so
says the apostle, received you the spirit by the works of the law

Secondly, the way to make us believe the promises, to make us believe that we
are transformed into a heavenly nature, for when we believe

Thirdly because hereby we are able to resist the tentations which

Fourthly, because we do delight in God, for when we do believe in

1. First, for direction to teach us the way how to heal a sin,

But sorrow and a broken heart are required, for sinners to be assured

This sorrow is not so much commanded, but it is that whereby God prepares his
servants hearts, to make them see what need they have of pardon and so they may
ask pardon, but the sorrow commanded is that which follows belief, for the
more I believe the promises, the more I shall grieve for displeasing him.

But what is the way to get assurance of the forgivennes of our sins may some
say?

I answer that that be
done which is to be done on our part. believed which God has promised
Q. The things to be done on our part, are these,

Confession plainly and truly we must confess them to God, and to man, when
we our selves cannot overcome them,

Secondly, contrition) which is when a man is not stubborn, and resists Gods
will, and will please himself, to get his heart broken, and Hab, ^, ^,
he says as saint Paul says. Lord what will thou have me to do? and then we
are subject to his will, to him will I look that is of a contrite heart.

Thirdly, desertion), or forsaking of sin, for he that forsakes not his sins
shall not prosper, which is when we having the like occasions, yet Pro^^ 6.
will not give way to him but follow our own lusts.

Secondly, That that be believed which God has promised, and that is, that as
he has said; he will forgive our sins, upon such and such conditions, so we
believe it, and to make us to do this, these motions may persuade us.

Q. Because he is merciful, in whose mercy there are three things, all very
material and moving,

First, it is natural to him, he is not wearying of showing mercy, as the eye
is not weary of seeing, nor the ear in hearing, no more is God in showing
mercy, but in us it is not natural, but an infused quality, and therefore we
are weary when men provooke us often,

Secondly his mercy is infinite, but in men it is not so, therefore come within
compass of this quality, and he will exercise it, for no sin is beyond Gods
mercy, this keeps us from despair, for though they be great, yet God is able
to forgive them, as the rain waters as well the great field as the little
garden, and as the Sun shines as well on mountains, as on Molehills, and as
it disperseth the thick mist, as well as the least thin cloud, so does Gods
mercy pass by great sins as well as little.

But if our sins be exceeding great, aggravated with circumstances Sol.
man can be sinful, he is more merciful than we can imagine, my Isay, 55
thoughts are as much above your thoughts as the heaven is above the earth.

Thirdly we see much mercy in men, and in the mother of a child, now it is but
a drop out of the ocean of Gods mercy, but as a spark to the whole element of
fire, if you being evil can give good things to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father, etc. see what the scripture says, I am mercy^ull
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, the first word signifies original
sin, the second actual, the third rebellion, all which God can forgive.

Secondly because it is the end of Christ's coming unto the world, ^ Tim, ^, ^5
saint Paul urges the end of Christ's coming, was to save sinners, otherwise
the cross of Christ had been of none effect, and his mediation of no use, if
men did not commit sins, or if God should not forgive them, therefore God
must needs be ready to forgive.

Thirdly, because God bes^echeth us to be reconciled, unto him through

Fourthly. the charge laid on us to believe, we are charged on the pain of
death to believe, and therefore it is most profitable for us, and most pleasing
to him, he takes it well at our hands, that we should believe and by the hand
of faith lay hold on him, which he would not do if he were not ready to
forgive, Ioh, 3. 23.


Fifthly, from the examples of others, let us see what God has done for them,
and it will make us believe he forgave Manasses as well as Joshua, he pardoned
Mary Magdalen, as well as Elizabeth, and Paul as well as Peter, he has
forgiven the greatest sins as well as the least: and he will also deal so with
us.

Sixthly, from the effects of it which are these.

Q. It glorifieth God much, Abraham believed, and glorified God much for the
greater the sinner is, the more honor is given to God, as the physician has
the greatest glory by curing the greatest wound, so God has the greatest glory
by forgiving the greatest sins which wound the soul even to death.

Secondly, It moves us to love God the more, Mary loved much, because much was
forgiven her.

Thirdly it mollifies the most, it causes them to relent, and weep much more,
this is plain, by that place, where it is said, that when God forgave the
greatest sins then they mourned and lamented, as in these converts,

Fourthly it purifies the heart, for no man looks to keep his heart Acts. 2,
37*
pure until he be assured of the forgivennes of his sins, for till then he
cannot look on God as on a father: but on the contrary, when the sin is not
forgiven, God loses the glory of being a father, and the glory of his truth,
and of his mercy, and that hardens the heart from relenting.

7, from the price which was paid and which no sin can go beyond,

Eighthly from the tenor of the promises, which proclaim that they that
believe and repent, and forsake their sins, shall find pardon for the^, as a
King that proclames that all traitors, and rebels shall be pardoned if they
would lay down their weapons, now non est excipi^ndum ubi lex non excipit,
there is no exception to be made where the law maks none. God says, yea
therefore has said and sworn it, that he will forgive our sins, that we may
believe it.

But I have committed the sin often.

Yet God will forgive thee, though thou have often committed whooredome, Ier. 3.

Hence then to make some use o^ it, as our use is, we may learn not to deceave
our selves, ^o think we are in the state of grace, when we are not, for if we
did truly believe our sins are forgiven us, we would

And thus much for the third point too, there yet remains one more behind,
wherewith we will conclude the whole text, and that we may draw from the
contrary, to what the Apostle here says, and indeed it is employed, though not
expressed, for if sin have no dominion over them that are not under the law but
under grace, then on the other side must it needs be as true. viz

That whosoever is under the law, sin has dominion over him, that

First because all such as are not under grace, but under the law have

Secondly, to such Gods service is burdensome, and violent motions last not
long: they are weary in clamtering up an Hill, all natural motions are swister
at the last then at the first, but these are like the Israelites who after a
time, would have returned into EGYPT again.

Now then to end all with the time, let us

Q Be exhorted not to abstain from any sin for fear of punishment, but
consider whether thou would serve God for Gods sake although there were
neither heaven nor hell; it must be our meat and drink, which men would do
though there were no punishment for the omission of it, Blessed is he that
hungereth and thirsts after righteousness.

2. Hence we may learn not to defer repentance till death, sickness, crosses,
or age somes, then it may be you would not sin though with Balaam you had your
housefull of gold and silver, for its not the abstinence from sin that God
loves, but the change of the heart. Amaziahs heart was not right though he
walked in all the ways of David, these are the men that have made a covenant
with hell and death, but God will dissanull that covenant, or it will be but
equivocal, many have sworn in their sickness never to commit sin again which
afterward, they have committed again with greedines, many have dyed in the
same repentance.

3. Labor to see your selves doing duties with as much love as you

FINIS.
AMEN.

