A PREPARATION TO THE DVE CONSIDERATION AND REVERENT Coming to the holy
Communion of the Body and Blood of our Lord.

THE CONTENTS whereof follow in the next page.



IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Christopher Barker, Prin ter to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. 1580.

The Contents.
1 What an high dignity it is to be a Christian, and partaker of the holy
Sacraments of Christ. 2 An instruction how a Christian ought to be occupied,
before he presume to come to the Table of the Lord. 3 How dangerous a thing it
is to come unworthily, or unadvisedly, to the holy Communion. 4 A prayer to be
truly penitent for our sins, before we receive the holy Sacrament of our
Lord. 5 A prayer to be said immediately before the receiving of the holy
Communion, and in the time of ye celebration thereof. 6 A thanksgiving after
the receiving of the holy Communion. 7 An excellent Psalm of King David. 8 A
prayer for our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth.
To the most excellent, virtuous, and our dread Sovereign Lady Elizabeth,
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. Grace, mercy, and everlasting
peace from God the Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
HAVING CONsidered, and called to memory (most gracious Sovereign) the
manifold blessings and benefits, given by the incomparable mercy of God to
us your subjects, by your ministry, and the execution of your Kingly office,
and under your Majesty's protection, and most peaceable government: wherein we
do not only enjoy, and quietly possess the fruit of our labors, and all
other our temporal commodities, but (that which is many thousand times more
worth) even the liberty of conscience, the preaching and hearing of Gods most
sacred truth, the fruition and use of the most holy Sacraments of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which are seals unto us of the assurance of our inheritance in
the kingdom of GOD. And on the otherside, having thoroughly weighed our
contempt and ingratitude to Almighty God, to his son Jesus Christ, and to
your Majesty: by whom, as the only mean from God, we reap all these good
things, and are defended and maintained in this our happy state: I cannot
enough wonder, nor sufficiently lament, to see for the most part how little we
regard, and how seldom we come to the hearing of Gods most holy word, and to
the celebration of these his most holy mysteries: and when we do come, how
rudely, unadvisedly, and irreverently it is, cannot be but most fearful, and
most pitiful to behold. Wherefore most gracious Queen, and dread Sovereign,
the zeal and duty I owe to the glory of GOD, and to the honor of your
Majesty, (who cannot, but be greatly dishonored in this our negligence) has
enforced me to procure the aid of an excellent learned and godly man, to
compile three short instructions, or admonitions upon the three first titles,
or contents in the second page of this little manuel (whereunto are added
certain most needful prayers and thanksgiving, all which may properly be
entitled, A preparation to the holy Communion of the body and blood of our
Lord) to the end we may be moved with better consideration of the benefits
we receive in these sacred mysteries, and also with the greatness of the
danger for the abuse and contempt of the same: Most humbly beseeching your
Majesty, according to your accustomed goodness, to accept in good part this
my simple and unskillful service, that by your good acceptance hereof, many of
your Majesty's most honorable household, and others also, may be drawn and
procured to the exercise of the same, to their further instruction, comfort,
and consolation, by the working of Gods holy Spirit: to whom with the Father
and the Son, be all glory for ever, and to your Majesty, a most honorable,
long and prosperous reign over us, with all other his merciful blessings in
this life, and in the life to come, joy, felicity, and continual dwelling
with all the blessed Angels and Saints in the kingdom of God, world without
end, AMEN.

Your Majesty's most lowly subject, and servant, C. Barker.

What a high dignity it is to be a Christian, and partaker of the holy
Sacraments of Christ.
SAINT JOHN the Evangelist, in the first Chapter of his Gospel writes, that
our Savior Christ coming into the world, which was made by him, was unknown
of it: yea, coming among his own, of his own was not received: but yet to as
many as received him, he gave this dignity, that they should be called the
sons of God, which are borne not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of
man, but of God. By which testimony of the holy Ghost, we may understand
how great and excellent is the dignity of true Christians: namely, that they
be the children of God, begotten not carnally, but spiritually of God himself.
And that we should not deceive our selves, by a false imagination of
christianity, as it is commonly called and reputed in the blind world, the
same scripture teaches us who be true Christians in deed: not every one that
is so called, or would be so accounted, not every one which has taken upon him
the outward sign and badge of christianity, which is the Sacrament of
Baptism: but only those which receive Christ, are true Christians, and the
children of God. But who are they that have received Christ, that they may be
partakers of so high a dignity? even they which seeing, acknowledging and
confessing their own shameful, miserable, and damnable estate, which they have
not only received by propagation from their parents, but also have wilfullye
incurred through the just judgment of God for their own sins, do willingly,
joyfully, and thankfully hear and obey this voice of our Savior Christ, Mat.
11. and 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and be heavy laden, and I will
refresh you. And so reposing their whole trust and confidence in the mercy of
God (whose justice they know to be satisfied in the merits and sufferings of
his only begotten son our Lord and Savior Christ, their whole and only
Redeemer) do willingly take upon them the sweet and easy yoke of Christ,
which he requires in the next verse to be taken of all them that come unto
him, and look to be refreshed by him: which yoke of obedience unto the rule of
Christ, though it seem hard and unpleasant to be borne, unto the corrupt
nature of man, yet unto the children of God, (whose weakness is assisted by the
holy Ghost, and their faults committed of weakness, are washed away with the
blood of Christ) there is nothing more sweet, pleasant, and delectable:
insomuch that David upon this consideration, prefers the Law of God before
honey, and the honey comb in sweetness, protesting that it is more to be
desired then all jewels of gold and precious stones. Behold, these are true
Christians which have received Christ by faith, and gladly bring out the fruits
of faith in all godliness of life, to the glory of God their Father, and the
profit of Gods children, their brethren and sisters. Therefore if we be such,
whatsoever we be in the estimation of the world, we are most honorable. And
if we have all the vain titles of worldly honor heaped upon us, and be not
such, we are most vile and contemptible in the sight of God: for God makes
more account of his children, then of all the creatures of the world beside:
as every father more esteems his natural sons and daughters, then any
other thing he has in the world. yea for them the world was made, for them
the son of God became man, and suffered death for their redemption: for them
the world is continued, that their full number out of all ages might be
gathered, in which God has appointed them to live: and when the number of them
is once accomplished and fulfilled, this world shall be at an end, and Christ
shall come to give the^ all together that perfect reward, which God has
promised, and he for them has deserved. What worldly dignity, have it never
so swelling titles of honor and glory, can be comparable to this high dignity
of true Christians? If we should speak of the sons of Knights, Lords,
Earls, Dukes, etc. they are all surmounted and excelled by the children of
Kings and Emperors: and for what cause, but that the majesty of Kings and
Emperors so far passes those meaner titles of honor before rehearsed? It
follows then of necessity, that the more excellent the parents are, the
greater is the dignity of the children: and consequently, by how much the
eternal glory and majesty of God excels the honor and dignity of earthly
Kings and Emperors, by so much the dignity and honor of Gods children
exceeds the honor and dignity of Kings and Emperors children. Wherefore,
if in respect of worldly honor, we worthily esteem those happy, which have bin
borne of earthly princes: much more ought we to account them blessed in
heavenly and spiritual dignity, unto whom this prerogative is granted, that
they should be called the sons of God. For thereby they are assured, not
only to be maintained and protected by the governor of all things in heaven
and earth, but also they are certainly persuaded to receive such an
inheritance, as it is meet for the Almighty creator of al things to bestow
upon them, whom he accepts and takes for his well-beloved children: yea, such
is his bountiful goodness toward us his adopted sons and daughters, that
as his chosen vessels, S. Paul does testify, he has made us assurance, and
by the earnest of his holy Spirit, put us in possession, (though not yet in
full fruitio^) of that most roial inheritance, which he gives to his only
natural son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Romans 8. And as the Spirit
of adoption, by which we cry, Abba, father, which is the Spirit of truth,
and therefore can not deceive us, bears witness inwardly to our spirits, that
we are the sons of God: So it has pleased our heavenly Father, outwardly by
holy signs and Sacraments, to testify the same unto us: which Sacraments, as
seals of his promises which are daily preached unto us out of his holy word,
he has given for a further and more full confirmation and strengthening of our
faith, and most perfect assurance of those things which he has promised: by
which Sacraments also he does not only signify and show what he has
purposed to do for us, but also works effectually in those that be his true
children, the same things which he does signify and teach by them. For as
by his holy word he teaches us, that after he is reconciled with us for
Christ his sake, he accepts us for his dear children, and assures us that
he will never forsake us, but continue his mercy and love toward us for ever
and ever: even so he testifies and ratifieth the same by his holy Sacraments.
For in as much as it is necessary, that if we be the children of God, we must
know that we are borne of God, it has pleased him in the Sacrament of
Baptism, which is the lauer of regeneration or new birth, to testify unto
us, that by virtue of the blood of Christ washing away our sins, as water
does the uncleanness of our bodies, and by the grace of his holy Spirit
working wonderfully in our souls, our old man is abolished, and we borne
anewe of water and of the holy Ghost, to be the children of God. Being thus
assured of our spiritual birth, that we should not doubt of our everlasting
preservation in the same state of Gods dear children, he has prepared us
also a spiritual nourishment of meat and drink, by which we should be fed
to everlasting life: namely, the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ, which was
broken and shed for us upon the cross, that it might be spiritual food to
all them that shall be partakers of it by faith. Of which everlasting food and
nourishment, he has given us a seal or sacrament in his holy Supper, that,
receiving that bread and cup of the Lord worthily, according to his holy
institution, we should no more doubt that our souls are spiritually fed and
nourished with the precious body and blood of Christ, to the forgiveness of our
sins and life everlasting, then we doubt that the outward elements, which
we have taken into our bodies, according to their quantity do feed and
nourish the same, unto the maintenance of this temporal life. Whereby we may
easily see unto how great honor we are called of our Savior Christ, when we
are made partakers of that most holy and heavenly Table, wherein he sets
forth unto us, most unworthy wretches of our selves to sit at his high Table,
no meaner food then his own flesh and blood, to be a spiritual nourishment
unto our souls, whereby we are made one body with him, and members one of an
other, and an holy temple of GOD, through the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us,
and Kings and Priests do reign with him, and praise his holy name for
evermore.

An instruction how a Christian ought to be occupied, before he presume to come
to the Table of the Lord.
SOLOMON, in the 23 Chapter of his Proverbs, exhorts them which shall be
partakers of an earthly princes table, to have due consideration of their
behavior thereat to be used, and of such meats as shall be set before them: how
much more ought a Christian diligently to weigh with him self when he is
called unto the high Table of the Lord, by whom he is called, whither he is
called, unto what he is called, and for what end he is called. Verily, a
Christian man, when he is bidden to this royal banquet, is called by no person
of mean estate in this life, nor by any of the highest dignity in this
world, but by him that made them all: and in comparison of whose excellency
they all are but dust and ashes. It is even the Lord our GOD, the creator and
maker of all things, most holy, most righteous, hating and abhorring all sin
and wickedness, in whose sight no unclean or filthy person may abide to stand:
but such as are holy, righteous, clean, and pure in heart, are acceptable
before him. The place whereunto a Christian man is called, when he is required
to be partaker of the holy Sacrament, is the Lords Table, whereof this earthly
and corruptible table is but a figure and shadow: for even as he that calls
us, which is God our Father, and that whereunto we are called, which is the
body and blood of Christ, is in heaven at the right hand of God in glory and
majesty: eue^ so the Lords Table, on which we shall be partakers of the same,
is lifted up above all height of the visible skies, into that place of Gods
eternal glory, and majesty, where Jesus Christ is resident in the throne of
his magnificence. The holy feast and banquet, whereunto a Christian man is
called, consists not of earthly dainties prepared by the art of man, to
please the bodily taste, which as soon as they are received into the body,
tend to putrefaction and corruption: but of that lively bread which came down
from heaven, and gives life to the world, even the flesh and blood of our
Savior Christ, the immaculat lamb of God, which gave himself an holy and
undefiled sacrifice unto God his Father once for all, and found thereby
everlasting redemption: of which most holy and heavenly meat and drink,
whosoever is partaker, shall live for ever. The end wherefore a Christian man
is called to be partaker of this holy Sacrament, is, that he might be assured,
that he is regenerate and borne again by the holy Ghost, to be the child of
God, and inheriter of the kingdom of heaven, notwithstanding that he remains
still as yet subject unto death of his body, and (that which is more to be
feared) through infirmity falls often times into sin, the reward whereof
by the justice of God, is death both of body and soul: yet being nourished and
fed with the food of immortality and everlasting life, which is the flesh
and blood of our Savior Christ (as he him self testifyeth in the sixth
Chapter of John) he shall by the divine virtue and quickening spirit of our
Savior Christ, be raised up in the last day unto everlasting felicity. These
things if a Christian man do duly consider, before he presume to come to
the Lords Table, he will not thrust forward himself rashly, unadvisedly, and
contemptuously, but with such reverence, preparation, and examination, as is
meet for him that is called by so great a person unto so high a place, to be
partaker of so holy, and so fearful mysteries, for so weighty and necessary
an end and purpose. For in respect of him that calls, which is most holy and
righteous, he will remember, that it is his part to cleanse his soul from all
uncleanness of sin and wickedness, by true and hearty repentance: he dare
not appear in his presence, (which sees and knows the secrets of his heart)
with an outward show of fained holiness and counterfeit sorowfulnesse for his
sins, which he purposes not to leave and forsake, but to continue in the^,
after the receite of the Sacrament, and to delight in them as much as ever he
did before. He will not presume to deride and mock the Judge of all the world,
with a feigned countenance of modesty, taken upon him for a few hours while
he is in the Church, and laid aside again almost as soon as he steppeth over
the threshholde of the Church door, to return no less to his former
lightness, vanity, pride, lust, covetousness and other ungodliness, then to his
private house and lodging. And when he considers that he is called into
heaven, where no uncleanness or corruption can abide, where holiness and
righteousness does dwell, he will call to mind the answer which God makes to
David in the 15. Psalm, where he inquireth who shall dwell in his Tabernacle,
and rest in his holy hill: Even he that leads an vncorrupt life without
hypocrisy, without fraud and guile, covetousness or oppression, that deals
justly, faithfully, and mercifully with all men: such a one shall never be
removed. He that is called into heaven, where Christ is sitting at the right
hand of GOD, and willingly obeys his calling, acknowlegeth that he must
forsake the earth, with all earthly affections, and set his mind upon heavenly
things, upon those things that are above, and not upon the earth, as S. Paul
exhorts, Colossians the 3. Chap. he must mortify his members that are on
earth, fornication, and all uncleanness, covetousness, and deceitfulness,
wrath, malice, blasphemy, and filthy speaking: and putting off the old man
with his works, he must put on the new man, which is renewed according to the
image of him that created him, in holiness and righteousness, in
mercifulness, humility, meekness, long suffering, and forgiveness of all
them that have offended us, even as God has forgiven us in Christ Jesus. And
for as much as the distance between the earth, where we are strangers, and the
Heaven, whereunto we are called, as to the place of our inheritance, is so
great, that it is not possible for our heavy and lumpish bodies to ascend
thither, before they be made conformable and like to the glorious body of our
Savior Christ, which is gone thither before us to prepare a place: a Christian
man will consider, that as yet he can no otherwise be lifted up into heaven,
but in heart and soul, by the wings of faith. And therefore he will seek to
confirm and strengthen his faith, by the often and diligent meditation of the
most comfortable promises of God contained in the holy Scriptures, and by
earnest and fervent prayer unto God for Christ his sake, to increase his faith
by the virtue of his holy Spirit, as well in this time of his participation of
the heavenly mysteries, as at all other times, unto the end of his life. Yea,
that spiritual food of the body and blood of Christ, whereof he is called to
be a partaker, will admonish and put a Christian man in mind, as well of
repentance, purpose of ame^dment, reverence and humility, with which he ought
to be prepared that shall receive the Sacrament worthily: as also, that faith
and constant belief in the promises of God is necessarily required of him that
shall be nourished with so wonderful and heavenly food. For were it not that
the son of God, which is truth it self, has promised by his holy word,
to give us his body and blood to be meat in deed, and drink in deed, to
feed us unto everlasting life: and for assurance of this his promise, does
give us his seal in bread and wine, which therefore he calls by the name of
his body and blood, because they do truly, and not vainly represent unto us
the truth of his promise, and effectual performance of the same: how should
we differ from the unbelieving Jews, which understanding carnally, that which
our Savior Christ spoke spiritually, demanded how it were possible to give
his flesh to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken? But being instructed by
faith, although the mystery far pass the reach of any man's understanding,
yet do we nothing doubt, but according to his holy word and promise, after a
heavenly and spiritual manner, he gives to al them that are worthily partakers
of that holy Sacrament, his very body and blood to be spiritual meat and
drink, whereby they are fed and nourished unto that life which is immortal
and incorruptible. Which faith of ours receives strength and increase by
worthy participation of this holy mystery: for which end and purpose it was
instituted and ordained to our comfort. In consideration whereof, and of all
and every the respects before mentioned, a Christian man is compelled to fall
down before the throne of Gods grace, and from the bottom of his heart to
yield most humble and unfeigned thanks to God the Father, with the son our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, by whose infinite mercy and goodness,
without al merit and desert of himself, he is called to so high honor and
dignity, that he is admitted to be a ghest at the Lords Table, in which he is
made partaker of the flesh and blood of the son of GOD, who so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, to suffer most cruel and
shameful death for the redemption of mankind, to satisfy the wrath of God,
and to reconcile us again into his favor, of his enemies to make us his
children, and of his children to make us joint heirs with his only begotten
son Jesus Christ our Savior. Last of all, a Christian man thus assured, that
he is made partaker of the body and blood of Christ his head, of whom he is
now made a living member, must acknowledge and purpose with himself, that it
is his bound duty, not only to be more circumspect and watchful of himself,
that he be not forgetful for so high and incomparable a benefit, nor
unthankful to so merciful a Lord that has thus loved and saved him: But also
to show all love and tender affection toward all them, which by the same
means are made fellow members with him of the same mystical body: and as
occasion and ability shall serve, like a living member, to feel joy and
comfort at the prosperity of his fellow members, and to be so grieved at the
hurt or affliction of any of them, that he be ready to relicue and comfort
them, to aid and assist them, as we see by the example of the members and
parts of our natural body. He therefore that examineth him self after
these rules, shall be rightly prepared to receive the Sacrament worthily, to
his everlasting comfort.

How dangerous a thing it is to come vnwor thily or unadvisedly, to the holy
Communion.
Unworthily they come to the holy Communion, not whosoever are unworthy of that
high honor, which GOD vouchsafes them whom he calls to his holy Table:
(for then should all men, even the most righteous come unworthily. For no man
is worthy to stand in the Lords presence, much less to sit as a bidden
gheste at the marriage of his Son, or rather as a child, at the high Table of
Almighty God the Father, but that he of his infinite mercy, whereby he
accepts them to be his children, vouchsafes also to give them this heavenly
nourishment.) But all they come unworthily, not only which come like
hypocrites, with fained hearts and contemptuous minds against the Lord, who^
they pretend to worship: but also even as many as presume rashly, negligently,
and unadvisedly to receive the holy Sacrament without due examination of
themselves, and consideration of the excellent benefit whereof they come to be
partakers. Of them S. Paul writes, that they eat and drink, not the body of
Christ, whom they despise in his holy mysteries, but their own damnation,
because they discern not the Lords body, from other bodily meats and
drinks: For seeing our Savior Christ has adorned these holy mysteries with
the name of his most precious body and blood; whosoever conte^neth or lightly
regards the fame, must needs deserve such punishment and condemnation, as
they which abuse not only the name of GOD, (of whom he protests that he will
not hold the^ guiltles:) but also the seal of God, whereby he offers the^
assurance of their redemption, and even the very body and blood of Christ,
whereof this Sacrament is a true and lively representation. Wherefore the
Apostle says, Whosoever eats this Bread, and drinks of this Cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall not be guilty of abusing of bread and wine, and other
such like creatures, (the abusing whereof is nevertheless unanswerable before
GOD:) but he shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Which sin, how
horrible and gricuous it is in the sight of God, to be guilty of the body and
blood of Christ, we may easily perceive, if we call to remembrance the example
of those, who most cruelly and despitefully betrayed, condemned, scourged, and
crucified his most holy and innocent body, when he lived upon the earth. The
guiltiness of whose treason, false witnessing, unjust conde^ning, cruel
scourging, and crowning with thorns, and most dispitefull crucifiyng, and
shedding of his most precious blood, beside spitting, scorning, and reuiling:
the guiltiness (I say) of all which injuries and villenies they do most justly
heap upon themselves, which unworthily, unadvisedly, rashly, or negligently
presume to come to the Lords Table, and so become guilty of the body and blood
of our Savior Christ: whereby they procure unto themselves (if GOD should
deal with the^ in justice) such punishment, as was deserved by Judas
Iscarioth, the false suborned witnesses, Annas and Caiaphas, with the rest of
the high Priests and Pharisees, Pilate with his soldiers, and the people that
cried out upon him, Crucify him, Crucify him. And more worthily deserve they
such punishment, then many of these before named: for of them the holy Ghost
testifies, that they did it ignorantly: for if they had known him, they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory. But these men contemn and despise him,
whom they know and confess to be the Lord of glory, and the eternal Son of
God: the other despised him in the estate of his humility, when his Godhead
was covered with the shape of a servant: but these men set light by him, and
contemn him, now he sits in his throne of magnificence and majesty.
Therefore, much greater is their guiltiness, and more grievous is their
condemnation, if the Lord should deal with them according to their deserts.
But although he be ready to pardon and forgive such as have so despised him,
upon their hearty and earnest repentance, even as he was ready to pardon them
which crucified him: yet does he not suffer his children to be altogether
without chastisement, but that they may more deeply consider how grievously
they have trespassed against him, he punishes them oftentimes with sharp
sickness and sudden death, which have presumed unworthily to be partakers of
his holy mysteries, even as the Apostle says: For this cause many among you
are sick, and some are fallen asleep, by which temporal punishments, if the
residue can beware, and learn to judge themselves, they shall escape the
judgment of God: but if neither by Gods threatening, nor example of punishment,
they will be taught to amend this great and gross contempt of Gods lenity and
mercy, they shall heap upon themselves vengeance in the day of wrath: from
which, our most merciful GOD for Christ his sake, vouchsafe to deliver us.

A prayer to be truly penitent for our sins, before we receive the Sacrament
of the Lord.
O Eternal, and most merciful Father, we most vile and wretched sinners (and
yet thy children through thy singular grace and mercy) fall down before thee,
most humbly acknowledging and confessing our own vileness and unworthiness,
through our infinite sins and wickedness, to come into the presence of thy
majesty, or stand before thy face, whom we have so grievously offended, and
dishonored thy glorious name, by which we are called. O Lord, we are ashamed
to present our selves into thy sight, who seeest and know all our
wickedness, much more clearly then we our selves, and yet such is our
miserable estate, that when we look back to our former life that is past, we
see nothing in a manner, but a monstrous heap of ignorance, error, sin,
wickedness, and ungodliness: for which, O Lord GOD, we are so far off from
making any satisfaction or amends, that we are not sufficiently displeased
with our selves for so great unworthiness, nor sorrowful enough for so great
wickedness. Therefore most merciful Father, we fly unto thy only grace,
and bountiful mercy, which art the only fountain of all good gifts: most
humbly beseeching thee to mollify our stony hearts with the deawe of thy holy
Spirit, to subdue the pride of our nature with the terror of thy justice, to
grant us true repentance, that we may be truly turned unto thee. Convert us,
O Lord God, and then shall we be converted: yea, turn unto us the light of
thy countenance, and then shall we be saved. And for as much as thou have
given the holy Sacrament of the body and blood of thy son our Savior Jesus
Christ, to be a seal of thy promised mercies and our redemption, to be a
confirmation of our faith, and medicine of our infirmity: we heartily beseech
thee, most merciful Father, that as we humbly present our selves to celebrate
this thy holy institution, not in presumption of our worthiness, but imboldned
by thy heavenly voice commanding us: so we may be partakers of thy holy
mysteries to our comfort, that we may feel the fruit and effect ofthy promise
adioined unto them, lively working in us. Prevent by thy grace (O Lord God)
least through our negligence and default, the same be not only made
unfruitful unto us, but also hurtful, which thou have ordained and graciously
given for our profit and comfort: but grant that thy grace and goodness
assisting us in all things, we may enjoy thy benefits to thy glory, and our
everlasting felicity, through our Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ: to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all glory, praise and dominion, both
now and for ever, AMEN.

A prayer to be said immediately before the receiving of the holy Communion, in
the time of the celebration thereof.
O Most gracious and bountiful Savior of mankind, Jesus Christ our only
redeemer, which for our sake did abase thy self to come down from thy
eternal throne of Majesty, in which thou art equal with God the Father and
the holy Ghost, to take upon thee the shape of a servant, that thou might be
stricke^ of God the Father for our sins, and buffeted for our iniquities,
that through thy stripes we might be healed, which did become obedient (to
satisfy for our disobedience) unto the most shameful and cursed death of the
cross, that thy shame might be our glory, thy curse our blessing, and thy
death our life everlasting: We most humbly beseech thee, that as we present
our selves at thy holy Table, to celebrate an holy memorial of these thine
inestimable benefits, according to thy gracious institution and ordinance: so
it may please thee, all lettes and hindrances, which our unworthiness may
object before thy righteousness, being taken away through thy only goodness,
we may receive to our comfort, that which thou of thy mercy do offer unto
us: even thy most precious body and blood, to be a spiritual food and
nourishment, to feed us unto immortality both of body and soul, that we may
glorify thee with the Father and the holy Ghost, one eternal God world
without end, Amen.

A thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, what thanks are we able to yield unto
thee, sufficient for so many and so great benefits, of which we are daily
partakers, without all merit or desert of ours, thorough thy only goodness and
mercy? And now (O Lord God) that thou have refreshed our souls with the
heavenly food of the body and blood of our Savior Christ, in this holy
mystery and Sacrament of thine institution, whereby we call to remembrance
our whole and perfect redemption, by the bitter passion and shedding of the
blood of thy immaculate lamb, our Savior Jesus Christ, who offered himself
to be a sacrifice of sweet savor and full reconciliation once for all to thy
Majesty for our sins: how are we able to testify our thankfulness for so
wonderful mercy and goodness? The consideration of the greatness whereof,
swalloweth up all our cogitations and thoughts: so that we find nothing but
eternal and infinite praise to be due unto thee, for so infinite and eternal
mercy. Which, because (O Lord) we are neither able, nor worthy to express
and set forth, we humbly beseech thee, as well for this want and
imperfection, as for all other our weakness and insufficiency, to accept the
satisfaction of our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, who has washed us, and
made us Kings and Priests, to offer up spiritual sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving acceptable unto thee. In whom (O Lord) we yield unto thee, that
which we cannot of our selves, perpetual and worthy thanks, honor and
glory, world without end, AMEN.

An excellent Psalm of King David.
MY soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise his holy
Name.

2 My soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits.

3 Which forgiueth all thine iniquity, and heals all thine infirmities.

4 Which redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassions.

5 Which satisfies thy mouth with good things: and thy youth is renewed like
the egles.

6 The Lord executes righteousness and judgment to all that are oppressed.

7 He made his ways known unto Moses, and his works unto the children of
Israel.

8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great
kindness.

9 He will not always chide, neither keep his anger for ever.

10 He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to
our iniquities.

11 For as high as the Heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him.

12 As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins
from us.

13 As a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him.

14 For he knows whereof we be made: he remembers that we are but dust.

15 The days of man are as grass: as a flower of the field, so florisheth he.

16 For the wind goes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall
know it no more.

17 But the loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness upon childrens children,

18 Unto them that keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments to
do them.

19 The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom rules over
all.

20 Praise the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that do his
commandment in obeying the voice of his word.

21 Praise the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye his servants that do his pleasure.

22 Praise the Lord, all ye his works, in all places of his dominion: my
soul, praise thou the Lord.

A prayer for our most gracious Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth.
O Almighty eternal God, Creator, governor, and preserver of all things,
Lord of all lords, and King of all kings, who made man like unto thine own
image, that he should honor, serve, and obey thee only, and that all other
thy creatures should serve to his use and commodity, over whom thou made
him lord and ruler, the forbidden fruit only except: but he most miserable
man, by his own disobedience in eating thereof, lost not only that kingly
prerogative, but brought himself, and all his posterity, into the state of
eternal damnation. Yet thou (O Lord) in thine unspeakable mercy did then
promise, and in time broughtest to pass, that thine only son became man
like unto us, sin except, and was borne of a pure virgin by thy divine
providence and power: who to restore this, now, most miserable man, with all
us, whose children by nature we are, unto the state of eternal salvation, did
suffer most shameful, most vile and bitter, yea most cruel and painful death
on the cross, whereon his glorious body was broken, and his precious blood
shed, a sufficient ransom, a full satisfaction and just recompense of thy
justice and law, for all them that believe and embrace thy Gospel and sacred
truth. But, O Lord our good God, be merciful unto us, who by our infirmity
(through the fall of this lordely man, our great grandfather Adam) can not now
live in any peaceable or good condition and state, without magistrates and
kings to rule and govern us: we therefore most humbly and heartily beseech
thy divine Majesty, for the love of thine only son Jesus Christ, to look
down with thy fatherly compassion upon thy servant Elizabeth, our most
gracious Queen and dread Sovereign. Graft in her royal heart, by the working
of thy holy Spirit, thy manifold good gifts and benefits, as wisdom,
grace, perseverance in thy truth, increase of faith and affiance in thee:
defend her (O Lord) with thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm: grant unto
her a most honorable, long and prosperous reign over us. Moreover (O Lord) if
the service of golden vessels in thy Temple at Jerusalem, were accetable unto
thee: vouchsafe this thy servant to be esteemed in thy sight, as a most
honorable ornament in the new Jerusalem, not built with money, by the labor of
the servants of the first Salomo^, but bought with the precious blood of the
second Solomon thy son our Savior. Behold her, and make her to be, O
Lord, as the precious stone or signet of thine own hand, and as the apple of
thine eye, for thy truethes sake: to the enemies whereof, make her name most
dreadful, and to thy Church wheresoever dispersed, most acceptable and
joyful. Confound and put to shame, O Lord, all those that wish or procure any
evil to her royal person, or diminution of her kingdoms, and imperial
dignity over them. And when for the multitude of our sins, O Lord, thou will punish us with the wind of thy displeasure, by taking from us this our
fragrant and sweet smelling flower, which we beseech thee for thine own names
sake long to defer: then (O Lord) plant her in the garden of thy presence,
where she may grow and dwell in felicity incomparable, which the eye has
not seen, the ear has not heard, neither ever came it into the
understanding of man, those joys which thou have prepared for her, and all
thine elect. Moreover (O Lord) grant thy heavenly wisdom and grace unto all
us her subjects, that we may advisedly consider, and duetifully call to our
remembrance, the manifold blessings that we so long time have enjoyed, and
do presently possess through thy mercy by her ministry authority, and the
execution of her kingly office, under the which we do not only reap, and
peaceably enjoy the fruits of our labors, and other corporal commodities:
but also (that which is more worth then all this) even the freedom and
liberty of conscience, the preaching and hearing of thy most holy word, and
the administration and receiving of thy holy Sacraments. For all which, and
many other thy blessings, O Lord, work in us thy grace to yield unto thy
divine Majesty all possible and continual praises and thanksgiving, that it
be not said unto us, Are there not ten cleansed? or, Is not England
preserved from all tyranny, and enjoy all these benefits? But where are now
they returning to give thanks? Quicken our memories therefore, (O Lord) that
we never be forgetful of thy great goodness toward us, and make us more
and more, for thy sake, reverently to fear her, duetifully to obey her, and
faithfully to love, honor and serve her, as our natural loving Prince, and
mother, and as the mean by whom we receive all these thy good blessings, that
her Majesty perceiving our diligence, and readiness to obey and serve her,
may be the oftener put in mind to fear, honor, love, serve and obey thy
divine and incomparable Majesty. Furthermore, inspire her royal heart (O
Lord) with thy divine grace, that as she has begun to set forth and
maintain thy sacred truth, so she may zealously and boldly increase,
persevere and continue in the same, whereby the filthiness and nakedness of
Antichrist may be more and more revealed, superstition and idolatry more and
more abolished and removed, and that old lying serpent, and roaring lion
Satan, our ancient enemy, may be more and more restrained and kept back
from his malicious purpose, in seeking to devour and drown us all in
ignorance and security. Grant all this, O Lord, to our great comfort, her
honor and immortal fame, yea to the discharge of her own conscience, and
kingly duty: and evermore reward these thine own good gifts in her, O
Lord, not for the work sake, but for Jesus Christ his sake. And when thou
shall, to our great sorrow and loss, but to her great joy and profit, take
her from us, crown her, O most merciful God, with a crown of everlasting
glory, and give her the full possession of that eternal kingdom, purchased
by the blood of that immaculate lamb, thine only son our Savior and
redeemer Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and
one immortal and everlasting GOD, be all honor, dominion, praise, and
thanksgiving, for ever and ever, AMEN.

Places, and sentences of holy Scripture, wherein the minds of the godly may
be occupied at the Communion, if the time give occasion.
A prophecy of Christ. Esai. CHAP. LIII.
1 Of Christ and his kingdom, whose word few will believe. 6 All men are
sinners. 11 Christ is our righteousness, 12 And is dead for our sins.

WHo will believe our report? and to who^ is the arm of the Lord reueiled?

2 But he shall grow up before him as a branche, and as a root out of a dry
ground: he has neither form nor beauty: when we shall see him, there shall
be no form that we should desire him.

3 He is despised and rejected of men: he is a man full of sorrows and has
experience of infirmities: we hid as it were our faces from him: he was
despised and we esteemed him not.

4 Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows: yet we did
judge him, as plagued, and smitten of God, and humbled.

5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities: the chastifement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes
we are healed.

6 All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned every one to his own
way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

7 He was oppressed and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth: he
is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearer is
dumme, so he opens not his mouth.

8 He was taken out from prison, and from judgment: and who shall declare his
age? for he was cut out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my
people was he plagued.

9 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death,
though he had done no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his mouth.

10 Yet the Lord would break him, and make him subject to infirmities: when
he shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed and shall
prolong his days, and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

11 He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities.

12 Therefore will I give him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he has powered out his soul unto death: and
he was counted with the transgressers, and he bare the sin of many, and
prayed for the trespassers.

COLOS. Chap. 3.
1 IF ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God.

2 Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things, which
are on the earth.

3 For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

4 When Christ which is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory.

5 Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness
which is idolatry.

6 For the which things sakes the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience.

7 Wherein ye also walked once, when ye lived in them.

8 But now put ye away even all these things, wrath, anger, maliciousness,
cursed speaking, filthy speaking, out of your mouth.

GALA. Chap. 5.
15 IF ye bite and devour one another, take heed lest ye be consumed one of
another.

16 Then I say, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh.

17 For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh:
and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do the same things
that ye would.

18 And if ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the law.

19 Moreover the works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness,

20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions,
seditions, heresies,

21 Envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, whereof I tell you
before, as I also have told you before, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

22 But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith,

23 Meekenes, tempera^cie: against such there is no Law.

BLessed is the man whom the Lord chooses and receives unto him: he shall dwell
in his court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of his holy Temple.
Psalm 65. 4.

BLessed are they that are called unto the Lambs supper. Reuela. 19. 9.

FINIS.

