Lord omnipotent and most merciful father, give us remissyon of our sin,
and grant us delyueraunce from all our iniquity. Give us thy most holy
spirit, with thy blyssed and merciful favor, that he may lead us to
everlasting life through thine only son Jesus Christ our saniour and only
satisfaccion. For whom gracious father and almyghtye God, we most humbly
thank the, for all thine haboundaunre benefits, with the which thou haste
hither unto haboundantlye endued us. And that it has pleased the, the year
now past, to preserve us: And brought us to the beginning of this year: thou
haste noryshed us, taught us, and defended us, both in body and soul. We
wholly beseech thine ineffable pity, and clemencye, to pardon us, whatsoever
hither unto we have offended against the, and that thou will replenyshe us
with thine most holy spirit, which may this year and for ever teach and
govern us, that whatsoever be done by us, it may redounde to the glory of thy
name, and to the edifiynge of thy church. Oh pitiful father, and God full of
compassion, behold thy congregation or churches, and deliver them from
Woulfes, and hyryd servants, and give them true shepherdes, that may study
to gather together thy flock, so myserablye disparsed abroad unto thy dear
beloved son, our only sheparde: and give grace that they may pasture under
him in ye pastures yt leads to eternal life. Unto our most noble King,
Edward ye vi. his most honorable Systers, his gracious, and honorable
Councellers, to all the Magistrates and governors of this realm and others,
send the fear of thy holy name. And grant most benign and merciful God
that they may study and take pains to govern thy people and their subjects
after thy holy law and good will, so that they thus being delivered from all
ydolatrye and wickedness may have forse and strength to defend theirs from
the enemies of thy holy name.

To all those that be ignorant and not yet come to the understanding of thine
only truth: make the gospel to shine unto them, and draw them unto the
right knowledge of thy dear son: that they also with us in him, may obtain
eternal salvation. To all troubled, afflicted, and miserable persons, send
succoure good Lord and cousolacion from heaven, and give them all grace,
vnfarnedly, hollye to turn them selves unto the, that iustlye strykest them.
So that in case any in their trouble depart, yet let not thy mercy suffer
them to doubt, but that they do in Christ pass from death to life. Unto all
other Lord grant we pray the that this present castigacion and punyshmente
may be to the amendment of their lyfes. Unto thine one, and universal
church, into the which thy so^e mercy and grace has called and appointed
us, unto all virtues and godly Scoles, which inyndethe to promote, and
auaunce thy glory, unto this most noble City of London, and unto all other,
as well within this realm as without: in the which thy miserable and
persecuted servants has entreteynement, lodging, and consolacion, unto all
such as by office and duty peculiarlye are commended unto us: which
prayethe unto the for us, and for whom also we be bound to pray. Unto these
good Lord and unto us all thy miserable creatures, and subjects of this
realm give grace, that we may farther enter into a knowledge of our selfs,
and more depely understand our sins, and infirmites, and more dilygentlye
study to amend them. Grant good Lord that the mercy thou haste promised
us in Christ, we may with an unfeigned heart seek for, and with a sured and
steadfast faith undoubtedly apply it unto us. So that from day to day ever
mordyinge to our selves we may more live unto the. And thus putting of, the
old man, we may by the, put on the new man which is created unto thy
licknes through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy only son. For whose sake good
Lord defend and keep us this year and for ever. So be it.

Imprinted at London by Richard Judge, dwelling in Paul's church yard at
the sign of the Bible.


