Sur le Miroir de grand Bretaigne, de M. Iehan Norden.
GArdez gentiles, regardez cest' ouurage,
Tres-doctes Dames, and tres-sages, Sieurs:
Moult delectant voz yeulx, voz sens, and coeurs,
Cy fait Plaisir, auec Profit marriage.
Chacun Degree, rumine, chachun Aage,
Ce petit liver, plein de grands doulceurs:
Rend luy louange, qui doulces rend odeurs,
Que chacun fait, qui est scauant ou sage.
Les autres sont autheurs d' Enui', and vice,
Ennemis a virtue, sciens, and Notice,
Vilipendans les oeuures de scauoir:
Mais nobles, doctes, and gentiles esprits,
Qui compte tiennent des elegans escripts,
Hault priseront NORDEN son cler Miroir.
N'ayant espour qu' en Dieu, Robert Nicolson.

Corrections.
In page 11. line 5. for eighteen, read thirteen.

In page 21. for Io. Fortescue esquire, read sir John Fortescue knight.

In page 27. for 5191. read 3911.

In the same page for Antonius, read Antoninus.

In page 47. for Staple Inn, read Lions Inn.

Wheresoever you see me, Trust unto your self.

OR, THE MYSTERY OF LENDING AND BORROWING.

Seria Iocis: OR, The Tickling Torture.

-- Dum rideo, veh mihi risu.

By THOMAS POVVEL, London-Cambrian.



LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1623.

TO THE TWO FAmous Universities, the Seminaries of so many desperate Debtors,
RAM-ALLY and MILFORD-LANE, MILFORD-LANE and RAM-ALLEY.
TWo questions in demurer seem to stay us,
Which is the elder? and from whence ye came,
Not all the learning in old (...) Caius,
Was ever able to resolve the same:
Your Books and studies are the same and one,
The blessing from your Creditor must come.
Yare both as deeply learned (we do know it,)
As to the very center of the celler:
For Kitchen Physic, if ye list to show it,
Y-haue stomachs that can far out do Mountpellier,
And for the rest of all the Sciences,
We may send Doway bold defiances.
You Are both so ancient, worthy, so alike,
It were great pity that you should contest,
But rather let your wits best powers unite,
Against your equal enemy professed:
To multiply your Partisans apace,
The Temple Gods vouchsafe and give ye grace.
D. P.

To the Reader.
YOu see our Author goes not upon trust,
And if the Title of his Book beiust:
He bids you trust your self, where ere you see him,
So shall ye never fall to disagreeing.
The Students of Ram-Ally to the AVTHOR.
IF all be true that men speak a their knowledge,
Your self was sometimes fellow of a College
Within Ram-Ally: and you should do well,
To come and take a place that late befell:
(To tell you true) it is the welsh Professor,
Your pulpit shall be Robin Gibbes his Dresser.
If you stand for the Lecture, fear not speeding,
For then we are like to have a merry reeding.
From the Horse-shooe, this first of May, 1623.
The Authors Invocation.
THou spirit of old Gybbs, a quondam Cook,
Thy hungry Poet does thee now inuoke,
T-infuse in him the juice of Rumpe or Kidney,
And he shall sing as sweet as ere did Sidney:
I am not so ambitious as to wish
For black spic'keale, or such a precious dish,
As Dottrels caught by pretty imitation,
Nor any thing so hot in operation,
As may inflame the Liver of mine Host,
To swear I chalk too much upon the post:
My self a damned Promethian I should think,
If with the Gods Scotch-Ale, or Meth, a drink,
The vulgar to profane, Metheglin call,
Or drops which from my Ladies Lembick fall,
In several spirits of a fifth transcendence,
No, no, the hungry belly calls my mind thence:
I wish not for Castalian cups not I,
But with the petty-Canons being dry,
And but inspired with one bare Qu: let any
Compare with us for singing (O Sydany.)
Thy Pot Herbs prithy Robbin now afford,
Perfume the Altar of thy Dresser-boord,
And cover it with Hecatombes of Mutton,
As fat and fair as ever knife did cut on:
Then will I sing the Lender and the Debtor,
The martial Mace, the Serieant and the Setter,
Ruins and reparations of lost wealth,
Still, Where you see me, Trust unto your self.
WHERESOEVER YOU SEE ME, Trust to your self. OR THE MYSTERY OF LENding and
Borrowing.
SEtting aside the contemplation of such Lending and Borrowing, as whereby the
soul of Traffic is breathed into the body of a Commonwealth; I descend
lower to that practice of mutuation, whereby we accommodate one another for our
present necessities in moneys and other requisites.

First, for the Borrower.
I Will first show who be the most notable sort of Borrowers and Booke-men.

Next, what method every one holds in his several way of Borrowing and Booking.

Then their several cause of failing and insoluencie.

Next, their sundry ways and weapons, with which they fence with their
Creditors.

Next, their noted places of refuge and retirement.

Then their Iubilies and days of Privilege.

Lastly, the certain marks of a conscious cautious Debtor, with the Martial
discipline of the Mace, according to the Modern practice of these days.

Next for the Creditor.
I Will first show the charitable extent of the Creditors courtesy.

Then his Mystery of Multiplication.

Next, how the Oyster caught the Crow. The hand in the book bred the
wind-collicke in the warehouse.

And then how that wind being not able to force a passage through the cauernes
of his credit, shakt the very foundation of his shop-boord, threatening a most
sudden, strange, and stormy eruption.

Next, the signs fore-running the wonderful crack.

Then the Reparation of the decayed man.

And lastly, the singular comfort which the Commonwealth received by him, when
he was sent forth for current out of his Creditors mint, with a new impression
and a second edition.

And of these in order.

The chief and most notable Borrowers are,

The Courtier, that neither cares for the call of the Counting House, nor the
Check of the Chamber.

The Innes of Court-man that never was Student.

The country Gentleman no Hospital housekeeper.

The city gallant that never arrived at his freedom by service.

The Courtiers method follows.
FIrst he invites his Creditor, to a dish of Court-Ling, with Masculine mustard
plenty.

Then shows him the privy lodgings, and the new banqueting house.

Perhaps the Robes next.

Then the great Magolls tent in the Wardrobe: And so much serves for the first
meeting, and to procure an appetite to the second.

To the second meeting our Creditor is summoned, and brings behind him his
wife, like to a broken wicker glass bottle hanging at his tail, and enters
into the Masking room.

Whereat the Courtiers skill in delivering of the Maskers names, under their
several disguises, did purchase an everlasting and indissoluble
citie-consanguinitie with his female charge, over whom the more sleepy her
spouse, the more vigilant was my cosen courtier.

And now he has made his party strong enough to visit my citizen, and to
borrow and take up of him at his own home, in the most familiar phrase that
can be devised for such like use and purpose.

Then for the quickening, continuing, and enlarging of his credit, our Courtier
pretends how he has received news that his feigned kindred is very sick: and
thereupon a takes occasion (in stead of venison) to send her a bottle of that
famous and far fetched frontineack: He bids himself to dinner the same day,
and there in a cursorie way of commending the excellent art of man, in matter
of Manufacture, he falls by chance upon the remembrance of an extraordinary
stuff which he saw a great personage wear lately in Court, not doubting but
that his cousens shop did afford the like: His purpose was to have a suit of
the same very shortly, if they would but lay it by for him till his moneys
came in: Yet with a very little entreaty so cleanly exprompted, he was
persuaded to take it along with him, but only for fear lest the whole piece
might be sold by the foolish foreman unawares before his return. Give us old
Ale and book it,
O give us old Ale and book it:
And when you would have your money for all,
My cosen may chance to look it.


The Innes of Court-man, and his Method.
FIrst he makes himself acquainted with the Creditor, by going to him in
company with one who is a known customer there, and an approved good
play master.

Then he procures this known customer to take the man of credence (as it were)
modestly apart, and at his back while he is walking down the shop and
auersed, to whisper, That this gentleman whom you see here, is son and heir
to that worthy Knight so potent in the Peake, or that most markable Malster of
much Marlborne: Or the great Grasier of Grymsborow, or the like. Then he
returns to the upper end of the shop, and the Master takes an occasion to call
to Thomas to give the Gentleman a stool, and tells him that he knows his
friends very well: The ancient Manor house, and the Mill and goodly meadows a
little beneath in the bottom: adding further, that no doubt but if he please
the good old Gentleman, he may in time be owner of them all himself.

Be owner? says mine Innes of court man. Why I tell you, that water-mill came
by my mother, with all the meadows of that Level: And my Father would hang
himself he cannot give them away from me.

And whereas you say I may be owner in time, I think the old man has held them
long enough: unless you would make his time endless, and him a very wandering
Jew. I wis my Grandfather served not him so, he knew what he did when he died.
He did it out of true judgment, in fullness of understanding, able to pen
his own will himself, when he was no longer serviceable to his country, he
would not live only to mend the fire, or preserve it by applying every
circumstant cinder within his reach: but though I pinch for it a while, a time
(I hope) may come.

Whereat my Creditor interrupting him, says, alas you pinch for it? That shall
not need (God be thanked) your credit is worthy to be ranckt in a shop book,
cheek by iowle with any debitory disposed Gentleman of this town whatsoever.
Besides, if you would be loath to have your name extant in so public a
Repertory, you are able by such estate as is inseparably annexed to your person
to give farther assurance (I do but speak it if need were) by other ways,
and otherwise at your pleasure.

Further assurance (replies my Gallant) A pox on it: For assurance they shall
have what they will: And for price of any thing, it is my desire they should
gain by me, yea they shall gain by me: For otherwise how should you be able
to live by it?

Now sir, you speak like an honest Gentleman (says he again) I would all our
customers were of your mind, there be too few such as you are; if you have
need of any thing here, either for your wearing, or else for conversion,
wherein I hope you conceive me sir, it is at your command.

Hereupon the man of the sword swears that he shall not out-doe him in
nobleness; Had he robbed the Statuaes of the new Standard of all their royal
resolutions. He vows to return thither again, and that speedily: To bring
his Tailor with him advisedly; To take up for diverse uses with much facility,
and to give assurance according to the direction of his own Scriuener, a Bow
lane most legally.

And so leave we him like a horse put up to diet, whereby to be prepared to
run his train sents on the deepest ground of assurance, that City counsel
can find out or devise. Puppy runs well, but who shall win the day
Puppy? or Noddy? It Is an even lay.


The Country Gentleman, his Method.
THe country Gentleman, he is by this time come up to London; and has brought
his Attorney with him, one that professes the taking up of money by writ of
right. His Atturnie brings him to the ship behind the Exchange, and leaves him
there while he goes to fetch the only Nouerint in those parts, whom he
prepares at his shop with the purpose, aduising him withal in his eat, so to
handle the matter in hall, that beards may wag all, which he delivered with a
most familiar wringing of him by the hand, to insinuate his meaning as unto his
share: He then brings the Scriuener unto the Tavern, good compliance is in all
parties, and the Scriuener according to the true practice of the most of them,
at the first meeting, especially while they are with the borrower in a Tavern,
was more easy in promising, then they in proposing.

The attorney then softly tells the Gentleman apart, that he should do well to
bespeake supper instantly, assuring him that if he could but fasten that
courtesy upon the Scriuener for the present, he were their own for ever
after, neither the sum nor the security could be matter of any difficulty.

The counsel was held wholesome as unto the supper, the Attorney was forthwith
preferred to the bar, where he spoke so learnedly in the cause, that upon the
same hearing, they recovered three full dishes on their side, the boys drew
the proceeding of the business very Clarke-like, the Kitchinmaid supplied with
a Tales. The Mistress called earnestly for the Postea, and the master he
rated and allowed the bill of costs.

At the execution whereof, my Scriuener fearing left the shot should disperse
and scatter it self amongst them, while the Gentleman was feeling for money to
discharge it; he to facilitate that hand, asks him softly in his ear; What is
the sum that he would have? Then suspecting the long dwelling of his hand in
the pocket, he tells him, He shall have what sum he will: Let me see, says
the Scriuener, there comes in this night of Sir Sam van Skynkers money, five
hundred, and to morrow as much more I can supply you from one hundred to ten
out of that as your occasions require; how say you?

We will have no dry reckoning replies the Gentleman: Here Is the full sum
of the bill and a pottle over; Though we be Leichestershire fed, yet we be not
Brackly bred, I assure you.

And for the sum which I should (or at least would have) for especial
occasions, Let me see: There is a horse-race at Northampton on Monday come
seuenight; I must needs have new furniture for Cropeare, which I will send
down by Leicester Wagon.

I will have that Hawke which I saw in Southwarke this afternoon: clothes
would do well: But that's my least care of a thousand. A pox a pride I say.

Howsoever I must see the party I told you of by the way, before I go out of
town, by any means if she keep the same lodging and the same name that she
was wont to do: that's all now. Lets see, A matter of some three hundred will
do it, so far forth as my present and most urgent occasions do press me at
this instant: As for payment,
And for raiment,
For hedges and mounds,
And stocking of grounds,
For Corn for seed,
Or Cattle to breed,
Or the Wolf at the door,
And a thousand things more.
They are nothing so important and concerning as the least of these: I would
not miss Monday come seuennight for three such sums, I tell you Sir: Monday
come seuennight! That were a jest indeed.

For that and what you please beside, says the Scriuener, you shall find no
default on my party: This honest Gentleman that is with you knows the course
of these kind of businesses: He and I shall take care of you wheresoever you
dispose or repose your self: And so with thanks for your costs and kindness,
I shall take my leave at this time.

The Scriuener departs, and the Gentleman stays behind, only to hug and
endeare the endowments of him that procured this meeting: He praises the
prosperity of their journey, commends the comely carriage of the Scriuener, and
vows everlasting acknowledgement of his Atturneys actiuity. And so they betake
themselves to their lodging likewise for that night.

The next morning my Gentleman sends his Atturny to see that the money which he
spoke for, be told out and made ready for him against his coming, which should
be when and where it shall please the honest Scriuener. (For by this time he
had attained so much of reputation among them.)

The same day and the next were both spent in continual quest of the
Scriuener. But the Boys in the Shop according to their masters direction made
answer, one while that he was gone to Sir Sam for moneys: Another while that he
was at the sealing of writings at such a place: Then that he was at the
speeding of a commission of Bankeruptisme at Guild Hall, God bless the place
and every good man of the Grand Jury: And then shortly after, that he was but
even now gone forth, and that it was impossible but that he should meet him,
unless the dust of Pope's Head Alley had put out his eyes by the way.

The time wears out, and the horse-race comes onward, the apprehension whereof
puts our Gentleman into such a perpassion, that on the next day early in the
morning he goes to the Scriueners shop, where suddenly and unawares he finds
him saying his prayers, while he was withal cross gartering of himself; and
had he not known him better by his crosse-garters than by his prayers,
questionless he had lost his labor.

Godmorrow (says the Gentleman) perhaps I do disturb your devotion?

You Rascal, how chance you do not hang out the Labells? (says the Scriuener
to his boy.) Then he proceeds with his prayers, and suddenly bespeaks the
Gentleman, asking, What is your will with me Sir? Have you any business with
me I pray now?

O Lord Sir, (says he) I hope you remember what past between us at the Ship
on wednesday night last, touching the three hundred which I was indeed to have
the next morning, parcel of the thousand which was to come in then.

Hum (says the Scriuener) I think there was some such matter: I remember we
talked of it: But what were the names of your security which you did then give
me?

For names (replies he) why I gave you none, for I conceived it should not
need: Or if it do, you shall have lands that for seat, and site, value, and
Virgin title, shall bear and balance your morgage down to the center.

Now you come to me (says the Scriuener) go you two to the Antwerp, but only
to prepare me a particular of this land, and I will be with you presently.

They go before the particular is made ready. The wine is burnt, the Scriuener
with much pain has past through his prayers, and recouers the Tavern do ore,
by that time he was come to (Amen.) He returns to his old complement, pockets
the Particular which they deliver him, and puts all unkindness into this cup;
He drinks freely, and promises nobly: So that now there was no doubt made but
we might be at Northampton most opportunely. And so much for that meeting.

After dinner they came both again to the shop, where they found my Scriuener
wrapped warm in his gown about him, fast asleep (Good man.) For if ever he
were good, he was then good; Or (at least) I am sure he was then and there at
the very best of Scriueners goodness; the height of their holiness, and the
perfection of their punctuality.

They must by no means trouble him before he be fully recovered and enabled
for a second meeting at the Mermaid after Exchange time. They attend the while:
the clouds of claret shortly spend themselves: he wakens, they salute him.

At length with much ado he calls them to remembrance, and asks them for
their particular: they show the error in his pocket, and so he promises their
dispatch the next morning without any fail, and they are gone to bespeake
furniture for Cropeare in the mean time. At the appointed hour my Atturnie
comes to know if the writings were ready to seal, and the money proportioned
into several hundreds, in so many several bags or no.

The Scriuener replies, that it should be forth with prepared accordingly, so
as they should bring good city security with them, but only to undertake for
the property and transparancie of the title of the Lands so tendered, and that
was all should need for the matter, procuration being ever provided for, and
writing taken to estimation according to the repate of the place where it was
to be written, and that was all that was now remaining to be considered of on
the Gentleman's behalf. This new task required more time in possessing and
persuading of some Citizens his Countrymen, who knew him and his lands so
well, that it was disputable, whether was more dear and desired unto them.

They join with him in the security, and become immediately bound with him by
bond for the payment of the money at a certain day to come, and to the great
amazement of the Scriuener, thank him for this counsel in aduising and
directing them to the cautionary causeway of security both laterally and
collaterally, by direct and oblique lines which he most mathematically had
imagined and contrived in his head, as well for his own commodity as for their
indemnity, without demanding of any other assurance as yet, and so my
Gentleman is dispatched without further tie upon lands or person hitherto,
saving what is mentally reserved upon the growth of this sum, by these his
loving friends and countrymen. Friendship for countries sake I do commend,
But not to sell my country for a friend.


The Citizen, a Redemptionary Freeman, his Method.
THe last, but not the least of these is our city borrower, a hopeful young
man (though I say it:) A man of wisdom, for he is the best
That ever was of our Ward-mo^t inquest:
Of sweet behavior, for this very year,
He has discharged the place of Scauenger.
At an arbitrament he is a cutter,
As ere concluded in a Tavern supper.
If females for their linen do contend,
He takes up all, and makes a friendly end.
And if our Vestry brethren do dissent,
He makes the elder head most eminent.
Grow up thou man of justice and of hope,
My pen gives thee thy due, give thou it scope.


This City youth, not altogether free by patrimony, but partly by matrization,
is wonderful cautious of being a borrower upon record, or in the eye of the
world. He will not have his name tendered to a Scriuener by any means, while he
is yet but easily declining upon the stream of ready moneys, and not in
stock, like the water which though it fall and sink by the sides, yet runs
up in the midst with a manifest current long after.

He now studies how to take up without expression to be a principal for
himself, or to be too promptly drawn into security for others. He finds out
for property for this purpose a young heir, who for a third share of the
sum, was content to bear the only name and blame of borrower, and to yield
to the ensafing of my Citizen, by such counter-bonds, sales and assignments, as
by the Scriuener and himself, could be devised to uphold the reputation of a
wonderful wary man.

Can you now call this man a borrower for doing his friend a courtesy? Or is
this man in a declension, when it appears by the book, that he is in the way
of purchasing? No such matter, this cries up his credit: And howsoever these
moneys be repaid, yet he is sure of the land, which before any insoluency shall
appear on his party, he does intend to convey over in trust secretly, to the
uses of his liuelihood for the time of restraint to come, and like one that
prepares his tomb while he is yet living, he resolves what lodging to take up
on the masters-side, when his credit shall depart this mortal life.

Besides, he had another way of borrowing, he finds out an old usurer of the
same parish, father to diverse daughters, who caught at espousall preferment,
only by their fathers countenance, and their concise carriage.

The one of these he singles out from the heard, and pretends most pure and
unfeigned love unto her: He visits her in his gown at Midsummer, whereat the
old man conceiues great joy and comfort, glories in his gravity, and delights
in his decency. He on the other side peceiues the powle-cat in the Pursenet,
makes present use of it. He shows him the conueiance which the heir made the
other day unto him of all the houses in Conny-hoope-lane a one side; and
desires to be furnished by him with so much as might bring the other side into
his property likewise: for that it was now offered unto him upon reasonable
conditions, so should be reduce all (as it were) into a circle, and his
daughter should hold that for her Iointer, and have the evidence in her own
custody.

The old man liked this passing well, and for fear left the bargain should be
snatched out of his hand, he takes him into his closet, tells out the money, and
sends him away instantly.

The old man turns him about, and (pointing at her sweet heart) bespeaks his
daughter thus:

There goes he that labors for you most industriously, studies your good right
carefully, I pray God make you thankful for him accordingly: For you shall
have a husband (be it not vainly spoken) that for thrift and husbandry may
be the very browch of all the City.

In stead of going forthwith unto his Chapman, for the housing and candle
rents, he is housed presently at a widows in the way, where he spends his
time till candlelight.

Here he likewise protests and professes love by whole sale: he shows her the
moneys, and tells her what a bargain he could now have, if she would join
stock with him in such a commodity come lately into the Downs with the last
East-Indian ships. It might please God that this might be a happy occasion of
uniting their persons as well as their parcels together.

The Widow was hereupon taken with such a Sorpego in her wrists, that her
fingers ends itcht to be telling out of her part, and to take issue upon his
promise of the union, which she performed with much dexterity.

Then he puts all together, and assures her that he will be gone the next tide
to Grauesend.

When he comes home, he dispatches letters speedily to the old Usurer,
certifying him of his good progression in Connie-hoope-lane, and desiring his
patience for certain days, which the contriuing of his assurance by good and
sufficient counsel would take up.

The time pretended for the Downs, and to draw down a good estate for his
young Mistress, is upon better consideration bestowed at Rumford, where
whosoever had seen him in the lift of his liberality, would little think him
to be so little a thing as might be contained within the compass of a
counting house, or be confined within the prospection of a false light. Expect
anon the sequel of his story,
Let Rumford now be famous for John Dory.


Their several cause of insoluency follows.
THe Courtiers cause is in his conscience: For he neither can nor cares to pay.

The innes of court man's cause is in his Coercence, for he would if he could
pay.

The country Gentleman's cause is in his confidence, for he trusts to his
country men of the city, and had rather they then he should pay.

But the citizens cause is in hi^ complacence.

It pleases him so to pay, and he sees no reason why he should go beyond the
rule of conformity.

He finds good graund Jury Presidents of five shillings in the pound, and it
is fair too and sufficient soder for the first flaw (by my faith.) Some would
and if they could,
Some can, and yet they care not:
The least pay what they should,
The most spend all and spare not.


The sundry ways and weapons with which they fence with their Creditors,
challenge the next place.
THe longest weapons with which my Courtier keeps his Creditor farthest off,
are the winters iournies, and the summers progress.

And when he is nearer hand, he does keep them at staves length, by
challenging of a priuacy for indisposition of body, conference with great and
honorable Personages, or imploiment in the States wonderful weighty affairs,
when (God wot) the indisposition is for want of clean linen.

The conference is with his boy, how to pay the Landresse which detaines it.

And his employment is in and about the taking of a pipe of Tobacco.

The privy watergate, and the garden outlet do well.

And when he finds no remedy but that his Creditor will close and come into
him within his weapons length, then he swears that he was even now about to
send for him, had he not prevented him.

He tells him in great secrecy how he is in possibility to pass a suit of
great worth, only he wants some money to scatter in fees by the way: For it is
to be understood, that with great Officers the chamber-men wear good clothes,
and the doorekeeper has a precious faculty: he shall only supply with so much
as will even the old sum, and pay himself, tot, talia, and tanta, at his
own pleasure, yea he shall be a Patentee himself, for argument of honest
purpose and honorable dealing. What shift so ere we make, he needs must do it.
For profit and preferment prick him to it.


The Iunes of Courts man's weapons.
HIs first weapon is a well-pend Letter, excusing his delay by incompetencie of
exhibition.

Or by the necessity of attending the revolution of their Tenants six months
day of payment, according to the custom of the Country.

But especially by occasion of his fathers great and dangerous sickness
(though there were no such matter) for that he knew was the only viscouse
matter to belime his Creditor that could be devised or applied.

The next weapon, when the former way is stale of assiduity, is his good sword,
a watchful eye and a ready hand.

The last is the deuiation and avoiding of the most frequented passages and
streets, and to hold compass at the half point, through the Letgoes of
Allies, Tauernes, with back doors, or by water, as stands with most
accommodation. His fencing in the night I most commend,
When he may safely drab, and drink, and spend.


The Country Gentleman his Weapons.
THis youth (alas) has neither occasion at the first to practice his defense,
nor knows the use of the weapon, nor will he be brought to it of a long time;
when payment is prefixed to be made to him the said Solomon set in silver
street London, he in his better wisdom is betting of all his white money at
the Cock-fighting in Couentrie.

And when all comes to all, when farther occasion has drawn him into a
farther respectualitie with his undertakers in London; so that he must either
stand upon his guard, or lose the Bleane, with all Meadows, Pastures,
Feedings, woods, underwoods, and other the appurtenances worth ten times the
money borrowed:

Then, O then, he looks out his manly munition.

The ancient sleeping entaile.

The old mothers Ioincture.

The endowment of his wife, adostium Ecclesiae.

All these he brings to his Cutler of Chancerielane, and bestows so much upon
the oil of equity, as will scour them up cleanly, and make them fit weapons
of defense against all the Cossaques of the City. Petitions be the Postures of
thy guard,
And may thy motions be like Canons heard;
Set field, or skirmish, Chamber, or the Bar,
It Is like to prove a very lingering war.


The City borrower his fence.
HE handles his weapon with the best grace of them all, his Creditor dares
scarce come within his reach, but only ask how he does as he goes by. And if
he do presume to leave word with the apprentice boy, that he would have him
tell his Master that he was here to speak with him in the current of his other
business, it is a bold adventure, and a saucy presumption taken very
censoriously by my young. Master at his coming home, especially if he have
been at the Renterwardens feast.

The Cities occasion,

The Companies conuention, and

The parochicall provision,

These be the things which challenge propriety and prioritie in a comely
Citizen, before all other respects whatsoever.

He will not discontent the first,

Nor disappoint the second,

Nor disfurnish the last for observance of whomsoever.

For the money taken up of the Scriuener, the interest only needs to be paid
in as yet: and the Scriuener (to stop his mouth) he shall have the imploiment
and benefit to eiect the Tenants of Conie-hoope-lane, and withal he will have
the Scriuener sue the bond both against the heir and himself, upon which he
will appear to suffer judgments against both right willingly. (Marry) he
shall take execution against the heir only.

For the old Usurers money, he found that the assurance could not be perfected
till the next Michalmas term, for it required the ceremony of the bar, and
before he would debar his wife of any ceremony belonging to her, he would be
reputed the vnperfectest member that ever ministered in the Cities mysteries.

And for the Widows money bestowed in the Downs, he found the commodity not
so vendible here as beyond the seas, therefore he thought it best to send it
into Holland, where it attends the next market, and would not so much as suffer
it to touch at our coast. This cannot cure but lengthen thy disease,
It may defer the pain, but not release.


Their noted places of refuge and retirement follow.
Ramme-Alley,
I Will not so much as look into the court, or any the standing houses; the
housekeepers lodging, nor the gardiners receipt, neither the Mewes. Nor pry
into the meniall precincts of any the Innes of Court, farther then they stand
for refuge and relief of the neighboring privileges about them.

The first and chiefest of all which, for advantage of the ground, for
fortifications, for waterworkes, posternes and passages, supplies and provision
by land or otherwise, is that so far famed, and so fitly named Ram-Alley, or
the Ramy-kins, according to the Dutch translation.

In it is a garrison of old soldiers, every one of the which is able to lead a
whole army of younger Debtors.

They call their Muster-roll in the round Church.

They drill them in the garden, and

They make their set battles under the trees in the new walks, which piece
of ground was listed in and leuel'd for the purpose.

For the works within Ram-Alley, there be two most notable: the one is raised
and contrived in the form of a Ram, which Rams were used in the old Jewish
Discipline, as appears by the History it self more at large.

This work is of a reasonable strength, having a Watchtower in the similitude
of a Cobblers shop, adjoining, from whence all the forces about are called
together upon the least approach of the enemy.

But the other is a fort most impregnable, where the enemy dares not so much as
come within shot, to take the least view of it.

There is none but this only one so invincible, far and near, and therefore
our latter writers have styled it the Phoenix. There be other pretty contrived
plot-formes in the fashion of Cooks shops two or three, where if a Setter or
Spy do but peep in at them, they will make him pay for the roast before he
depart (I Will warrant him.)

To the Rammykins do belong a very great fleet, consisting of many sail well
manned, and these ere only for the service by water.

This place according to the Geographicall map, and the report of our modern
Authors, cannot possibly be so besieged, but that they within may go in and
out at their pleasure without impeachment.

At the Middle Temple gate they will issue in spite of the devil.

At the Inner Temple gate they fear no colors in the Rainbow.

And at Ram-Ally Posterne, in case they cannot fetch Fetter-lane, but discover
ambushment, they need only draw their bodies within guard of pike, turn faces
about, and retreat through the Miter.

Or admit they stand for Fleet Street, and be so intercepted, that they can
neither recover the Miter nor Ram-Ally, it is no more but only to mend their
march, fall downward as if they gave way, suddenly discharge their right hand
file, and fall easily into Serieants Inn, where by an ancient treaty had
between these two houses, it was agreed that the parties in such distress
might, paying the Gentleman Porters Fee, have conuoy and conueyance through the
Garden into the Temple, without rehazzard of his person.

Then when they would forage, they are no sooner out of the Middle Temple
gate, but there be three several places of defense to friend them: (viz.)

The Bell.

The Barregate, and

Shire lane.

The passage through the Kings Bench office is a most excellent safe way for
close contriuing and retriuing.

The Gardners wharfage as the tide may serve, will serve the turn too.

But the new door by the Bochards, though it be none of the sweetest way, yet
it is the safest of all the rest, for at the sight of the pomp the setter
starts back, and will by no means pursue him any further.

Fulwoods Rents.
THe next place of refuge is commonly called Fulwoods Rents, which lies so in
the maine and plain continent, that it requires the stricter watch and
stronger court of guard to be kept about it.

Besides, the General of the enemy has planted very near it, and lately cast
up a mount in the fashion of a Sherifes Office just in the face of them.

In Fulwoods Fort, otherwise yckleeped Skink-skonce, besides Robbin-hood and
his out-lawes, lie a regiment of Tailors, the one half whereof with red
beards, and the other having no beards at all. Captain Swanne was a very tall
man,
So was not Francis Drake a;
When Snypp does swear in single beer,
The Bailiffes use to quake a.


At the upper end of these Rents, and at the very portall of Purpoole-palace
westward, was lately begun a most excellent piece of work, which had it not
been interrupted by those that played upon them from above (questionless) it
had been the strongest and surest hold that ever was raisd within the
continent for this purpose.

The back gate into Graies Inn lane, with the benefit of the little Alley, ex
opposito, is of good use, but not at all times.

The passages through certain Innes on the field-side, are attempted with some
hazard by reason of the straggling troops of the enemy, who he pardue in every
alehouse thereabouts.

The only safe way of Sally, is that through the walks, from whence the
Red-Lion in Graies-Innelane receives them with good quartering, and passes them
through the back way into the maine land: And so much for Skink-Skonce.

Milford lane.
THe next is Milford lane, to which certain Captains and their companies
being long since cashiered, betook themselves, and liking the situation of it,
did there erect diverse works, both to the land-side and the water for their
ensafing.

As they came in by conquest, so they hold it by the sword; and howsoever their
title has been much disputed heretofore, yet they have now commuted the
matter, proved plantation, pretended the first discovery: and withal have
reduced it to a most absolute Hanse and free town of it self without
dependency.

The chief benefit they have for securing of their persons is that of the
water, for to the land there is little safety when you are once without their
works, and therefore I will abide here no longer, but hold my course onward to
the Sauoy.

The Sauoy.
IF the Sauoy should not be sufficiently defended every way, and in every
respect, it were a great shame to the discipline of the place, and the troops
that are there billeted, the rather for they consist for the most part of
Engyniers and Proiectors: and in memory of them, have builded there certain
tenements which shall bear the name of Proiector-Ally for ever.

Duke Humfrey.
FRom hence you must give me leave to pass by boat to Duke Humfries, which was
a very strong fortress in former times, when the Megazine of munition, viz.
the treasury of Tobacco-pipes was there established.

But the Megazine is removed, and the place much weakened, their Commanders
dispersed about Budge-row, and scattered in Warwicke-lane, where they are the
only vpholders of the threepenny ordinary (a strange alteration.)

The poor remainder of this Garrison, unless they be speedily relieved by
them of the College, to re-enforce the daily assaults of the enemy, must of
necessity yield up all with much dishonor.

I can stay no longer here with good name and fame, and therefore I return to
my waterman attending all this while, who is to set me over to Southwarke, and
land me at an excellent hold indeed, commonly called Mountague-close, sometimes
the Site of the Monastery of Saint Saviors near the bridge.

Mountague close.
ANd though the Garrison here consist not of so many old Soldiers, yet there
number is no whit inferior to that of Ram-Ally, and some of them serve on both
sides, and are in both rolls ever attending where the service most requires,
and the most of them are men of much actiuity.

The eldest company within it, are and have been directly diers in grain,
descended from the race of the old blew Britains.

In Lent when other Garrisons are most thin and worst victualled, these do
most exceed in both, for then whole troops of Butchers from the Cantons
adjoining, offer themselves like so many Switzers unto them: and convey by land
and water to that place, such abundance of cattle fetched from the Kentish
Kernes, and the Sorry Yonkry about them, as makes themselves plumpe and pliable
for any enterprise all the year after, and also draws very great store of
Wascoterians and handsome Basketerians unto them from all parts of the City and
Suburbs, and all for mere carnality.

Ely Rents.
THe last is that everlasting liberty of Ely Rents in Holborne, which is so
aduantagiously mounted, that it commands all the level beneath it. It is a
work of small receipt, for it may be made -- good, with three Brokers, two
Cobblers, a Baker and a Tapster, against all invasions and Inuaders whatsoever.

I cite not that privilege of S. Martins le grand, with many other adjoining,
which have proper officers for return of writs within themselves; because
though they be not under command of the city, yet they admit no Sanctuary or
refuge to the borrower, unto whom the Fire and the Fryingpan are both alike.

These forementioned Garrisons, Forts and Fortresses, stand still in such state
as is before expressed.

But I cannot forget the present estate of others, upon which the enemy has
entered, either by conquest or composition:

Namely,

Cold Harbor.
THat of Cold Harbor, where was an excellent Blockhouse to correspond with that
of the close on the other side. Both which together cleared the passage of the
river between them, so that no water Bayliffe durst come within their reach at
point blanke.

And this (as they write) was taken in by the sword in time of their security.

The Friars.
THe Friars, Augustine and Cruciate, Black, White, and Gray, great and less,
and those of the Trinity. The Spittle and Saint Graces, had all their Cooles
pulled over their heads, and so were all for the most part led into the city
captivity, where they remain to this day.

It Is said that they were most lost by this means, that they suffered those of
the Freedom not only to dwell among them, but likewise to increase and
multiply, to plant and supplant, the Nobility and the Gentry which vpheld their
liberties: and in the end when they had got and engrossed all power of office,
trust and authority, into their hands; they set open the gates and suffered the
military men of the Mace to enter and surprise all.

The Commanders of the city were only content upon treaty, to article and
agree with those of the Blacke-Friers; that notwithstanding they so entered by
conquest, yet the old companies, especially the English Fether-makers, ^he
Dutch Iewellers, the Scotch Taylers, and the French Shoomakers, with some other
foreign forces, should have and enjoy their ancient privileges, without
molestation or interruption in any kind.

Saint Bartholmewes.
But the greatest blow that ever was given to the Borrower, was the taking in
of Saint Bartholmewes, upon whose plat-forme A whole Army of Borrowers and
Booke-men might have been mustered and drawn out in length, or into what
form or figure it had pleased them to cast themselves.

What works, yea what variety of art and workmanship was within it?

What an excellent half Moon was there cast up without it for defense,
toward Aldersgatestreet?

What Sconces in the fashion of Tobaccoshops and Taphouses, in all parts of it.

What art was in the Silkeweauers there, who in twisting of their silk made it
serve like so many Opticke lines to convey and receive intelligence to and fro
in an instant, and laugh to scorn asinissimum illum Nuntium inanimatum.

But alas, these are all demolisht, the old soldiers discharged, and all
delivered and yielded up upon composition and consent of the Commander.

By the last packet we receive news, that there are daily assaults made upon
Saint John of Jerusalem. It is said likewise that they are in a mutiny within
themselves; which if it be so, the band of borrowers there billetted will be
shortly disbanded and dismissed utterly.

The Jubilees and days of Privilege follow.
THe unparalleled Parliament is the first and of all others the best.

The very Tunc temporis wherein Jupiter has the full effects of his influence,
when he is in his masculine house, and in a full aspect (hora optima.)

The next is a time of a raging pestilence: for if the serieants do not then
fear the plague of God hanging over their heads, I know not what the devil
will fear them.

The next is the time wherein my Lord Mayor takes his oath: For then the
Serieants and their Yeomen are all at Westminster (hora bona.)

The next is that wherein the Sheriffs are sworn: For in the forenoone the
Mace-men attend their masters. At noone they have enough to do to wait upon
Mr. Mayor of Oxfords cups: And in the afternoon it is as much as they can do
to get home.

Other days of privilege are all such wherein they are all generally tied to
attend their Sheriffs to Paul's, as that of Christmas day, All Saints day,
Candlemas day, the Coronation day, the Pouder-plot, and the fifth of August.
(hora mediocres) Only take heed how you touch at any Tavern near unto Paul's
after the Sherifes are once set, and until they be ready to depart, for
fear of freebooters.

I cannot say what hope there is in the privilege of the Sabbath, but there is
great presumption upon the benefit of those times, wherein the Serieants wear
their best Apparel, for I have observed that they will make bold with their
zeal, when they place much matter of conscience in their clothes.

The days of their Spittle-sermons are especial good ones: for their Masters
and Mistresses being then in conjunction, it requires that they should be
double diligent the while.

The days wherein the great Lords come down to ociate, or negotiate, eat, or
treat with their Masters, are reasonable good.

Whitsonday at the new Churchyard does well, but I am afraid that they will
not be altogether so mad as to be all comprised within the perambulation of
Bedlam, where I will leave them at this time: and proceed to

The marks of a Conscious Cautious Debtor, with the discipline of the Mace.
These be the general Marks.
1 Uncertainty of meeting. 2 Obscurity of walking. 3 Variety of lodging. 4
Inconstancy of abiding.
The particular marks follow.
At the lanes end he ever looks behind him.

And after he is once turned out of sight he mends his pace in an extraordinary
degree of footmanship, till he have gained some ground of the followers.

And then he makes another stand to take notice whether any of them have
arrived thither with more than ordinary speed, or precipitate himself at the
coming about the lanes end, which is the certain sign of a Setter or a
Serieant.

He never keeps the proponticke passage.

He has a catalogue of all Tauernes with back doors, especially to the
waters side.

Difference of attire (if he have it) stands him in great stead.

He enuies the increase of the Moon more then he pitties the decrease of his
own fortunes.

He knows there is little got by running, and less by rising at the Serieants
hands.

Therefore when he has business to do on the next day, he commonly remoues
himself ore night to the end he may have a safe mornings flight.

His meetings (when he does say and hold) are in places where he may stand as
much upon his reputation as his Tailor may upon his credit.

With the Italian he does much mislike the ouerhasty manner of pace used by our
nation in the city, (a place of ciuility, and that in the following of their
ordinary affairs.

He is better at retriuing then at contriuing.

He is a great enemy to idleness, for he loves not to see one stand leaning at
a stall, or looking about him, where he claims no property, nor owes any
service.

He learned of his Grandmother to hate whistling after candlelight above all
things.

He prays not in common for me, but that the Commons may meet in for me (as
aforesaid.)

And no sin sticks so impressiuely in his conscience, or disperses it self
through his whole heart, as that he ever paid any thing to his Creditors in
part.

The Discipline now offers it self, and the Mace is lifted up, in Terrorem
populi.
WIthin London there are two regiments of Mace-men.

The one is encamped in the Poultry.

The other in Woodstreet.

The greater number of them attend their colors where they are ever ready to
sally upon the Alarm or signal given.

Other of them guard their Colonels person by turns.

And the rest are appointed and exposed (as follows.) So many of the best
able and most trusty of their Cauallerie, as their service requires, especially
in term time, are planted at Chancery lane end, to make good that place, and
to cut off such as issue out of the works on the other side, or come down
from other parts to put themselves under the protection of them.

Of these Chancery Lane end men, if the design do deserve it, some one or two
are drawn out of them, to defeat the passage between the middle Temple and
the Bell or the Barre-gate, but this is upon especial occasion, and therefore
seldom attempted, but when they have intelligence of some extraordinary booty,
or good pillage coming that way.

Others of them are quartered in Smithfield, where every Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, they stand charged with cock up, ready to give fire at every poor
Butcher in the Grasiers quarrel, and these are of their Infantry.

Others are on every market day commanded for Leaden Hall, where they serve
one-day under the Tanner, against the shoo-maker, another day under the Butcher
against the ^^^mer, and sometimes for the Scriuener against both.

Others are appointed to other seueralll markets, where rather then they will
want entertainment, they will bear arms against the very butter-wiues (enough
to make their hearts to melt with the very thought out) the eldest sort of
them, such as hold charge, rather for their advice then their ability, are laid
at the Exchange, where though the service be daily, and the Nation against whom
they serve are all people of great stomach, meeting ever at dinner and supper
times only, yet the danger is but small in regard they have the Country round
about to friend.

The only Despervieos among them are severally appointed to the several gates,
where they scour and keep clear the passage to the Bars, being the utmost
extent of their works.

They are all right perfect at their Postures: As

Bear your Musket under your left arm, id est,

Be sure to touch the prisoner on the sword side.

Pull out your Scowrer, id est,

Draw your Warrant.

Advance your Pike, id est,

Exalt your Mace.

Cock your Match, id est,

Enter your Action.

And so for every posture, Punctually and particularly in his order.

Then for Stratagems of war, they ride the ancient discipline, quite dagger
out of sheath.

The best that Roman Histories afford us, is of that one noble resolution, who
to gain belief and credit of the enemy, mangled himself, tunning out of the
gates into their Camp to complain his own misery and his Countries tyranny,
with offer of giving them up into the enemies hand, only for actuation of his
own revenge.

But give me the plot that conquers at a far less price.

A Porters frocke (a Project of excellent carriage.)

A Lawyers gown, (Latet quod non patet.)

A Scriueners Pen and Inke-horne (a design of deeper reach then you are aware
on.)

These shall make his passage, sine sanguine and sudore.

This is your only Proiector indeed, whose first ancestor was begot between
the man in the Moon, and Tom Lancasters Laundresse, upon a fair faggot pile,
from whom are descended the only Choristers of our counter-quire.

It would do you good to hear the whole pack of these together, they are so
excellent for sent and cry.

But the best mouthed among them in truth, and for my money, the only mouth is
without Bishopsgate.

And the best sented at the upper end of redcrosse street, just at the entrance
into Golding-lane, into whose sweet bosom I commit them all, and there leave
them.

It may be expected that I should say somewhat of the Discipline of the
Bailifes, but especially of those of the Vierge and the Clinkonians.

But some of them have no Discipline or order at all, and the rest very little.

The poor Pichard cannot out pilfer them in the plain pathway of their
practice, they hold no good quartering with any man, but are more desirous of
prey then of lawful conquest.

The better sort of them go in boots without spurs, and they for the most
part are bought in Turning-stile lane in Holborne: the Author holds them not
worthy his pen, or to be rank't with the men of the mace before mentioned,
and therefore by his good will he will have nothing to do with them at any
hand.

The Creditors part.
FOr the Debtors part, I am persuaded that our Author has performed it
reasonable well.

But for the other of the Creditor (to say the truth) he has practiced that
part very little hitherto, and therefore is very diffident of his ability
therein. Yet howsoere, heel stand upon his credit,
And justify his word, because he sed it.


For the charitable extent of the Creditors courtesy.
VErily this man of Credence does observe these principles in all his
proceeding of this nature.

First, that he may lend or trust upon such conditions as may tend to the
benefit of the Borrower or Debtor chiefly.

Then, that his own gain may be moderate.

Then, that there may be Record thereof kept for testimony of his sincere
intention, in two or three several books at the least.

And lastly, he does not only lend or trust, but farther gives it a blessing,
that it may yield much increase to the borrower and debtor.

The reasons hereof are all as pregnant as pious.
1. For it is better for him to build then to pull down.

2. He will not grind the forehead of his poor brother.

3 His book cannot err, for it admits no tradition, but the pure and
uncorrupted text it self, as it was delivered in the primitive register, while
Thomas his foreman was yet living, and did bear record as a faithful
witness of these proceedings.

And though the blessing be bestowed upon a dead commodity, yet I hope it
argues no superstition in him that gives it.

And all this is apparently good till we come to

The mystery of Multiplication.
TRadition, it is not tolerable but an abomination, and yet our Creditor holds
that Addition in the secret of shop-booke may be very allowable.

For so long as he does only make up in credits what he has lost in stock,
or what is decaid in necessary expenses, and not riotously or vainly, seeing
the wicked are but usurpers of the riches of this world, it is lawful for him
with an equal hand to be carried among his Debtors by way of apportionment,
to rate and assesse them at his discretion.

He will take no interest, nor wrong his conscience for any good, his
shop-booke has hitherto held good name and fame. Heresies may creep into the
Church daily, but never into his shopbooke in any wise: there is nothing there
but what has been delivered, and his servants (especially one amongst the
rest) will as boldly as any Brewers desperate Clarke maintain and justify it:
shall he not maintain his masters mystery, when they are both to be saved by
the same faith? Why, he shall put the debtor in mind of the delivery of every
parcel, with all the circumstances to it, for he remembers it as perfectly, as
if it had been done but yesterday. Now the Debtor begins to quarrel the
Shop-booke, my Creditor is most justly incensed: And therefore now in the next
place The Crow looks to eat the Oister alive, but is caught in the attempt,
and the hand in the Shop-booke breeds the winde-collique in the warehouse,
which shook the Fabrique and foundation of all his factory as follows:



Suppose the tide is now coming in, and the poor Oister gapes for some
refection in the moisture of it. The Birds of prey (s^ilicet) the shopkeeper
the Crow, and the Usurer the Cormorant: these houer about it, each of them
hoping to pull it out of the little (...) where it dwells, and to devour it
alive. Hereupon the Cormorant and the Crow contend for the prize: The Crow
claims it as a Stray lost, and left without the bounds of any watery couerture
on the dry land at a low ebb, The Cormorant challenges it nevertheless, as
being still within his high water-marke; Then the Crow alleges that its so
wasted (wanting water) that it is become no better then Carrion, and therefore
it does properly belong unto him. The Cormorant denies that, and assures him
that the Oister is yet alive, and therefore no carrion. But the Crow had given
so much credit formerly, that he would now scarce believe his own eyes
(especially in his wifes case) he would by no means believe this to be true,
and therefore in hope to cosen the Cormorant, he desires that he may only
feel with his bill whether it were so or no? Leave is given by the Cormorant,
who thought it was enough for the Crow to smell upon the prey, intending that
never any more should come to his share: Then the Crow who knew how to tickle a
Trout at his pleasure, did without assistance of Constable or advice of
Counsel, make a most violent entry upon the Oister, which presently claps to
his door, shuts the Crow within, and caught him so fast by his bill of entry,
that all Colchester and the custom house can testify to this day, with what
uncustomed and discourteous entertainment he was there received.

Well might the Crow cry and call for his companion the Cormorant to redeem
him from captivity, but all was in vain. The doors were shut up, he could not
so much as belch at the key hole, or let out the wind which troubled the
warehouse by any means forward or backward, the very foundation of the shop
and shopbord, were shaken with the violence thereof.

Being in this extremity, and so taken with the wind, that nothing applied
inwardly could possibly help him, he calls for the shop-booke, and begins to
conjure the collicque with such terrible charms and incantations, as the like
were never devised nor put into any pentacle: Then he raised the great Prince,
In primis, out of his Eastern Emperie, with a legion of Items attending him.

These two he sets to task, and enioynes them to distinguish his Debtors in
Spero, from those in Despero, and to deal more plainly with him herein, then
Widows use to do by their Husbands estates in the Court of Orphans, and
elsewhere: They perform his design instantly, and the greater number
appeared to be perdues directly desperate and debilitate, amongst the which my
cousin Courtier and my Innes of Court-man were of the number.

The Courtiers suit did long languish and was palliated and vpheld with letters
commendatory, it complained much of the disease called the reference, it was a
little lightened by a Cordial certificat laterly, yet in the end no means nor
medicine could serve the turn, but of a stopping and obstruction at the great
seal it died.

The Innes of Court m^n was neither heir nor aged sufficiently, for the
enabling of any such act as he had undertaken publicly by deed, or privately
in the shop-booke. The Scriuener, the City counsel, himself, and all were
fatally infatuated, betrayed with a beard, and foold with formalitie.

The wind rises more and more, the storm increases, strange stitches on every
side of the shop, wonderful weakness in the warehouse, and convulsions in
the Counter-boord and box, complain and cry out upon the Collique, at whose
mercy we leave him, expecting the eruption thereof very speedily.

The Signs fore-running the wonderful Crack.
THe certain Signs in a Citizen are these:

He strives to be called into such office, especially as whereby he may have
the stock of the Parish or Company in his custody.

He gives ground in matter of payment, the longer he deals, the more he
leaves in the remainder upon every payment.

He leaves the plain path of his profession, and places more faith in a
Project, then in all the probabilities of his own Trading: and when a Citizen
turns Proiector, he has the very tokens of the wonderful Crack upon him.

His Country house is too little for him, and it wants a gate house for his
Wife and Coach to come in at, and therefore there must be laid out in building
thrice as much as the Fee-simple of all when it is finished will afford.

He takes up at interest to make good the building: all his good debts he
sets over to the immediate accountant in trust, and with an intention to
prevent his Creditors.

All his purchases are either in the name of his son, or some trusty Kinsman
of his wines.

The nearer the Crack, the faster he lays about him, to take up in any kind,
and upon any conditions, then he conueies all things of value out of his house.

And at last he gives fire with a report of his great losses at or beyond the
seas, where he (God wot) had never any factory or dealing in all his life time.

Then he sends his Wife to her Mothers, where she must live awhile, that she
may not be troubled with the noise and clamor of the Creditor.

He betakes himself to his Chamber, keeps the shop windows shut, and
prouides a Catalogue of all his desperate credits only to deliver to his
Creditors, when they shall come to treat upon the subject of satisfaction.

The news reaches to the Exchange by noone, where they that have given credit
to him, look so prettily and pitifully one upon another, as you might know
and challenge them by their faces.

Then they gather together, and confer their notes, and cast up the whole
sum what all their credits may come unto, only some of the more pragmaticall
sort, who fear to publish their losses lest their own estates should come
likewise in question, do dissemble the matter, and speak with the least.
Others that suspect, it may be their own case very shortly, pity the man's
misfortune, blame the hardness of the times, deadness of trade, and scarcity
of coin, recounting what he is out for foreign plantations abroad, and other
contributions at home, and with what charge he has gone through so many
offices in so short time, whereat every man relents and lets slack his more
strict purposes, agreeing all to go to his house to confer with him after
dinner.

And so dismiss we them till then.
IT may be you look I should have spoken somewhat of the Crack of my City
gallant, but it is improper to place him amongst Creditors that has been bred
a borrower from his cradle, and that according to the custom of the City: let
it only suffice, that though he had not his country house, yet he had his
country hostess, and though he dealt not in court Proiection, yet he kept a
vile coile for court Protection.

His Hostess she paid the old Widows and his young Mistress their debts in
the same coin that he tendered to them.

And at last when his insoluency appeared upon every post, she preferred any
Justice of peace his Clarke thereabouts to her respectuality before him, so
that there was neither abiding at Rumford, nor return to London, but he must
of necessity make a voyage, be it but to Britlesey, where he lies close under
a borrowed name, which was the last commodity that ever he took up, till his
friends shall have rectified his credit, and restored him to the estate from
which he was so lately collapsed and fallen.

The recovery of the old man, with the common comfort which it did beget, hold
the next place.
AFter dinner all the Creditors met again on the Exchange, where they hold
full three hours conference, during which time not any of them did believe one
word which another spoke unto him, for they were too wise and learned in the
use and exercise of conformity, to speak the simple truth, because they were
to deal in a matter mixed and compounded of many ingredient credits commedled
and put together.

From hence they go to the house of their Debtor, in number as many as a whole
college of Physicians to enquire for their Patient: they are forthwith brought
up unto him into his chamber, where they found him in an old suit only fit for
garbling or eating of greene-fish, with as many night-caps upon his head as
there be cups in a nest of Court-dishes, and the old gown which was always
wont to lie at the Hall for ordinary days: in stead of plate there were only
two full Vrinalls standing upon the Court-cubbord, by which they might discern
the great disabilitie and weakness, which the windchollique had wrought within
him.

And in stead of accounts, bonds and bills, and other evidences, there lay only
open before him, the foresaid Catalogue consisting of desperate debts and
debtors (as aforesaid.)

They salute him as if they did in a manner partly remember him, and then all
together, as well the man of ten, as he of two and twenty hundred in credits,
without difference, put forward for the first delivery of his mind unto him.

This disorder was much blamed by the grauer sort, and upon better advice,
select men were drawn out of them to compound, for so many as would
voluntarily conform themselves, which was to be done according to the
Catalogue, and as the ability would bear it.

In the mean time a letter of license is sealed for his liberty, to call in
and recover what was due unto himself.

This Letter of license begat a commission of conformity, and then to work
they go full roundly: some of the chief who had taken other and better
conditions of satisfaction of him in private, then the rest, showed much
forwardness in the public way of composition, and in the end did so
strengthen their party, that they prevailed against the other.

The whole debt was cried down to six and eight pence in the pound, the
windows were opened, the servants in the shop flung up their caps, the Curse
was removed from their house, their Master was a recovered man, and none but a
banquerupt would say to the contrary.

Their Mistress was sent for home with all the speed that might be, and this
night all her kindred and their masters friends were to solemnize this happy
recovery of the decayed man, where they meant to drink to the health of six
and eight pence, from six in the evening till eight next morning.

The common Comfort only remains.
NOw the recovered man makes a most strickt scruteny and reuiew into his
shop-bookes, as well for debtors soluent as insoluent, he confers his Registers
all together, and where he finds a debt vncrost in any one of them, though it
be discharged in the other two it makes no matter, this is it by which he must
stand charged, and unless he can discharge himself by this also, he is like
to perish and receive condemnation by the very letter without tradition.

He will spare no man whom the Law puts into his hands, lest he become a
partaker in his iniquity. He calls home all things which he had formerly
conu^ighed out of doors. And sets forward his building in the country.

He flourishes as he never did before, and will give 1000 pound with his lame
daughter now, more then he offered with her at the last swan-hopping.

Heel out bid all the town for the great and lesser sons.

Briefly, he vows:

To redeem the time past.

To prevent the evil day to come.

To run the course, and tread in the footsteps of some of the right
worshipful, and in reverence of conformity to convert his old composition
gown into a fair and conformable foot-cloth.

But three rich wives, and such another Crack,
Will make thee scorn to cry (What do you lack?)
By the Counsel of Ram-Ally.
Non nobis nati sumus.
WHereas in these latter times it concerns us in civil policy, to be so much
the more industrious as we are become numerous above formerages, and no
endeavor can be so beneficial and honorable as the enlarging of our
territory by discovery and plantation in parts habitable and agreeable with our
debitory disposition, where we may disperse our Colonies with more conueniency
and advantage then at this present: for which purpose we have lately employed
and set forth the good ship, called (The least in sight) accompanied with that
approved and well appointed Pinace (The pay naught) the charge and command of
both which, we conferd upon Mr Cliuer Owemuch, who manned, the same with persons
best qualified in the Art of Insoluency, the greater part whereof, himself had
known and tried to be men of much trust, being his own Creditors, and
creatures of his own discreation, whose loving kindnesses he requited in
manner of imploiment following, viz.

His Mercer he made Master of (The least in sight) and his Baker Boat-swaine.

And because his Vintner had bestowed many a shot upon him in prosperity, he
made him Master Gunner in his adversity.

His Tobacco-man desired to be the Gunners mate, because he would make all
smoke again.

A Purser they needed not: for besides that, they had all bad memories in
calling of things past to remembrance, they held it a foolish thing to keep
accounts where there was no purpose of payment.

His Haberdasher came somewhat with the latest, but his Laundresse by the power
of her Letters commendatory, preferred her husband to be Controuller of the
Coile, Remembrancer of the Bilbowes, and Yeoman Squabber of (The pay naught.)

And his Tailor last of all, because he had the best stomach to the action,
he was made Steward, and had charge of the victual for the voyage.

Being thus provided on Monday the first of March, the wind blew fair from the
East, when they left the Temple-staires: And the same day being Saint David's
day, the air grew thick and very foggy, insomuch that the pinace had lost the
Admiral, had it not in stead of a light in her Lantern hung up a Leeke in
the maine top, by the sent whereof it recovered sight of her again the next
morning by break of day.

On the second, third, and fourth day the weather was very variable and stormy,
howsoever they still spoond onward for most advantage.

About eight of the clock on friday the fifth of May, their Pylot who had
been a Spectacle-maker and a Prospectuary without Temple-barre, descried a
sail making toward them which they suspected by his flag to be the
water-bailiffe of London.

Hereupon a Council was called aboard, the Captain to consider what was to be
done in this imminent extremity.

Some advised that it were fit to make the land, if they knew where to touch
without hazard.

Others of higher resolution advised to stand the fortune of a Sea Fight, and
to draw their number out of sight into the hold, whereby to encourage the enemy
to a nearer approach, which opinion was generally received and allowed.

Presently, as the occasion required, it was agreed that for the sublimation of
every spark Spirit amongst them, there should be an extraordinary allowance
made instantly (that was) the full proportion of one pipe of Tobacco, and a
Temple-pot of six to every two of them, which when they had cheerfully past
about; the Tailor whose conscience was more tender then his stomach, would
needs (...) be resolved in two points concerning his souls health before the
fight should begin. The first was, whether the cause and quarrel which they
were to undertake were justifiable or no, for that he ever held Ludgate more
worthy then Newgate in diverse respects: and the next was in case he should
miscarry in the action, whether Limbus patrum and infantum, were not under his
own shop-boord or no.

Before my Tailor could have opinion herein of their Captains Chaplain, who
had been a Viniger-man formerly, and a fellow of excellent sharp
apprehension: the supposed enemy came within shot, whereupon every one of them
began to apply him to his charge.

But just as Matter Gunner was ready to let fly, (not for fear I hope) they
perceived no other assailants but the Churchwardens of new Braineford, who
were bound for London to buy bells, not for the Church but their morris dance
against the ensuing Whirson-ale. Hereupon for their better recovery, the
allowance was again doubled to every one of them. And on they pass bravely
till on Saturday the sixth, they discerned firm land, lying upon the Savoyans
Eastward. Here the Captain drew out the one half of his forces, and with his
long boat put them to land, where they found a most spacious continent fit for
plantation at four degrees beyond the Temple, the climate exceeding temperate
so long as you pay the Tennis-court keeper for your lodging, the accommodations
most excellent, either through the white Heart into the Couent-Garden, and so
into the country round about; or from the great house through the Swanne into
Drury Lane, and so forth free as bird in the air: The Lacedemonian women
supply them with fish and fruit of all sorts, which they bring down in
abundance from the vpland countries: insomuch as there is neither fear of
want of victuals, so long as they have money; Nor of security while they do put
themselves under the protection of Denmarke-house: Here they left the
Haberdasher and certain other to winter it, and the rest returned aboard the
ninth day of May, bearing their course still West and by North: On the the
twelfth day, Cape Virde, or Greenes wharfe, did show it self unto them, where
they likewise put in, and forraged clean through it on both sides. This place
(besides other goodly beasts of all sorts) is most famous for Hearts, whose
horns are of the comliest branch and spreading, as also of dimension and
extension that can be; so that in memory of them, the Captain named the place
Harts-horne-Ally: Then the which no place hitherto discovered, is of a more
capable continent, or more rich in Minerals, Vegitatiues or Victuals, or more
agreeable with the constitution of our countirimen, especially if they be
married. The several commodities and merchandises whereof you shall receive
more at large upon return of the Least in sight, from thence

In the mean time we exhort you that both with cheerful contribution, and
otherwise with your advice, you do not only uphold the old ones, but also
further and advance the said two new plantations so happily discovered, and so
prosperously pursued hitherto, by you the Council and Adventurers of the said
company, and at your only charge and expense. So ye that see it may wish, but
never shall ye
Perform the like adventures as Ram-Ally.


FINIS.

