A godly and wholesome preseruatyue against desperatio^ at all times necessary
for the soul: but then chiefly to be used and ministered when the devil does
assault us most fiercely, and death approaches niest.

Be sobre, and watch, for your adversary the devil as a roaring lion: walks
about. seking who^ he may devour, whom resist, steadfast in the faith. 1. Pet.
5. The preface.
THis preservative (gentle reader) is prepared for thy profit: that you reding
it at leisure may chose out such comfortable sentences as may both stay
thy own conscience in the time of temptacion: and also quiet others when the
Devil shall be busy with them. 2. Cor. ii.
For we be not ignoraunte of the thoughts of satan, how he continually
furnishes him self, to bend his ordinance against man. And now with the
consideration of ye greatness and multitude of sin: Now with the terror of
death and dampnacion, Ephesians. 6.
do labor to beat ye buckler of faith out of our hands, i. Tess. 5.
to strike the helmet of hope from our head: Ephesians. 6.
And to wrest from us ye swerd of the spirit, which is gods word

But here christian reader is thy swerd and buckeler delivered unto the, here
is thy helmette put upon thy head, here thou shalt find such armor, and
weapon, whereby thou shall both be able to withstand the forse of cure commen
enemy the Devil: and also (by thy council) to rescue others that they perish
not. Yea, here you shall find choice of most comfortable sentences, whereby man's
conscience may be staide from dampnable desperation.

i. Co. xvi.
Watch therefore, stand steadfast in faith, play the man, and be of good
comfort, Iaco. iiii.
Resist the devil, and he will flee from the. Not for fear of thy own power,
strength, or holiness: but for fear of Christ: in whom by faith thou art
ingraffed. For it is christ thorough whom god has given i. Cor. xv.
us victory against sin, death, hell, and the devil. Acto. iiii.
Nether is there any other name under heaven given unto man, wherein we may be
saved, but the name of Jesus Christ our lord. To whom with the father, and
holy ghost, be al honor and glory. AMEN.

A preservative
FOrsomuche as ye diseases of the body and corporal death, does so trouble
man's mind, that we commonly trimble and quake at the only mention of them:
How much ought we to fear the sickness of the soul and death of the same, then
which, there can no greater, nor more fearful calamity chance unto man.

And saying that every man does avoid (so much as in him lyethe) the pain,
myseryes, diseases, and death of the body: how much more ought we to decline
and eschew, the causes of these euilles, which be sins and offenses, and
fear the ire of god, which we so (by our enormities) do provoke. If we be
never so little sick in our body, by and by we send for the physician, we spare
no cost, we seek for medicines and remedy, though they be never so chargable,
and al to patch and clout up this earthen vessel of our body, which do we
never so much can not last long. And why use we not like dylygence in
desiring, and seking remedies against the diseases of the soul? which like as
they be more grievous: eue^ so they bring with them (without comparison)
infinitely more danger. For what can it profitte a man though he have all the
riches in the world, though he live a thousand year, and that in such health
and pleasure, that he is not once touched with sickness or grief: his soul in
the mean time being poisoned with sin, being captive to satan, having God
displeased with him, and dampnacion ready for him after this life. For truly
this life must once have an end nether know we when, where, after what manner,
or how soon. Therefore says Christ watch for ye nether know the day nor hour
when the son of man will come. Mat. xxv.
And lest we this short time of our abode (omitting things most waightye and
profitable) should follow trifulles, and things of small price: he has
vouchesaue to prescribe us an order and as it were a breue, certain and sure
way: to come unto true felicite saienge. Seek first for ye kingdom of god and
righteousness thereof: Math. vi.
and all things shall be added unto you. Care for living, care for riches, care
for worldly dignity, worldly favor, worldly estimacion and such like
transitory things (which in deed does little profitte but many times be cause
both of filthy vices and also of grievous calamities) does besy, does vex,
does trouble, does eue^ defatigate us both day and night, but in seeking for
and procuring of godly and heavenly things: we be most negligent, most slack,
most dull, most forgetful. And I pray you, what can be a greater blindness or
a more dangerouse madness? whiles we be lusty, whiles we be in health, whiles
we be in prosperity we scasely think upon any life to come, we remember not
once yt we shall dye. But when we be in perell, and danger by sickness, and
death beginnethe to knock at our door. Even at that same hour when we
should play the men and fight against our enemy (being sufficiently armed
and weponed before) the^ begin we first to think upon our armoure to think
upon our weapon, to think upon mending of our life. These things declare us to
be smallye exercised soudiers to be me^ of preposterous judgment, and very
weaklinges in faith. God be merciful unto us. Amen.

But yet though a man be never so old, though the day be never so far past, so
he amend whiles he is here: ear it be night, his repe^ta^ce comes not out of
season. Nevertheless it were to be wisshed, yt no man should differ his
repentance to his last and most dangerous conflict For eue^ they shall have much
a do to stand and to defend them selves from the assaults, ye guiles, and
invasions of the enemy: which in ye time of their health prepared and armed them
selves, what then shall come of them which not fearing god neither minding
once repentance hathled a dissolute filthy and naughtye life? how shall they
fight? how shall they be able to withstand the force of satan?

Saying therefore the multitude of people is great, and the ministers of the
gospel very few, nether able to be every where to do their office to every man:
I having a will to help al men: have gathered to gether, and written out of
scripture, a certain brief form how to admonish, instruct, and comfort such
as be sick, that they either reding these things, or hearing them red by
others: may conceive certain hope and perfect consolacio^, lest in this most
dangerous conflict they faint, give over like cowardes, and so be ouercomed
and perish: For this is certain, when soever a man is taken with extreme sickness
and is in danger of death, he is assawted with diverse many, and grievous
tentacions. First it is a grievous and vehemente tentacion, when he sees the
most terrible image of death before his eyes, when he sees, he must leave this
light, leave this life, leave friends leave lands, goods, kinsfolk, father,
mother, wife, childern, all things, wherein he had here either pleasure or
comfort. Then such sins as he against the will and pleasure of god has
committed shall show and present them selves, and shall appear more in nu^bre,
and more grievous then ever they seemed before, and so shall wonderousely vex and
torment the conscience. Then death, judgment, hell, dampnacion, as it were in
a plumpe, shall assaut and lay sege with diverse dangerous engines against the
old man of ours.

In these Agonies, except a man be armed with a sure and constant faith: it is
to be feared, lest he be weried, tired, and at last ouercommed. For these
tentacions which chance unto men lyeng in extremes: appear most houge,
fearful and daungerouse, and that for by cause our faith is very sclender,
and waueringe: neither yet able to see, perceive or apprehend, the
incomprehe^sible and inestimable riches of the childern of god, which be
remission of sins through christ, resurrection of the flesh, communion of
saints, everlasting life, and all these given unto us in Christ and for
Christ.

In these articles of our faith we must dailye exercise our selves. These we
must diligently reuolue and earnestly expende in our minds. For though all
the articles of our faith are diligently to be remembered and without al
waueringe believed: yet in the Agonye and point of death, these four (that
is) the communion of saints, remission of sin, by ye blood of Christ, the
resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life: are chiefly to be minded
expended, and inculcated.

For like as death is the pain and stipend of sin: Roma. 6.
even so for sin God does commenly punysh us with diverse diseases and
plages, As it is to be seen i^ diverse places of scriptur. Io. 5. Ps. 88. Deute.
28. 2. Reg. 24.

Nevertheless afflictions be many times laid upon us, that our faith may be
tried: For than is it easy to be perceauyd how much we love GOD, what faith
we have in him, how we trust him, when we be pressed and greuyd with adversity.
In this case therefore we must bewail and acknowledge our sins, for the which
we have justly incurred gods displeasure, and deseruid most grievous pain.
We must turn to God with true repentance in all our heart and mind, without all
faynynge and conterfaitinge, we must have recourse unto the Gospel where we
shall find most bountiful co^solacio^.i. absolucio^ or remission of our sins
which christ has instituted i^ ye church Io. 20. Receive (says Christ) the
hollie ghost whose siftes ye forgive they are for geaue^. This inestimable
treasure is daily opened and offered unto us.

When remission of sin is thus desired, and optained: undoubtedly the^ ye
pain of sin which is ye disease or afflyccion shall sone cease and leave us,
or else according to the most beneficial will of our heavenly father: shall
turn to ye profit and soul health of him that is diseased or afflicted, For
this may we be sure of, that the pain and affliction of the body in this
world (seem it never so grievous a bourden or heuie yoke to the flesh) is
comenly nothing else but a fatherly rod, Psalm. 88.
wherewith god does draw us his childern from sin, and call us home to him.
Truly our heuinly father does love us most fervently, he bearithe us good
mind, and does all things for our amendment and profitte, Heb. xii.
for whom God louithe, him he chastisethe, and correctith us temporally here:
that we should not be punished in hell everlastingly. 1. Cor. xi.
Though he semith angry: he louithe singulerlye. Nether is his Ire the Ire of
a tyrant or torme^tour desyringe our perdycion: but of a father sekinge our
amendme^t and sauftie. First therefore we must cry God mercy desire pardon and
forgeuenes of our sins (but by christ, but with a heart truly penitent) that
we may be at one with God, and have him mercyful unto us. This done we may
then desire GOD to deliver us from ye Imminent and present affliction and
disease. For so teaches ecclesiast. Ecclesi. 3
Son in thy infirmity neglect not thy self, but pray to the Lord: and he
shall deliver the. Also in the Ps. Psalm. 70.
remember not o lord god our old iniquities but let thy mercy spedely prevent
us: for we be very miserable, help us God our savior. Lord God of power
turn us how long will thou be angry? show thy face and we shall be saved.
Here we be taught first to desire remission of sin, that we may so be at one
with god: and after that to have his wrath, and the tokens of ye same, taken
away. But when soever we desire to be deliueryd or to be eased of ye cross
that presses us, we must always annexe this addicion. Mar. vi.
Thy will (o heavenly father) be fulfilled.

Neither know we so well what is profitable unto us. Nether ca^ we so well
provide for our selves as our most loving heavenly father. Which is both of
infinite power: and also of incomprehensible wisdom which never tournethe his
eyes from us, which caryth continually for us, which knowith the number of our
here is, which does quicken norish, feed, keep, defend provide for all his
creatures much better than they can wish or desire. But to draw to the more
particular temptacions, and to show what things do most fiersly and
daungerously at the time of death assault us. And how we shall wtsta^d the^.

There be three things, which at the hour of death does wonderously vex,
trouble, and fear our minds (that is to say) sin, death, hell or dampnacion.
Sin.
WHerein we have ungodly misspent our life, whereby we have grievously offended
god and our neighbor: This coming to our remembrance when we lie upon our
death bed, does drive us to a wondrous fear, Roma. ii.
pensiuenes, and anxiety. As saint Paul says, wrath indignacion trouble
and anguishe against every soul of man that does evil.

A medicine against sin vexing and troubelinge. our conscience.
LEt us call earnestly to remembrance that the son of God came down from
heaven, became man, took up on his back the sins of the world, died for them
upon ye cross, there making satisfaction for us and paing our dettes. This
most precious blod of christ was shed also for us, and of this death we be also
partakers so we rightly believe in Christ, Nether need we to doubt but Christ
died as well for us, as for Peter and Paul: Romans 6.
For we be baptized also (as saint Paul says) in the death of Christ. This
ought to comfort us, this ought to erect and stay our minds. For saying we be
baptized in the death of Christ. Christ's death brings also unto us health
and salvation. By Christ's death we be also dead to sin: by Christ's death we
have also certain and sure remission of our sins, by Christ's death we be
raised also to a new and everlasting life. For baptime is a couenand betwixt
God and us. And a sign of his grace and favor toward us wherein we be
reconciled and made at one with god again, so that we may now have a joyful
and quiet conscience, for somoche as our sins be forgiven us, through the
resurrection of Jesus christ. Yea christ also in the institucion of the most
blessed sacrament of his last supper speaks also to us saing, that his blood
is shed for the remission of sin. Now although we have not lived alwaie
innocentlie nether led such a life as we ought to have done: Yet we may not
despair, but without delay resort unto god, by true repentance, call
faithfullye upon his name, and we shall be saved. Romans x.
Ye let every one of us with a meke heart burst out in to these, or like words
and say O most merciful God, father of al mercy, father of our LORD Jesus
Christ, be merciful unto me a wretched sinner, make speed to deliver me, for
the most bitter (but most precious) death, and passion of Jesus Christ thy
only begotten son, our redemer, and only savior: Amen. Enter not (o lord)
in to judgment with thy feruaunte, handle me not according to my deserving,
nether do unto me after my iniquities: but according to thy infinite and
botomles goodness and mercy take me unto the. I a miserable and wretched
creature am i^ thy hand, I am in thy debt and danger, thou may do with me
what it please the. O most merciful father forsake me not, nether cast me
of. I am thine all that I am. There can no man comfort, no man help no man
deliver me, but thou alone. Thou art the true comfort, the most present help,
the surest bulwark in all necessity. Thou god art my refuge, my strength, my
help in all trouble. Thou art my Lord in thy hands rests al my chance and
affairs. Show thy loving and merciful face upon thy servant, save me in thy
mercy O lord: but in any ways in our extreme sickness and affliction, let us
beware we look not to earnestly neither to long upon our sins. But rather
let us have the image of Christ's most helthfull and precious death before our
eyes. Let us fix that in our mind and be fully persuaded that Christ is now
bourdened with our sins, that he has now taken them upon his own
shoulders and so has satisfied for them and washed them away, that he will
never charge us with the^, but frelie forgeaue us them as we profess in our
Creed. when we say Credimus remissione^ peccatoru^. we believe the remyssion of
sins.

Here it shall be mete that in our sickness we call to remebraunce such places of
holy scripture as testifies of remission of sin purchased by Christ of the
which some be here subscribed.
Io. i.
BEhold ye lamb of god which takith away the sin of the world.

We are bought with no gold, i. Pet. i.
nor silver, nether any corruptible price, but with the precious blood of the
unspotted and undefiled lamb Jesus Christ.

So god has loved the world that he gave his only begotten son to the end
that we so beleuinge in him should not perish but have life everlasting. Io.
iii.


I come not to call the righteous but the sinners to repentance. Mar. ix.
Come unto me al ye that labor and are laden and I shall refreish you. Lo he
calls al, he refuses, Math. xi.
he excludes none, we must includ also our selves within this word (All) we
must resort to him, and he will receive and refresh us.

God sets forth his love toward us. For Christ died for us, Romans 5.
when we were yet sinners, much more now therefore we being justified by his
blood shall be sauffe from wrath by him.

i. cor. i.
Christ Jesus is becommed unto us wisdom, rightousnes, holiness and redemption.
Here let us comfort our selves yt though we have be never so great sinners, let
us confess and knowledge our sin, let us call for mercy and pardon, let us
unfeignedly believe Christ to be our only health Justice, and redemption: and
straight way he is so, he will by and by cover and put away our sins in such
sort yt we shall need fere no peril nor danger

ii. co. v.
Him that knew no sin, has god made sin.i. a paymente of sin for us, that
we should beco^e the righteousness of god by him.

Gala. i.
Christ gave him self for our sins that he might deliver us from this
present wicked world according to the will, of god our father.

In Christ we have redempcio^ thorough his blood, Ephesi. i.
even the remission of sins according to the riches of his grace.

Christ Jesus is come into this world to save sinners. i. Ti. i.


Christ Jesus has geuin him self a redemption for all men. i. Ti. ii
This let us consta^tly believe and undoubted we be of the number of those yt
shall be saved. For when he is come a redemption for all, these things yt he
has suffered pertains no less to the and me, and every one of us (so we
believe) than to Peter or Paul. i. Pe. ii.
Christ has borne our sins in his body upon the cross.

Christ died once for our sins ye righteous for ye unrighteous. i. petr. iii


The blood of Jesus christ cle^seth us from al sin. i. Io. i.


If any man does sin we have a advocate with the father eue^ Jesus i. Joan. ii
Christ the righteouse and he is ye attonemente for our sins: Not for ours
only: but for the sins of the whole world.

By these places and such like we may se how god the father (which will not
the death of a sinner, but that we should turn and live) for that most fervent
and burning love that he bears toward us, has eased us of the burden of our
sin, and has laid it upon ye back of his most dear beloved son. which his
son has so taken, borne and suffered for them: that they can never condemn
us. For god takes and reputeth the death of his son for a full satisfaction
and payment for all our sins, so that we truly believe in him: For seeing that
our sins thus laid upon Christ could not overcome him, detain him in death,
nor da^ne him (for why he rose again) undoubtedly a full satisfaccion is
already made for them, the justice of god is fully answered, and they be utterly
hid and forgeuen. Let us believe this and we shall not perish euerlastignly.
For Christ is now become ours, with all that he has with his death, with his
resurrection, with his assencion into heaven, with his life, Qui proprio filio
suo non pepercit.
his merits his glory. As saint Paul witness. Romans viii. wherefore Satan has
now no title to us, he can not meddle with us, he has no power to hurt us.
For So Much as we be justified by christ, purged from our sins, and made the
children of god by Christ who has reconciled us and wrought our peace, we must
therefore be of good comfort. For saying we be in the hands of god, that is
omnipotent, who is now our best most loving, and trusty father we be in a sure
port, we be with our danger, there ca^ no incommodity nor adversity hurt us,
for we be environed with the custody of god, and the guard of angels, out of the
hands of this heavenly father can no creature by force pluck us When we be at
an end by death of this cross and corporal affliction then have we ended our
journey, then have we finished our war: Christ has borne the same cross,
Christ has passed the same way, he has suffered like death, he is our
head we must be like to him, we must suffer with hi^, if we intend to reign
with him, we must leave this corporal life, ere that we can inioye life
everlasting. Let not our sins trouble us, let them not tormente our
conscience, as though they could not be forgeuen. They are already forgeuen, if
we repent and believe: Christ is al ours as much as he is. He by his innocence
has covered and taken away our sins. As Christ can not be dampened, even
so we can not be dampened, if with a right faith, we cleave unto him. As
sin, death, and hell, had no power against Christ so have they no power
against us so we be in Christ, and Christ in us. If the matter had be left
and committed to us to have borne our own sins, and to have satisfied for
them, they would have be to heuie for us, we had not be able to stand under
them they would have pressed and sunk us down to hell. But christ both god
and man has (of his own free will) offered him self for us. he has taken
our turn, he has plaide our part, and paid for us all that we ought. As it
is in the Psalm spoken in the person of christ, I paid that I ought not. We
had trespased, we were ye detters, so far behind hand, that all that was in
us, was not able to pay ye lest so^me we ought. Christ became our suertie,
paid for us, acquitted us, and set us at liberty. yea, made us coheires with
him of everlasting glory.

If it were possible for one man to commit the sins of the whole world, so
he truly repent and cleave by true faith to Christ, he can not be dampened,
his sins be sufficiently and abundantly by Christ satisfied for. For Christ
(as towchinge his godhed one in substance with the heavenly father As towchinge
his manhede our very flesh and blood) has purchased, and truly bought grace
and pardon for us. For Christ became man for us, was borne for us, died upon
the cross for us, rose from death for us, ascended into heuin for us, and has
accomplished and performed all things mete for our salvation, for us. If
therefore we believe in christ we are become partakers of gods favor we are eased
of the pack and bourde^ of sin, we are made the heirs of god and coheires
with Christ for ever, and that by Christ and for Christ. For without Christ
there is no consolacio^, no health no hope, no help. In Christ alone is all
comfort, all health, all hope, all succor, all refuge, all grace and mercy
more habundant more ple^teous, more excellent than any man is able either to
comprehend or to wish. God grant us therefore a true and a constant faith. In
this form or in like sort we must comfort our selves in our sickness or
calamity, and our brother being visited. But in any wais and with all
dilygence it is to be foreseen, yt we withdraw our mind from the fearful
and terrible contemplacion of sin, death, and damnacion. And that we fix
these of our mind and whole thought upon Christ only, yt we cleue unto him,
that we call upon him, that we commit our self wholly to him. For in Christ we
shall epsy nothing but innocence, justice, life, salvation, which al be
derived from Christ into us, so that we will acknowledge him, and receive him
for ye author of our salvation and only redemer. if we have christ crucified
before our eyes: if we imprinte him in our heart, if we flee to him with our
faith: if we wholly cleue to him. Then shall hell gates nothing prevail against
us, then shall we be able to withstand all the forcible assaults of Satan,
though they be never so sore, never so fierce, never so terrible.

Let us call to remembrance with what lenity, what ge^tilnes, what humanity,
what clemency Christ (as it is in the euangelical history) has called unto
him and receued al such sinners as has repented them, and desired his help.
We shall find Mary Magdalen, the sinner that honge upon the right hand of
christ crucified, the publicane, zache, with other mo whom Christ most
lovingly receiuinge pronounced clear from sin, (though they had sinned
greatly) and the childern of salvation, Christ is very grace, mercy, help,
comfort, life, joy, and salvation to al those which look for these things at
his hands: and put their trust in him. And all these things has God (who is
truethe it self and can not lie nor will not deceive) promised unto us for
christ's sake.

Finally when death approaches we must do as Christ did upon the cross, we
must pray for our enemies and forgeaue them with our heart. If we have
offended any man we must be hartelie sorye for it, we must desire forgeuenes.
if we have injured any man, we must make him amends, or take such order that
amends may be made unto him. if it passithe our power to make restitucion and
amends: it shall be enough that we desire forgeauenes. And with our hearts
forgeaue others which has hurt us either in name, body substance or
estimacion. For if we truly forgive: god has promised we shall be forgiven as
it is in the syxt of Matthew.

It is very necessary also and profitable for the confirmacio^ and
strenghteninge of our faith to receive the most blessed sacrament of the
body and blood of our savior christ which we are commanded to receive in
remembrance of his benefits, that hereby, we may be truly certified in our
conscience his body to be given for us, and his blood to be shed for remission
of our sins.

Death
OF our flesh and fraill nature is so feared and abhorred yt when he
approaches, man's heart is filled and laden with such sorrows, panges, and
anxieties as tongue is not able to express.

A medicine against the fear of death.
WE must call to our remembrance death to be ouercomed and abolished by
Christ. So that now the souls of so many as trust in Christ, ca^ not die nor
perish: but departinge from the body goes straight to christ. For thus was
it said to the thief at his hour of death. This day shall thou be with me in
paradise. The body though it rest and pause for a while yet we be in
certain hope that at the last day it shall be raised again to immortal and
everlasting life. And therefore scripture calls the death of the body but a
sleep, for that this same frail, weke, vile, mortal and corruptible body,
which we carry about, which lies sick and sore diseased, which shortly shall be
put into the earth, burnt to ashes, devoured with bestes or fowls, drowned in
water, ye same self body (I say) shall be raised again incorruptible, glorious,
bewtifull, strong, i. cor. xv.
pure immortal to possess a new and everlasting life: where there shall
neither be hunger, thirst, heat, cold, sin, death nor any kind of calamity,
but justice, innocencye, life, joy, bless, world without end. For as the
body of Christ laid in the grave rose again the third day never more to die.
Eue^ so shall ye bodies of all that believe in christ at the later day be
resuscitate to a life, after which shall follow no death. God who is of
infinite power and infallible truth has promised these things, they must
therefore needs be so. And here it shall be profitable to call to remembrance
such places of scripture as treatith of the resurrection of the flesh, which
be the words not of man but of god. who is able and will certainly fulfill
what soever he has spoken. No man can change his will, no man can alter his
purpose. No creature can frustrate, let, or tarry his sentence. He is
omnipote^t, he is true, he is faithful, his goodness and mercy is
inexplicable. Let no man therefore doubt of the treuthe of his words let no man
doubt of the performaunce of his promise.

Herafter folowithe certain places of scripture witnessinge the resurrection
of the dead according to this article of our faith wherein we say we believe yt
this flesh shall rise again. John. vi.

THis is the will of my Father which sent me, yt whosoever seith the son and
beleuithe in him shall have life everlasting and I will raist him up again in
the last day.

The hour comithe wherein all they that be i^ the grauys shall here the voice of
the son of God and shall go forth they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life. Johan. v


For if so be that the spirit of him which raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
in you: Romans viii
euin he that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies because of his sprite that dwells in you.

God has both raised up our Lord Jesus Christ and shall also raise us up by
his power. i. Cor. vi.


Christ says Lazarus was but a sleep where in very deed he was dead and
buried. Johan. xi
But Christ is the resurrection and life (as it is in the same place) so that
he that beleuethe on him though he were dead he shall live, In verefienge
whereof he raised straighte way Lazarus being four days dead and stynkynge.
And because we be naturallye in the agonye of death very fearful, weak and
faintherted: to the end yt we might be the easelier persuaded in the article of
resurrection: Scripture makes mention of many which in the time of the
prophets, Christ, and thappostles were called from death to life,

Luc. 7.
Christ raised the widows son.

Luc. 8.
He raised the ruler of the sinagoge his daughter.

Ioa. xi.
He raised Lazarus.

Act. ix.
Peter restored to life Tabitha.

Act. xx.
Paul raised again Eutichus.

iiii. Re. 4.
Elizeus the prophet called again to life his hosts son.

iii. re. xvii
Helias raised the babe of ye woman of Sareptanie.

God took also unto him out of this frail and transitory life, Genesis 5. 4. Reg.
ii.
these two excellent and holy me^ Enoch and Helias quick both body and
soul, to give us (as it were) a taste and representacion of the true life to
come, lest after the opinion of ye ethnickes and epicures we should think
there were no world, nor being after this wretched and miserable life. Let us
not forget what christ Jesus lord of life, and death, says in the.viii. of
Luke, weep not, the maid is not dead but a sleep. Reason not co^prehe^ding ye
mysteries of god, nether perceiving his power does laugh this sai^g to scorn,
but christ prouethe his saing true, he raises by and by ye dead maid to life.

The.xv. chapter of the first epistle to the Corin. is replenished with most
godly pleasant and pithie consolations. Truly it is more precious than any
gold. For in that Chapit. saint Paul does so annexe and couple our
resurrection to the resurcection of christ as though they could in no wise be
separate or divided after this form. Christ is risen from death (which thing
is certain) ergowe al so shall undoubtedly rise. For christ is our head and we
his members: This head is neither without nether will forsake his members. The^
it follows that where christ is, there shall we be. For why, we are the
members of his body and euin of his flesh and bone, Ephesi. 5.
what tongue, what pen, what wit is able to set forth (as it is worthy)
this ineffable, and inestimable glory of the mercy and grace of god, that God
has vouchsafe so low to humble him self as to become mortal man that this
feeble and frail nature of man united and knit to the divine nature by the
power and efficacy of the godhead, might be inhaunced and promoted to
immortality. For truly the nature of all faithful men which either were
before christ, has be sens, ar now or shall be to the worlds end:
undoubtedly in christ very god and man has optained imortality. The
consolacion therefore yt rises of christ's resurrection is of great
efficacitie, As when saint Paul says to the Corinthians: Christ, i. Cor. xv,
is risen again from dead, and is the first fruictes of them yt sleep for by
one man truli came death and by one man comes the resurrection of ye dead. And
as al die i^ Adame: euin so shall all be made alive in christ, but every one
in his order. The first is christ. The^ they which are christ's which has
believed in his commi^g. And saint Paul does add a similitude taken of
natural things where by he does set forth and declare the resurrection of
bodies. The similitude is taken of sede which cast into the earth by the
husbandman dies as it were and rotteth. Never the less it is not utterly
lost but at lenght springs and comes forth of ye earth, goodly, beautiful
and pleasant. So our bodies shall rise again not feeble, vile, corruptible,
mortal: but strong glorious incorruptible, immortal never to die again but
ever to live

The way in to true and everlasting life to our long home (as they call it)
and country is by corporal death. Flesh and blood being corruptible and
mortal can not inherit ye kingdom of god where nothing is but life. Therefore
this corruptible body must put on i^corrupcio^, and this mortal must put on
immortality. Ore. xiiii. Esa. xxv.
Than shall the saing that is written be fulfilled. Death is swalowed up in
victory. They that believe in Christ has now ouercomed sin, death, and hell.
Therefore not fearinge death but strong, bold, and well hearted in Christ: they
may say death where is thy sting? death where is thy victory? The stinge of
death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks be unto god
which has geauen us the victory through our lord Jesus Christ.

Let us hear also more sentences full of godly and mighty consolacion.

He that has raised up Jesus shall raise us up also with Jesus. ii. Cor. iiii


Phili. iii.
Our conuersacio^ is in heuin from whence we do look for the savior our lord
Jesus christ which shall change our vile body yt it may be like fashioned unto
his glorious body according to the workinge of his power, by the which also he
is able to subdue all things unto him self.

Col. iii.
Ye are dead and your life is hid with christ in god, but when christ your life
shall appear then shall ye also appear in glory with him.

i. Tesso. 4.
We would not (brethern) that ye should be ignorant concerning them that
sleep, yt ye sorrow not also as other do which have no hope. For if we believe
that Jesus christ died and rose again: euin the^ also which are a sleep,
through Jesus shall God bring with him.

ii. Tim. ii
Saint Paul also does comfort Timothe with the article of resurrection saing.
Remember ye the lord Jesus Christ being the seed of David rose again from the
dead according to my gospel. And if we be dead with him we shall also live
with him. If we suffer pacie^tly we shall also reign with him.

It is written also to ye Hebreus that Christ tasted death for all men, Hebre.
ii.
and that he was partaker of flesche and blood.i. became very man that he
might destroy him which had the rule of death (that is) the devil, and that he
might deliver them which were in bondage all their life time, by the reason of
the fear of death.

God has deliueryd us, ii. Tim. i.
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works but according
to his purpose and grace which is geauen us in Christ Jesus before the time of
the world but is now made manifest by the apperinge of our savior Jesus
Christ which truly has destroyed death and has brought life and
immortality to light by the gospel.

i. Io. iii.
We know that we are translated from life to death because we love the
brethern.

i. Io. 4.
In this has the love of god apperid in us, because God sent his only
begotten son into the world yt we might live through him.

Job. xix.
I know that my redemer does live, and in the last day I shall rise again,
and again be wrapped in my own skine. And in my own flesh shall see God,
whom I my self shall see and these my eyes shall behold and none other:

These places of hollie scripture and such like, if we diligently remember
and faithfully embrace: we shall perceive great consolacion and conforte, Phi.
iii.
And euin with saint Paul rejoice, that we know christ and the power of
his resurrection, whereby death is ouercomed. Nether is there now (to these that
believe in Christ) any thing in death terrible or to be feared, sauinge only
the Image and outward form, hurt it can not. Like as a deed serpent keapith
still his old fearful shape and form: but to stinge or do harm he has no
power at al. And like as by the brasin serpente which Moses by gods
commandment set up in deserte when it was looked upon through the power of
gods word men were deliuerid from danger of the lively and venyme
serpents so our death is made harmles and we delivered from the fear and
danger of it, so often as with the eyes of our faith we do behold the
helthefull and medicinable death of Christ. In conclusion death is now
become but a Image and shadow of death, yea the entrance and gate to life.
For Christ who is truth it self says. If any man keep my word, Io. viii
he shall never see death, For a man trustinge to the mercy of God, through
faith, which he conceauith by heringe of Christ's gospel: is so unite and
knitt to christ his lord and master, that he can not be plucked nor separate
from him.

The body in deed for a time is separate from the soul but in certain hope of
risinge again to everlasting life. And so he that beleuithe in Christ does
not see nor feel the everlasting death of body and soul, which is
everlasting dampnacion, For the death of good men is nothing else but a
departure from this transitory and mortal life: to immortality to christ, to
his angels and saints.

Hell and dampnacion
Does offer it self at ye hour of death, so that many times man does greatly
fear lest he be abject from the favor of god and appointed to everlasting
pain: The devil (which seeks by all means how to devour us) steringe up
in our minds many dangerous and troubellous thoughts, concerning our
eleccion and predestinacion.

A medicine against the fear of hell and dampnacion.
WHen ye devil goes about to cause us to dyspaire or to doubt of our election:
whether we be of the number of them that are appointed to everlasting life or
no, In any wais let us not be to boulde in copinge with him, let us not enter
disputacion against him (for he is to subtle and expert for us) but say
shortly unto him Away Satan with sorrow, it is written, thou shall not tempt
the lord thy God, For seeing that god as a most louinge father has not only
geauen us life. fed and preseruid us, to this hour: but also has endued
and even laden us from time to time with his singular benefits. what madness
were it contrary to our former experience, now to dout of his mercy? He has
receauyd us in to his flock by baptime.

He has sent us the gospel of his grace, wherein he has promised to
become our father. we have be fed with the flesh and blood of his son
our savior CHRIST in remembrance that our debtes be paid and we
acquitted, why should we now then doubt of the good will of GOD toward us?
let us not therefore admit the doutfull and dangerous Imaginacions of our
predestinacion which the devil like a crafty and malicyous merchant does
labor to iustill. But let us think upon such sentences as God would have our
minds occupied withal, which Christ him self has prescribed, as John.iii.
where he sayethe. GOD has so loved the world, that he has geuyn his only
begotten son, that whosoever beleuythe in him shall not perish, but have
life everlasting. Loo here we see that he which beleuithe in Christ, which
faythfullye acknowlegeth christ, to be his sanctifycacyon, justice, redemption
and satisfaccion: can not be dampened, but is assured of everlasting life. So
many as conceive faith by hearing of Gods word: and so trust sted
fastelye upon the mercy of christ: Undoubtedly they be of the number of those
which be chosen to everlasting bliss, known before in CHRIST predestinate,
and written long since, in the book of life. These things be most certain,
and most true, God can neither deceive nor be deceived. Romans viii
Such is his good will, so has he purposed and decreed before the world
began, what things soever therefore our enemy the devil (spytynge our
salvation, and seeking our destructyon) shall put in our mind contrary to
this doctrine. Let them not move us, let them not make us afraid, but let
us trust truly in christ: and so shall he become ours, and we become his, who
being our good LORD, we can not perysshe nor be dampened. Io. x.
For he will lose none of those that his father has given him. we must fyxe
our eyes upon Christ, we must flee to him, we must cleave to him. He is
our only and true sauyoure, who must be apprehended and embraced by faith,
if we look to be saved. For they that believe rightly in Christ, they are
predestinate to everlasting life. Here we must diligently remember and
earnestelye expende the godly exhortacion of saint Paul which he writes in
the.xii. to the Hebrews, whose words be these, Let us run by pacyence unto
the battle that is set before us, He. xii.
lokynge unto Jesus, the auctore and finisher of faith, which when the joy
was set before him, suffered the cross, and despised the shame, and sits at
the right hand of the seat of GOD:

Furthermore all the grievous tentacions and afflictions that CHRIST suffered,
he suffered them for our sakes. As saint Paul says also in the iiii. to
the hebrews. He. iiii.
We have not a high priest that is not able to have compassion on our
weakness: but such one as was prouyd in all points without sin, let us
therefore with bouldnes go unto the seat of his grace, that we may obtain
mercy and find grace to help in time of need: Let us in any ways consider, and
deplie imprinte i^ our hearts, christ to be geuin unto us, not only to thend yt
we might be redemid, reconciled and made partakers of everlasting salvation:
but also yt i^ him we might have an example, both how to live, and also how
to end our life. Nether can any man live, suffer or dye well: unless he look
upon and follow the life, sufferinge and death of Christ. if therefore we desire
to end this life well and godly: let us consider and remember how Christ
behaved him self in that bitter and smart agony, when hanginge upon the
cross, he was assaulted with diverse fyersse and most grievous temtacions, and
pray that we may have grace to follow his example.

First he was temptyd with syn, when being hanged betwixt two thieves as a
notable and heinous sinner: it was said unto hi^ if thowe beist the son of
God, mat. xxvii
come down from the cross. By this co^tumelious voice what do they signify
else, but that they judged him a noughtie and ungodly person, such one as by
craft subtiltye, falsheade, sossery, and other unlawful means had deceived
the people, had blinded the world, and to be nothing less then the son
of GOD. Even in like manner at the hour of death does the devil tempte man,
what soever man has committed against god, all the sins that ever he did, he
shows unto him, he does exaggerate them to the vttermoste, to the end that the
multitude and hainousnes of the^ considered and perceauid, manne should doubt
of the mercy and favor of god, and so fall into desperacion. Here we had
need to stand sure. And every one of us had need to answer our enemy, thus
temptinge us after this manner I knowledge my self to have sins above all
number, and measure but Christ, who never sinned, in whose mouth was found no
guile. who is that very innocent lamb, has suffered death for my sins,
he has washed them away, he has satysfied aboundantlye for them, Esa.
liii.
how many and how great so ever they were. Christ's death partaineth also
to me, he was wounded also for my iniquities, he was bruised for my
vngraciousenes, by his strypes I am also healed. All my sins has CHRIST
taken to him self, so that now I have none (thanks be to CHRIST) who has
satysfyed for them in his own body.

CHRIST was tempted also with death, when it was said unto him: he has
saved other, Mat. xx7
but he can not save him self. (As though it should be^ said) he is now
at appointe, he must dye, there is no remedy, he can not escape. Thus does
our old and irreconciliable enemy labor to fear us with death but let us
hold out the buckeler of faith in Christ against him. Let us remember that
Christ our Lord, king of glory, and prince of life, could not be
ouercommed nor holden of death, but though he once tasted of death: he now
lives and reigns for ever. This LORD of ours will not leave us, nor suffer
death to execute any tyranny against us, that after he has suffered us to
be tempted a while he will also that we dye corporally: all that is wholly for
our wealth. Neither could we other ways come to everlasting life but by
temporal death. We must therefore leave this present life, ere we can inherit
the eternal life. Also this corporal death bringethe this comoditie that by
tastinge the bitterness and sowernes of it: we have experience and know the
exceeding love that Christ bare toward us, and the inestimable benefitt ye he
did for us, in cleansing our sins, in abolisshynge of death, in breaking up
of hell gates, and al by his death. Other ways we could never have known the
power of christ in abolishinge of death, we could never have justly esteemed the
excellency of this benefit, we could never have seen how just cause we have to
give thanks, to christ our lord and redemer. Christ living truly, we shall
also live. and this corporal death to us shall be nothing else but a sweet and
wholesome sleep, an intraunce and gate in to the true and blessed life. For after
this transitory life then begin we first truly to live.

THirdly Christ was tempted with hell, or everlasting damnation, wha^ it was said
unto him, he has trusted in GOD let him now deliver him if he will. As though
they should say. Now it appearethe yt he has hoped in god in vain. For god
will none of him, he has forsaken him, he likethe him not, he does abhor
him, he will cast him down to hell and perpetualy co^dempne him. When
therefore the temptor shall lasche at us wc like temptacions, we may not
shrink, we may not be afraid, we may not be discoraged but commend our self,
wholly to CHRIST, hang upon him, who is wholly ours, who has geuin him self
wholly to us, so that sin, death, nor hell, has nothing to do with us. CHRIST
with a inestimable price, his own blood has deliueryd us from the tyranny of
the devil, and ever lasting dampnacio^, he is become our innocence, our life,
and our justice. Let us take heed in any ways that we turn not our hearts from
CHRIST crucified, If we cleue to him, we are set upon a sure and inexpugnable
rock, against the which all the power of hell is able to do nothing. So
that we may boldly exclame, and every one say with CHRIST I provided the Lord
before my eyes all way, Psalm. xvi
for he is at my right elbowe, that I should not be mouyd, therefore my heart
has be glad and my tongue has reioysed, moreover my felsshe shall rest in
hope. By faith in CHRIST we become the sons of GOD, the brethren and
coheires of Christ, and partakers of everlasting life, by this faith departing
hence, we shall go to the kingdom preparyd for the elect, before the
beginnynge of the world. And if in the feruentnes of these temptacio^s our
faith begin to waver, if we do not bear patiently the will of our heuinlye
Father, if our love toward god wax faint and cold, if our hope begin to
be feeble and weak: and therefore we begin to fear, lest god and we be not all
at a full point, but that he is yet displeased with us: which tentacion
(surely) is very grievous, painful, dangerous, and hard to overcome: we must
call to remembrance Christ to have suffered for us so intolerable and
invincible tentacions: that there apperyd no help, no comfort, no refuge,
wherein GOD and the whole world: semyd to have forsaken him, and to be against
him: In somouche that he exclaimed, O my god, o my GOD why haste thou forsaken
me. Oh here was a grievous tentacion, A sharp and a bitter death that CHRIST
sufferid for us, and all to make the way of the cross and death easy unto us.
Therefore seeing that, CHRIST of his own free will, cast him self into the
felinge of so intolerable pain, calamity, and anxiety (GOD our most louinge
Father being therewith content) vndoubtydlye he knowith and consyderyth our
infirmite, undoubtedly he will not deal with us according to the rigor of
the law, but will bear much with us and pardon many things, to our infirmity.
Does not CHRIST speak to al men? does he not call men, when he says: Come
unto me all you that do labor and are laden and I shall refresh you? how can
there be any greater consolacio^? how could CHRIST speak more mercyfully to
us. There be many things that pinche, vex, and trouble man grievously: but what
thing is it that can trouble the conscience of a sinner, more tha^ when he
doubts of the mercy of god, then when he fearethe least GOD will cast him
of, then wha^ he can not persuade him self to conceive any trust of gods mercy,
but Imagine that as a witheryd member he shall be cut of and cast away. Here we
had need of christ's present help, here we had need of spedy comfort, lest
this violent tempest ouerwhelme and drown us. But let us not fear, CHRIST is
no dissembler, he will stand by his word, he will perform his promise, He
will help and refresshe. Therefore when we begin to trymble and fear in
our conscience, when we begin to doubt of gods mercy, when we perceive our
faith to be feable. Let us forthwith call upon GOD, and that fervently, and
that indesinantly, leven from the bottom of our heart, that he turn not his
face from us.

Let us power before him all that does trouble us. Let us disclose, to him
our myserye, our imbecillitie, our incredulity. Let us cry with the
disciples, lord increase our faith. Luc. xvii.
And with the Father of the Lunaticke. Lord we believe, help our incredulity.
And with the prophet. Marci. ix
Lord make have to help us. For thy mercy is above all thy works. O most
loving, O most mercyful father, lord god of our health, Ps. lxix
our only help and refuge. Enter not into judgment with thy servants.
Christ is our justice, our redemption, and innocency, he for us has suffered
most bitter and cruel death.

Let these things move the o father of mercy. For this thy son our savior
Christ's sake have mercy upon us, confirm and strength our heart in faith,
comfort us with the consolations of thy holy sprit, that we may finally obtain
Joy everlasting, through Jesus christ Amen.

After this sort if we (laboring, wresting, and striuinge with our
imbecility, accusing before god, and lamentinge our pusilianimity and
incredulity) do catch hold of christ and cleue fast to him, earnestlye and
fervently desirynge his help, that he will vouchsafe to take our place and to
supply that is lackinge in us. These things if we do surely all things shall be
well, we shall avoid and escape easly all danger and peril, we shall be safe
enogh. For these two, to believe in Christ and with heart to desire faith, does
not much differ the one from the other. For though we feel yet great weakness
and imperfection in our self, yet this ought to comfort us, that god wylleth
and commands that he should be called upon, yt he has promised to here and
help these, that call ryghtly upon him. Now as nothing is more justly or
necessarily desired the^ true faith, even so god hearith no prayer sooner or
more gladly then when man findyng no goodness in him self, does acknowledge his
own infirmity, his own mysery, his own beggerlines, does accuse and lament
his own incredulity, and with deep sighs, and hearty desires calls for
faith. These sighs, these desires, these prayers, this little spark of faith
is ye very sede of GOD, wrought in us by him, which says of Christ by the
Prophet Esaias, yt he shall not quench the smokinge flax, nor break the brusyd
read. Therefore let us steadfastly believe, or at the least earnestelye and
heartily pray that we may believe, bewaylyng before god our lack of faith,
which things if we do, we need not doubt but we be acceptid of god, we be
taken for his children. For it is not for naught, nor in vain that he has
laid our imbecillitie and sins upon his only begoten sons back.

In Matthew Math. v.
it is said blessed be those that mourn, for they shall be comforted, blessed be
those yt ho^ger after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. These words are
spoken al so to us, they may justly be applied to us, we mourn and are sorry in
our hearts that we have mispendyd our life paste. We wish and desire, yea we
eue^ honger and thriste after righteousness. Let us be of good chere, we shall
obtain our desire, we shall be comfortyd, we shall be counted just a fore GOD,
for CHRIST our savior his sake. Finally let us after the example of Christ
and saint Steuin commend our souls into the hands of GOD our heavenly father,
sainge every one after this manner.

O Most merciful father I co^me^d into thy holly hands my spirit, yea thy
spirit, for thou have create it, thou haste committed it for a time to the
body, thou haste given it thy own Image and similitude. Thou haste sent for
the redemption of it, thy own most derely beloved son to shed his blood.
This the spirit, I resign into thy hands, O GOD of all mercy, I am thine all
that I am, I beseech the refuse not thy own but receive, keep and place me in
everlasting glory for the sake of Jesus Christ, thy only begoten son Amen.

Imprinted at London by James Burrel, dwelling without the North gate of
Paul's in the cornor house of Pater noster row openinge in to chepesyde Cum
priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


