The copy of a pistel or letter sent to Gilbard Potter in the time when he was
in prison, for speakinge on our most true queen's part the Lady Mary before he
had his ears cut of.

The.xiij. of Iulye.

Si deus nobiscum, quis contra nos.

Anno. M. D. Liij. the first of August.

Poor Pratte, unto his friend Gilbard Potter, the most faithful and true lover
of queen Mary does him salute with many salutations. S. P. D.
WHereas thou haste of late showed thy self (most faithful Gilbard) to be a
true subject to Mary queen of England, not only by words, but by deeds, and
for the farther trial of thy true heart toward her did offer thy body to be
slain in her quarrel, and offered up thy self into the hands of the ragged
bear most ra^cke, with whom is nether mer cy, pity, nor compassion, but his
in dignation present death. Thy promis (Gilbarde) is faithful. Thy heart is
true. Thy love is ferue^te toward her grace. And whereas you did promis me
faythfullye (when I last visited thee in prison) to be torn with wild horses,
thou would not deny Marye our Queen, and to yt which thou tofore did
say, no denial shall be found in thee, so still do thou continue in ye same
mind, have a respect of thy conscience. Fear not to say the truth, if thou
dye, thou shall die in the right, pugna propatria, fight for thy country
(says the Philoso pher). For as it shall be to thy great honor and praise in
this world and in heaven to dye in her graces quarrel, and in the defense of thy
cou^ trey, so would it be to the utter destruction, both of thy body and soul
to do the contrary. But (o thou true Gilbard) stand stiflye in her cause, and
do thou according to thy last promis made me (as I do not doubt but thou will)
then will god keep thee and preserve thee. If thou should dye, thou shall die
inno cent, so shall you be assured to possess the everlasting kingdom of
heaven. If you fortune to live, then shall it be also accounted praise to thee.
And fully persuade with thy self, that her grace will consider thy faithful and
true heart (as she has just occasion). For who could have been more
faythfuller then thou haste been? What man could have showed him self bolder
in her graces cause, then thou have showed? Or who did so valiantlye in the
proclamation time, when Jane was published queen (unworthy as she was) and more
to blame, I may say to thee, are some of the consenters thereunto. There were
thousands more then thy self, yet durst they not (such is ye fragility and
weakness of the flesh) once move their lips to speak yt, which thou did
speak. Thou offerest thy self amongst the multitude of people to fight
against them all in her quarrel, and for her honor did not fear to run upon
the point of the swords. O faithful subject, O true heart to Mary our Queen,
I can not but write of the conding praise that you deseruest for this thy
boldness. I may compare thee to Sidrack, Misack, and Abdenago, which ra there
then they would forsake their master, were contented to suffer the torments in
the hoate burning oven. And as young Daniel when he was brought before such a
ruler (as that false Duke of Northumberland) rather then to deny his Lord,
would suffer the pains of imprysonment, and to be cast in the den of lions.
Even so (faithful Gilbard) rather then thou wouldeste consent to their false
and trayterouse proclamation for Jane, when thou did hear it, having a clear
conscience, would not consent to the same most traitorous fact. And so little
regarded thy life, boldly stood in thy mistres cause, and offered thy body to
be inprisoned, and to suffer death, then to deny our virtuous Mary to be
queen. And therefore trust to it, (my faithful Gilbard) as the god of Sidrack,
Misack, and Abdenago saved them from al hurt in ye hot burning oven, that not
so much as one hear of their head was peryshed. So shall the same God save
thee out of the hands of the cruel bear, and give him no power of thy life.
Again as God preserved Daniel when he was cast in the den amongst the lions
at the commandment of the king Nabuchodonosor. And when he was in the
middeste of the^, the lions played with him (which was admirable). So do thou
trust to, albeit thou art now in the den amongst deuourers (I mean under
the power of the bear and the raged staf) yet the god of Daniel shall safely
deliver thee out of all their hands, and thee rather, if thou do still
continue steadfast and hold on Mary our queen, and forsake thy master, no more
then Daniel and the brethren did their God and master. Despair not, but live
in hope to se a good day, and the sooner will it come, it we continue in prayer.
For my part, faithful Gylbard, I will never sease day nor night from praying for
our good Mary yt her grace might once obtain the crown, and that it would
please him of his omnipotente power to strengten and help her grace, Mary thy
Queen and mine, so say I to the death, and to conquer yt bear. So here I
shall desire thee also to offer up to the almighty lord, god ly contemplations,
that she may overcome her enemies.

For as the inhabitours of the great city of Niniue continued in prayer, and
clothed them selves in sackecloth, cast duste upon their heads, repented, and
bewailed their manifold sins and offenses, at what time as the Prophet Jonas
had preached to them the destruction of their city, knew that it was time to
do all the same, else destruction would follow. So should we now not cease praying
to God to send us quietness, and that the lady Mary might enjoy ye kingdom.

For we have had many Prophets and true preachers which did declare unto us,
yt our king shall be taken away from us, and a tirant shall reygne, the Gospel
shall be plucked away, the right heir shall be dispossessed, and al for our
vnthanckfulnes, and think thou not (Gilbard) ye world is now come? Yea
truly. And what shall follow if we repent not in times. The same God will take
from us the virtuous Lady Mary our lawful queen, and send such a cruel
Pharao as the ragged bear, to rule us, which shall pull and pol us, spoil us,
and utterly destroy us, and bring us in great calamities and miseries. And
this god will send us, and all for our iniquities. For if unto our queen Mary
any evil should happen, let us fully persuade with our selves, that it is not
for her small sins only, but for our euel liuinges. And this little troubles
(which be grievous to her grace) does chaunse to her for thy sins and mine,
let us so think. For truly (faithful Gilbard) god is displeased with us many
ways. And here I dar be bold to say, yt her grace is more sorrowful for ye
death of king Edward her brother, then she is glad yt she is queen. For her
part (good virtuous lady) she would have been as glad of her brothers life,
as the ragged bear is glad of his death. Agamenon the heathen king was never
more unquieted with his high estate, when he lamented for that he was king
over so many people, as her grace is now troubled to rule and govern so
many evil persons. Plato was never gladder, when he was exiled from the
kings court, because his mind was more addict thereby and given to the study
of Philosophy, as she would be, if she might once be exiled from the company of
such traitors, whereby she might be more quieter, and possess this her
kingdom peasablye. Even so I dare aduouche, yt her grace was far quieter,
and better contented with her old estate, then now she is queen (if it had
pleased God) But now praised be almighti god because he has so provided us a
right and lawful air, and so virtuous a princess, to possess this imperial
crown of England, and so are we all bound highlye to thank him therefore.
Trustyng that the same god will shortly exalt her grace, and set her in her
perfect dignity, and pluck down yt Jane, I can not nominate her queen, for
ye I know no other queen's, but the good lady Mary her grace, whom God prosper.
I hear say (faithful Gilbard) yt the true subject sir Edmond peckhame is gone
with all his power and treasure to assist her grace. Ex fructu scimus quid sit
arbor, By ye fruit we may know what the tree is. So by his fruits, yt is, by all his do inges we may know, what he is, how true and faithful has he showed
him self to be at all times to Henry theight of famous memory. What man
deserved more commendation then he? He never rob bed his grace, when he had all
the rule of his treasure, he used not to bye silver for four shillinges an
once and made the king pay five shillinges four pence (as other false
traitors did) but look what he paid, the king paid no more. He was ever true
and faithful by re port as well of all other as of his own servants. And now
for ye full trial of his true heart, how has he showed him self to her
grace, left house lands and al, and gone to help her. Truly we have to few
such faithful men. I hear also, yt there is come more to help her grace, the
Earl of Darbey, the Earl of Oxford, the Earl of Bath, and diverse other nobles,
which I can not rehearse nominatly. The God of hosts, ye God of Abraham
prosper them, keep them, and give them power to withstand al their enemies, and
the most mighty lord take part with them (as I do not mistrust) for the right
sake. I hear no other news, but yt here is con tinually great preparation, and
many carts appointed to carry harnes and artilery, God send the^ evil to
speed. The good Earl of Arun del, and the Earl of Shrosburye be here still, but
as I am informed, the Earl of Arundel will not consent to none of their
doings. O God I most hertelye desire thee, hear my prayer, keep and preserve
the good Earl of Arundel from the tira^ny of yt deuouryng bear. For as thou
have from the beginning en dued him with all truth, so does he still continue
steadfast in yt same, like a worthy noble, preserve him I be seche thee (o my
god) and give him grace still to stand steadfast. The Earl of Shrosbury
bears him self equal god keep him, and send al those that would ye lady Mary
to be queen long life and pleasure, and they which would not, I wyshe the^ the
pains of Satan in hell. I have (faithful Gilbard) scattered abroad three of ye
books more, and two also have I sent into the ragged bears camp, keep that
close which thou have: the world is dau^ gerous: the great deuell Dudley
rules, Duke I should have said, well let yt pass, seeing it is out, but I
trust he shall not long. I have proved if I could get a. M. of the^ in printed
in some strange letter and so a number of the^ to be disparsed abroad.
Forasmuch (Gilbard) as I perceive that thou art straytly kept, and not suffered
to have liberty I shall brieuely visit the with my letters from time to time.
And here Gilbard I exhort the to continue in prayer, and to take in good part
this yoke, laid upon thy shoulders and bear this cross patiently. For
adversity is a good thing, and shall make thee to know god ye better. For I
trust in the lord to live to se ye day her grace to mary such one, as knows
what adversity mea neth, so shall we have both a merciful queen and king to
their subjects. And would to god yt I might live (if it so pleased her grace) to
have an other virtuous Edward: and God make her grace frutful, and send her
fruit to inherit the kingdom after her. I promised you to salut your friend
Robert in your name, accor dingly I have done, desired him to pray with you for
our queen Ma ry, yt it would please ye lord to give her the crown, which she
ought to have of right. And thus to breuiate my long process I end, desiring
the (my constant Gilbard) not to behold the gorgiousnes of my letters, which
be void of al, but to weygh in an equal pair of balla^s the good will of the
writer, who bears the no worse will, then to his own soul, prayinge God to
strengthen the, and give thee grace, to abide faithful toward our most
excellent true and only queen Mary, so shall thou be assured to have god thy
faithful fre^d again, and at the last thou shall inherit his kingdom: to the
which kingdom bring both you and me, and us all.

Amen
Fair you well. Quod Poor Pratte.

Finis.
Imprynted at London in Temstrete over against the Stiliardes, at the sign of
the dobbel hood, by Hewghe Singelton.


