THE NEW COVENANT, OR THE SAINTS PORTION.

A Treatise Unfolding the All-sufficiencie of GOD, and Man's vprightnes, and the
Covenant of grace. delivered In fourteen Sermons upon Genesis 17. 1. 2. Whereunto
are adjoined Four Sermons upon Eccles. 9. 1. 2. 11. 12.

By the late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON. Dr.
in Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel
College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

PSALM. 111. 5. He has given a portion to them that fear him: he will ever be
mindful of his Covenant. LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicolas Bourne, and are
to be sold at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1629.

ILLVSTRISSIMIS, ET HONORATISSIMIS VIRIS, THEOPHILO COMITI LINCOLNIENSI, ET
GVLIELMO VICE-COMITI SAY, ET SELE, DOMINISSVIS SVBMISISSIME COLENDIS, HAS
IOHANNIS PRESTONI SS. THEOL. DOCT. ET COLLEGII IMMANVELIS MAGISTRI PRIMITIAS
DEVOTISSIMI, TAM AVTHORIS, DVM VIVERET, QVAM IPSORVM, QVI SVPERSVNT, OBSEQVII
TESTIMONIVM L.M.D.D.D.

RICHARDVS SIBS. JOHANNES DAVENPORT.

To the Reader.
IT had been much to have been desired (if it had so pleased the Father of
Spirits) that this worthy man had survived the publishing of these, and other
his Lectures: for then, no doubt, they would have come forth more refined, and
digested; For, though there was very little or no mistake in taking them from
his mouth, yet preaching, and writing have their several graces. Things
liuened by the expression of the speaker, sometimes take well, which after,
upon a mature review, seem either superfluous, or flat. And we often see men,
very able to render their conceits in writing, yet not the happiest speakers.

Yet we, considering not so much what might have been, as what now may be for
the service of the Church, thought good rather to communicate them thus, then
that they should die with the Author. He was a man of an exact judgment, and
quick apprehension, an acute Reasoner, active in good, choice in his notions,
one who made it his chief aim to promote the cause of Christ, and the good of
the Church, which moved him to single out arguments answerable, on which he
spent his best thoughts. He was honored of God to be an instrument of much
good, whereunto he had advantage by those eminent places he was called unto. As
he had a short race to run, so he made speed, and did much in a little time.
Though he was of an higher elevation, and strain of spirit then ordinary, yet
out of love to do good, he could frame his conceits so, as might suit with
ordinary understandings. A little before his death (as we were informed by the
Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Say, and Seal, in whose piety, wisdom,
and fidelittie, he put great repose) he was desirous that we should pervse what
of his was fit for public vs^.

We are not Ignorant, that it is a thing subject to censure, to seem bold, and
witty in another man's work, and therefore as little is altered, as may be.
And we desire the Reader, rather to take in good part, that which is intended
for public good, than to catch at imperfections, considering they were but
taken, as they fell from him speaking. And we entreat those, that have any
thing of his in their hands, that they would not be hasty, for private
respects, to publish them, till we, whom the Author put in trust, have perused
them. We purpose (by Gods help) that what shall be judged fit, shall come
forth. We send forth these Sermons of Gods All-Sufficiencie, and Man's
Vprightnes, and the Covenant of Grace first, as being first prepared by him
that had the Coppies, and because, the right understanding of these points has
a chief influence into a Christian life. The LORD give a blessing answerable,
and continue still to send forth such faithful Laborers into his Harvest.

RICHARD SIRS. JOHN DAVENPORT.


OF GODS ALL-SVFFICIENCY.
GENESIS 17. 1. When Abraham was ninety years old and nine, the Lord
appeared unto Abraham, and said unto him, I am GOD All-sufficient, walk before
me, and be thou upright, or perfect.
BEcause, in the performance of all the Duties of Sanctification, Sincerity is
all in all, therefore I have chosen this Text, that you may not be deceived. It
is true; many things are very excellent, if they be right: There is no question
but the Diamond is very precious, if it be a true Diamond, but if it be false,
it is nothing worth; If you take a precious Balm, you make no question of the
thing, and of the excellency of it in general, all the question is, whether it
be right or no, And so in the graces of Gods spirit, especially, seeing they
concern our salvation; It much concerns us, to know whether they be right or
counterfeit; and therefore you see the condition, that God requires here of
Abraham, is, that he be upright, and perfect, without hypocrisy; (so the word
signifies) walk before me without hypocrisy. Now we have rather chosen this
Text than another, because sets forth the ground of all sincerity, and perfect
walking with God, which is, even this apprehension well settled in the heart,
that God is Allsufficient: for this is the Lords precept, Walk before me, and
be thou perfect, or upright, or sincere, let it not be in hypocrisy: and this
is the motive that he vs^th to persuade him to it, I am All-sufficient, as if
he should say, if there were any defect in me, if thou did need or could
desire any thing that were not to be had in me, and thou might have it
elsewhere, perhaps thy heart might be imperfect in walking toward me, thou
might then step out from me to take in advantages elsewhere; but seeing I am
All-sufficient, since I have enough in me to fulfill all thy desires, since I
am every way an adaequate object, that if thou look about, and considerest
all that thy soul can wish for, thou may have it in me, why then should
thou not consecrate thy self to me alone? Why then should thou be uneven in
thy ways, serving me sometimes, by fits, and sometimes the creature? for there
is nothing in the creature, but thou may find it in me, I am Allsufficient.
I am All-sufficient, therefore walk before me, and be perfect.

Yet these words contain somewhat more, which you may see by that which
follows, I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and I will multiply
thee exceedingly. The ground of all our sincerity is the Covenant, that is
between God and us. Now these words do the most briefly, that I find, of any
in the Scriptures, express the Covenant between God and us on both sides, for
they are but the sum of the Covenant, which in other places of Scripture is
explicated, and set forth more at large; so that the opening of the Covenant on
both sides, is the ground of all the sincerity, of all that obedience that we
yield to God: And therefore, I say, you shall not only have occasion from this
Text, to examine the graces of Gods spirit in you, and the actions that flow
from them, whether they be sincere or perfect, but likewise we will show you
the ground of this sincerity whence it arises; and how it is wrought in every
man's heart. And thus these words contain the Covenant, says the Lord to
Abraham, I will be thy God. On the other side; thou shall be mine. Now he
shows what a kind of God he* will be to him, I will be All-sufficient to
thee; which consists in two things, Genesis 15. 1.
If you compare this with Genesis 15. 1. I will be thy Buckler to preserve thee
from all evil: And again, I will be thy exceeding great reward: that is, I
will not only be a shield, but I will be a Sun to thee; I will both preserve
thee from all evil, and I will fill thee with all good things, I will
^omp^^ss^ thee about with mercy and loving kindness: so that thou shall find,
that I will be an exceeding great reward. So God expresses himself to
Abraham. And this is the Covenant on Gods part. Now that which is required on
Abraham's part, is, that he be the Lords, as the Lord is his, for so you see in
the words following. The question only is, in what manner Abraham shall be the
Lords; how that shall be declared? Says he, It is not an empty relation, but
thou must show that thou art mine by walking before me. And yet it must not be
any kind of walking before the Lord, but it must be a perfect walking before
him; Walk before me, and be perfect, and therefore it is added, I will make my
Covenant, that is, this is the Covenant, of which Circumcision was but a Sign,
for it was instituted presently, as we see in the words following.

There are three especial points that we will gather out of the words.

The first is from the connection, and we will begin with that, because it is a
preparation to the other two: In that the Lord uses this as an argument to
Abraham, I am All-sufficient, therefore walk before me, and be thou perfect;
We may observe this; that The cause of all departure from God, Doct. 1.
of all vnevennesse in our ways toward God, Doubting of Gods All-sufficience,
the cause of departure from God.
is from hence, that we do not think God to be All-sufficient.

As on the other side, the cause of all our sincerity and perfectness,
arises hence, that we do apprehend him to be All-sufficient. This you see
evidently arises from the words; for thence is the force of the Argument, I am
All-sufficient, therefore walk before me, and be perfect. My Beloved, it is
evident, that the cause of every man's keeping off from God, the cause of his
vnevennesse after he is come in to him, is from hence, that men think not God,
to be All-sufficient; for if a man had enough in the Lord, he would never go
out from him; but because he wants something, he desires something that is not
in him, or he fears something, that he thinks he cannot keep off from him:
hence it comes to pass that he steps out from God, he goes out of the ways
of his Commandments. And therefore I say, the cause of every man's departure
from God, the cause of his keeping off from God, or of his vnevennesse in the
ways of God, is from hence, that he thinks not God to be All-sufficient; and
this you shall see in three sorts of men.

First, there is a generation of men, that live as without God in the world,
and that look not toward God at all, that make conscience of nothing; and
what is the reason of that? but because they think, they have sufficient of
their own, and therefore they walk in their own ways, and stand upon their
own bottom, and they love thernselues, and serve themselves altogether; and
apply not themselves to the Lord at all: and therefore whenever any man is
brought unto God, the work is, to take him off from his own bottom, to show
him his own insufficiency in himself, and the emptiness of himself, and of
every creature, and the All Sufficiency that is in God, and upon this ground,
he comes in to him. As you know, Luke 15.
the Prodigal Son, when he saw that he could not subsist longer, but he must
perish, if he stayed where he was; and saw again, if he went home to his
Fathers house, there was meat enough: this was that that moved him to go home:
this course the Lord takes with all whom he brings home to him; Act. 16.
as we see in the Iaylor: and in those Act. 2. Act 2.
They were pricked in their hearts; and in Paul, when the light shined about
him, and he was stricken from his horse, Act. 9. Act. 9.
It was all but to show them their vanity, to take them off from their own
bottoms, to show them their own insufficiency, and then he discovered that
All Sufficiency that was in himself; for no man will change but for the
better, he will not deny himself, and leave what he has, till something that
is better be propounded unto him: So, I say, the cause why men come not in is,
because they have an opinion of sufficiency in themselves, and in the creature,
and they apprehend not an All Sufficiency in God: that is, an All Sufficiency
to be in him alone.

bring forth some fruit, and become professors of the fear of God, and yet
they do it not thoroughly, But by halues; the cause of this is likewise from
hence, that they do not apprehend God to be All-sufficient; for it they did,
they would be perfect with him; Math. 13.
as we see the Second and Third Ground (for that Parable does but show you the
kinds of Professors) they were all such as professed the fear of the Lord,
that are there spoken of, for we see, they brought forth fruit, They received
the Word with Joy. What was the reason the second Ground was not perfect with
the Lord? Because they thought him not to be a Buckler strong enough to bear
off all evils, to bear off all persecution. What was the reason the Third
Ground did it not? Because they thought there was something in riches, in
pleasures, in diverse lusts, that they could not have in the Lord, so they
departed from him: Only the Fourth Ground kept close, because they did
apprehend all to be in the Lord that they desired, they did apprehend him to be
strong enough to deliver them from all the things they feared.

The third sort of men are such as are regenerate, which yet are subject to
many slips and falls, to many turnings aside: And the cause of all this is,
that they apprehend not God to be All-sufficient. As, for example, what was the
reason that Abraham when he went down into Egypt (being driven thither by
reason of Famine) saved himself with a lie, saying that Sarah was his Sister,
and not his wife, but because he thought God was not able to keep him and
defend him? If he had thought him to have been All-sufficient, he would not
have done it. What was the reason that Moses, when God sent him on a message
into Egypt, was so backward to perform it; but because he thought that the
Lord was not All-sufficient ^ For he has two reasons why he would not go; One
was, he wanted speech, he wanted ability and gifts; He was of a stammering
tongue; And the other was, those were alive, that (he thought) sought his life:
If he had thought that God was able to have been with his tongue, to have
stregthned him, and to have improved his gifts, and to have enabled him to that
service: if he had thought, likewise, that he had been able to have defended
him from those That sought his life, he would never have disobeyed the
Commandment of God, and been backward to perform it as he was.

And so likewise Rebeccah; What was the reason she used that wyle and shift,
that inordinate means to bring a good thing to pass, to obtain the blessing,
when Jacob and she joined in lying to Isaac, but because they thought God was
not Sufficient to perform that Promise? for the blessing belonged to Jacob,
and no doubt but he should have had it in due time. And so it is in all the
faults of the Saints; which are hence, because they apprehend not God to be
all-sufficient; even as it was in the first sin of Adam, and the Angels; What
was the reason that Adam fell from God at the first? It was because he desired
something that he thought he could not find in the Lord, he desired to know
good and evil, which he thought he should not have in the Lord, he thought the
Lord had kept it from him, and therefore he stepped out from the Lord, to eat
that Apple, using that as a means to obtain his desire. And this, indeed, was
the cause of his falling away. So likewise the cause of the falling of the
Angels. 1 Timothy 3. 6. 1 Timothy 3. 6.
the Apostle says there, that a Minister was not to be a young Sc^oller, least
he be puffed up, and fall into the condemnation of the Devil, that is, least
he be puffed up, and fall into the same sin, for which the Devil was
condemned, that is, to be puffed up, that is, to have the desires enlarged
beyond the bounds which God had set them, to desire more then they should have,
to be exalted above measure, that measure, that God had appointed them, that
is, they desired more, they looked after more, they thought there was not an
All Sufficiency in God for them: This was the sin of the Angels that fell.
And as it was the cause of their first fall, so it is the cause of all the
sins that have been committed since. And the reasons of it in brief are
these:

First it arises from the desire of happiness that From man's desire of happiness.
Happiness, you know, is a compound which consists of all good things, so that
none must be wanting; there is no good thing but it must be an ingredient into
it. Now the nature of man is made by God to desire happiness, every man
naturally desires happiness, and may desire it, if there be any scantnes in
this, if there be any evil that lies upon him, that is not removed, or if
there be any good that he desires and wants, that he does not enjoy; (I say)
his heart cannot rest, for he desires happiness; therefore if he find not an
All Sufficiency in God, so that nothing be wanting, that his heart can desire
or look after, it is impossible he should cleave close unto him, but he will
be ready to step out from him.

From the nature of sin.
the definition that the Schoolmen give of sin, (which we may receive) is
this, that it is the conversion of a man from God to the Creature, from the
immutable God to the mutable creature: In every sin there is such a turning
of the soul from God to the Creature. Now, it is certain, if a man did find
an All Sufficiency in God, he would never turn from him, nor seek to the
Creature; even as the Be, if it did find honey enough in one flower, would
not hasten to another, but because it does not, it goes from flower to flower:
And so is the nature of man (as Solomon expresses it, saying, that) He
hastened to out ward things; that is, when he fell upon one, he found not
enough in it, he made have to another and to another; so the nature of man, if
it did find sweetness, and comfort, and contentment enough in God, it would
not turn from him to the creature; but because, in his sense, the object is
too narrow, there is some what he would have more, he looks over the Pale, as
it were, he sees something that he desires, and that causes him to step out,
whereas if he had enough at home, if he had enough in the Lord, he would not
go out from him, to turn inordinately to the Creature upon any occasion.

sincerity, From the nature of sinceritic.
and perfect walking with God, for to walk perfectly with God, is nothing but
this, when a man chooses God, so that he cleaues to him alone, whereas
doublenes of mind stands in this, when a man is distracted between God and
some other object; I say, between God and riches, between God and credit,
between God and pleasure, and is sometime applying himself to one, and
sometime to another, and so he goes a double way. So that when a man has two
principal objects, and two principal ends, upon which his eye is set, when he
has two inward principles within, that are the cause of his motion, this way
and that way, such a man is a double minded man; he is a single hearted man
that chooses God alone, and though he walk imperfectly with him, yet he
chooses him. Now if a man apprehend Gods All Sufficiency, he will choose him
alone, if he do not, it is impossible he should choose him alone, but he will
join somewhat else with him; for if he think there is but a partial
sufficiency in God, and that there is some sufficiency in any creature besides,
it must needs be that he must have an eve upon both; and then his ways will be
uneven, then his way is unstable; and, therefore, I say, the cause of that
instability, to which men are subject, is, because they do not apprehend God
to be All-sufficient, for you must know this by the way, that there is a double
instabilitie (that word is used in I am. 1. 8. Iam. 1. 8.
A double minded man is unstable in all his ways) One is an instabilitie
between two objects, which makes up all the sufficiency that he desires, so
that there is part of that sufficiency in one, and part of it in another. The
second is an instabilitie in following one object that he has chosen. Indeed,
the second instabilitie all the Saints are subject unto, all regenerate men are
unstable thus in all their ways, they cannot stick fast to God, and walk
perfectly with him. But herein is their sincerity, they choose him, they pitch
upon him. Now the ground of it is, they apprehend him to be All-sufficient;
though this apprehension be not always kept strong, it is not always lively,
and active in their minds, their persuasion is not always full and present, and
therefore they are ready to step out. So the latter instabilitie befalles the
Saints, the former befalles hypocrites, and both the one and the other
instabilitie still proceed from hence, that we apprehend not God to be
All-sufficient. Holy men have that apprehension in the maine, but not in a
constant tenor at all times; Hypocrites have it not so much as in the maine.

faith: From the nature offaith.
that which makes a man righteous, that which sanctifies a man throughout is
faith: That which is the cause of all unrighteousness in us is unbelief, for
it causes a man to depart from the Lord: Heb. 3. 12.
as Heb. 3. 12. Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief to depart from the living God. In this sense faith is said to be
accounted for righteousness. Abraham believed God. Genesis 15. Genesis 15.
God indeed made the same proposition that he does here, for substance, he
tells him what he would do for him, and, says the Text, Abraham believed God,
and it was accounted to him for righteousness. Now, It was accounted to him
for righteousness, chiefly, in this sense, as it is interpreted Romans 4. Romans 4.
that his very taking of the promise, and his accepting of the Covenant, in
that he did receive that which God gave, that put him within the Covenant, and
therefore the Lord reckoned him a righteous man, even for that very
acceptance, and believing. But that is not all: but likewise he accounted
faith to him for righteousness, because faith does sanctify, and make a man
righteous: and therefore Beloved (by the way) wonder not at this, that we put
so much upon faith; for let a man believe, that God is All-sufficient, which is
the Covenant, for justifying faith is but a believing of that part of the
Covenant, and inabling a man to keep the other part, which is required; and, I
say, it makes a man righteous: for when a man believes that God is
All-sufficient, it will cause a man to give up himself to the Lord. Again,
when he believes the Lord to be all in all things to him, it inableth him to be
all in all things to the Lord again, that is, to be holy to the Lord in all
manner of conversation. It knits his heart unto the Lord. It sanctifies a man
throughout, it makes him peculiar to the Lord, i^ makes him wholly to him. This
is the nature of faith. (Now mark it) faith could not thus sanctify, if it
did not believe Gods All Sufficiency. Again, unbelief could not cause out
falling or departing from God, if it were not hence, that we fail in believing
some promise of his, or some threatenings, we think there is not an
All-sufficiencie in God: you know his promises contain all good things, if we
cleave unto him, and his threatenings all evil things, if we depart from him.
If this were fully believed, our hearts would keep near to him: as far as
it is not believed, so far we step out. Now I say hence faith purifieth the
heart: It sanctifies, is the cause of all righteous^esse that is wrought by
us: and unbelief is the cause of all unrighteousness that is wrought by us.
Hence we gather then, that the persuasion of Gods All Sufficiency keeps a man's
heart perfect with God: and as far as you come short of this persuasion, so
far you are ready to depart from him. And all the ground of it is, because
that which draws us from the Lord, is either vain fears, or vain hopes.
Those are the two ears as it were, by which Satan takes every man, whereby
the draws him away, out of the ways of the Lords Commandments. Now if a man
did believe that God were All-sufficient, he would be subject to none of these
false fears, if he did apprehend him to be a Buckler, that could keep him
from all ill. Again, on the other side, if the did believe God to be an
exceeding great reward, that is, so great a reward that there can be nothing
wanting in him, that there is a length, and breadth, and depth, and height, in
that reward; that his heart has latitude enough to walk in, he can dosire
nothing out of it: this would free a man from all vain hopes, so that the
apprehension of it would keep his heart perfect Contratiwise, as far as you
fail in either, so far you are subject to those two, either false fears, or
vain and sinful hopes: and that is the cause of our uneven and unequal
walking with God, that we are not upright and perfect.

Hence you may see both the nature of sin, Use 1.
and the cause of all sin; for it is profitable for us Beloved, (nothing more
profitable than) to find out the cause of sin. It is a Rule that Physicians
have, that a disease, when it is thoroughly known, (that is, when the cause of
it is fully known) it is half cured; so it is in the disease of the soul, to
know the very root and rise, from whence it proceeds, or comes, to know the
principle from whonco it arises, it is a great help to us to prevent it, to
heal it. But, I say, this will both show the nature of sin, and the cause of
sin in us.

First, it shows the nature of sin, how evil a thing it is, yea worse,
than, for the most part, we apprehend it to be; for, if there be no sin
committed, but it comes from hence, that you apprehend not God to be
All-sufficient, then there is Idoldtrie (in a manner) committed in every sin,
that is, you take from God and add another God to him, if you think him not
to be All-sufficient; whatsoever you seek to, and youne with him, you make it
God as well as he; If it be credit, if it be honor, if it be pleasures, if it
be riches, yea whatsoever it is, I say, there is a bitter root of Idolatry in
the commission of every sin, that makes it out of measure sinful. This we
may consider by the way, but this I purpose not to stand on; the thing that I
would chiefly press, is to find out the cause of sin, the cause of that
hollownesse, and that imperfectnesse, and insinceritie that is in the hearts of
men toward God, which, I say, arises from hence, that they apprehend not God
to be All-sufficient; for this (for the most part) is the case of men, if they
did not apprehend some sufficiency in him, they would not seek him at all;
again, if they did apprehend him to be All-sufficient, they would serve him
perfectly: but this middle apprehension in men, that they think there is a
sufficiency in the Lord, but not an All-sufficiencie; this is the cause why
the hearts of men are hollow toward the Lord. Even as when a man looks
toward a great man, that is a man ofsome power, able to do him hurt, and that
has some ability to do him good: this makes him to fear, it makes him
careful to please him, and to abstain from what may offend him: yet, because
he thinks he is not perfect with him, that his heart is but hollow toward
him, he does it not fully. So it is in our walking before God. Because we
apprehend him not to be All-sufficient, therefore it is that our hearts are not
perfect with him. Instances.
We shall best show you this in instances; for example; What is the reason,
that a man is discouraged in seeking to God, Seeking to God in difficult cases.
in praying to God, in depending upon God in any great case of difficulty,
where there is more then ordinary difficulty, there is more to be suffered,
there is more to be done, what is the reason of it? because we apprehend him
not to be All-sufficient. You know the turning of men away from God, commonly
it arises from this, they meet with some rub, some crosses, some bar, Some
Lion in the way, which they are not able to grapple with, it is too strong for
them: and then they turn out of the way; the reason, I say, of all sin and
departure from the Lord, is, because we do not apprehend him to be
All-sufficient: for if we did, why should not a man in an easy case, turn
from him as well as in the most difficult? As, for example; David followed the
Lord long, yet when Saul grew exceeding strong, and he very weak, then he
stepped aside, and said in his heart, I shall perish one day, and so he goes
out of Gods ways, and flies to Achis, to the Philistines: This was from
hence, that he did not apprehend the Lord to be All-sufficient and Almighty,
for the word signifies both. And so likewise Moses, Number. 11.
Numb. 11. what was the reason that he started aside, that he did not believe
as at other times? When God said to him, that he would give them flesh for a
month together; what says Moses again? Shall six hundred thousand men be fed
with flesh, shall all the Beeues and Sheep be slain, or shall all the fish in
the Sea be gathered together? He could not believe the Lord: here was a
difficulty, that Moses was not able to reach, that there should be so many fed
with flesh, and that in the wilderness, and that for a month together: he
thought it impossible to be done, that all the fish in the Sea should be
gathered together, and all little enough to serve such a turn. Now mark the
Lords answer there, is the Lords hand shortened? You may know by the medicine,
what the disease was. Moses (says he) thou think I am not able to do it,
thou think my hand is shortened that I cannot do it. And the like was when
he came to draw water out of the rock: you shall see, Moses there stuck: for
the case was a case of difficulty. If it had been out of the earth, where
there had been probability, it had not been so much: but Moses makes two
arguments against it, (you know how great the sin was for the which he lost
going into the Land of Canaan, I say, he makes these two arguments against it.)

First, says he, the people are rebels, and will the Lord give them water,
that have carried themselves in such a manner? that was one thing that caused
his infidelity at that time.

Another was; What? shall I give you water out of the rock? As if he should
say. That is a difficult thing. So that put these two together, out of the
rock, and unto rebels, there his faith failed, for it was difficult: and
whence came this? because he thought the Lord was not All-sufficient. And so,
likewise, Martha, and Marie, when they came to Christ for Lazarus, when he was
dead, they were out of hope: the reason was, because there was a difficulty
now more than before; so that, I say, the common cause of our turning aside
from the Lord, is, because we meet with some difficulties which our faith is
not able to grapple with, and it arises from hence, that we forget this, that
the Lord says to Abraham, I am God All-mightie, or All-sufficient. I am able
to do whatsoever I will.

Besides this: what is the cause that men seek Seeking praise with men.
that they are subject to envy? (the spirit that is in us is subject to envy)
for everyman envieth another, because he desires vaineglory too much to
himself: this arises from hence, that he reckons not God to be
All-sufficient. That is. If we did reckon it enough to have praise with God, if
we thought that his knowledge of our uprightness were sufficient, though no
man in the world knew it besides, we would be content with that honor that we
have, which he has allotted to us within our own compass, but, because we
think him not to be All-sufficient, we would have something, likewise, from the
creature, we would have honor, love, and respect from men; which sin arises
hence, that we apprehend not him to be All-sufficient; so does that, likewise,
which is contrary to it, (for sins of the same nature and they arise both
from the same ground) when men are so sencible of shame, and reproach, and
disgrace, and disparagement, does it not arise hence, that we reckon man's day
too much, and Gods day too little? We apprehend not God enough in his
greatness; as the Apostle says, I reckon not to be judged by man's day. As if
he should say. It is but a day, it is but a time that man has to judge: there
is another day, the Lords day, that great day. If a man did apprehend that
which is in God, if he did see his All Sufficiency, he would not regard to be
judged by man's day, as long as he were not judged by the Lord: he would not
care what his fellow prisoners thought of him, as long as the Judge, and the
Law cleared him.

Indirect courses taken to bring enterprises to passc.
which they take to bring their enterprises to pass? is it not hence, that
they apprehend not God to be All-sufficient? David, when he was in a strait,
when the Kingdom, you know, was promised him, and many opportunities he had to
have gotten it, if he would have used evil means, when sometimes the Lord put
Saul into his hands, yet would not touch him, but committed it to the Lord, for
he thought him to be almighty, able to bring it to pass, as also he did bring
it to pass.

And so likewise, Daniell; there might have been means used for him to have
escaped; you know how he was in danger, when he refused to eat of the Kings
meat, he was in danger again, when they obtained of the King, that is any man
did make any request to any God or man, but the King for 30. days, he should
be put to death: yet he trusted in God, he thought him to be All-sufficient,
able to keep him, and therefore he stepped not out of his way. And so Paul,
when he saw that Festus thought to have had money give him, yet doubtless, in
those circumstances, he thought it not lawful to do it, and therefore he
trusted in God; though no doubt, he might have made friends, to have gathered
the money: It is likely Festus thought there was a probailitie for it, because
he hoped for it, but Paul would not do it, because he thought the Lord was
able to deliver him. But on the other side, Jeroboam when he had a business to
do, you know what course he took, he joins them together, he adds to
Religion, he corrupts it, that he might keep his Kingdom. And so Saul. (But I
need not give you Instances) I say, the cause of all indirect ways we take to
bring our enterprises to pass, it comes from hence, that we trust not in God,
we think him not to be All-sufficient, not able to do it, except we help him
with wyles, and tricks, and devises of our own: What is the reason of that
lying and dissembling, that is used likewise, for the same purpose? Is it not
from hence, that men apprehend not God to be All-sufficient? Peter, when he
denied Christ, was it not from fear? And from whence was that fear, but
because he reckoned not God, to be a Buckler strong enough, and sure enough?
And so Sarah, when she denied, that she laughed, says the Text, for she was
afraid, and therefore she said, no, I did not laugh, when she did, and was
charged for doing of it. I might give you many other Instances, but I shall not
need. Go through all varieties of sins, and you shall see they arise hence,
that we reckon not God to be All-sufficient.

The satisfying of sinful lusts, Satisfying of sinful lusts.
does it not arise Lord is able to fulfill him with joy, and comfort
sufficient, that the Lord is able to mortify those lusts, and to heal the^ in
him, he would keep close to him, and would not go out from him: for he need
not, the Lord is All-sufficient. That is. He is able to satisfy him, he is
able to fill him with joy and peace, through believing, which should be enough
to satisfy his heart with contentment; he is able, likewise, to mortify that
lust, so that, as he is forbidden the satisfying of it, so, likewise, he should
have no such prevailing desire to it. And therefore ( Beloved) the way to keep
our hearts perfect with God (for that is the thing for which I press all this,
for which I bring all these instances) it is to come to this, to set down this
conclusion with our selves, that he is All-suffi-cient: No man is ever fit to
serve him without this: except a man be content to have God alone for his
portion; if he will join any thing with him, if he will join God, and credit
together, God, and riches together, God, and pleasures together, he will never
keep close to him: for one time, or other there will fall out a separation
between God, and these things, and whosoever does not resolve thus with
himself, I will be content with God alone, though he strip me of all things in
the world, I say, he will never keep close to the Lord, but his ways will be
uneven toward him.

Gospel, would never have gone away sad, (...)
if he had thought God had been All-sufficient: but he thought, when his
riches were taken away, that some what was taken from him, that belonged to his
happpines, that he could not have been to well without it. Again, Abraham, on
the other side, would never have been willing to have offered Isack, if he had
not thought that God was All-sufficient: as we see Heb. 11. 19. Heb. 11. 19.
It is said there, that, though I sack were the son of the promise, yet he
willingly offered him; why? sor he thought God was able to raise him from the
dead again, from whence he also after a sort received him: As he received him
from Sarahs dead womb, so he thought, he might be raised again from the dead
ashes. What was the reason that Paul served the Lord with a perfect heart? You
see in 1 Timothy 4. 10. 1 Timothy 4. 10.
that he trusted in God, and therefore (says he) we labor, and suffer rebuke;
those are the two parts of new obedience, (to do, and to suffer) and
therefore, says he, we do it, because we trust in the living God: that is. We
trust in him for all things: I believe him to be Almighty, and All-sufficient,
every way, both to defend me from all evil, and also to provide all good
things for me, and therefore I serve him, and labor in his service, and suffer
rebuke. What was the reason, on the other side, that Demas turned from the
Lord? was it not, because he thought there was not enough in him? and
therefore, says the Text, he embraced this present world: and therefore, (
Beloved) the way to keep our hearts perfect with God, is to consider well the
great power of God, and the great goodness of God, for in these two his
All-sufficiencie to wards us consists; consider his might^^ power, and say
thus, with thy self, he is able to do all things for me; consider, withal,
the greatness of his goodness, and mercy, and say, he is my father, he is
willing to do all things for me Indeed, that conclusion we should set down
with our selves, (if any thing be not done, if we want any thing, if any cross
lie upon us at any time,) to be ready to say, this is not because the Lord
cannot do it; for he is Almighty. Again, it is not because the Lord will not
do it; for he is as infinite in love to me, as he is in power: What is the
reason of it then? because it is not best for me. So should every man say, if
there be any want, if there be any cross, it is best for me. It is better for
thee, it may be, to be in a low estate, than to be in a high: it is better for
thee to be pinched with poverty, than to live in abundance: it is better for
thee to lie under temptation, (though it be a great vexation to thee for the
present) then to be freed from it: it is better for thee, it may be, to have
mean gifts, than to have high gifts: it is better for thee, to be in a low
place, than to be in eminent place: it is better for thee, to be crossed in thy
name, in thy estate, it is better for thee to be sick in body, it is better
for thee to be troubled (sometime) in mind, than to be freed from it: Beloved,
this we must come to, and yet we must think the Lord to be All-sufficient. For
if it be so, thou ought to say thus with thy self, it is best for me to be
so. You will say, how shall we do to be persuaded of it? Digress.
Beloved, there are many instances, where in we are in such a condition, which
we think worst for our selves, which many times is the best, nay, always it
is best for every man that is in covenant with God. For this rule must be kept,
he is All-sufficient to his children, and they find him so, he has performed
it, and made it good to their experience, and therefore, whenever they find
any want, it is best for them to be so: It is not either defect in the power of
God; or in the love of God: for example; Abraham thought it a hard thing, a
great cross, that he was put to expel Ishmaell his son, whom he loved; Was
it not better for Abraham? had he not another son that was fitter for him,
borne of his own Wife? And so Moses thought it a hard thing, to be barred from
coming into the land of Canaan; but what lost he by it? was he not led into a
better Canaan, into Paradise, into a more glorious condition? So likewise, when
he went down into Egypt, if he had had a tongue of eloquence given him, to his
will, that would have satisfied him: but was it not better for Moses to have a
stammering tongue, and yet to have the work done as well, Aaron and he being
joined together? For by that means Moses was kept humble, and his love
likewise was increased. For that mutual indigence knits men together, when
they have need one of another. In like manner, David had an exceeding great
desire to build the Temple, when it was not the Lords will, that he should do
it; was he a looser by it? David was at that time not fit to have done it, he
was not able to have done it, as circumstances were: but was he a looser by it?
had not he a house built him, as well as if he had built the house of God? had
not he as great a reward, as if he had performed it? So likewise in the loss
of his child, it was exceeding grievous to him, yet, was it not better that
that child should be taken away, and that another there should be given him,
that was legitimate? Did not the Lord recompense it abundantly to him, when
Solomon was given to him in his stead? And so Paul, he was exceeding desirous
to be freed from that temptation, which, no doubt, was very grievous to him,
that did gall, and vex his mind continually, even as a pricking of the flesh
does: yet it was much better for Paul, it was not because God was not
All-sufficient, either in power, or in love to him: but he was an exceeding
great gainer by that means, he was emptied of himself: for that is the scope
of God, in the ways of his providence toward his children, even to magnify
himself toward them, which cannot be without emptying them of themselves, by
discovering to them their own insufficiency: and that is done partly, by
affliction, and partly by sin, but chiesly by sin, because that works more
immediately upon man, it makes him to see how little excellency, and how
little worth, there is in him; it makes him again to see the glory, and the
power, and the pureness of God, to magnify him, and to humble himself; this
Paul got by it, and it was better for him, he was in a better condition by it.
Therefore I say, this conclusion must be set down, that the Lord is
All-sufficient, and when we fall short of any thing that we desire, lay it not
upon God, that the Lord is short of his performance, of any promise, that he
compasses us not about with mercy, on every side, as much as we need, that he
delivers us not from every evil: for he will make that good always, that no
good thing shall be wanting to them that lead a godly life: He is a Sun and a
shield to them. And whenever it is otherwise, it is because it is not best
for them: but this is a digression; the thing we have to do (for all this is
but a preparation) is to persuade you now that the Lord is All-sufficient: as
we told you, we handle this point first, because it is a preparatiue to the
rest: It shows you of what moment it will be so to be persuaded, and of what
evil consequence it is, not to be so persuaded. Now I will add a word of the
second point; that God is All-sufficient. Doct. 2.
God is All-sufficient.


To prove that he is so, I will propound to you but these two reasons;

First consider that all that is in the creature, Reas. 1.
all the comforts, all the excellency, all the beauty that is to be found in
them, it is but borrowed, and derived: God is the primitive, he is the
original, he is the first, the universal cause, the general cause of all:
hence we gather this, that there is an All-sufficiencie in him, and in him
only, he is All-sufficient exclusiuely: so that no creature has any
sufficiency at all in it self: for ( Beloved) you must know, that the
creature adds nothing at all to his sufficiency, but all sufficiency is
comprehended in him; for if they be all derived and borrowed things, then they
are in the creature, but as far as it pleases him to communicate the same to
them: now that it is so, see Ier. 2. 13. Ier. 2. 13.
My people (says the Lord) have committed two evils, they have for saken me
the fountain of living waters, and (secondly) have dug to themselves pits
that hold no water: Where we may briefly observe: First, that God is the
spring, from whom all comforts come originally, the pits, you know, have the
water, but borrowed and derived from the fountain; secondly, there is
something in this, that he calls them pits, that is, the comfort in the
creature is a mixed comfort, it is like water in a pit, it is muddie, and not
pure and clear, like the water in the fountain: That is, the comfort that
comes merely from the creature (if you receive any comfort in the creature,
and Gods hand be not in it) it is always mixed with some sorrow, with some
evil, but if it come from the Lord, it is a pure comfort: he gives riches, and
no sorrow with them, Thirdly, the comfort that is in the creature, it is but a
dead comfort, compared to that which is in the Lord, and therefore he is said
to be a fountain of living water, that is, running water. The comfort that is
in the creature, it is able to do little, it is quickly spent, and when it is
spent, there is no more in it: but the comfort that is in God, it is like water
that comes out of the spring, which is still renewed from day to day, and
therefore it is called living water, there is no end of it, but still it flows
more and more. Last of all, they are broken pits that cannot hold the comfort
that they have, thought there be comfort, yet it is like liquor in a brittle
glass, that is not able to hold this comfort. In the creature, it is but
borrowed comfort, and therefore we see 1 Timothy 6. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 17.
(where an instance is given of riches) Charge those that are rich in this
world, that they be not high minded, that they trust not in uncertain riches,
but in the living God, that gives all things abundantly to enjoy. Mark, you
shall see there the difference, that they trust not in uncertain riches, but
in the living God, (that is) riches are but dead things, God is the living God:
they are able to do but some things for you; God gives you all things, and
gives abundantly. And again, if riches do something, yet the enjoying they
are not able to give; but the Lord gives us all things abundantly to enjoy.
Now, when we consider, that whatsoever is in the creature, it is but a borrowed
and derived comfort, then the sufficiency is wholly in the Lord, he is the God
of all comfort; as the Sun is the cause of all light, whatsoever the air
has, it is derived from the Sun, so whatsoever is in the creature, it is
derived from God: and therefore this is one ground, why we should persuade our
selves, that he is All-sufficient.

The second, Reas. 2.
is this, he is All-sufficient, because he only can be the author of good and
evil: God only the author of good and evil.
that, you know, which can do neither good nor evil, there is no sufficiency
in it at all; Now that is the property of the Lord, as we see Ier. 10. 5. Ier.
10. 5.
a place worthy our consideration; The Idols stand up as a palm tree, but they
speak not; they are borne, because they cannot go; fear them not, because
they can do neither good nor evil: this is the argument, whereby the Lord
proves them to be Idols, because they can do neither evil not good: as if he
should say, if they could do either evil or good, they were Gods, and not
Idols. The same we may apply to any creature, considered in it self, without
the influence and concourse of God: If it were able to do either good or
evil, you might worship it as God, for God only can do good and evil of
himself. My Beloved, if we could bring our hearts to this persuasion, that it
is the Lord only, that can do good and evil, we would then cleave to him, it
could not be, that we should depart from him upon any occasion, for that which
is able to do neither good nor evil, we contemn: if your opinions were such
of the creature, that it were, without God, neither able to do good nor evil,
you would never turn from God to any creature, upon any occasion: for
certainly, he is able to do both good and evil, he only can make every
manslife, comfortable, or uncomfortable; it is his prerogative royal, it
belongs to him alone. In Mat. 5. Math. 5.
it is said, a man is not able to make one hair white, or black; so small a
thing he is not able to do: and in Luke 11. Luke 11.
it is said more plainly, if we be not able to do the least thing, we be not
able to do the greatest. That place, you know, Amos 3. Amos. 3.
shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? The
Scripture is plentiful in this; I should loosetime to urge places; I say,
there is no creature in heaven or earth, that is able to be the author of the
least good, or the least hurt.

But you will say to me, Ob.
we find it otherwise in experience; we find that they are able to do us
good, and to do us hurt.

You have an answer for that, Ioh. 19. 11. Answ. Ioh. 19. 11.
when Pilate says to our Savior, have I not power to crucify thee, or to
loose thee? He answers, no: thou have none at all of thy self: Indeed, thou
have a power, but it is given thee from above, thou have not a jot more then is
distributed to thee: if you compare that with Act. 4. 28. Act. 4. 28.
you shall see it was so; Pilate and Herod joined together, to do whatsoever
God had appointed before: they did not the least evil, but God had appointed
it: And so it is with all the creatures, the principal creatures, that we have
to do with, and that we see before us, even men, they do us not (without his
commission) the least good, not the least hurt. When shemei cursed David, you
know, what expression he used; The Lord has bid shemei curse, as if he should
say, shemei, nor any man else in the world, could not move his tongue, if God
did not say to such a man, go curse him, go and reproach him. It is said of
Pull and Tiglapellazer, TiglathPileser.
Kings of Assyvia, that the Lord stirred them up, and they carried his people
away captive: if God had not stirred up their spirits, they had not done the
least thing. You know, often it is said, the King of Ashur the stasse in my hand;
and so Cyrus is said to be his servant, he stirred him up, he was his
Shepherd, to do whatsoever he desired to his sheep. Isa. 44.
Isa. 44. Now if a man be able to do nothing, but as far as God sets him on
work, then much less can other there things, as riches, and the like, they can
do no more then men can do: for what serve they for, but to set men a work;
so, honor, and credit, and estimation, which men so much esteem, they can do
no more then men can do; for they set men on work to do good, as reproach
sets them on work to do hurt. Now if there be no man, nor no creature in
heaven or earth, that can do good or hurt, ( Beloved) why should we be
servants to men? why should we be subject to carnal delights? to carnal
fears? to carnal hopes, and the like? surely, it is hence, we overvalue the
creature, we think it is able to do something, we think that there is some
suffciency in that, and not All Sufficiency in God: certainly, all the
Commandments of God, are grounded upon clear reason, if we were able to find
it out: But now when the Lord requires at our hands, that we worship him
altogether; Thou shall have no other Gods but me, thou shall serve me only,
thou shall bestow thy self wholly upon me, thou shall be perfect with me, as
you see here: surely, it is upon this ground, thou shall have all from me, and
therefore thou shall do all to me. If any creature were able to do good or
hurt, without the Lord, if they had any part or portion with him in being
authors of our good, certainly, they should have a portion of our service: for
there is reason and equity in it, that that which does us good, in such
manner, we should seek unto it, we should serve it: and likewise, if it could
do us hurt; but now in that the Lord challenges all to himself, (I say) it
is upon this ground, I am All-sufficient: there is no creature is able to add
to me more or less: and therefore ( Beloved) consider the ground of it, and
let the equity of it establish your hearts to be perfect with God, that he
only is able to make your lives comfortable, or uncomfortable. Put the case, a
man has a great addition to his estate: put the case, he has much credit, and
esteem among men: put the case, he have the favor of Princes, that are most
able and powerful among men: if the creature be able alone, to do neither
good nor hurt, they shall not make the least addition to his happiness; and if
it be so, why should we esteem it so much? if on the contrary side, it turn
against us, it shall not do us the least hurt. Should not this free us, from
fearful perplexities, from vain hopes, and vain fears? should it not keep
our hearts perfect with God, if we were thus persuaded? for, what are all the
creatures? are they not like servants in the great house of the world, and we
as children? and the servants are all at the Masters command, to do
whatsoever he has appointed: if we want any thing, he can appoint them to
provide for us; there is not any creature in heaven or earth, that stirs
without a command, without a warrant from the master of the house: if he do
command them, they go: they are ready and nimble to do us any service: this
is the nature of all the creatures we have to do with. Think with your selves
then, it is no great matter for them; if the Master of the house be our
friend, they are all at his command; you know those mean creatures, the
Caterpillars: are they not all the Lords host, that go and come as he bids
them, as Joel 2.? Joel. 2.
So the meanest creatures, the fire, and the air, and whatsoever they are,
they are all at the Lords command: and therefore think not, that the creature
is able to do any thing for us.

There are but two things, one is our everlasting happiness, The creature cannot
help to eternal happiness.
and there the creature by fruition of it self, is able to do nothing; there
it is wholly excluded, for it is inferior to us. Besides, there is a curse
upon the creature, there is an emptiness in it: besides, it is under the
Sun, and therefore it cannot help to the happiness, that is above the Sun.
These arguments you shall find in Ecclesiastes. Besides, it is temporal,
whereas we must have an eternal happiness; for, our souls are eternal, and
therefore, for eternal happiness: for the chief good of man, the creature is
nothing at all, it helps but in particulars. Take credit, it does but help
against ignominy and obscurity: learning does but help against ignorance:
health is but a remedy against sickness, and distemper of body: riches are
but an help against poverty: and so go over all the creatures in the world.
But the Lord is universally good, he gives us all things, and therefore
godliness is profitable for all things: he gives us all things to enjoy: that
is, he fills the soul of man every way, not, Beloved, that simply an infinite
object is necessary, as it is usually understood, (I see no ground for that) I
see it not necessary, that a finite faculty, should have an infinite object,
if that which is proportionable be enough; but this I affirm withal, that
unless God were infinite, he could not satisfy the soul of man, for this is
the nature of the soul, if it find a bottom in any particular, it passes
over that, and hastes after more, and, therefore, in all particular creatures
(you see) when we have had once trial of them, when we have had the inioying
and possessing of them, we leave them and seek after that which we want. Now
the Lord gives us satisfaction, because the contentment, the happiness, that we
have from him, is without a bottom, it is without limits, that, when we have
had never so much, still there is more to be found in him; and hence it is, in
regard of the universality, he has all things in him, he is All-sufficient,
and, in regard of the latitude, when we enjoy never so much, still there is
more behind in him, and therefore he only has to do in that business, in
making us eternally happy, in giving us that summum bonum.

For the help that the creature gives for the things that belong to this life:
there, I confess, the creature has somewhat to do, but it does it all as an
instrument, and if it does all as an instrument, then the creature does
nothing, in a manner; we thank not the hand, but the mind within that moves
the hand to do a good turn, much less dowe thank a dead, inanimate
instrument. Let us look upon every creature, and every man as Gods instrument;
when any man does you a kindness, when any man does you a favor, or does you
good, say as the Scripture phrase is; The Lord has given me favor in his
sight; he stirred up his spirit. And so, when he does us hurt, say such a man
is but a mere vial, an instrument, whereby the Lord has powered out some part
of his displeasure upon me. This will cause your eye to be upon the Lord
altogether; you will over look men, not regarding preferment, or advancement
by them; nor the contrary; for in all these things, they are but instruments.
And so much for this time.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. I am God All-sufficient.
THe second doctrine that we have delivered out of these words, and are now to
insist upon, was, that God is Almighty, or All-sufficient.

I put them both together; for, the word, in the original, signifies as much,
Elshaddai, El signifies the strong, the mighty God, and Shaddai, properly
signifies, All-sufficient; when one has all in his own compass, that he
needs not go out to fetch in, or borrow any commodity, any comfort, or any
advancement, or any excellency from any other; and, therefore, that is the
(...) translation, and most agreeable to the word, in the original,
All-sufficient, (though some translations have it, the All-mightie) and, this
is a point that will well suit with the present occasion of the Sacrament; for,
as I told you, these words contain the Covenant on both sides, says the Lord,
this is the Covenant that I will make on my part, I will be thy God; and I will
tell you what a God I will be unto you, I will be a God all-sufficient. That
is; you shall have all things in me that your hearts can desire: The Covenant,
again, that I require on your part, is, that you be perfect with me, that you
be upright, that you be without hypocrisy; for so the word signifies in the
original, that the heart be single, so that though a man be subject to
infirmities, yet, if he have a single heart, an upright heart, the Lord accepts
it; and therefore, when you are to take the seal of the Covenant, how can you
be better exercised, and prepared for the work, than by considering the
Covenant it self? that is the point then, that God is All-mightie, or
All-sufficient, wherein two things are to be considered; Two things
considerable.


First, that the Lord is so in himself.

Secondly, that he is so to every one of his children.

That God is All-sufficient in himself.
I will show that he is so in himself; for, except he have an All Sufficiency
in himself, he cannot communicate it to another. Thought this be a point that
we all believe, Difference between the All Sufficiency in God, and that which
is in the creature
yet the opening of it will not be unprofitable to you, and, therefore, you
must know, that he is All-sufficient, not only as the creature may be
All-sufficient: for there is this difference between him and the creature.

The Angels and blessed men, and other creatures, Difference.
may have an All-suffiencie, but it is such an All Sufficiency as belongs to
them, in such a sphere, and such an order, and measure: as the creature, that
has all things belonging to the life that it leads, it has an
All-sufficiencie suitable to it self: a beast, that has all things belonging
to the life of a beast, has an All-sufficiencie fit for it, and so has every
creature else, when God will make it happy; but the All-sufficiencie that is in
God, is different from it in this, that he has a simple All-sufficiencie. That
is. Take all things that you can possibly take, take them all without
comparison, take them without all limits, and so he is All-sufficient, that is
one difference.

The second difference is this; that the creature, though it have an
All-sufficiencie within its own God, that is peculiar to him alone, that he
can make another All-sufficient, he can cause another to partake of that
All-sufficiencie that is in himself; this is the difference between God and
the creature. Now, to make it evident to you that he is All-sufficient, you
shall know it by this.

First, Reas. 1.
in that he is most simple, without all mixture, as we say, that is, perfect:
for perfection and All-sufficiencie are all one. Perfection is that, whereby a
thing is made up, so that there be nothing wanting to it; first, therefore, he
is perfect, in that he is without all mixture; we say, that is perfect gold,
that has no mixture of dross in it; that is perfect wine, that has no
mixture of any thing besides; and in that the Lord is simple and most pure of
essence, it must needs be that he is All-sufficient, that he is most perfect,
as it is 1 John 1. He is light, and there is no darkness in him. That is.
There is no mixture of any thing in him.

Secondly. Reas. 2.
As he is without mixture, so he is without composition; wheresoever there is
composition (as there is in every creature,) there is some imperfection: for,
wherethere is composition, there are parts, and wheresoever there are parts,
there must needs be imperfection: for the part wants something of the whole;
but in the Lord there are no parts, he is without composition, and therefore he
must needs be most perfect, and most absolute, and All-sufficient in himself.

Thirdly. Reas. 3.
As he is without composition, so he is without number: for all number, and all
multiplying, arises from imperfection: for if one would serve the turn, what
needed more? And, therefore, he, being one, simply one, must needs be
All-sufficient, for there is no multiplying in him, and, therefore, there is no
sign of imperfection.

Fourthly. Reas. 4.
As he is without number, so he is without any passive power. If he had any
passive power in him, (as every creature has,) he were capable of receiving
something that he has not, but the Lord is not so much as capable of it; for,
if there be no receptiue power, no passive power in him, it is impossible that
any more should be put, or infused into him, or imprinted, or stamped in him,
then is in him already. And, therefore, he is all in act. There is nothing in
possibility in God.

Fifthly. He is (...), (I find no word to express Lord whatsoever he has, he
has it of himself, and, therefore, in Ier. 2. Ier. 2.
he calls himself, a spring of living water, where (...) all the creatures in
the world are as pits, and Cisterns. That is. Such as have it borrowed, he has
it of himself, and therefore, he is All-sufficient, which no creature is.

Lastly. Reas. 6.
He is without all causes, and is himself the cause of all things, Romans 11. 3
6. Rom, 11. 36.
And what have thou that thou have not received? This may besayd of every
creature: and if God have given to every creature all that is in it, that there
is no excellency, no happiness, no gift, no comfort, no blessing that any
creature has, but it is from the Lord, then he himself must needs have it in
a greater measure. As the fire, that makes any thing hot, must needs be houer
it self, and the Sun that enlightens other things, must needs be more full
of light it self; so is the Lord, when all that is in the creature, is taken
from him, he himself must needs have an All-sufficiencie, he must be full of
all things; and this shall be enough to show you that the Lord is in himself
All-sufficient.

All-sufficiencie consists to us, That God is All-sufficient to us.
then we will make that good, that he is to every one of his children
All-sufficient. His All-sufficiencie consists in there two things, Which
consists in two things.
as you shall see Genesis 15. Genesis 15.
Fear not Abraham, I will be thy Buckler, and thy exceeding great reward.

Buckler, to keep us from all evil, To keep us from evil.
that is one part of his All-sufficience, which he communicates to us, that he
will suffer no evil to come near us, he is a Buckler that compasses us round
about: that speech is delivered upon this occasion, when Abraham had gone out
to war against those Kings that came out against Sod^m, the Lord delivered
him, and after this deliverance he tells him, Abraham, says he, as I have
dealt with thee at this time, so fear not, when thou ^allest into the like
distreffe; for, I am the Buckler, I will defend thee from all evil, as I have
done from this. Now, he is such a Buckler, that no creature can pierce though,
he is such a Buckler as covers us all over, he is a wall of Brass, as it is
expressed in Ier. 1. 18. Ier. 1. 18.
not so only; but he is said to be a wall of fire about his children. That is.
He is not only a wall that keeps them safe, but a wall of fire to consume all
them that come against them: for a fire, you know, does not only defend those
that are within the compass of it, but it burns those that come near it Such
a one is God to his children; And that is one thing wherein this
all sufficiency consists, that God communicates to them.

The second is, Filling them with all good.
in filling them with all comfort, Psalm. 84. Psalm. 84.
The Lord will be a Sun, and a Shield; he will be a Shield to keep off
evil, and a Sun to fill them with all comfort. I am (says he) the exceeding
great reward. That is. As if he should say, Abraham, whatsoever is in me, all
that I have, all my attributes are thine, forthy use, my power, my wisdom, my
counsel, my goodness, my riches, whatsoever is mine in the whole world, I will
give it for thy portion, I and all that I have are thine. And might he not well
say, he was an exceeding great reward? Who can vnder^tand the height, and
breadth, and length, and depth of this reward, I am thy exceeding great reward?
That is. Thou shall have all kind of comforts in me, and thou shall have them
in the highest and greatest measure. And in these does Gods All-sufficiencie
consist, that God communicates and deriues to us from himself.

Now to show that he is so, you must understand not only that the Lord is
wholly All-sufficient to his children on the one side. That is. He brings all
comforts with him, but this must also be understood, that in the creature, on
the other side, there is no sufficiency at all. It was the point I began to
touch upon the last day; I will now open it unto you more fully.

That in the creature there is no sufficiency at all, and in the Lord there is
All-sufficiencie. We will not dis-joyne them, but handle both together; (for it
would be in vain for me to prove the Lord is All-sufficient,) but the great
deceit, which prevails with the hearts of men, is this, that they think there
is something to be had in the creature of it self. And, therefore we will spend
those Arguments by which we will prove this chiefly, and convince you of it,
that there is nothing in the creature, no stabilitie, no sufficiency, it can
do you, of it self, neither good, nor hurt, as we told you the last day. All
the good and hurt that the creature can be supposed to do, it stands in one of
these two things, Either, in making us happy, or miserable; Or else, secondly,
in affording us subsidiarie helps, such as we have need of, upon occasion. In
neither of them the creature of it self, The creature can do nothing, of it
self, to make us happy. Because
is able to do any thing. You must remember (that which we then delivered)
that the creature is not able to do any thing in the matter of our happiness;

It is inferior to us.
and that which is inferior cannot add to that which is above it.

Secondly. Because the creature is accursed; It is accursed.
there is an emptines, and a vanity in it, and that which is empty in it
self, can give no fulness to us.

Thirdly. The creature is under the Sun, and Ecclesiastes, It is under the
Sun.
All things under the Sun, are vanity and vexation of spirit. Now the
happiness that we seek for, is above the Sun, which the creature is not able
to reach.

Fourthly. The creature is corporal, the mind It is corporal.
it is a spirit, and therefore it can receive no happiness from it; therefore in
Heb. 12. Heb. 12. 23.
we are said to go to the spirits of perfect men, as if that were a sutabl
converse for a spirit.

Fifthly. It is temporary, It is temporary.
whereas the soul is immortal,

Besides. As I told you then, the creature is It is finite.
and therefore is not able to fill the soul; God is infinite, and therefore is
able to do it. That no creature can do it, we see in continual experience.
Take any comfort that you find in the creature, and, when you have enjoyed it,
still you want somewhat, and you would have more: But when you come unto the
Lord, and enjoy him, when your hearts are filled, still there is somewhat
beyond in him, there is no stop, there is no restraint. And, therefore, he
only can make the soul happy. Now the ground of it, why he is only able to
do it, is, because the soul is made for him, the soul is fitted for him, and
therefore there is nothing else answerable, there is that constitution of the
mind, that it will not be filled with any thing besides. The Lord might have
put the mind into such a frame, he might have so constituted the soul of man,
that the creature might have filled it, and satisfied it, and have bin an
adaequate object to it, but he has not done so: for he made it for himself,
and therefore, it is not filled but with himself. So much for that, that the
creature in the matter of happiness is able to do nothing.

But you will say to me, Quest.
This is a thing of which we make no doubt; But what do you say for ordinary
uses, and for the vicissitudes of this life, is not the creature, in these,
able to do good and hurt?

Beloved, Ans.
as I said to you the last day, the creature is not able, considered without
the influence of the first moover, In doing us good, or hurt.
to do you the least good, or hurt; as the words are Ier. 10. 5. Ier. 10. 5.
speaking of Idols, they can do neither good, nor hurt, and therefore fear
them not. As if he should say. If they could do you, either good, or hurt, you
might fear them, and it is certain, if any creature were able, in manner
aforesaid, to do you any good, or hurt, you might fear the creature: for, God
alters no Law of nature, that which is in it self to be feared, we may fear,
that which is to be observed and regarded, we may regard it. Now, if any
creature were able to do good, or hurt, certainly it were to be feared in
regard of the hurt it could do, and to be regarded and observed in regard of
the good it could do. Then, again, the Law of the Lord should be unequal, if
the Lord should require all worship, that the intent^o^ of the mind be wholly
taken up about him, and that we should have no eye to the creature, if the
creature had any selfe-part with him in doing us good or hurt; for, if the
creature could do us hurt, we should not only look to God, that he should be
a Buckler, but we should have an eye upon the creature. If a man should say, I
will be a defense to you, I will keep you safe; but I cannot do it wholly,
such a one stands by, that may reach you a blow, from which I cannot defend
you; In nature and reason, a man will have an eye to that man, and so we would
to the creature, if it were able to hurt us: And so, likewise, for good, the
Lord restraines not that, nor says, you shall have a partial happiness, you
shall have no more then is in me, though there might be something besides in
the creature; but he suffers our souls to be at full liberty, to seek their
happiness to the utmost, and, therefore, if the creature did add the least drop
of happiness, or if the least beam of happiness did spring from the creature,
certainly, you might have an eye upon it, you might so far worship it, and
regard it; but it is wholly from the Lord: therefore, says he, let your hearts
be only fixed upon me, let your eye be only toward me, let your affections
be taken up about nothing but me, you shall spend all the strenght of your
souls in obeying me, and keeping my Commandments: for, there is none in the
world that is able to do you good, or hurt, but my self. Now, to make this
good to you, I will propound but these two things. First. That all the
creatures are absolutely at his disposing. Secondly. That when he has disposed
of them, when he has distributed them to us to afford us comfort, yet they
cannot actually comfort us, without a special hand of his. Those two, being
fully opened, will make this point good to you, that the creature thus is able
to do you neither good nor hurt.

Because the creature is fully at Gods disposing.
all the creatures in this world (let a man cast his eye upon the whole
universe) they are all but as so many servants, which are in the Lords house,
prepared to wait upon his children, to convey such comforts to them, as he
has appointed them, so that there is not one creature in heaven or earth,
stirs it self to do you the least good, but when the Lord commands it, and
says, Go, comfort such a man, go, refresh him, do him good; it stirs not
without a warrant, and without a special command from him. The bread and
meat, which you eat, nourish you not, except he say, go, and nourish such a
man; the fire warmes you not; and so of all the creatures else. Again,
Instance.
when he does command them, they do

So all the goodness that we participate of, In Man.
Lord; either it is from his mercy, Others.
or from his providence; therefore we should learn to sanctify the Lord, both
in our hearts, and in our speeches, not by saying I have gotten me favor and
friendship of such a man, but, the Scriptures expression is, the Lord has
given me favor in such a man's eyes. So, again, not by saying I have procured
the hatred of such a man against me, but say, the Lord stirred up such a man's
spirit against me, and so not by saying, I have gotten such and such things,
but, as Jacob, the Lord of his goodness has given me all this, not Laban, not
my own labor; if, in any enterprise you have success, say not, I have done
it, but say, as Abraham's servant said, the Lord has prospered my Journey. That
is. The Lord does all in all, it is he that commands all, it is he that
disposes all; I say, that we should sanctify the Lord in our speeches; this
is the language of the Scriptures; But, chiefly we should sanctify him in our
hearts. That is. Thus we should conceive of him, and thus we should think of
every creature. Beloved, it will not be unprofitable, if we draw this a little
nearer into particulars. That all the creatures are so at his disposing, that
they stir not a jot, but at his command, you shall see in Eccles. 3. Eccles.
3. 14.
the general there set down; I know that what soever God shall do, it shall
be for ever, to it can no man add, nor from it can no man diminish, for Cod
has done it, that men should fear before him. (Make) I know that what soever
God shall do, it shall be for ever. That is. The creature cannot alter any
course that God has set, neither at this time, nor at any other time, but it
shall run in a constant course, like a strong stream that cannot be resisted,
it shall be for ever, to it shall no man add, and from it can no man diminish.
That is. The creature cannot only do no substantial action, but, when the
Lord has done any thing, the creature cannot add the least thing to it, and
as it cannot add, so it cannot diminish, nor take away the least thing from
any blessing that he bestows, nor any evil that he will do, the creature
adds not a jot to that evil, to that cross, to that affliction, nor the
creature mitigates not the cross in the least degree, though you think it
does: But that we shall answer afterward. But why is this? This (says he) the
Lord has done, that men should fear before him. As if he should say; they
would not fear me, but they would fear the creature, and look to the
creature, if it were able to add any thing, or to detract any thing, either to
or from any blessing, or comfort, that we have, or to or from any evil, or any
cross that lies upon us. Now, that it is so, that the creature is thus guided
and disposed by him, that it is able to do nothing without him, we will not
instance in the unreasonable creatures, which you all believe well enough to be
at his command, but we will instance in those that seem to be at the greatest
liberty: that is, the wills and understandings of men; certainly, if there be
any liberty in the creature it is there, the will of man is so free a thing,
the devises of a man's heart, his turning of himself this way or that way, who
can set any Rules to it? But in this the Lord guides all: take it in other men's
hearts. Pro. 29. Prove. 29. 26.
Every man seeks the face of the Ruler, but his Judgment is from the Lord.
That is. Men are deceived in this, if they think the Ruler, as of himself,
can do any thing, though he seem to have much power, and ability, to do
some good, and hurt to men, if any else can; therefore, says he, men seek his
face, but, says he, you are deceived: he is not able to do any thing, but
what the Lord dictates to him, or permits him, what he prescribes to him to
do, what he says he shall do, just so far he goes and no farther; for, the
whole judgment that a man has, it is from him, it is from the Lord. That is.
All the good and evil that he does, that mind of his, from whence it
proceeds, is guided and fashioned by the Lord, upon every particular
occasion, whenever he has to do with us, or we with him: but that is for
men that are without us, for other men.

But, now, for a man's self: there is the same Our selves.
indeed, of the one as there is of the other, but man thinks he has liberty,
he thinks he can go to such a place, or not go; he can do such a thing, or
not do it; Beloved, it is very true, and therefore the All-mightie power of
God is seen herein, which we are not able to comprehend, that when there is
such a liberty in the soul, in the will of man, in the devices and thoughts
of a man's heart, yet that they should be all so guided by him, that there is
not the least stirring of them this way or that way, without his ordering and
concurrence; even, as you see, Birds flying, they seem to fly at liberty,
yet that all should be guided and ordered by an overruling hand; Such are the
wills of men; and that you shall see in these particulars; when a man thinks
with himself, he consults with himself about a thing that lies before him,
that is his own power to do, or not to do, in this, says the Text, Prove.
19. 21. Prou. 19. 21.
Many devices are in a man's heart, but the counsels of the Lord shall stand.
That is. Though there be such variety of devices, that he is able to cast
things this way, or that way, and to reason to and fro, and to think with
himself, I can do this, and I can do the contrary, yet, says he, look what
the Lord, by his counsel, will have that man to resolve upon, look what issue
he has put to his deliberations, that counsel shall stand, and all those
devices shall be guided and ruled by it, and not go one step out of it. Come
now to the counsels of a man's heart, when a man has thought this with
himself, I will speak or utter this, or act that, as he has resolved to do,
you would think this man has power to do it; but in Prove. 16. Prove. 16. 1.
a place that you know, There are preparations in a man's heart, but the answer
of the mouth is from the Lord. That is. Even when it is so near, that, you
think, there is nothing that can come between that a man has resolved with
himself, and says this will I do, or this will I speak, says the Lord,
notwithstanding, this preparation, though you have made all these ready, that
now it is upon the very point, on the act of execution, yet now, says he, the
answer shall be given, as I think meet: and, that which is said of answering,
may be applied to all kinds of actions, when a man has thought with himself,
and has made his heart ready, that all the wheels of his soul are guided,
and turned, and compassed to effect such a business, yet the Lord comes between
the cup and the lip, between the preparation and the execution, and he does
but that which the Lord would have done. My Beloved, thus it is in others, and
this use you may make of it, by the way; take a man that is full of good
thoughts toward you, the Lord can turn it in an instant; take a man that is
full of evil devices toward you, if the Lords counsel be otherwise, that
shall stand; Put the case that the Lord suffer him to go so far as to
resolve to say, I will do some hurt, or I will do some good to such a man,
yet this preparation of the heart shall not stand, unless it be the same that
the Lord has appointed; that shall be spoken, and that shall be acted; and
therefore, you shall see what conclusion is gathered upon it, Prove. 20. 24.
Pro. 20. 24.
says the wiseman there; The steps of a man are ruled by the Lord, how can
then a man understand his own way. That is. A man, in the morning, when he
rises, and thinks with himself, this and this will I do, says he, deceive
not thy self, thy steps are ruled by the Lord, thou take not a step into
any action, thou take not a step into any good or evil to thy self, thou
take not a step into prosperity or adversity, but it is ruled, and
overruled by the Lord, so that a man cannot understand his own way. That is.
He cannot say this, and this will I do, but like that in Dan. 5. 23. Dan. 5.
23.
Him have thou not feared, in whose hands is thy life, and all thy ways. That
is. Every thing that thou do, every step that thou take, every thing
that befalls thee. So, my Beloved, this shall be enough to show you, that man
in his actions is at the disposing of the Lord.

As for other creatures, if you will have a proof for it, to make it evident
to you, that no creature stirs without him, consider that in Esa. 40.
speaking there of the armies of the Lord; they are called the armies of the
Lord, because every creature is like a Soldier that stands under his General,
ready to go, ready to do, and to execnte whatsoever he commands. In the 26.
Isa. 40. 26.
Verse, Lift up thine eyes on high, and behold who has created these things;
he brings out their Armies by number, and calls them all by their names, by the
greatness of his power, and his mighty strenght nothing ^ayles. This is the
thing I would have observed out of this place, that they are all Gods armies.
Now an army consists of many particulars; take all the creatures under the cope
of heaven, they are not single, you know, but there are multitudes of them,
thore are many Dealls, many Fowls, many Fishes; says the Lord hoar, I call
them every one by their name. That is. He knows every one of them,
notwithstanding that infinite number of them, he knows them every one: even as
a Master knows every servant in his house, and can call them by their names;
So, says he, every particular creature he knows by name. It is a comfortable
consideration, when you consider that there is not one of these, but the Lord
knows them by name, and they are (...) Instruments to do either good or hurt,
as it pleases him; the sleep that you take, the meat that you eat, the
comforts that you have, whatsoever is done by any creature, all comforts come
from him: But this is enough for that. But, that wherein there seems to be the
greatest liberty, the greatest variety, the greatest changablenes, the minds
of men, we see also is disposed by him. That is the first thing we are to show,
to make this good, that the creature can neither do good nor evil; because
though it do both (for that there is such a thing experience shows, that the
creature does good and hurt, and every creature sometimes comforts, and
sometimes hurts and grieves, but that is at Gods disposing) and since it is an
Instrument, and is in the hands of the Lord, as an Axe, or a Sword, or a
Staff, and is not used, except it be at his disposing; it appears, that it is
perfectly and absolutely subject to the dominion of God.

But, now, for the second, which is more than this, when the Lord, I say, has
sent such a creature to thee, and thou have it before thee (that is the second
thing) that it is not able to comfort, nor hurt thee, without him. Put the
case, the creature be pregnant, full of comfort, yet it is not able to give
down that milk of comfort that is in it, except the Lord educe and bring it
forth, except the Lord apply it in particular to thee. And the same I may say
of any hurtful creature; be it never so pregnant with evil, be it never so
full of it, yet, it is not able to exercise it, it is not able to act that hurt
it has, except the Lord bring it forth, except the Lord set it a work, and
use it for such a purpose: as an Axe if it be never so sharp, yet, if the
Carpenter do not use it to cut such a Tree, to lop such a branch, it is not
able to do it.

Now the ground of it, why the creature is not able to do this, is from hence,
that all the comfort that arises from the creature, proceeds from that
sutablenesse and that agreeableness which is between the mind and it. That
is; when the blessing and the mind are fitted one to another, as the sword to
the sheath, or as the meare to the palate, then the creature comforts; but, if
there be an vnsutablenesse, a disagreement, a disproportion, between the
creature and the mind, now thou receivest no comfort from it: for what is it
to thee? for comfort lies not simply in any thing; but that is comfortable that
agrees with the appetite, and the desire of a man. Whatsoever it is, let the
desire be what it will, if that which thou have, suit with that desire, it is
comfortable; when a man's heart is sad, such actions as are suitable to the
disposition, are pleasant; weeping is pleasant, and complaints are plealant;
music grieves, because that is not suitable to the present disposition. And so
in every thing else. It is no matter what thy condition is, but what
sutablenesse and agreeableness is between thy mind and thy condition; if
thou be in never so good condition, yet, except God make that and thy mind to
agree, thou shall receive no comfort from it; if a man be in mean condition,
if he be in prison, if he be in the lowest estate, if he be in bondage, if he
be in exile, wheresoever he is, if the Lord make but that condition and his
mind to agree, it will suit well enough. And therefore, hence comes the
discomfort that is in the creatures, when a man has them, and enioyes them, it
may be, those things which thou have, are such as suit not with thee, somewhat
there is that thou affectest, something that thou desire, that thou have not,
and that thou can not get. As, for instance, Haman had an estate full of
comfort, and of all kind of blessings, yet there was not a sutablenes between
his mind and that estate, one thing came between, Mordecai sat in the Gate,
and, therefore, this avayled him nothing. Hester. 5. 13.
Hest. 5. That is; Though there were all this together, yet since there was not
a conjunction of the faculty and of the object, this avayled him nothing. Why?
because it was not suitable to his desire, there was something that he would
have, that his affections and appe^ite were set on, that if he had he should be
well. And therefore, says he, all this avayles me nothing; that is his
expression. So Amnon, he was the Kings son, and had all things that a Kings
son might have, yet all this was nothing, there was something else, that his
heart was set on, that he had not. Many the like instances I might give, but I
need not. Therefore, I say, when the Lord puts an vnsuitablenesse between thy
mind and the comforts that thou have, and suf^ers thee to have an in ordina^e
appotite; as women that have good meat to ^ate, yet sometime do long after
ashes and coals, and such things; so when God gives a man an estate, when he
compasses him about with mercies and blessings on all sides, yet if he suffer
such an inordinate appetite to take hold of him, to desire some odd thing,
some by-thing that possesses his soul, he may have the blessing, and have it
present with him, and yet receive no comfort from it at all. Now, my Beloved,
all this tends to this purpose, that you may know, that it is the Lord that
gives all good and evil, both in that the creature is at his disposing that
does it, and, not so only, but, the efficacy of the creature (to exercise
such an act of good or evil to us, that we should receive actual comfort of
discomfort from it) it is from him, and all, I say, chiefly arises from that
dominion that the Lord has over the spirits of men, it does not lie so much in
the creature, as in framing the apprehension of the mind, and therein is seen
the truth of this point chiefly that we have now delivered, that the Lord only
is the Author of good and hurt, and not the creature; because he guides the
apprehension; for, The apprehension of the mind, makes happiness miserable.
if it be true, as it is most true, Animus cuiusque etc. it is the mind and
apprehension of every man that makes his life pleasant, or it is the mind of
man that makes him happy, and not the thing, then the Lord that guides the
mind, and that fashions the heart, he has the only hand in making the life
pleasant. When thou have gotten all thou would have, yet what is that, except
thy heart be fashioned to it? This you shall see in Psalm. 33. Ps. 33. 13. 14.
The Lord looked down from his dwelling, and from his habitation, upon the men
that dwell upon the earth, and fashions their hearts every one of them. (Make)
he fashions their hearts. That is; A man has such a frame of heart, such an
apprehension of things, as it pleases God to give him; So that, take any
estate or condition that a man is in (as you know there is a great variety of
conditions, to be rich, and to be poor, to be in prison, and to be at
liberty, to be in health, and to be sick, to be in honor, and to be in
disgrace) these are, as it were, the several moulds, into which the Lord casts
men. Now, if he will frame the spirit to that mould, like soft clay to the
seal (for that is an expression in Job) I say, if he fashion the spirit to it,
and make it pliable to the condition, to that mould, a man will bear and
endure it well enough, he shall find comfort in it, it is nothing to him. And
therefore, the Saints, the Apostles, and Prophets, when God was with them to
fashion their hearts to pass through the variety of troubles, might say of
themselves, Non patimur etc. They seemed to suffer, but in truth did not
suffer. What was it to Paul, when he endured that state and condition that he
did, when his heart was so fashioned to it as it was? Now, I say, in that the
Lord has this dominion over the spirits of men, hence it is that he makes a
man's life comfortable. Put the case, thy hand has gotten much, that thou have
gathered much wealth together, yet, you know, Eccles. 2. 24. Eccles. 2. 24.
There is no profit to a man, but that he eat and drink, and delight his
soul with profit after his labor, I say this also, that it was of the hand of
God. That is. All this is nothing, except a man delight in it, Quest.
except a man enjoy the comfort of it. Well, but is not that an easy thing,
when the mind and the state are put together? No; Ans.
(says the Wiseman) this is of the hand of the Lord. That is. Except the Lord
do it by a special hand upon the creature, it is not able to do it, except
he fit the mind to the state, except he suit them together, it cannot do it:
so I may say of all things else. A hony-Combe may be very bitter to a man, his
stomach may be so disposed, as in a Fever, you know, that which is sweet is
bitter; again, that which is bitter may be sweet to a man; so those that are
the greatest comforts may be bitter, and those things that may be bitter to
other men, may be sweet to him. It is said of evil men, they fear where no
fear is. That is. When there is no cause of fear, yet the Lord can so fashion
their hearts; and so frame their apprehension, that they shall fear where
there is no cause of fear, when they are but laru^ et spectra, shadows of
evils. Again, another fears not when there is cause of fear. That is; Though
things be pu^ upon him that are terrible, yet the Lord can take away that
fear. And as we say of that affection, so I may say of any other, of joy, and
gladness, he fashions the heart. Deuteronomy. 28. 75.
Deuteronomy. 28. 65. where the Lord threatens many Cursles, and this is one amongst
the rest, You shall go into a strange Nation, and there you shall live. A man
might object thus; Though I live in a strange Nation, yet I hope I may have
some rest and some comfort there. No, says the Lord, you must know this, that
I have dominion over the apprehension of your hearts and affections, when you
come thither, I will give you trembling hearts, and sorrow of mind. That is.
Though there be comforts there, yet you shall not take comfort from them; and
the reason is added, for thine eyes shall sail. That is; When thou come
thither, I will put a restles unquiet disposition into thee, that thou shall
not content thy self with the comfort thou find, but shall have a longing
desire to return to thine own home, and that thou shall not be able to do;
so thou shall have a restles mind whilst thou art there* Thus I will follow
thee with judgments I am sorry, I have stayde so long in the doctrinall part,
the life of this point is in the use and application of it; I will add a
little, that I may not wholly dismiss you without it.

And first, Use.
this use you may make of it. How to guide our comfort.
If the Lord be All-sufficient; hence we should learn how to guide our
comfort, how to guide our joy, how to guide our affections. That is. Labor to
see that fullness that is in God, and that emptiness that is in the creature;
if the Lord be thus All-sufficient, my Beloved, then let your hearts be
satisfied with him alone, let them be filled with him, let them be so bottomed
upon him, and so strengthened by him, that you need not to go out from him to
fetch in any comfort from any creature whatsoever; if the Lord fill the heart,
it should strengthen you against all carnal joy. What need you go out to
others, if you have enough in him; it will strengthen you against that expense
of spirit, and of your thoughts, which you bestow upon vain things; for, my
Beloved, we have but a short time to live in this world, the strength of our
mind is the most precious thing we have, the thoughts and affections that we
have, the business, the actiuenes of our minds, we should be careful to
improve them, we should be careful that none of this water run besides the
Mill. That is. That it be not bestowed upon things that are unworthy of it. If
the Lord be All-sufficient, why should you not bestow it altogether upon him?
Why should you spend it upon the creature? Why should your mind be occupied
about it? Why should you be so intent upon them? Why should you be so subject
to carnal griefs, and fears, and carnal desires? Surely, all these should
be taken up about the Lord: for he looks for it at our hands, I am
All-sufficient: therefore let all these be bestowed upon me. And again, as we
should learn to see this fulness in God, to have our hearts bottomed and fixed
upon him, so we should labor to see the emptines of the creature. Quest.
But, you will say, who does not know that the creature is empty? It is no new
thing, Answ.
my Beloved, it is certain we do not fully know it, if we did, what mean
those complaints, and those griefs, that we take up upon every evil accident
that falls out? for nothing is said to be empty, but when you look for a
fulness in it; you say a Well is empty of water, because you look for water
there; you do not say a Rock is empty, for you do not expret it there: So
we may say of the creature, if we thought, and did believe, that there were an
emptines in it, we would never expect so much from it as we do. But, when we
complain and say, I thought to have found such and such things, and I find
them not, it is a sign that we look for a fulness there; and, therefore, let
us labor to correct that conceit, it will help us against those griefs and
complaints, to which we are so much subject; let us look for no more in the
creature then is in it. All grief and stirring of affection, arises from this
expectation, this overweening, this high prizing of the creature: if you find
inconstancy in men; why do you look for constancy in them? they are
creatures; if you look for stabilitie in your estate, and wonder why a change
should come (I was heretofore rich, and now I am poor, I was honorable, and
now I am in disgrace) why did thou expect stabilitie in that which is subject
to vanity? Things would not trouble us, if we did not expect too much from
them, if we knew there were an emptines in them; he that looks not for much
from the creature, can never be much deceived: he that looks for much from
God, shall be sure to have his desire answored and satisfied; he shall never
fall short of his expectation. And therefore, Beloved, labor to alter your
conceits that way, that whenever any thing fall out, you may not be troubled
^^it, you may not fear for that a coident, for it arises hence, because you
looked for more in it, than was in it. It is (...) saying that we have in
moral Philosophy, that after a man is put into expectation of any thing, then
every affection is stirred more vehemently, whereas had he not had that
expectation, he would have been more quiet. Therefore, if we were persuaded,
and convinced of the vanity of the creature, and the emptines in it, we would
never expect much from it; and, if we did expect nothing, our hearts would be
quieted within us, for all varieties of accidents that fall out; for, I say, it
arises hence, that we think there is some fulness, some stabilitie in them, we
are not fully perswa^ed of the vanity of the creature, we think it can do
good or hurt. You will say; Is not the creature able to do good or hurt?
Beloved, I will name but one place, besides that I named before, 1 Cor. 7. 30.
1 Cor. 7. 30. Let those that weep be as those that weep not, and those that
rejoice as those that rei^yce not, and those that buy as th^se that possessed
not, and they that use this w^rld as they that use it not, for the fashion of
this world goes away. When the Lord gives such a precept as this, certainly
there is a ground for it (as that we have often told you, that) in all the
Command^ments of God, if they were open to us, if we did see the ground of
them, we would see that there were so much reason for them, that if God did not
command them, you would see it best for you to practice them, you would see
reason for it. Now, when the Lora bids them that grieve, to do it as though
they grieved not, and them that rejoice, to do it as though they rejoiced not,
I gather this from it, that the creature can do very little good or hurt; for,
if the creature could do much hurt, certainly, then we might grieve to some
purpose; but, says he, let the evil be what it will, yet grieve as though you
grieved not. That is; Let it be as good as nothing, that, as a man is said to
hear as though he heard not, and to see as if he saw not, when he does not
intend the tale that is told, but yet he hears it* so, says he, if you have
some grief, let it be so small, so little, as if you grieved not; And so
likewise for Joy; Put the case, you had all the preferments, all the comforts
and blessings in this world heaped upon you, yet rejoice in these so rmisly, as
if you rejoiced not. Now, it is certain, if they could do us any special
good, we might rejoice in a greater measure then so: but, when the Lord says,
rejoice as if you rejoiced not, it is certain, they can do us very little
good. That is; So little as if they did us no good at all.

But, Ob.
you will say, it seems it is a little good that they can do us, whereas it
was said before, the creature can do neither good nor hurt.

We will answer that briefly; Answ.
The meaning is this, that the Lord gives us leave to grieve a little, and to
rejoice a little, so that it be in a remis^e manner, so that it be kept within
bounds, but the creature can do us no good, nor no hurt at all of it self,
but as it is disposed by the Lord, and therefore though it do something, yet
that is done by God, and not merely by the creature. So the rule holds good,
though the creature do something, yet seeing it is not of it self, but as it
is an Instrument, you may truly say, it is not the creature that has done any
thing, but the Lord has done me good and hurt by the creature.

But, Quest.
why then is it said, it is a little? for this takes all away.

I answer, Ans.
the meaning is this, it can do a little. That is; All the evil any creature
can do, it is but a little in regard of the eternal that God inflicts on the
soul, it is as good as nothing in comparison of those eternal good things. As
if he should say; The things that belong to God immediately, the things that
belong to the Kingdom of God, and to a man's salvation, the things that are
spiritual and eternal, these are good indeed, and evils indeed, if any of
these befall you, you must grieve exceedingly: for you have great cause: for
that can do you great hurt, and so grace can do you much good, for it tends
to eternity, it tends to set things even, or odd between al-mightie God and
you; and, therefore, in these things, let your reioyching be very great, and
your grief very great. But for any thing that belongs to this present life, it
is exceeding small, it is as good as nothing.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE THIRD SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. I am God All-sufficient.
THe next Use we are to make of this, Use 2.
that God is All-sufficient, Be content with God alone.
is, to learn to be content with him alone for our portion. That is a Use both
to those that are strangers to the life of God, and likewise to those that are
within the Covenant; For those without the Covenant.
to bring them in, for the Lord propounds that but upon reasonable conditions.
It is true, he requires of you absolute and perfect obedience, that you serve
him altogether, But then withal he propou^ds to you an absolute and full
reward, I am All-sufficient, you shall need nothing out of me. As he requires
you to Ieaue all for his sake, so he promises that he will be to you in stead
of all things; and therefore let men consider that in Heb. 11. 6. Heb. 11. 6.
Whosoever comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that serve him. That is; a man will never change, except it be for the
better, except a man think his condition will be better with the Lord, than it
was out of him, he will never come in, but, when he is once persuaded of that,
he cannot keep out; you know, that argument is used by the Prodigal son,
Luke 25.
says he, if I stay here, I shall perish, if I go to my fathers house his
servants have bread enough; that double argument brought him home. So when a
man considers, out of God there is no sufficiency at all, there is not any
thing in the creature, as we showed to you before at large: then if you come
home to the Lord, there is All-sufficiencie in him. That is; All your desires
shall be satisfied, there is nothing that you need, nothing that you want, but
it shall be supplied. This, I say, is that that brings a man in to consider of
Gods All-sufficiencie; but this we do not mean to enlarge now, but rather
proceed to the other.

Whether a man be come in or not, there will not be much difference in the
application of this that we are now to deliver, to be content to have God alone
to be our portion; for that is the cause of all our vnevennesse, and of our
imperfect walking with God, we would have somewhat besides. And therefore the
Lord takes this course with his Disciples, he tells them the worst first; he
tells them they must part with all, that they must deny themselves thoroughly
and perfectly, and they must be content with him alone; because the Lord knew,
otherwise, they would never have constantly followed him, and though they might
have gone far with him, yet, when they had met with a rub, when that, which
they would not part with, and the service of God should come in competition,
surely, they would turn aside, and leave him. Now, my Beloved, you must
consider this, and work your hearts unto it, that, if you have him alone, it
is enough; for if men were persuaded, that he is enough, they would be content
with him alone. When the Sun shines to you, though there be never a Star,
is it not day? Do you not call it so? Again, when all the Stars shine, and
the Sun is set, is not that night? Is it not so when you have the Lord alone?
Suppose you have nothing but him for your portion, shall not the Lord be
sufficient to make you happy? Is he not a Sun and a Shield, says the
Psalmist? Is he not a Sun. That is; All-sufficient, to fill you with comfort
of all kinds? What then though you have nothing but him alone? Again, put
case you had all those creatures, all those Stars to shine to you (for they
have an excellency in them, they have a light, and a comfort, though it be a
borrowed and a derived light, as we heard, such as they receive from the Sun)
suppose you have them, it is but night notwithstanding, you are but in a state
of misery. And therefore, Beloved, why should you not be content to have the
Lord alone for your portion? Take all the creatures, and you find, by
experience, that when they are inioyed, you see an end of their perfection, you
quickly find a bottom in them; the heart hastes after somewhat else, you
quickly suck out the ^oney that is in every one of those flowers, and, when
you have done so, you go to another flower, and to another, and no where does
the soul find rest. God did purposely set forth Solomon, and gave him all
things that his heart could desire, so that no man had the like before him, nor
any man since. And for what end do you think did the Lord it? Surely, for
this purpose, that he might be a perpetual example (as things were written for
our learning, so all these things that were done in those former times, which
are the Rule of these latter, they were done for our learning) he had all
variety of blessings, more then any man else can hope to attain to, yet you
know what verdict he gives of them; Eccles. 1.
All is vanity and vexation of spirit. That is. He found in them an emptines
of that good he looked for, they were empty Clouds, Wells without water.
Again, they were a vexation of spirit. That is. There was the presence of much
evil in them tha^ he looked not for, many stings, many troubles. And therefore
why should you not be content with God alone? Take all outward things; before
you enjoy them, they seem to be great; when you have inioyed them, and tried
them, you quickly find a bottom in them; for there is but a false luster that
Satan and your own lusts put upon them; they have gilded outsides, but when
they come to wearing, the guilt wears off, and you find after a while, what
they are. But come to spiritual things; the more you wear them, the more you
find the beauty and excellency that is in them; for there is a dust and a
rust that is cast upon them, which likewise, the wearing takes off. And
therefore why should you not be content to take God alone? What is it that man
so seeks after? is it not happiness, and comfort? Alas; suppose that you had
all these in the highest degree that you can look for, when all is done, you
shall find that but labor lost, you shall find no stabilitie in them. You
know what Davsd says in Psalm. 30. Psalm. 30. 7.
when he thought his mountain was made strong and underpropped well on each
side; What caused now an alteration? He does not say, there was a change in the
thing, he does not say, his mountain was pulled down, or that there was an
alteration in his estate, that this or that accident fell out, that the people
rebelled against him now which did not before, or, that he had lost such and
such friends that he had before. But, says he, thou turnedst away thy face,
and then I was troubled. The meaning is this, that, if there was a change in
his estate, the change in God was the cause, so then it was the Lord that
comforted him, though he saw it not, it was not the mountain that held him up,
it was not all those blessings that he enjoyed in it that refreshed his heart,
but it was the light that shined through them; and therefore he found, when this
light was with drawn, though he inioyed them still, his comfort was gone. So,
I say, if it were from the things, they might continue your comforts to you,
but when there is a change in heaven, then comes the change upon earth. And on
the other side; if God continue constant, if he remain safe, you need fear
nothing, the creature follows him, it is he that shines through them. What if
a man had the avre and no light in it? So, what if we had never so much, and no
beams flowing form him though them, who only is the God of all comfort, and
the Father of all consolation?

But, my Beloved, to be brief; Put the case a man were stripped of all things,
and suppose he were exiled out of his own Country, suppose he were reduced to
extreme poverty, or shut up close Prisoner, suppose all employments were
taken from him, and he were laid aside like a broken vessel; now for a man to
say, yet God is enough, and that he is content with him alone for his portion.
This is the trial, and this we ought to do: and there is great reason why we
should do it; you shall see it was practiced by the Saints. When Abraham was
an exile from his Country, and had not a foot of land, was not the Lord
All-sufficient to him? did he not provide for him abundantly? When Eliah fled,
and had no meat, he had neither money, nor any body to provide any thing for
him, did not the Lord provide for him? he set the creature a-worke to do that,
to feed him in an extraordinary way, when the ordinary failed. When Paul was
shut up in Prison, yet the Lord filled him with joy and comfort; you know,
Syl^s and he, their feet were fast in the Sto^kes, yet they sang with joy of
heart, there was such a flush of joy, their hearts were so filled with it, that
they could not contain. If a man be brought to poverty, it cannot be beyond
that of Jobs; was it not enough for Job to have God for his portion? did he not
soon turn it? did he not soon take away that, and turn the River another
way, as it were, and fill him with abundance?

Oh; Ob.
but you will say, if I were a spirit, and consisted only of an immateriall
soul, and no more, I should be content, (it may be) to have the Lord for my
portion, but, besides that, I have a body, I have a temporal life, and
therefore I need temporal comforts, and therefore though I would have the
Lord, I would have these things added; for, how should I be without them?

To this I answer. Ans.
First; that, though thou be deprived of all these temporal blessings and
comforts, yet thou shall find them all in the Lord, I say, though ^hey were
all lost, and all scattered, though thou were stripped of them all, yet thou
shall find them all in the Lord, if thou have him alone. You will say, 2. Ob.
Answ.
how can that be? This you must know, that all that God has wrought in the
creature, all the excellency, all the beauty, and delight, and comfort, he
has put into the creature, into meat, drink, music, flowers, yea, into all
creatures of all sorts; who is the cause of all this? Is not the Lord the
cause? It is certain then, that whatsoever is in the effect, is in the cause,
and in the cause in a more excellent manner. There are some causes that produce
but their like, as when fire begets fire, or, when a man begets a man, here
there is an equality between the cause and the effect: but there are other
causes that are unlike their effects; as the Sun produces many effects, that
have a dissimilitude to it, it hardens, and softens, and heates, and dryes, and
all these are in the Sun, but they are in a more excellent manner, then you
shall see them in the effect: that is but a poor similitude, to express that
I would, but yet it is the best we have. Look now upon whatsoever thou have
found in the creature, whatsoever beauty thou have ^eene, whatsoever delight
thou have ta^ted of, whatsoever excellency thou have discovered, and be
persuaded of this, that all this is in the Lord in a more excellent manner,
than it is in the creature.

Well, Quest.
you will say, I grant this; but what follows on that? what is this to my
comfort?

Beloved; Answ.
It is this to thy comfort; If thou loose all, Mark. 10. 29.
make use of that in Mark. 10. If thou loose father, and mother, or brethren,
or sisters, or lands, and houses, and all that you have, you shall find all
these in him: for, if all these comforts be in him, if thou have him alone,
thou shall find all these comforts communicated to thee. That is; Thou shall
find the comfort of them in a greater measure, in a more excellent manner,
than thou should in the things themselves: why else should he say, You shall
have an hundredth fold with persecution? And mark the instance; for you shall
find the promise repeated again, and he names them every one; I say to you,
there is no man that forsakes father, or mother, wife, and children, brother,
or sister, or lands, and houses, for my sake, and the Gospells, but he shall
receive an hundredth fold in this world, and in the world to come eternal life.
That is, you shall find comfort in God alone; if thou be shut up alone, and
yet conversest with God, and have communion with him, and see no creature in
the world besides him, thou shall have abundance of sweet comfort: take all
those varieties of comforts that these give; as, lands give one kind of
comfort, and Parents another, and wives another; thou shall find all these
varieties of comforts in him, he will fill thy soul with all these, for they
are in him alone. Mark that reason that the Lord used to Moses, when he
complained of his tongue, that he was not able to speak; Send, says he, by
whom thou should send; (says the Lord) who made the tongue? who made the
dumb, and the deaf, and the hearing, Exodus 4. 11.
and the seeing? Is it not I the Lord? As if he should say; Moses, sure I am
the maker of all these, though I have not the things in me (the Lord has no
tongue, he has no eye) yet, says he, thou shall find them all in me. That
is; His comfort is this, I will be with thee; when Moses might have made this
objection; Though thou be with me, yet I shall want a tongue to speak, what
will that help? Says he, I, who made that, I have a power in me, and if I be
with thee, it shall be sufficient. I will find out a way for thee, that shall
be as good as if thou had the most eloquent tongue in the world. The same may
I say of all other comforts in the world; who made them? who made those fathers
and mothers? who made those brothers and sisters, that thou art deprived of in
exile, or upon any such occasion, in poverty and disgrace? Is it not he that
made them? What if the Lord will be with thee? What if he will go with thee
into banishment, or into prison, as he did with Joseph? What if he will be with
thee in disgrace? What if he will be with thee in poverty? Is there not enough
in him, who is full of all comfort? He can fill thee with all variety by that
immediate communicating of himself. Beloved, what do you think heaven is?
When you are in heaven, do you think your estate shall be worse? You see what
varieties of comforts we now have here. When we come to heaven, shall we have
less varieties? No; we shall have more; how shall we have it? for we shall
have none but God alone; we shall have fellowship only with him. If there were
not that variety in him that is in the creature, certainly, we should be
loosers, the soul should not be filled, nor satisfied: And therefore, says
the Text; Rev. 21. 23.
There shall need no Sun nor Moon; all the creatures that now give us
comfort shall be taken away, why? for the Lord shall be Sun and Moon, he shall
be every thing, he shall be all in all things. That is; Thou shall find them
all collected in him; and do you think, that the Lord shall be thus in
heaven, and will he not be so to his servants upon earth? It is certain,
wheresoever he pleases to communicate himself to any man, to reveal
himself, and to take any man into fellowship with himself, if he please to
come to the soul of a man, to dwell with him, to suppe with him, as he has
promised so to do and does, then when all other comforts fail, at that time
God delights to come, then thou shall find variety of comfort enough. And
therefore, why should thou not be contented to have God alone for thy
portion? Thou shall find enough in him as in an adaequate object. This is the
first thing I have to show you, that in your very communion with him, you shall
find enough, when the Lord has done it, when thou art filled with the joy of
the holy Ghost, what will all be to thee? what do you think all the world was
to them, if it should have been presented to the Apostles, if one should have
presented them with a Kingdom, with all that ever the sons of men could
devise? Do you think they would have regarded them much? Surely, they would
not, as they did no^ regard the contrary. Imprisonment was nothing, and death
was nothing to them; you see with what facility they passed through them. By
the Rule of Contraries, outward happiness had been nothing: for he that
grieves much for any outward loss, he would much rejoice in the contrary
con^^^^ments: when the Apostles were thus filled with the joy of the holy
Ghost, in regard of the one, certainly they would not have regarded the other,
if it had been represented unto them; what was now the joy in the holy Ghost?
it was but the Lord communicating himself: they had but the Lord alone, they
were but led into a nearer fellowship with him: there was but a little cr^vis
opened, as it were, to see that excellency and fullness, and that
All-sufficiencie in God, and it filled them so, that they cared for nothing
besides. But this, I say, we would work our hearts to, if we did look upon
God as an adaequate object.

But, Ob.
you will say, though this be something to have my soul filled with comfort
thus; yet there are many necessities, many uses, that I have of other things.

Therefore, Answ.
I will go yet further. Do thou consider the Lord, what he is; go through
all his attributes, consider his almighty power, consider his great wisdom,
his counsel, and his understanding, consider his great goodness, and his
truth, and kindness, consider his patience, and his long suffering, etc. all
these are thine. My Beloved, God is not known in the world, we consider not
aright what he says, when he says, I will be thy portion, I will be thy God;
for so he says, I my self am my beloveds, Cant. 1. 6.
and my welbeloved is mine. Now to have the Lord himself, is more than if he
should give thee all the Kingdoms of the earth; consider this, the power of
God is thine, to work all thy works for thee, to make passage for thee, when
thou art in a strait, to bring thy enterprises to pass, to deliver thee out
when thou art in any affliction, out of which the creature is not able to
deliver thee. Think what it is to have an interest in Gods almighty power,
and think this is one part of thy portion: the Lord himself is thine, and all
his power is thine. Consider, likewise, his wisdom, if thou need counsel in
any difficult case, if thou would be instructed in things that be obscure, if
thou would be led into the mysteries that are revealed in the word, to see
the wonderful things contained in the Law; the wisdom of God is thine, thou
have interest in it, it is thy portion, thou shall have the use of it as far
as he sees it meet for thee. And so the Justice of God is thine, to deliver
thee when thou art oppressed, to defend thee in thine innocence, and to
vindicate thee from the injuries of men. And so we may go through the rest.
Now consider, what a portion it is to have the Lord alone: if thou had
nothing but him, Simile.
thou had enough. When a woman marries with a Tradsman, or with an Artist,
that is excellent but in some one Art, or with one that is excellent in
learning and knowledge, she is content, it may be, and thinks it to be a
great portion, as good as if she had many thousands with him, for, says she,
this is as good, it will bring it in. Think then, if thou have the Lord alone
for thy portion, if thou have nothing else, thou have sufficient. Think of all
these attributes, and say within thine own heart, all these are mine. And
therefore, why should I not be content to have him alone? But yet this is not
enough, I will go yet further with thee, if thy heart be not satisfied with
this, yet consider all things in the world are thine: for whatsoever is the
Lords, is thine. When a virgin marries with a man that is rich, she looks
upon all his possessions, and sees so many thousand sheep, so many fair
houses, and so much land, he has so much gold and silver; and, she says thus
with herself; now he is my husband, all this is mine: I shall have my interest
in them, I shall have that that is fit for me. So, look now upon the Lord,
consider when thou have chosen him to be thy portion: though thou should be
content to have him alone, yet all this comes together with him, it cannot be
separated from him, so that even then when thou art deprived of all, yet all is
thine: he has it ready for thee, to bestow on thee, as there is occasion.

You will say, Ob.
these are notions, these are hard things to believe, to see these really is
another thing.

My Beloved, Ans.
will you believe your senses, I find that the Scriptures take away arguments
from those things, that are exposed to the view of men, look on nature and see
what the Lord does there, do but compare a housekeeper on earth with the
Lord, and see what the difference is between them; Consider how many there are
in this house of the Lord, of which he is Master, how many there are at
vprising and down-lying from day to day; Consider how he provides for them all
in Psalm. 104. Psalm. 104.
and in Job. 38. Job 38.
you see the holy Ghost reasoning with the sons of men, even after this
manner; Why, says he, do you doubt him? why are you not content to consecrate
your selves to him, to be to him alone? Do but see how he deals with all
creatures, in the morning they know not what to do, but they look up unto
him; he instanceth in the Ravens, and other creatures, he opens his hand and
gives them food, Psalm. 104. 28. 29.
he shuts his hand and they perish. That is; He feeds them all. Consider the
Treasures in Job 38. Job 38. 22.
Do thou (says the Lord) know the treasures of snow and hayle that I have
hid? When there is a snow all the Land over, think what a great treasure the
Lord has, from whence it comes: in the mighty hayles that be, says he to
Job, do thou know the treasures of hayle? When you see a mighty rain, says
he, who can open the bottles of heaven, Verse. 37.
and who can shut them? That is; Consider well, look on these outward things,
and think who it is, that does this, Verse 38.
when the earth is hot, and the clods knit together, who can open the earth?
These sensible things would lead us to see the Lord in his greatness; so says
he, who is the father of the Rain, Verse. 28.
who has begotten the drops of the dew? Again, as in a great house, there
must be water to furnish the rooms; so says he, Psalm. 104. 10.
from his chambers he sends springs throughout the world. My Beloved, if the
water were all in one place, if it were all in one river, in one chamber, what
would become of mankind? What would become of the Beasts? But, says David, he
sends forth his springs to every mountain, and every valley, that the Birds,
and Beasts, and mankind might have water to refresh them: for otherwise (says
he) they would perish. Thus the Lord has done. So again, says he, who is it
that enlightens the earth? Whence comes the light? and wh^ draws the Curtains
of the night? Again, who is it that maintains all the creatures? the Lion
when he runs out of his den in the morning, Psalm. 104. 21.
he knows not where to have his prey: and not he only, but all the creatures
besides. Consider how he provides for all: the Ostridge (Job 39). God has
taken understanding, Job 39 17. 20.
says he, from her, and she leaves her young ones behind her, and provides
not for them; how comes it then that they grow up, that the species is not
extinguished, but continues? Says the Lord, I take care for them. And so the
Hind that is in the Wilderness, as she calves she bruseth her young, and
casts them forth, and there she leaves them, who should provide for them? Is it
not I says the Lord? And so along. But I will not enlarge my self further in
this; because I have to that which remains. Only this Use is to be made of
it, that when you look upon the universe: look upon all the parts of it; see
the work of God in every kind; and see how he provides for the Ravens, Math.
6. 26.
that have neither barnes nor storehouse; see how he clothes the earth, that
spinnes not, that has no garments made for it; see all that he does in the
work of nature, and by this you may learn to know God: by this you may know,
what he is, how you may well be content to have him alone for your portion.

But this will be objected; Ob.
I but we find it otherwise, those that are his children, are they not poor?
are they not forsaken many times?

Beloved, Answ.
I answer in a word; It is true, while the children are under age, they enjoy
nothing in comparison of that inheritance, that is provided for them. The
servant many times lives in a far better condition, and escapes that
correction, and that discipline and nurture, which the child is subject to;
and he has money in his purse many times, when the Son has none: he has
many liberties, which the child is deprived of. The reason is, because it is
the time of his nurture; And so says the Lord to Israel, I could have brought
you into the land of Canaan at the first: it was no difficult thing to me, but
I led you forty years: to what purpose? Deuteronomy. 8. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 5.
that I might teach thee (says he) that I might nurture thee, that thou
might learn to know me, and to know thy self: that I might humble you, that
you might learn by that to see the vanity and emptiness of the creature. So
the Lord deals with his children; But yet, my Beloved, why should you not be
content to have him alone for your portion? he has it for you, it is not for
want of good will toward you, it is not for want of power, but because it is
best for you: And therefore, likewise, that is answered, that the children of
God want, and those that are his enemies have abundance, but they are but
land-flouds of comforts, that make a great show, and have some reality in them
to comfort, for the present; but it is but a Pond, it is but a land-floud; the
spring of comfort belongs only to the Saints, it may be, they are but little,
but yet they are springing, they are renewed to them from day to day, they are
such springs as make glad the heart of all the household of God: And therefore,
what if his enemies have abundance? it is but as summer flowers; though they be
set in gaudy places, yet they are but slippery places, though they flourish for
a time, it is but the flourishing of a green tree, that lasts not long. And
therefore be not mistaken in that, that Gods children want, and others have it,
his children have it in a better manner. But I will not stand upon this any
longer.

If the Lord be All-sufficient, Use 3.
then learn hence, To look only to God in our ways.
to have your eye only upon him, when you have any enterprise to do; if there
be any cross, that you would have prevented, if there be any blessing, that
you would obtain, if there be any affliction, out of which you would have
deliverance, let your eye be to him alone, rest on him alone: for he is
All-sufficienet, he is able to bring it to pass; as he says here to Abraham,
I am All-sufficient, so he will be to all that are within the Covenant, as well
as to him. And therefore, I say, whatsoever thy case be, look to him only,
and thou need no other help, and be ready to say thus with thy self, the
greatest mean, without his help, is not able to bring this enterprise to
pass, it is not able to deliver me, it is not able to comfort me, it is not
able to work such a work for me; and the weakest with him is able to do it.
You see Asa was able to say this in 2 Chronicles. 14. 2 Chro. 14. 11.
Lord, says he, it is all one with thee to save with many or with few. And the
Lord made it good to him; for when he had but a few, and a great multitude came
against him, you see he was saved with those few; and, afterward, when Asa had
a great multitude, he was not delivered, that he might learn to know the truth
of that which then he heard; And therefore, says he, we rest upon thee, Oh
Lord, it is all one with thee to deliver with many or with ^ew: I say, so it is
in all things else. Therefore, Beloved, learn to conceive thus indeed of
things: we do not usually do so, if we did, what is the reason, that you
provide much for your children, and all your care is to leave them portions? I
would ask you but this question; Whether can all that portion make them happy,
or make your selves so, or any one else? It cannot make them happy, without
Gods favor, without his blessing* Put the case, again, they had his favor
and blessing without this portion, Is not that enough? Is it not sufficient? We
may run through many instances, but it is enough to touch upon this. And
therefore thou should be ready to say thus with thy self; If I have never
so much, if I were in the greatest floate of prosperity, what is this without
him? If again, I were in the lowest ebb, is not he enough? And therefore in
every business say this with thy self; All my business now is with God in
heaven, and not with men, nor the creatures, and therefore, if I want comfort
at any time, if I cannot have it from men, nor from the creature, yet I know
where to fetch it; if I want wisdom, counsel, and advice, if I want help, I
know whether to go; if the Cisterne fail, I can go to the fountain, I can
go to him alone, that is able to be my helper in all my needs, to be my
counfeller in all my doubts, and to comfort me in all my distresses. But,
Beloved, the thing I would press is this, to settle your eyes upon God alone.

It may be, Ob.
you will say, you have an eye to God, but you would have other helps too.

No: Answ.
All the trial is in this, to trust in him alone: for if you did think him
All-sufficient; why should you not do so? If he had but a part of
sufficiency, and the creature had another part, you might join help with
him; but since he is All-sufficient, you must be content with him alone. Put
the case, he give you no pawn, as he did not to Abraham, the Text says, he
had not a foot of land in all his possession, and yet he believed; for he
thought God was sufficient: Therefore when thou have any thing to do, trust in
him alone, and thou shall then find it the best done: for when we trust in him
most, then we pray best, and when we pray best, we speed best: and therefore
we commonly find, when things are in the lowest condition, then it has best
success with us: because, by that means we are taught to go to him alone. To
give you an instance of this, consider David and Jacob; I will show you but
these two cases; you shall see it in David and Jacob.

David Instance. David.
did not make have when the Lord promised him the Kingdom, and sent Samuel to
anoint him, (though at one time he did, when he fled into the land of the
Philistines, yet in the general he did not) if he had made have, he would have
taken away Saul's life, when he was put into his hands, but, says he, I will
stay the Lords leisure, I will not meddle with him, wickedness shall come from
the wicked. What was the issue of it? you see how the Lord brought it about
without pain, and labor to him, (as you shall see in the wheels of his
providence, how he wheeled that about, to bring David to the Kingdom) you see
first he takes away Saul by the hands of his enemies, David's hand was not on
him, he took him away in due season. When that was done, then there was Abner
a mighty Captain, you see, he was taken away, and that without any fault of
David's, upon a quarrel between Ioab and him. When Abner was taken away, there
was Isbosheth left behind; you see, there were two set a-worke by his
providence (for those things come to pass by his providence) to take away his
head when he was asleep; so that all the posterity of Saul was gone. He took
not only Saul away in the battle, but all the rest, and there were but two
left, Mephibosheth, that was lame in his limbs, and not fit to manage the
Kingdom, who likewise, afterward, put himself into David's hands, and
Isbosheth, that was lame in his mind, as the other was in his limbs. And
therefore, when Abner was gone, there was no strength in him; So the Lord
brought it to pass without any action of his: so it is when men learn to
trust in God. Likewise, see it in Nabals case: he was making have, he was
stepping out to an inordinate way to help himself, but when he stayed
himself, and did it not, how did the Lord bring it to pass without him? did
not he himself take away Nabals life, and give Nabals wife and goods, as he
did Saul's goods, and his house, and his wives to him? This the Lord did: for he
trusted in him, he made not have, but he stayed on him alone. I say, if we
could learn this in all our enterprises, to trust in him, he would work our
workers for us. On the other side; wheresoever you see a man that makes have,
and that joins others with the Lord, and is not content with his
All-sufficiencie; does it not cost him much, when he will do his own works,
and will not leave it to the Lord to work it for him?

Jacob, Jacob.
you know, what it cost him, when he made have to get the blessing by a wrong
way, how many years exile, how much pain, and separation from his friends?
And so Saul, it cost him the loss of his Kingdom, for making have when he
offered sacrifice, and did break the Commandments of God, because the people
were dispersed; And so of the rest. And therefore, Beloved, what if there be
nothing besides (for that is the case I press) suppose you were in such a
strait, that there is no more but the Lord to rest on, yet, if you be content
to trust in him alone, he will do it, as he did for David; if you will needs
indent, and bargain with him, then, I say, it may be, you shall have the thing
you would have, but you had better be without it; as we see in Math. 20. when
the workmen would not be content with the All-sufficiencie of God (as we see
in that Parable) but would make a bargain with the Lord, we will not serve
thee, say they, except thou will give us so much wages, if thou will, we will
do it; so he bargained with every man for a penny a day; Go then, says he,
and work in my Vineyard, and thou shall have a Penny; Well, when he comes to
pay them, he gives them their Penny: they thought that was not enough, but they
murmured against him; Mat. 20. 13.
says the Lord, did you not bargain with me for a Penny? The meaning of it is
this, it does most concern the laborers in Gods Vineyard, but it is appliable
to all others. They will not work for the Lord, they will not reckon him
All-sufficient, but they will have wages, they will bargain with him to have a
Penny. That is; One to have a Benefice to maintain him; another will work for
him, if he may have fame, and credit, and esteem; Another will work for him,
if he may have some great place. Says the Lord, I will give thee that Penny,
thou shall work in my Vineyard; I but when a man has it, (mark it) he
murmurs, why? for when the end of the day comes* he sees that preferment, that
riches, that credit, are but empty things, they are but small things when he
is to go into another world, there is nothing left for him, he is naked and
destitute, it is but a Penny, and therefore he murmurs and complains. That is;
He sees now that it was but a poor bargain that he made; But, says the Lord,
thou would needs bargain with me for a Penny, and thou have it. So, I say,
to those that are not content with the Lords All-sufficiencie, but will have
present wages, they will bargain with the Lord: He will give thee this
particular, thou shall have this, but remember this, that it is said in Math.
6. thou have thy reward. Mat. 6.
If thou will have praise of men, and wile do it for that, thou shall have it,
but that is all thou shall have. If a man will have his portion, as that Son
had of his Father, Luke 15. 12. Luke 15. 12.
it may be, he will give thee thy portion. The Son that stayed at home, had
no portion given him, for says his Father, I and all that I have is thine. But
if a man will have his portion, and will not be content with Gods
All-sufficiencie, he shall find that it is not best for him. My Beloved,
consider whether it be not better to trust in God alone, to rest in him alone.
Psalm. 146. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Consider that, Psalm. 146. 3. 4. 5. 6. Trust not in Princes, nor in the sons
of men, for their breath is in their nostrils, and their thoughts perish, but
happy is he that trusts in the God of Jacob. And he gives two reasons for it,
For he made heaven, and earth, and the Sea; and secondly, He keeps Covenant
and mercy for ever. There are two reasons in that place, why we should trust in
God: One is, though the enterprise be never so great and difficult, though the
blessing thou would obtain, be never so hard to come by; yet consider, thou
have to do with him, that made heaven and earth. As if he should say; Lay
those two things together, do thou think it an easier thing to make heaven
and earth, then to bring that thing to pass? If he made heaven and earth,
do thou not think he is able to do that? You will say, we doubt not of his
ability. Beloved, we do: We showed this at large before, we will add that
to it, in Romans 4. 21.^
in Romans 4. You know Abraham's faith is every^where commended, and what was his
faith? Surely, he trusted in God, that he was able to do it, he being assured,
and not weak in faith, but strong, He gave glory to God, and believed that he
that promised was able to do it. Beloved, though we think it not, there is
the stop that we make in believing the promises; that is one reason, he made
heaven and earth. The second is, he keeps fidelity for ever. And in another
place, as it is interpreted, he keeps covenant and mercy for ever. Mark,
says he, let Princes do their best, alas, what can they do, they are but
weak men, their breath is in their nostrils, but God made heaven and earth.
Secondly, says he, their thoughts perish, but God keeps co^enant and mercy
for ever, there is no change in him.

Oh, Ob.
but you will say, there may be a change in us, all my doubt is of that, of
keeping covenant on my part* thus men are ready to say.

My Beloved, Ans.
consider (for this I will be very bri^fe in) that thou need not fear that
thy disobedience, if thou be once within the Covenant (if thou be one whose
heart is upright with him) shall (...) the Lord to depart from thee, he will not
be unfaithful to thee, though thou be weak in thy carriage to him; for he
keeps Covenant for ever. That is His* Covenant is to keep thy heart in his
fea^d, that thing we forget; if the Lord keep Covenant with us, he does not
suspend his promise of help upon our obedience, and leave us (...) but he
promises to give us a heart and (...) he has promised to circumcise (...),
that we shall not depart from him: and therefore in Esaias 40. the Lord
expresses it thus; You shall know me as Sheep know their Shepherd, and I
will make a Covenant with you, and thus and thus I will deal with you: And how
is that? Why the Covenant is not thus only; As long as you keep within
bounds, and keep within the Fould, as long as you go along the paths of
righteousness, and walk in them, but this is the Covenant, that I will make,
I will drive you according to that you are able to bear; if any be great with
young, I will drive them softly, if they be lame, that they are not able to go
(says he) I will take them up in Isa. 40. 11.
mine arms, and carry them in my bosom. If you compare this with Ezech. 34.
Ezekiel. 34. 16.
you shall find there he puts down all the slips that we are subject unto;
(speaking of the time of the Gospel, when Christ should be the Shepherd,) he
shows the Covenant that he will make with those that are his; says he, if any
thing be lost, if a Sheep loose it self, this is my covenant, I will find
it: if it be driven away by any violence of temptation, I will bring it baeke
again: if there be a breach made into their hearts, by any occasion through
finne and lust, I will heal them and bind them up. This the Lord will do,
this is the Covenant that he makes. Now consider these Reasons, I made heaven
and earth, and, I keep Covenant and mercy for ever.

But, Ob.
you will say, though I must trust in the Lord, because he made heaven and
earth, and because he keeps covenant and mercy for ever, yet the Lord does it
by means, he does it by friends, by some mediate instruments.

My Beloved, Answ.
here is the great deceit of mankind, that we think, that the Lord dispenses
his comforts according to those means that we have. A man thinks, if he have a
great estate, his comforts shall be more, if he have many friends, he thinks,
he shall be safer; says the Lord (you know that place, Psalm. 62.) if riches
increase, Psalm. 62. 10.
set not your hearts upon them: for, says he, they are able to do little
good. Power, and kindness belongs to me. Ob.
But then this objection comes in, the Lord dispenses comforts by such means?
Answ.
No, says the holy Ghost there, he rewards not men according to their riches,
but he rewards every man according to his works. And therefore think this
with thy self, thou that have abundance of outward comforts, if the Lord did
reward thee according to them, thou had cause to rejoice in them, but he will
reward thee according to thy works; and therefore, trust in him, learn to
reckon him to be All-sufficient, learn to be to him alone.

But, Ob.
may not a man that trusts not in God, but looks a little too much to the
creature, prosper? A man again that withdrawes his heart from them, and trusts
in the Lord, may not he wither?

Beloved, Answ.
I will add but that in brief; see thou a man that does not reckon the Lord
to be All-sufficient, that does not rest on him alone, but makes flesh his
arm, Ier. 17. 5.
and trusts in any creature, that has such thoughts as these, I have the
favor of high persons, and therefore I am safe, or I have many friends to
back me, and to support me, and defend me, and therefore I am safe, I have a
great estate to help me against dangers, to provide for me against the time of
difficulty, and therefore it shall go well enough with me. I say, be it thine
own case, or see thou any man doing so, be assured that such a man shall
certainly wither: cursed shall that man be that does this, that makes flesh his
arm. Again, on the other side, see thou a man that is willing to deprive
himself of all these things, when it is to keep a good conscience, when he
put to it; It is an evidence that he rests on God, that he trusts in him
alone; be assured, howsoever that man may be under a cloud, and, though it may
be winter with him for a little while, yet he shall spring again, his light
shall break forth, and he shall prosper, says the Text, Ier. 17. (That is the
place I have reference to) and his leaf shall be green. The other man, says
the Text there, though God do come to him, and all about him, yet he shall not
see good, he shall have no part in it, but he shall surely wither sooner or
later. On the other side; Though evil do come upon this man that trusts in
God, yet he shall not see evil. Now, my Beloved, consider (that we may draw to
a conclusion) whether you do this or no, Ob.
which you are here exhorted unto. But it may be, a man will be ready to say,
I hope I do perform this. Ans.
It is well, if you do. But I will say but one word to you, if you do thus
look upon God as All-sufficient, if you reckon him your portion; do you walk
as one that sees him in his greatness, and in his almighty power? Remember
that in Pro. 30. Prove. 30. 2. 3. 4.
when Agur looks upon God and himself together, says he, I am worse then a
Beast, I have not the under standing of a man in me. And why? says he, I have
not the knowledge of the holy one, he that ascends and he that descends, he
that holds the winds in his fist, he that gathers the waters in his lap as into
a garment, he that stretches forth the ends of the earth, and that settles it,
who knows him, says he, who can tell his name, or his sons name? The
meaning of it is this; says he, when I consider what God is, and begin to
think how I have walked with him, and how short I am of knowing him as I
should; says he, I am as a Beast, I am confounded and amazed. Now, consider
that, and make it your own case; who walks with God, my Beloved, and sees
him that ascends and descends; (which has reference to that vision that
appeared to Jacob; The Lord was on the top of the ladd^r, and the Angels
descended and ascended. That is; All the Creatures both in heaven and earth are
like messengers that go to and fro at his Commandment) who walks with God as
knowing this providence of his, that sets the Angels a-worke, all the hoasts,
all the particulars of them in their kind, to do this business and that
business? Who walks with God, as seeing him sending a messenger to do every
thing that we see done in the world, sending a messenger to take away such a
man's life, to give another life and health, sending a messenger to remove such
a difficulty from one man, And again stopping up another man's passage. This
you call accident, when you see a concurrence of two things together, the cause
whereof you know not, but he knows both, who walks with the Lord, as seeing
him do this or that, through the ends of the earth. Again, he holds the winds
in his fist; who sees him as such a God, that is able to hold the winds in his
fist? Who looks upon him as such a God? The breath of a man, that is less
then the wind, he holds it in his fist, as a man holds a thing in his hand,
and that he keeps there at his pleasure. Who looks upon God, as thus great in
power? And so again, breathing the holy Ghost, who looks upon God, as one
that dispenses it, as it pleases him to give it and withdraw it at his will?
Who looks upon him, as one sending forth motions, and iniecting them into the
mind, stirring it this way, or that way, as the winds, and the storms, and
the Creatures? He has them all in his hand, and holds them all in his fist:
for by these works of nature, we may learn to know the greatness of God, and
to reflect upon our selves, and see how far we are short of him.

And so again, who looks upon him as lapping up the waters as in a garment?
That is; When the Sea is outrageous, yet he takes it as you would take a little
water in your lap sometimes, and he contains it, and gathers it up, and
sometimes he lets it loose again. And so likewise, he is able, when the people
are unruly, even great Nations that sometimes are ready to overspread his
Church, and to run over it with proud waters, yet he is able to keep them
back, he is able to restrain them, and to shut them up with bars and
doors, as he does the waters. He that lappes the waters in a garment, is he
not able to restrain men that are violent against us in wrath? Who can stand
before wrath, and envy, that is like a violent water, that overflowes all, and
that carries all before it? Yet he that laps the waters as a garment, he is
able to restrain them wheresoever he finds them. And so again, who walks
with him, as knowing him that establishes the ends of the earth. That is; (as
the original shows more clearly) as one that has founded the great and
weighty earth upon nothing? Says he, that God (when a man's spirit has
instabilitie, and inconstancy in it naturally,) he that establishes the earth
upon nothing, making a mighty building where there was no foundation, he can
establish thy spirit too. Suppose there be nothing to support the Church, to
suppo^^ a man when he is falling, or, that he has no friend to prop him,
nothing to underlay him, yet he (that has set the earth upon nothing, but upon
the thin air, that, you know, is not able to support it, but he only says
to the earth stand there) is he not able to support a man in any case? See now
the Lord in this greatness of his. But who walks as seeing him thus in his
greatness, and in his All-sufficiencie? For all these do but express the
All-sufficiencie of God. Beloved, if we did it, why are our hearts discouraged?
Why do we hang down our heads upon every occasion, when troubles come? If we
see the Lord in his All-sufficiencie, he is able to stay our hearts, if we
trust in him alone. What though he suffer his Church to be over-runne with
enemies for a time? What though he suffer men to prevayle against it, (as you
see how the Adversaries prevayle against the Church of God by their strength)
yet, if you did see him in his All-sufficiencie, your hearts would not fail
you a jot. You may either apply it to the Churches, or to your own particular
cases. (And to give you yet an insta^ce of these sensible things.) When the
disease prevayled far on Hezekiah; says the Lord, thou see Hezekiah what I
can do, I will make the shadow to go backwards. Think with thy self; Though
the disease be gone thus far, yet I, that make the shadow to go backwards,
am I not able to make thy disease to return? And so we may say of any trouble,
or affliction, of any temptation, or cross that lies on yo^, that you think
it so far gone, that there is no recalling of it again, yet he that made the
shadow to go backward, is he not able to reduce it? And so again, when you
see the Church in such a case as it is now in, we are ready to cast away all
hope, and to say, What shall we do? Beloved, consider that which was said to
Gideon (as we are ready to say, when we say the Lord is All-sufficient, he
has enough, if he be with us, we desire no more) we make the objection with
Gideon thus; If the Lord be wish us, why is it thus? Why is Israel oppressed?
Says the Lord to Gideon, thou shall see what I am able to do, when the Fleece
is dry, all the earth shall be wet, and when the earth shall be dry, the Fleece
shall be wet. That is; As if he had said; Though the Church now be overflowne,
yet I can dry it up, and lay misery upon them. As again, that little Church,
that little Fleece, when that was in peace, they were afflicted, as they were
in peace when that was afflicted. Genesis 15. 10. 11
The like, you see, in Genesis 15. where there is another resemblance of the
Church, when the Sacrifices were cut in pieces, and he had divided the Rams;
says the Text, the Fowls come and would have devoured them. There are two
similitudes of the troubles of the Church, and Gods rescuing them. When the
Crows came, Abraham drove them away. That was one. And the other was, when
there was a very fearful darkness, there came a Burning Furnace, and a
Lamp. The meaning is this; The Church then was in Egypt, (for that he has
reference to) it was a dead Sheep, exposed to Ravens, and you would think
there was nothing there to help it, but it must needs be devoured. Why yet
says the Lord, though it be thus near, I will drive away the Ravens, and I
will save my Church. You know, what the strength of Pharaoh, and of Egypt was.
Again, says he, the Church was in fearful darkness, in the valley of the
shadow of death. That is; They thought they should never be recovered, you
know, what ways Pharaoh took, and at how low an ebb the Church was, when he
would have all the males destroyed. Who would have said, that this Church
should have recovered? Yet, says he, as, after this fearful darkness, the
Furnace came and gave light, so, says he, I will scatter this darkness.
Beloved, consider, if you believe Gods All-sufficiencie, and consider, if thou
do thus know him in his greatness, what though the motions be exceeding great
and strong that come against the Church, yet in Esaias 40. (it is to that purpose
brought in) What are they to the Lord? they are but as the dust of the
Balance, or as the drop of a Bucket. The Bucket it self is no great thing,
but the drops that fall from the Bucket, when it arises out of the Well,
they are exceeding small; Says he, the Nations are no more to me, than the
drop of a Bucket, or the dust of the Balance, which does not sway them either
way; So, look what I do, the Nations are notable to sway me, be they never so
strong, they are not able to turn me, but according as I pitch things they
shall stand.

Now my Beloved, consider whether you be able to comfort your selves thus out
of Gods All-sufficiencie. We do, for the most part, as Hagar did, when the
Bottle was spent, she falls a crying, she was undone, she and her child
should dye, and there was no more hope, till the Lord opened her eyes to see a
Fountain near her; the Fountain was near her, but she saw it not; when she
saw it, she was well enough. Is it not so with us all? because the Bottle is
dried up, because such a means is taken away, we think presently there is no
more hope, when the Fountain is near, the Lord himself is the fountain, and
he is near, if he did open your eyes to see. Consider whether you walk thus
with God, as seeing him in his greatness. Beloved, if we did see him in his
greatness, why should Torches and Candles have so great a light before us?
That is; Why should we regard men so much? Put the case, many Nations were
against thee, thou would look upon all those in comparison of God, as a drop
of the Bucket, or as a little dust on the Balance. Art thou able to do so, to
see and know him thus in his greatness? if thou be not, certainly, thou art
exceeding short of seeing God in his All-sufficiencie.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. I am God All-sufficient.
ANother Use, and deduction that we will draw from this point, Use 4.
that God is All-sufficient, is, to comfort us in regard of our imperfect
obedience. To comfort us in our imperfect obedience.
We ought not to think, because we are not exact in keeping all the
Commandments of God because we have much unevenness in our ways, because we
are not able to keep the Rule so strictly, as we ought, that therefore God
reiects us: for he is All-sufficient in himself, he needs not our
righteousness, and therefore he can well bear with the imperfections of our
righteousness. You shall see this use made of it, Act. 17. 24. 25. Act. 17.
24. 25
God that made all things, the world, and all that is therein, seeing he is
Lord of heaven and earth, he dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is
he worshipped with men's hands, as if he needed any thing. (Mark) he gives to
all life, and breath, and all things. Thus the Apostle makes his argument; if
God, says he, made the world, and all things therein, if he gives to all
life, and breath, and all things; then, when you do worship him, it is not
because he has any need of your worship, or any need of your righteousness,
or of all that you can do, he has enough, he does it not as if he needed any
thing: for he is All-sufficient. Psalm. 50. 12.
And so like wise in Psalm. 50. says the Lord there, If I be hungry, I will not
tell thee. That is; To show how little need he has of Sacrifices, how little
regard he had them, when they were brought in, and how little he was moved when
they failed in it. For, says he, all are mine, the sheep upon a thousand
mountains are mine: If I be hungry, I will not tell thee. That is; I may
satisfy my self, (I do but apply it by way of allusion) if I would have
Sacrifice in abundance, might I not have it? If I were hungry after them, who
could keep them from me? We may say the same of the obedience of his children:
If he were hungry. That is; If he were desirous of perfect and absolute
obedience, could he not have it? Has he not spirit enough? Has he not grace
enough to put into their hearts, that he might reap the full fruits of
righteousness? And therefore, I say, in regard of Gods All-sufficiencie, he
needs it not; and if he need it not, he will be content with a more imperfect
measure of it, since he is no looser by it. This is to persuade our hearts more
fully of that truth, which we assent unto with some difficulty: for we are
something discouraged with the imperfections of our obedience; whose faith is
not weakened by it? who comes not more vnchearfully before God, because of it?
Now, if that fear were taken away, we would draw near more boldly. We see
what Job says in this case, Job 35. 6. 7.
Job 35. 6. 7. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him, yea, when thy
sins are many, what do thou to him? If thou be righteous, what give thou
to him? or what receives he at thy hands? Mark, you know, sin and
righteousness, are the two paths that we walk in, those are all that trouble
us; the sins that we commit, and the defects of our righteousness. Says he,
if thou sin, what is that to him? It does him no hurt. Again, if thou fail
in thy righteousness, or in thy performances, it is all one that way: for it
reaches not to him: because he is blessed for ever, he has all sufficiency
in himself: and therefore he pleases so to administer the world, and so to
guide the hearts of his children, and to dispense to them but such a measure of
grace, to leave sinful lusts in them in such a measure unmortified; because
himself is neither a gainer, nor a looser: therefore let not your faith be
weakened at this his administration of things, let not carnal fears possess
your hearts, to keep you off from coming with boldness to him, since he is
All-sufficient, since he needs not your righteousness, he can be without it.

Moreover; Man's benefit, should encourage him to Gods service.
This we may draw further from it; if God be thus All-sufficient, that what we
do comes not near him, then all the Commandments that God gives to the
sons of men, are for their good, and not for his profit. Mark that, that
should breed in us a great willingness to keep his Commandments, and a
great cheerfulness to perform them, when we understand that it is for our
own good. When a servant knows that all is for his own good, that he does,
he will go about all the business his Master imployeth him in with more
cheerfulness, because he loves himself; this is a principle God has put
into nature.

Now, That Gods Commands are for man's good, declared by Instances.
if God be All-sufficient, then he commands nothing for his own benefit in any
thing; no, not in that, in which he seems most to do it. The Sabbath, that he
has taken for himself, and has called it his day, Some may ask, is not that
In the Sabbath.
No: God says, the Sabbath is made for man. As if he should say; If it had
been made for mine own sake, I would have taken more then one day from you;
But I have given it for your sake, I made it for man: for man could not be
without it, he could not be religious without it, his heart could not keep
near to God without it, it would soon be estranged from him, it would be
over-growne with weeds, if it were not looked to ever and anon, he would soon
be defective in his knowledge, he would soon forget the purposes that he takes
to himself: therefore the Sabbath is made for man. That is; O^e day wherein
the Lord commands him to set aside all other business, and to intend his
service. And that which is said of the Sabbath, may be said of all other
Commandments: for he is All-sufficient.

deny himself, In selfe-denials.
and take up his cross. Is it for him? No, my Beloved, it is for our selves,
and therefore when a man denies himself in his profit, in his credit, when he
denies himself in the satisfying of his lusts, all this is for his own
profit: as you have it clearly set down in Esaias 48. 17. Isa. 48. 17.
I am the Lord that teaches thee to profit; therefore hearken to my
Commandments. As if he should say, It is for thy profit that I command thee,
and not for my own: therefore let that cause thee the more willingly to do
it. And so that is often repeated in Deuteronomy. the Commandments that I have given
thee for thy wealth, for thy good. Beloved, all the Commandments of Satan are
for our hurt, we do him service, as bond-slaues serve their Masters, not for
their own profit, but for their Masters. But all the service we do to God,
is for our wealth; for he is All-sufficient.

Last of all. We give nothing to God in our obedience.
If God be All-sufficient, then, when you perform any thing, do not think
that you give any thing to the Lord, and so look for recompense; (there is
that secret Popery in every man's heart, that he thinks when he has done any
special service to be rewarded for it) Indeed, if thou would do God a good
turn, thou mights look for somewhat again at his hands, but it is done to
him that is sufficient; and how can you do him a good turn? how can you give
to him? Mark. It is the ground which the Apostle lays Romans 11. 34. Romans 11.
34.
Who has given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him? He that is capable
of no gift, there can be nothing done to him, to premerit any thing; For he is
All-sufficient, there can be no addition made to him, and, says he, do thou
look for any recompense? What do thou else but give to him of his own?
Shall a man merit in giving to the Lord the fruits of his own Vineyard, the
Apples of his own Orchard? When as all the graces we have, are but as streams
springing from that fountain that he has put into us; therefore, when thou
have done thy best, say within thy self unto thine own heart; I am but an
unprofitable servant, I can look for nothing for all this: for he is
All-sufficient, and needs it not; I have done him no good turn, I have given
him nothing, he is incapable of my gift, and therefore I look for no
recompense, as by merit, from him.

Again; Use 5.
If God be All-sufficient; let us be exhorted to make a Covenant with him; Gods
All-sufficie^cie should persuade us to enter into covenant with him.
for (as I told you before) these words do but contain the Covenant between
God and us. Now, this is the Covenant, that God will make with you; if you will
enter into Covenant with him, that he will be All-sufficient to you. Now, that
which is expressed here generally, I find in other places, divided into these
three particulars, where in the All-sufficiencie of God consists, as if they
were the three parts of this Covenant.

All-sufficient, to justify, and to forgive us our sins.

All-sufficient, to sanctify us, and to heal our infirmities.

All-sufficient, to provide us whatsoever we need; so that no good thing shall
be wanting to us.

These are the three parts of the Covenant, which we find set down in diverse
places; Ier. 31. 34.
in Ier. 31. 34. Heb. 8. 9. 10. 16. Heb. 8. 9. 10.
But most clearly are they set down in Ezekiel. 36. Ezech. 36.
Says the Lord there; I will power clean water upon you, you shall be clean,
yea, from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. There
is one part of the Covenant, that he will cleanse us from all our sins. That
is; From the guilt, and the punishment of them. Secondly. A new heart will I
give you, also a new spirit will I put into you, and I will take away your
stony hearts out of your bodies, and I will give you a heart of flesh. There
is the second part of the Covenant, consisting of Sanctification. The third is;
You shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers, and I will call for
Corn, and I will increase it, and I will lay no more famine upon you, and I
will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that you
bear no more the reproach of famine among the Heathen. Here are the
particulars set down; some are named for the rest; I will call for Corn and
Wine, That is, For whatsoever you want. That is the third part of the Covenant.
These are the three parts of the Covenant, which I shall spend this time in
opening, and showing you, that God is sufficient in all, and to answer those
objections that men's hearts have against his All-sufficiencie: for the heart is
ready to object against these three, to have sins forgiven, to be
sanctified, and to have abundance of all good things, belonging to this present
life: in all these he is All-sufficient, to fulfill all the desires of men's
hearts. Now, to begin with the first.

First, I say, He is All-sufficient, to take away all Gods All-sufficiencie in
forgiving our sins.
My Beloved, it may be, when you hear this point, you will say, it is an easy
thing to believe it, there is no difficulty in this, the Lord is
All-sufficient to forgive sins. Surely, whatsoever we say, or pretend, we
find in experience it is exceeding hard. Who is able so fully to believe the
forgiveness of his sins, as he ought? Who is able to do it when he is put to
it? At the day of death, at the time of extremity, at that time when the
conscience stirs up all his strength, and, opposes it self against him,
when all his sins are presented unto him in their colors, who is able then
to believe it? therefore we had need to find out the All-sufficiencie of God
in this: for the greatness and exceeding largeness of his power is showed in
it, in nothing more then in forgiving of sins. Hosea 11. 9.
Hosea 11. 9. See there how the Lord expresses it; Says he, I will not
execute the fiercenes of my wrath, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for I
am God and not man. Mark, my Beloved, when we have committed sin against
God, we commonly think thus with our selves, if my sins were but as other
men's, if my sins wanted these and these circumstances, I would believe the
forgiveness of them; but something, or other, a man has still to object. Now,
says the Lord, it is very true: If I were as man is, it could not be, but I
should execute the fierceness of my wrath upon Ephraim, who has provoked me
so exceedingly (for Ephraim was a part of Israel, and is put for all Israel;
and the Prophet wrote this in the time of Jeroboam, the son of Ioash, when
Israel abounded in sins, and in Idolatry) but, says the Lord, though their
sins be exceeding great, yet I am able to forgive them: for I am God, and not
man. As if he should say; Look upon weak man, and compare God and man
together, and see how far God exceeds man: see how much he is stronger then
man, being infinite and almighty; so, says he, his mercy exceeds the mercy of
man. As if he should say; If I were not God, it were impossible I should
forgive the sins of Ephraim, which they have multiplied against me from time
to time. So, Isa. 55. 7.
likewise, in Esaias. 55. 7. the Lord calls them in there, and uses this as an
argument: for, says he, I will forgive, and multiply my pardons; so the word
signifies in the original; when a man makes this objection. But it is more
then any man can believe, that my sins that I have thus and thus repeated,
that the Lord can so easily put them away, and multiply his pardons, as I have
multiplied my sins? Says he, my thoughts are not a^ your thoughts, my ways
are not as your ways, but as high as the heaven is above the earth, so are my
thoughts above your thoughts, and my ways above your ways. That is; As a man
looks to heaven, and considers the great distance between the earth, and it,
so far, says he, do my thoughts exceed your thoughts. That is; When you
think with your selves, I cannot forgive; because you measure me, and draw a
scantling of me by your selves, when you have gone to the utmost of your
thoughts, my thoughts exceed yours as much as heaven exceeds the earth. And
therefore, says he, my ways are not as your ways. That is; When you would
not forgive, yet I am able to forgive in so great a disproportion. We do with
this as we do with all the Attributes of God, we are able to think him
powerful as a man, but to think him powerful as God, there we come short. We
are able to think him merciful as a man, but to think him merciful as God,
there our thoughts are at an end; we can think and see no reason why he should
pardon us. Now, says the Lord, my thoughts go beyond your thoughts as much as
the distance is between heaven and earth. If you say to me, who doubts of
this, that the Lord is able to forgive? My Beloved, if we did not doubt of it;
what is the reason, when great sins are committed, that you fall to
questioning of Gods mercy, when you can more easily believe a smaller sin to
be forgiven? Therefore, certainly, men doubt of his power, whether he be able
to forgive: for, if the difference of sin, do cause in you unbelief, it
could not be that you should pitch upon the power of God, and his readiness to
forgi^e. In doubting of forgiveness, we question Gods power.
Therefore it is certain, that it is his power that is called in question,
and, therefore, the thing we have to do, is, to make this good to you, that the
Lord is able to forgive. But you will say to me: It is true; If it were a
matter of power, I make no question. Beloved, you shall find it a matter of
power: take a man; Is it not a matter of strength in him to forgive, to pass
by an infirmity? If it be strength in a man to be meek, to forgive, and to
pass by injuries, to be kind to those that be unkind to him; Is it not also
power in God to do so? Besides, is it not a power to be rich? Riches give a
man a potencie, and the Lord is said to be rich in mercy. That is; As a man
that is rich, though he give much, yet he is not exhausted; So, when you have
made thus much use of Gods mercy, yet still there is more behind, still there
is more and more mercy for you, there is a spring of mercy, there is no end of
it. Besides, as there is a power in his wrath; Who knows the power of his
wrath? so likewise, there is a power in his mercy* as we see Romans 9. 22. 23.
Romans 9. 22. 23
(it is a place worth the considering for this purpose) What if God, to show
his wrath, and to make his power known, will suffer with long patience, the
vessels of wrath prepared for destruction? (And the next verse is thus to be
read, otherwise, you cannot make the sense perfect) and what if he would also,
to show the greatness of his power, declare the riches of his glory upon the
vessels of mercy, that he has prepared to glory? (Mark) as God shows the
greatness of his power in executing wrath upon evil men; so he shows the
exceeding greatness of his power, and declares his glorious riches. That is;
The riches of his mercy upon the Saints. Now, as it is hard to find out the
depth of the one, so it is to find out the depth of the other, to consider the
height, the length, and breadth, and depth of his mercy. When a man considers
his sins, and looks upon them in the height of them, in the breadth, and
depth of them, when he sees a heap of sin piled up together, reaching up to
the heavens, and down again to the bottom of hell; now to believe, that the
mercy of God is higher then these sins, and that the depth of his mercy is
deeper then they, This is to comprehend the length, and breadth, and depth of
mercy in him. Ephesians. 3. Ephesians. 3. 10.
This is exceeding hard and a great thing for us to do: but yet this the Lord
is able to do, his mercy is able to swallow them up; and therefore, you shall
find this expression in James 2. Iam. 2. 13.
mercy rejoices against Judgment. As if he should say; There is a certain
contention between the sins that we commit, and the mercy of God; though our
sins oppose his mercy, yet his mercy is greater, and, at length, it overcomes
them, and rejoices against them, as a man rejoices against an adversary that
he has subdued. Therefore herein we must labor to see Gods All-sufficiencie,
that although our sins be exceeding great, yet the largenes of his mercy is
able to swallow them up.

But, Ob.
you will say to me, we could believe this, if we were qualified, but all the
difficulty is to believe it, when we want those qualifications: God requires
softness of heart, godly sorrow, truth of repentance, etc.

Beloved, Ans*
to this, I answer briefly, that wha^soever thou see, that discourageth thee,
that thou see in thine own heart, when thou reflectest upon it, it is either
sin, or emptiness. That is; A want of that righteousness that should be in
thee. If it be sin, the greatness of his mercy is able to swallow it up.
Neither sin nor emptines, should discourage us from believing forgiveness.
And if it be emptiness, know this, that he is rich in mercy, and
All-sufficient, able to bestow this riches, even upon nothing: you know he did
bestow all the glory of the creature on it when it was nothing. There was
nothing, you know, when he made the world: when he made ^he Angels, what was it
he bestow^d his riches upon? And is he not able to bestow it on thee, though
there be an emptines in thine heart? Therefore, think with thy self, what is
the exceeding (...) of his love? It was a great love that moved him to give
Christ to us; but after we are in Christ, then you must consider this, that his
love has increased to a full object, his love is fully bestowed on him, and is
derived from Christ to us.

(...) sins, yea, all the degrees of my sins, to overcome them, and ^ubdue
them, yet, if the fullness of his love, that he loves Christ with, be derived
on me, what need I make question?

But you will say again, Ob.
What needs this persuasion of Gods All-sufficiencie in forgiving? This is but
to open a door of liberty, to make men more loose?

Beloved, Answ.
it is not so, it is the most profitable thing yo^ can do for your own
souls, to believe his All-sufficiencie in forgiving sins, as well as his
All-sufficiencie in any thing besides: therefore we see in Romans 6. Romans 6. 15.
16
concerning the abounding of grace (for so the objection stands) where sin
has abo^nded, there grace has abounded much more. If men's sins be
multiplied, grace and mercy shall be multiplied much more, and still outgoe,
and swallow them up. Shall we therefore sin that grace may abound, or because
grace has abounded? No, says the Apostle, for the abundance of grace kills
sin (for so the consequence stands) how shall we that are dead to sin, li^e
any longer therein? Grace kills sin, and not increa^eth it.
So that his answer stands thus; Says he, the abundance of grace does not
cause men to sin more: for it kills sin. And therefore, the more we believe
this All-sufficiencie in God to forgive sin, the more sin is killed in us;
it is not enlarged by it, life is not given to sin by it, but we are made
more dead to sin by it.

You will say, Ob.
how can that be?

Because the believing of Gods All-sufficiencie in forgiving our sins, (...).
increases our love, and our Joy. Belief of Gods All-sufficie^cie to (...),
increases love.
It increases our love; for, when there is no scruple in our hearts of Gods
love toward us, it makes our love more perfect toward him. It increases our
joy also; because, when we have a full assurance of the forgiveness of our
sins, that fills the heart with joy and peace in the holy Ghost. Now
spiritual love eats out of the heart all carnal delights, all sinful lusts,
and all inordinate love unto the creature, And so likewise, spiritual joy
takes away the vigor of all carnal joy, and sinful delight: So, the more you
see this All-sufficiencie of God toward you in love, the more you are able to
believe it, and the more it kills sin in you, the more it sanctifies you, and
the more it draws you to God. Therefore this is to be considered, to help us
against this objection, that there is a double fear; A double fear.
the one is that which keeps us from coming to God: The other is a fear that
keeps us from going out from God. We are very apt to exceed in the first
fear, And to come short in the second. 1. Keep^ from coming in to God.
Now, the fear that keeps us from coming in to God, is a fear that he is a
fear that he is not ready to forgive, that he is not All-sufficient, that he
has not power enough of mercy to forgive our sins, and to heal our
infirmities; this makes a man tumorous and fearful; as a man is fearful to
come near a Judge, to come near one that is terrible: Now the more this fear
is taken away, the nearer we come, the nearer we draw in assurance of faith to
him.

On the other side; 2. Fr^^ going out from him.
there is a fear that keeps us off from going out from G^d, and that is, the
more we believe this All-sufficiencie, the more we believe that happiness is
in him; the more we believe the riches of his mercy, and the abundance of his
goodness, the more we fear to step out from him, to have our hearts
estranged from him, to have our hearts sit loose. Now, the more we can believe
this All-sufficiencie, the more it takes away the first fear, and increases
the second, it takes away the fear that keeps us from coming in to God, and
it increases the fear that keeps us from going out from God. So much shall
serve for this first, the All-sufficiencie of God, in forgiving sin.

The second part of the Covenant, is his All Sufficiency Gods All-sufficiencie
in sanctifying us.
or in sanctisying us; as you have it in Psalm. 103. Psalm. 103. 3.
That forgiues all our sins, and heales all our infirmities. This belongs
also to his All-sufficiencie. This, my Beloved, is a necessary point to
believe; It serves likewise, to bring us in to the Lord: for a man is ready to
make this objection, when he looks upon Gods ways, the ways of
righteousness, and then upon the strength of his lusts, he is ready to say
with himself: how shall I be able to lead a holy life, as I ought to do?
This is the answer to it; God is All-sufficient. He that is able to bid the
light shine out of darkness, says the Apostle, he is able to kindle a light
in thy dark heart, where there is not a jot of goodness; though thy heart be
never so averse, he is able to change that heart of thine, and therefore say
not, I shall never be able to do it: for he is able to take away all that
reluctance.

For hence comes the difficulty: Ob.
how shall the strength of my lusts, this crooked and perverse heart of mine,
and the straight ways of God stand together?

It is very true. Answ.
Is thy heart continue in that temper, it is impossible; God changes the
nature of things.
but the Lord, that is All-sufficient, is able to take away that reluctancie:
for he does in the work of grace, as he does in the work of nature: he does
not as we do, when we would have an Arrow go to the mark, when we throw a
stone upward, we are not able to change the nature of it, but we put it on by
force: God carries all things to their end, by giving them a nature suitable to
that end. An Archer makes an impression upon an Arrow, but it is a violent
impression; God carries every thing to that end, to which he has appointed it;
but with this difference, he makes not a violent impression, but a natural
impression, and therefore he does it not by an only immediate hand of his
own, as we do, but he causes the Creature to go on of it self, to this or
to that purpose, to this or that end. And so he does in the work of grace; he
does not carry a man on to the ways of righteousness, leaving him in the
state of nature, taking him as he is, but he takes away that heart of his, and
imprints the habits of grace in it, and he changes a man's heart, so that he is
carried willingly to the ways of God, as the creature is carried by a natural
instinct to its own place, or to the thing it desires. So that thou may
think thus with thy self: It is true; if I have my old heart, my old lusts
still, there must needs be such a reluctance, as I shall not be able to
overcome; but, if the Lord change this heart of mine, and take away these
lusts, if the Lord put another impr^ssion v^on on me, that is natural to me,
which is like that instinct he puts into the creature, then it is easy for
me to do it. And this the Lord out of his All-sufficiencie is able to do.

But you will be ready to object, Ob.
if the Lord be thus All-sufficient, Why there are many imperfections in us,
though God be All-sufficient to sanctify us.
if he be able thus to kindle light in the dark heart, to change a man's
crooked and perverse spirit, to implant and ingraft such natural habits, and
instincts into it, to carry it on with such facility and connaturalnesse to
the ways of his Commandments, why am I thus? why am I no more able to
overcome my sins? why do I fall back so often to the same sin? why do I
come short of the performance of such purposes and desires? why do I find so
many things in my life contrary to the Rules of Sanctification, and so contrary
to this All-sufficient power of God?

To this I answer. Answ.
First; It may be it is from hence, that thou observest not those Rules by God
communicates this All Sufficiency, We observe not Gods Rules.
and this power of his. What though the Lord be willing to communicate it, yet
there are some Rules to be observed, which himself has given. That is; Thou
must diligently attend upon his ordinances, thou must observe and keep them,
thou must be careful to abstain from the occasions he bids thee abstain
from: if thou sail in either of these, he has made thee no promise to help
thee with his All-sufficiencie. Sampson, as long as the Lord was with him, you
know, had great strength, you know, the Lord tells him so long as he nourished
his hair, so long he would be with him, which was but a symboll of Gods
presence, but it was such a thing, as he would have him to keep exactly, and,
if he did not keep that, he would withdraw his presence, and would not be with
him. So likewise, the Nazarites were commanded to abstain from drinking wine,
if they drank wine, the Lord would withdraw himself. And so it is in this
case: the Lord has appointed us to keep his ordinances, and so long he will
be with us, as he was with Sampson, to be All-sufficient to us, to give us
strength to enable us to do the duties he commands us, and to abstain from
the evils he would not have us to do. But we must keep his ordinances, and
go by his Rules, and if we fail in either of them, that we neglect the
means, or adventure upon the occasions, now the Lord is discharged of his
promise, as we may so say, the Lord now withdraws his power from us, as he did
from Sampson. If you will needs marry with such a people, says the Lord, they
shall turn away your hearts: for now I will not keep you. If you will needs
touch that tree, if you will needs go into such a company, if you will needs
gaze upon such objects: or, if again, you will neglect prayer, and hearing,
and sanctifying the Sabbath, if you will neglect to observe the Rules that he
has appointed, in all these cases, the Lord withdrawes his All-sufficiencie.
And therefore lay the fault where it is; That is; Upon your selves. Do not say
with thy self, it is because the Lord is not All-sufficient, but rather
think, that he has power to go through the work he has appointed me to
do, but it is because I have not kept those Rules, I have neglected the
means, I have ventured upon such occasions.

Secondly. Answ.
Consider with thy self, that the Lord does this to humble thee. It may be, he
is as willing To humble us.
but he dispenses a lesser measure; it is that the heart may be kept humble:
for humility is the nurse of graces, take away that and grace withers in the
heart. And therefore when he is willing to bestow a mercy, or a grace on us, he
does as he did with Jacob, he leaves a lamenesse together with it, he will not
so bestow it on us, that he will make us perfect, but he leaves some defects,
some wants, that by that, humility may be preserved, and that may cause us to
cleave to him, and depend upon him, that he may keep us from an
All-sufficiencie in our selves, and teach us to wait on him: for without that
he does not communicate, and dispense unto us that sufficiency that is in
himself.

Moreover; Answ.
Consider with thy self, that the Lord many times suffers us to see changes
in That we may know God and our selves better.
that by them we may learn to know him better, and our selves also; if we were
able to do it by our selves, the Lord would spare us, but who is able to do
it? It is said in the Psalms, that therefore the wicked fear not God, because
they have no changes, and truly, even the godly men, if they had no changes,
they would fear him less, so that every change in a man's state, and the
falling into sin, and the rising again, leads a man to some new knowledge
of God, and of himself also, to a new experimental knowledge, and that
knowledge leads him to a new degree of fear: so that still by their sins
they get advantage, that they shall find in their spiritual estate: for, even
as we see the Sun when it breaks out of a thick Cloud of darkness, it shines
the brighter, so grace when it breaks out of a thick cloud of sins, or of
temptations, it shines the brighter, we are still gainers by those changes. I
say, we learn to know God, and our selves also the better, and for these
causes he leaves us to those changes, that we may be gainers by them, and so we
are. Therefore, say not with thy self, because I find some defects, and some
unevenness in my sanctification, therefore the Lord is not sufficient: for it
is for thy advantage, it is not for want of sufficiency in the Lord, nor of
willingness in him to communicate it to thee, but it is for thy adva^tage,
that thou should find these changes, and this vnevennesse in thy ways.
Therefore, my Beloved, build upon this that he is All-sufficient. It may be,
when thou go about a work thy self, thou find it a difficult thing to
overcome such a lust, but that which is impossible with men, is easy with God.
Those that rowed all night, and did no good, a word from his mouth brought them
to shore presently. The spirit that is in us lusts after envy, James 4. 5. 6.
James 4. but the Scriptures offer more grace. That is; Grace is able to heal
these natural hereditary diseases, there is an All-sufficiencie in him, he is
able to do it; He that can still the Sea, and command the winds, that at his
word they are quiet, can he not still strong lusts? He is able to restrain
them: therefore labor to see his All-sufficiencie in this, as well as in all
things else. Think with thy self, he has a sovereignty over all thy
affections, over all thy lusts: for what is it that troubles us, and interrupts
us in our way, but some temptations of the flesh, or the world? Is not the Lord
the Master of them? As Paul says, 2 Cor. 12. though Satan were the chief
Buffetter, Lusts are at Gods command.
and the lusts of the flesh the messengers, yet the Lord sent that messenger,
(mark it) therefore he goes not to Satan, he wrangles not with the messenger,
but he immediately sought the LORD, he beseeches him to recall it. So think
with thy self, when thou art set on with a strong lust, with a temptation that
seems too hard for thee, say with thy self, this is a messenger from God, and
I must go to God, and beseech him to take it off, and rebuke it: for he is
able to do it, he is All-sufficient, they are all at his command, as the
mastiue is at the Masters command, he is able to rate him, but a stranger is
not able to do it, and when he has done that which his master would have him,
he calls him in; Simile.
so the Shepherd sets his dog upon his Sheep to bring them in, but when
they are brought in, he rates his dog: And so does the Lord with lusts, and
sin, and temptations, he sets them on his own Sheep, his own Children, but
for this end, to bring them in* it is not in their own power to rate these
temptations, and lusts, nor in the power of a stranger, but only in the Lords,
who is Master of them, whose messengers they are, he is able to rebuke and
recall them, they are at his command, as it is said of the diseases of the
body, they are like the Centurions servants, if he bid one go he goes, if he
bid another come, he comes: so it is true of the diseases of the soul; if he
say to such a messenger as Paul had, to such a lust, to such a temptation, go,
and seize upon such a man, go, and vex him for a time, it shall go; if
again, he call it back, and restrain it, shall it not be restrained? Labor
thus to see Gods All-sufficiencie.

My Beloved, We stand in Gods strength, as we may see
if you look upon other men, or your selves, you shall see experience enough
of David, or Paul, upon Solomon, Lot, In others.
and Noah, and all the Saints, so long as God was with them, how strong were
they? Their strength was like the strength of Sampson: but when the Lord
withdrew himself, we see what base lusts they fell into; what lusts was David
given up unto? Also Solomon, and Peter, and Lot. All this the Lord has done,
even for this purpose, that they might learn to know that All-sufficiencie is
in him, and not in them. Therefore, when thou look on any Saint of God that
excels in grace, and goes beyond thee, think thus with thy self; it is not
because this man is stronger then I, but because the Lord has done more for
him, he has bestowed more grace upon him: he that has done this to him, is he
not able to do it to thee? He that is so strong, if the Lord withdraw his
hand, thou feast what he is. And therefore comfort thy self with this, that he
is able to strengthen thee. Think again with thy self, how thou have found
In our selves.
My Beloved, there is great strength in this, even when thou art at the worst,
to keep life in the root of grace; in the Winter time it is a mighty power
of God, if we look on the works of nature, to keep life in the Plants, when
they seem to be dead, that the hardness, and coldness of Winter take not
away the life of them: So it is no less All-sufficiencie, and almighty power
of God, to keep the life of grace in our greatest falls, and temptations, to
keep life in David, and Solomon, that it should spring again when the spring
time was come. Again, who is it that restrained thy lusts before? who is it
that has given thee any ability to think those good thoughts, to do those
good things? thou had not power in thy self, all was from the Lord.
Therefore, if he have an All-sufficiencie in him, as he is All-sufficient to
forgive sins; so likewise, he is All-sufficient to sanctify thee. Be not
discouraged then: Let not a man think with himself, oh, I shall never
overcome it, I shall never be able to be so exact in the ways of
rightcousnesse, as I ought to be; Remember God is All-sufficient. Our endeavor
must be to make our hearts perfect, to resolve to serve him with a perfect
heart. But for the power, and performance of it, this belongs to God.
Therefore, Beloved, hence comes all the difficulty, that our hearts are not so
perfect: for when a man is ready to object, I, but I find no experience of
this almighty power? See that the cause be not in thy self; he has made
promise unto those, whose hearts are perfect with him; it may be, thy heart is
imperfect, it may be, there has been hypocrisy in thy heart, thou have never
been willing to part with all, to serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind all thy days. But, when once thy heart is brought to sincerity,
doubt not that he will perform that thou look for on his part* for it
belongs to his part to give thee power, and strength to do that which thou
desire to do. So much likewise, for the secoud part of the Covenant.

Gods All-sufficiencie in providing outward good things
belonging to this present life: herein the Lo^d is All-sufficient to all those
that are in Covenant with him. I need not say much to make this good unto you.
All things are his, whatsoever a man needs; Riches are his, they are his
Creatures in Pro. 23. they come, and go at his command; Honor is his. I will
honor those that honor me, he takes it to himself to bestow it as he
pleases; Health and life is his; the issues of life and death belong to him;
Friendship is his: for he puts our acquaintance far from us, and draws them
near to us. Go through all the variety of things that your hearts can
desire, and they are all his, he is governor, and the disposer of them as he
pleases* and therefore, certainly, he is All-sufficient, he is able to provide
all things for thee that thy heart can desire, so that no good thing shall be
wanting to thee. I will not stand to enlarge this, but rather answer the
objections: for here we are ready to object;

If the Lord be All-sufficient, Ob.
why is it thus then with me? why do I want so many things which I have need
of, and desire to have? If God be All-sufficient; why are there so many defects
in my estate, in my health, this way and that way?

To this, Answ.
I answer. Thou must consider with thy self, if those desires of thine be not
unnatural desires, whether they be not sinful desires; the Lord has promised
to be All-sufficient to the natural desires, to the right desires of the
soul, but not to those that are unnatural, A double desire in the soul.
and inordinate. There is a double desire in the heart of man, as there is a
double thirst: there is a natural thirst, you know, Natural.
there is an unnatural thirst, as the thirst of a dropsy man, Unnatural.
and the more you give him, still the more he desires, and is never satisfied.
So, it is with the soul; there is a natural healthful desire, which desires
so much credit, and so much wealth, as is needful; there is, besides this, an
unnatural desire of the soul, when a man does long after abundance* now,
Beloved, do not look that the Lord should satisfy this, nay, the best way,
in this case, is not to satisfy, but to take from our desires* as we say of
the Boulemeia, that disease wherein a man eats much, that is called Caninus
appetitus, and likewise, in the dropsy, the one excessiuely eats, and the
other excessiuely drinks; and the Rule of Physicians is, Opus habent
purgatione non impletione, such a man has need of purging and emptying, and
not of filling; so I may say of all these, such men have need of purging and
emptying, which is to be desired in this case: that wherein God shows his
All-sufficiencie now, is not in supplying thy defects, in adding that which
thou desire, but in purging the heart, and taking away those desires; that is
the way to heal thee: Therefore consider seriovsly what that is that thou
desire, if it be an inordinate desire, if it be a work of fancy, know, that
thou can not look for this All-sufficiencie of God to satisfy this, but to
heal it. You shall see Ecclesiast. 5. 10. Eccles. 5. 10.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves
riches, shall be without the fruit thereof. You see what the Lord has set
down concerning this case: now a man may seek for a competency, but when he
comes once to riches, that he seeks for them, the Lord says, such a man shall
not be satisfied, or, if he be, it shall be in wrath: for it is in wrath given
to such a man. It is the destruction of a dropsy man, to have much drink
given him, or to give a man much meat that is sick of the disease, we spoke
of before. And therefore, says he, he shall not be satisfied, or, if he be, it
shall be in Judgment: Such are these desires, and therefore examine thy self,
whether thy desires be not such as proceed from fancy, such as proceed not
from the health, but the weakness of the soul. Therefore it is said in 1 Timothy
6. 1 Timothy 6 6.
that godliness is great gain with contentment. How does godliness give
contentment? Beloved, after that manner that Physic gives satisfaction. A
dropsy man after he is brought into health, Simile.
you know, he is contented with less drink, for now he is in health, God
brings the soul to a good temper, he takes away the distemper, the lustful
humors, that were there before, and brings him into a right temper, it gives
him now the content that before he wanted.

Again. Ob.
Another objection is; If God be All-sufficient for these outward things, why
am I thus crossed? why do I suffer these afflictions? why are they not removed
from me?

To this I answer briefly. Answ.
Thou may be deceived in them, That is not always good for us, that we desire.
that which thou make account is so great an evil to thee, it may be for thy
great good, as we see Ier. 42. Ier. 42.
that whole Chapter, the Captain there, and the rest of the people, they
reckoned it an exceeding great misery, a very great affliction to continue in
Jerusalem, they had a great desire to go down into Egypt, but the Lord tells
them, they were very much deceived: for this misery shall be for your good,
says he, but, if you will needs go down into Egypt, when you think to have
abundance of all things there, you shall meet with the Sword, and with Famine,
and with the Pestilence, and with utter destruction. So, I say, in this case,
we are often times deceived, we think that to be good for us which is not.
Certainly, the Lord is All-sufficient, he will withold no good thing, but it
is not always good to have such an affliction removed, perhaps, it were better
for thee to bear it, it were better for thee to lie under it, then that it
should be removed: we do, in this case, many times with the Lord, as the
children of the Prophets dealt with Elisha; they would needs go to seek the
body of Eliah, Elisha forbad them, but still they were importunate, says he,
if you will needs go, go, but they lost their labor, they had better to have
taken his counsel at the first: And so in this case, many times when the Lord
would have us to do such a thing, and to be content with the want of such a
comfort, to be content to suffer such a defect in our estate, in our bodies, in
our business, we are still importunate with him, sometimes he hearkens to us,
he suffers the thing to be done, but we were as good to want it. I would ask
thee in this case, would thou have it without thy Fathers good will? If thou
have it, it will do thee no good: The best way in this is to consider with thy
self, that he is All-sufficient; though this affl^ction seem to be exceeding
bitter, yet it is a cup of thy Fathers providing, it is that which the Lord,
that loves thee, has ordained, it is that which the Lord, that wants nothing,
who is able enough to take it from thee, and to supply it, it is that which he
has seen meet to dispense to thee: therefore it is not for want of
sufficiency in him, but it is better for thee to suffer the want of this
comfort, or to lie under this cross or affliction.

But lastly, Ob.
some will say, if the Lord be All-sufficient, and I must be subject to his
will, why is it not his will to put me into a higher condition? why has he
given me but such a measure of gifts, but such a mean place, but such a
quantity of health, of wealth, of understanding? a man's heart will go
further, if there be such riches in God, such an All Sufficiency in him, why is
it not better with me? why am I not in a higher condition?

To this, Ans.
I answer. First; That he that enters into Covenant with God, he should be
content A Christian should be content with a mean^ place in Gods house.
and be glad that he is within the door, as we see the Pr^digall did, and so
the Apostle Paul, I am the least of all the Saints, and he was contented to be
the least. A man that has been truly humbled and brought home to God, that
has tasted and seen how gracious the Lord is, that has had experience of his
own sin, and of Gods goodness, he will be content with the least measure,
if he be put into the lowest place, if he be made the least of all Saints, he
will not exalt himself above that measure, and that place that the Lord has
allotted him.

But besides this; Those that are mean in some things, may excel in others.
Consider, secondly, further God gives no man all things, but has mingled his
comforts, he has dispensed them diversely, 1 Samuel* 1. 2.
as we see in 1 Samuel 1. in that case between Hannah, and Peninnah, Hannah had
the love of her husband, but the Lord had made her barren: On the other side;
Peninnah had children, but she wanted the love of her husband: it is purposely
noted there, that you may see how the Lord dispenses his comforts: And so it
was with Leah and Rachell, the one, you know, had children, and wanted her
husbands love, the other had a greater abundance of love, but she was barren.
As it was with these, so generally the Lord dispenses good and evil together.
There is no man that has all things. You see Moses, he wanted eloquence, that
Aaron had, as Moses again had the wisdom, that Aaron wanted: so Paul, and
Barnabas, they had different excellencies, the one had that the other wanted,
and so it is generally. Therefore think with thy self, there is no man that
has all, and why should I desire it? there must be a mingling of some defects.

God gives to men, God can satisfy the desires in a low condition.
that he places some in a higher degree and some in a lower, to some he gives
greater gifts, to some lesser, some he makes rich, and some poor, some
honorable, and some base; this variety in all the works of God takes not
away from the perfection of each one: every man in his place may have a
perfection, he may have it within his sphere, so that there shall be no want
at all: for the Lord, out of his almighty power, is able to do it, that the
desire may be satisfied as much, they may be filled in a lower condition as
well as in a greater, thou shall feel no more want, but have as great a degree
of happiness as the other, you know, there are sundry expressio^s in that
case. A little Bottle is as well filled as a greater. What can a man desire
more but to be satisfied? And therein God is All-sufficient, there is in him an
All-sufficiencie to fill every Creature in his own sphere, and compass, when
he has made vessels of glory, they are not all of one sort, but of diverse
sorts, some of one, some of another sort, but they are all vessels of glory,
they have all experience of his riches, and of his mercies, so that none have
cause to complain.

Last of all; Consider in that meannesse of place, A Christians faithfulness
is accepted in a mean condition.
or condition, that thou art in; consider, thou may be as faithful in a
little, as another may be in much: Consider, that he that has much, yet there
is nothing his, but the sincerity wherewith a man has used that which he
has, werewith he performs all that he does: he that has the gifts that Eliah
and Paul had, that excellency of gifts, it is not his, but the Churches, all
that is his is but his faithfulness in dispensing those gifts, they are not his
own, but they are bestowed upon him; and he that has the lesser measure of
gifts, he that has the lower part given him to act, while he is on the stage
of this world, is accepted according to his faithfulness, every man shall be
rewarded according to his faithfulness, every man shall be rewarded according to
his faithfulness and sincerity: therefore content thy self with a lower
condition, say not that God is not All-sufficient, because thou have not a
higher degree (...) thou see here is an All-sufficiencie in God, to p^eserue
thee in all comfort, and to defend thee from all evil. It may stand with a
great difference of condition, though thou be not so high as another, though
thou have not so much grace, though thou have not so high a Calling as another,
yet even to thee also God is All-sufficient. So we have run through all these
three parts of the Covenant; He is All-sufficient in forgiving; He is
All-sufficient in sanctifying us; And he is All-sufficient, in providing for us
whatsoever we want.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. I am God All-sufficient.
YOu know, where we left; We proceed to that which remains, that we may
finish the point at this time. There remain but these two Deductions from
this, Two Deductions.
that God is All-sufficient.

First; This should lead us to a further knowledge The insufficiency of the
Creature proved.
(That we will first do, and after it we will add but a trial to all that we
have said, to see whether we be indeed persuaded of that All-sufficiencie,
that is in God, and of that vanity, and emptines that is in the Creature; And
this will be our business at this time.) If God be All-sufficient, and that
exclusiuely, as I showed before, then there is an emptines, a vanity, and an
indigence in the Creature, there is nothing in it: and to make this good to
you, consider;

It is made by another.
It is certain, no creature is able to make it self: for that which makes
another, must be before another; if a creature could make it self, it must be
before it self, and therefore all things are made by God; by this
All-sufficient God. Now then, if that which makes the creature be something
without it self, then the end of the creature, must be some thing also without
it self: for it is the maker that is the efficient cause of all things, and in
all things that propounds an end to it self, and the end of every thing, you
know, is the perfection of the thing; so that here we gather, that all the
perfection of the creature is without it self, for if the end be the
perfection, and the end to which every creature is carried, is without it
self, it must needs be, that, it has no perfection, nor excellency within it
self: hence it is, that every creature is bound to do something for another,
the inanimate, and unreasonable creature for man, and man for God: because all
are made for a further end. The Almighty God himself, the All-sufficient God,
that has no efficient cause, and, by consequent, no end without himself, he
may do all for himself, and for his own sake, and his own glory; if he will
dispense with the creature, and do good or ill to the creature, and make
himself the end of all that he does. I say, he may well do it: for he has no
higher end; But if any creature shall say, I will seek no further end, but to
have an happiness and perfection within mine own compass, it is all one, as if
the herb should say, I will not be beholding to the Sun, but I will live of
my self, or I will not be beholding to the rain, etc. this creature must
needs perish, because his end and perfection is without himself altogether; It
is as if the hand should say, I will seek a perfection in my own sphere, as
I am such a part, as I am such a member, without looking to the soul, that
gives life, or without looking to the rest of the body it subsists in, this is
the way to destroy it: So it is with every creature; if it seek a perfection
within it self, it is the undoing of it self. On the other side; when it
denies it self, when it emptieth it self, when it looks for nothing within
its own compass, but goes out of it self, and out of every creature besides,
to that Ocean of happiness, from whence it must receive all the perfection it
has, I say, therein consists the beatitude, and blessedness of the Creature.

It is in continual motion.
that the happiness of it is without it self altogether, and therefore it must
needs be empty, so this is another Reason, which you shall find in Eccles. 2.
Eccles. 2.
Every creature, naming diverse of them, the Sun and the waters, and the
wind, the several generations of the creatures, whereof one goes, and
another succeeds; thus the Wiseman concludes, says he, all things are full
of labor, man cannot utter it. And he prou^s it by this, The Sun rises, and
sets, and is never at quiet, the Clouds go about by their circuits, and never
remain still in their places, the water is still ranning to and fro, some
Rivers are running to the Sea, some running out of it, so that all things are
full of labor. Now what is the end of all motion, and of all labor? Beloved,
when any man, or any thing moves it self from one place to another, it is out
of a desire, out of an appetite to be there rather then in the place where it
is, there is no appetite or desire but of something that is wanting: for, if it
had the thing, it would have no desire to it, and therefore it is carried to
something without it self: So that the motion of the creature is a sign of
the imperfection of it. Besides, whatsoever moves, it moves to get that which
it has not, yet it is in possibility to have it, and it has it not: for, if
it had it, the creature would rest there, it would remain in that term, it
would stand still upon the Center; but, because it wants something it has not,
therefore it moves it self, and therefore it labors. Now when you see this is
the condition of every Creature under the Sun, we see all things are full of
labor, and sorrow, and man that is the Lord of them (you know what is said to
him, that in labor he should eat his bread, and all his life should be full
of labor) it is an argument of the imperfection, and of the vanity and
indigence of the creature, and that what it has it must have elsewhere.

It has all by participation.
it has it but by participation, it has nothing of it self; as in things
that are made hot, some things are more hot, and some things less hot, it is
an argument they have not hotnes in themselves, but there is something else
that is perfectly hot: for that which has but a part, it presupposes that
there is something else that is the whole, of which that is but the part: If
you look upon all the goodness, excellency, and beauty in the Creatures, you
see some creatures have it more, and some less, which is an argument that
there is something else without the creature that has a Sea of perfection,
that is full of goodness, full of excellency, as the Sun is full of light,
and as the Sea is full of water, and this is not within, but without the
Creature. Now the Creature being thus imperfect in it self, it has something
communicated to it from day to day: for if there be a continual need, there
is a daily supply that it must have, and it that fail, or be not so good as it
needs, the Creature languisheth. This is so in every kind: if it be in matter
of life, if meat, or drink, or Physic, or air be wanting, the creature
days for it: for it has not in it self, it is communicated from another. And
so likewise, if it be contentment, if it be refreshing, if it be joy, without
which no creature is able to live; if that be wanting, if God withhold his
hand, that there is not an influence into it, the Creature languisheth
according to the proportion of that defect; if it be in matters that belong to
eternal life; if the Lord withhold his hand, if he shut up his hand, they
perish eternally. And so we may say of all things else. So that this is the
condition of every creature, it is exceeding empty; Man himself is empty,
and so all other creatures besides are, there is no happiness to be found in
them, there is no satisfaction, there is no contentment to the soul of a man.
If I should go through the particulars, you should find it so. If you ask,
where this happiness is to be found? whether in riches, or in matter of
estate? Surely, it is not there: Riches of two sorts.
for riches are but of two sorts, either they are natural riches, such as
meat, drink, and clothes; or else they are artificial riches, things that
consist in exchange, that are invented by art, to be the measure of them for
commutation; it cannot consist in the natural; for what serve they to but to
maintain the body? and what does the body serve for but for the soul? and if
this were all, what should become of the principal part of man, that which is
indeed the man himself? Besides, it cannot consist in credit, in estimation,
in honor, surely, it cannot consist in that: for that is in the power of
another, and is not in a man's own power, and the happiness and blessedness
of any thing, the contentment which consists in the power of another, and that
in the power of the Creature, it cannot make a man happy, it can give little
contentment to him.

Besides; Honor of two sorts.
As we said of riches, so we may say of honor, and glory, it is either empty
glory, as the Scripture often calls it; That is; glory that is gathered from
vain things, as apparel, or houses, or learning, or knowledge: for there is
nothing that brings true praise, but grace only, as nothing draws shame after
it properly but sin, it is not in this, for this is a deceivable thing, it is
a shadow that has no substance to answer it, or else, it is true honor and
credit, and if it be that, that is but the shadow that follows the substance.
And therefore our blessedness, our contentedness, and satisfaction, rests
rather in the thing from whence this credit is gathered, then in the credit it
self: for that is but a shadow that sometimes follows it, and sometimes it
does not, sometimes it is a larger shadow, and sometimes a shorter, though the
body be the same.

I might go through many others, The Wiseman proves the insufficiency and
emptines of the Creature.
but I will rather confirm all this to you, that I have said of the emptines
of the Creature, by that testimony that is without all exception, That is; By
the testimony of God himself, even the testimony of By three Arguments.
in Eccles. 1. 2. where the scope of the Wiseman is to set out this point, that
we are now upon; That is; The emptiness of the Creature.

First; 1. Argu.
Says he, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. That is; There is in the
Creature an excess of vanity, as you know, that is the height of the Hebrew
Superlatiue, vanity of vaniti^s. Besides, it signifies a heap of vanities, a
nest of vanities, a wondrous exceeding great vanity, such as he knew not how
to express what that vanity is that is in the Creature. Beloved, it is a
vain thing, we say, that cannot profit, and therefore we see in the 2. verse,
What remains to a man of all his travels, or what avayles it, or what profits
it, according to that in the Gospel, which is the best expression of it? Says
our Savior, Put the case thou had all the good things in the world, that all
the glory of the world, that all the riches in the world were in thy
possession, yet, says he, when thou shall loose thy soul, what is all this?
It cannot help thee to save thy soul, what will it profit thee? That is; It is
an unprofitable thing to make us happy. Besides, in this the vanity of the
Creature is seen, that it is of a mouldring, vanishing nature. Isa. 40. Romans
8. those two places express it: Isa. 40. 8.
Isa. 40. 6. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of it as the flower of the
grass. That is; As it is expressed in the next Verse, as the grass is of a
fading nature, so is the Creature it self, and as the Flower of the grass,
sets out all the excellency, all the gifts, and beauty of the Creature that is
found in it, The spirit of God blows upon it, and the grass withers, and the
flower fades away: so in Romans 8. the Creature is subject to vanity. That is;
It is of no abiding condition, it withers, and wastes, and has nothing in it,
to maintain it. Besides, it is called vain: because it is not able to bring
any enterprise to pass. You would think the Creature were able to do much,
but you see what the Lord says; A man thinks he is able to build a house, or
he thinks he is able to watch a City. No; says the Lord, if I withdraw my
self, thou shall be able to do nothing, nor any Creature whatsoever. What is
said of that, may be said of any thing else. A man thinks a Horse is a
Creature that will stand him in much stead in the day of battle, but a horse
is but a vain thing. And so it is of all other Creatures, they are not able to
bring any enterprise to pass, herein is the vanity of them.

But now this is but the simple expression of vanity; Let us consider (for
what can we do better since we are upon this argument) what arguments the holy
Ghost uses to persuade us of this truth, that there is nothing but emptiness
in the Creature. My Beloved, I beseech you, harken to it: for all of us think
there is too much in the Creature, we should not seek it as we do, our
thoughts and affections should not be so much stirred about it as they are, if
we did not think there were something in it. I say, consider the arguments
which the holy Ghost uses, I will but name the places in brief to you, you
may read them in these two Chapters at your leisure, it will much help to
bring them to your memory. First, says the holy Ghost, there is nothing but
vanity: for, says the Wiseman, when I look upon the whole universe, upon the
whole frame of things, this I find; first, a great instabilitie in them, one
generation comes, and another goes, the Sun rises, and the Sun sets,
there is nothing constant under the Sun. Now the happiness of a man, that
which will give content to a man, it must be some stable thing: for a man
cannot rest but upon some Center, upon some place, where his soul may find
some quiet, and therefore an unstable thing, that is in continual passage, is
not able to give it rest.

Secondly; 2. Argu.
Says he, there is no new thing under the Sun: (Mark it) for, says he, if
you go through the whole course of things, you shall find nothing new, one
generation comes, and another generation succeeds like it. And so forward, that
as in the waves of the Sea, one follows another, till they be all broken upon
the shore; so it is in the succession of generations, and there is nothing in
one generation but what was in another, because, says he, the Sun rises and
sets, the winds go to and fro, they go about by their Circuits. And so the
waters in the springs, and in the Rivers, they go and come, and there is no
new thing under the Sun. What shall we gather from that? Why this, that
there is no satisfaction to the soul of a man. And therefore, says he, the
eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. Those are the
only disciplinall senses we have; you know, all the knowledge you have, is
gathered by the eye and the ear. Now if there be no new thing under the Sun,
but all things are the same; hence it is that the mind of man when it looks
about it, can find nothing to give it satisfaction, for there must be some
newness, some variety, something, that we have not here, that the soul
seeks after. But, says he, you shall find nothing but the same, nothing but
Identitie.

But, Ob.
if it be objected, there is some thing now that was not before, and there were
some things before that are not now;

The Wiseman answers thus, Ans.
those things that were done then, they are forgotten, they are not had in
remembrance; And so likewise the things that are now will be forgotten. And
therefore there is no new thing. Indeed, in grace there is some thing new,
there is a new Creature, there are all things new within and without, there is
a new Judgment, a new Conscience, new affections, every thing is new, all
things are become new there. Let him that has grace, look about him, and
there is some thing new, he comes into a new Company, he is brought into a new
world, his eye sees things, his ear hears things that never entered into any
man's heart. That is; into any natural man's heart, which only has to do with
natural things, let him look into the word of God, there is a newness: for
the more you read it, the more you desire still to read it, the more you
hear it, still you find some new thing discovered: Look on the depth of
those mysteries, look on the consolations of the spirit, still there is some
thing new in all the ways of God, that belong to the new Creature, still thou
shall have a fresh renewed vigor in every thing, that satisfies the soul of a
man, and there the eye is satisfied with seeing, and the ear with hearing. In
all the works of Nature, there is some thing new.

The third and last reason that he uses to show the emptiness of all things
under the Sun, 3. Argu.
is, because that which is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is
defective, can none supply; That is; There are many things in the Creature,
that are cross to us, that fall thwart upon us, there are many ils that we
find in our selves, and in all the things we have to do with. But, says he,
if you look upon the Creature, there is nothing that is able to make straight
that which is crooked: the daughter of Abraham that was crooked, all the
Creatures both in heaven and earth, were not able to make her straight. A
perverse and crooked mind, who can make straight? Crooked Children, who can
make them straight? Crooked affections, inordinate fears, and inordinate
griefs, who can rectify them? And so, likewise, who can supply that which is
wanting? When he looks upon all this, and sees it in the nature of the
Creature, he concludes upon all this, that all is vanity.

By his experience.
and now there were two things wherein Solomon did excel, which all men would
desire upon earth. That is; Greatness of Wisdom; And, secondly, Sun; Says
he, I was a King in Jerusalem, a mighty man, and therefore able to have
experience of those things that other men had not, I had oportunities that
other men such a King as exceeded in all kind of wealth, and abundance of all
things, as never any before, or any that came after; so he says of himself,
and therefore he had more liberty, and more experience, then any of the sons
of men besides. Moreover, he had better means to find out good and evil
under the Sun, because of the largeness of his Wisdom.

Last of all, says he, I gave my self to this, I se my self to search and
find out, His experience.
what is good and evil to the soones of men. Now, if you would know what
Solomon found, says he, there are but two things wherein this experience
consists; That is; to know what is in wisdom and folly; Secondly, to know
what is in great estate.

First, for matter of wisdom, he concludes Of the vanity of wisdom.
he that increases in wisdom, increases grief. That is; Let a man go
either way, says the Wiseman, (speaking of moral and civil wisdom, not of
sanctified wisdom, for that is another thing.) Now the question is this,
among the Creatures wherein vanity is seen, says he, he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow: for when a man is a wise man, he finds many
defects, he sees all the miseries a-farre off that are coming upon him, he
looks to all the corners of his unhappiness, which are hid from another that is
foolish. And therefore, says he, the more that a man sees, the more misery he
sees, and the more misery he sees, the more his grief is increased and
multiplied. Besides, he that increases wisdom, increases grief: for he
sees many defects, he sees many things out of order, many things in his own
soul, many things in his own family, many things in the Commonwealth, many
things in the Church, many things in the course of nature, but all a man's
wisdom will not remedy it; now when a man sees ill, and is unable to help,
in such a case, says he, he that increases wisdom, increases grief.
Besides, if the things themselves that are known, cannot give any filling, any
contentment to the soul of a man: certainly, the knowledge of them cannot do
it; for the knowledge cannot go beyond the thing, there is more in the thing
then in the knowledge of it. But there is a vanity, and a curse lies upon all
the Creatures, and therefore, he that increases wisdom, takes much pains,
and has little for his labor, it costs him much pains, much weariness in
reading, and searching, and when he has done all this, as there is a vanity
in the Creature, which is known; so there is in the knowledge it self.

But, Ob.
you will say, on the other side, there is some thing then in folly* if a man
be ignorant, if a man know not that which a wiseman sees.

No; Answ.
there is a madness in that, there is no Of the vanity of folly.
but it is of another kind; for evils come upon him, and he cannot see how to
prevent them, they lie upon him, and undo him before he is a-ware, he is full
of gray harres, and knows it not, as it is said of Ephraim. These are the
fruits of folly, he is precipitate, and runs into mischief, he falls into
quicksands, and has not eyes to discern it, So he that increases folly, on
the other side, likewise, he increases grief. This, says Solomon, I have
found out, therefore it is not in folly, nor in wisdom, I gave my self to
know wisdom, and madness, and foolishness, I know also, that this is
vanity and vexation of spirit. That is; both wisdom and folly. Folly,
because it is madness, and Wisdom, because it increases grief.

Now for the other, for the matter of his estate, Of the vanity of outward
things.
you shall find there, that he proves a vanity in that, by an induction,
going through all the particulars almost that the sons of men enjoy under the
Sun. And first Laughter and Iollitie, Laughter.
that which commonly every man seeks after, says he, I thought, I would
endeavor my self to see if there were any contentment to be found in that, but
it is not there, says he, I said of Laughter thou art mad, and of Joy, what is
this that thou do? These three things he says concerning Iollitie,
concerning that carnal mirth, wherewith men refresh themselves.

First; Says he, I find it a madness: because it sets a man a-worke upon
trifles, when he has greater things in hand, madness, you know, is humorous,
exulting and rejoicing in vain things, and intending of idle things, and
letting go things tending to our profit, as a mad man cares for nothing
belonging to his health, or his wealth, but bestows himself in picking of
flowers, or in doing some idle things, says he, there is a madness in this to
consider, that in the midst of sin, and of danger, and in the midst of so
many great bvsinesses and employments, in the midst of that labor that God
has given to the sons of men, for them to be full of mirth and jollitie,
this is madness. That is one of his censures of it.

The second is, it is Folly; Folly is a stupiditie, when stupiditie possesses
the soul of a man, that it is not able to judge of things that are presented
to him, that is folly, so, says he, I found this is jollitie and carnal
mirth, it breeds stupor, and takes away all taste and relish from me, that as a
man that tastes sweet things, is not able to find the relish of his Beer or
Meat; so, says he, when I had tasted of jollitie, and carnal mirth, it
caused me to difrelish all things: for that is the disposition of folly, when
it takes away the sense that we should have of other things, when it stupifieth
a man; stupiditie and folly we express one by another. Last of all; What does
it? That is, it passes away like as music, there is nothing left, it goes
and leaves nothing behind it, yea, it leaves sadness, if any thing, and sin
behind it, the thing passes away in a moment, but the sin remains, and
continues, This is his censure of that part, namely, carnal mirth and jollitie.

Wine.
Then, says he, I gave my self to wine, to After this, I gave my self to
great works, Great works
to make stately buildings, to show my magnificence. After this, to get great
store Servants, Store of Servants.
great possession of Sheep, and Beeues, and to get a great retinue, to live in
much pomp. After this, I sought all pleasant things; I made Paradises;
Paradises, i. e. pleasant Orchards.
That is; Orchards, and Vineyards, and Gardens. Likewise, I sought Singing men,
and singing women. All these things, says Singing men, etc. In those he found.
I sought for. And this is the verdict he gives upon all this, this I found.

First, that in doing this, I took hold of folly, Folly.
in some measure, restrained me, yet I took hold of folly; That is the nature
of these things, when a man is conversant with them, they deprive him of
wisdom, they lead him on to folly; That is; They draw a man on to sensible
and outward things, to corporal things, they abstract and withdraw his mind
from God, and from wisdom, and from spiritual things; this I found, says
he, that the more I had to do with them, the more my wisdom forsook me, the
more I took hold of folly, the more it grew upon me, the worse I was by
meddling with them, and by being conversant with them.

Secondly; Says he, I found an emptiness in Emptiness.
I found them empty Cisternes, I looked for contentment in them, but I found
none.

Thirdly; not so only, but I found a vexation Vexation.
for that which is said of Riches, that they are Thorns, (they are such
Thorns as do not only choke the good seed, but they prick and gall us) so
it may be said of these, they have Thorns in them, there is vexation of spirit
in them.

Restless care.
That is; All the while I was conversant in them, I was full of care, and
trouble, and thoughts; whereas those that are vacant from such things are at
rest, they have rest in the night, and in the day, but I have none; As if he
should say, he that will be occupied in all things of this nature, he shall
find a restlesnesse in his soul.

Sore travail.
this fore travail I had, and that was all that I had. As if he should say; I
found no comfort to answer it, I found no fruit from them, I found certain
labor, but uncertain refreshments from them: This I found, that they cost me
much trouble, and pains, but when I came to enjoy the fruit of them, to
receive comfort from them, then they failed me, then they deceived me.
Moreover, says he, I sound no happiness in them, no rest: for I was weary of
my self, and of my life, and of all my labors, that I had wrought under the
Sun: for how could he find that there, which was not there? for if God had
ever sown any happiness in the Creature, he might have reaped it from the
creature, but in all these things it was never sown: the Creature may give as
much as is in it, but to give more is impossible. And therefore, says he, I
fought diligently to see, if there were such a thing there, but I found it not.

Again; Says he, moreover, when I had gotten No comfort.
yet I found this, that I was not able to take comfort in it: for I saw that
was the gift of God; That is; Further than he gave me power to receive any
comfort from all the things that my hand had gotten, further I could not: for,
says he, who hasted after outward things more then I? the meaning is this, I
indevoured, to the uttermost of my power, to find out contentment in the
Creature, who could do it more, with more diligence, who could have after
outward things more, and with more attention seek for all the contentments
that are to be found in the Creature then I? And yet, says he, I found it was
not in me, but God dispenses that according to his own pleasure.

The last thing of all, the last argument he has We must leave them.
is, he must leave all, I must leave it.

But then comes an objection, 1. Ob.
I, but I shall leave it to my Son?

True, Answ.
says he, there is also a vanity in this, for, says he, first I took pains
in equity, and in wisdom, and honesty, but I shall leave it to him that
has not taken pains for all this. As if he should say, I shall leave them the
estate that I have gotten by wisdom, but I cannot leave them my wisdom to
guide the estate when they have it. This, says he, I found in my son for the
present, this I saw in Rehoboam.

But whereas it may be said, 2. Ob.
who knows what he may be?

Says he, Answ.
this is a mi^ery, that I know not what he will prove; or, put case I could
know what he would prove, who knows what his son may prove? So that all this
estate that I have gotten, it shall not stay with them, it may be: for this is
the nature of Gods blessings (mark it) that they abide not but upon that
Center where God has set them; if they come to a man that is wicked in his
sight, they are upon a Center, they are in a place where they will not rest,
they will not a^ide; fire, if be out of its place, water, if it be out of its
place, it is still wrestling, (though for a time it may be kept there) till it
return to its own place; So it is with all those outward blessings; It is
true, evil men may have them, and perhaps their heirs may have them, but, if
they be not right in Gods sight, these things will roll from them, they will
not be at rest, as it were, they will not be established there, but they will
go to their proper Center. This he expresses in the last Verse, This is a
vanity (says he) that a man must gather, and heap up, to give unto him that
is good before God, this also is vanity. So that, if he had known what a one
his son would have proved, yet he knew not what his other son would have
proved, and that all his estate should abide with him. Now, in all this, yet,
says he, two things I have observed. And, Beloved, what What due is to be
given and acknowledged to be in the Creature, declared in two things.
What can I say more then Solomon said in this point, to teach us the vanity,
and the emptines of the Creature; yet we must not take from the creature more
then we should, we must give its due to it, yet, says he, two things have I
found: One is, that wisdom is better then folly; As if he should say; Look
upon the whole universe, and see the variety of the Creatures under the Sun,
with the Creatures and the works of the Creatures, this I find, that wisdom
is best of all; though wisdom be a vanity, though it be vain, because it
cannot help us to true happiness, it falls short there, yet, says he, it is the
best thing under the Sun, as the light is better then darkness, and the
sight better then blindness: for, says he, wisdom teaches a man to direct
his way, it guids a man, when another man knows not how to go to his
journeyes end: wisdom teaches a man how to avoyde mischief, when a man that
is in the dark, stumbleth upon it, and cannot see it; That is the reason he
gives; And yet, says he, there is a vanity in it, says he, if you look upon
the wisest man, and the most foolish, the same event befalls them, the same
sickness, the same troubles, and vexation, the same death, as dies the one, so
dies the other; That is; for the outward appearance of their condition there is
no difference; Again, there is a forgetfulness of both, both are swept away,
both pass, and are blown over, and they are even alike, the wiseman as well
as the fool; But, says he, there is this difference, Wisdom is the best of
all vain things under the Sun.

The second thing, that he has found, is, that from all the blessings of God,
that he has given under the Sun, it is a better way, and there is less
vanity in it, then to heap up still, and not to enjoy it. This I found, says
he, that this is the best way for a man, to take the present benefit, this is
the wisest way, so that this be remembered, that you enjoy them with weaned
affections, that you do not so enjoy them as to commit Idolatry with them:
for, if you do so, indeed then there is a vanity in them; for then the Lord
looks upon you with a jealous eye, as that he will destroy both the things,
and the man, as a jealous man will destroy the adulterer and adulteress. There
is a vanity in them then, but to enjoy them with weaned affections, this,
says he, I found to be the wisest thing under the Sun, rather then to heap
up, and increase possessions, and not to enjoy them. This is that which Solomon
says. If a man say now; But I find contentment and satisfaction, though
Solomon found none, I find I have a sweetness in enjoying pleasure, and mirth,
and a high estate: Why, consider, if thou do, I will say but this to thee, it
is an argument, that thou committest Idolatry with them, and therefore God has
made thee like to the very things themselves. You shall find the Psalmist
speaking of Idols, say; They have eyes and see not, they have hands and handle
not; and he adds this, they that trust in them are like to them. That is; This
is the curse of God upon those that worship Idols, the Lord gives them up to as
much stupiditie, as is in the Idols, that, they have eyes and see not, that
they have ears and hear not. So, I say, when a man will so enjoy these
things, that he can find contentment in them, that he can terminate his
comfort in them; let him know this, that is an argument, that he is made like
to them, that the curse of God is come upon him, or else, it may be, because
thou have not summed up thy accounts, thou have not looked back upon them, as
Solomon did, thou have not yet run through the course of them; if thou have
full experience of them, and the end of them, as he had, thou would find
them vanity, and vexation of spirit. So much for the first, the emptines and
vanity of the Creature.

I say this, 2. Deduction There is a fullness in God, as there is an emptiness
in the Creature.
if God be All-sufficient, it should lead us unto a further knowledge of the
Creature, and so likewise it should lead us to a further knowledge of
Almighty God. That is; To see a contrary fullness in him, I must run briefly
through this, Labor to see him in his greatness, labor to see him in all his
Attributes, to see him in his unchangeableness, to see him in his eternity, in
his power, in his providence. You shall see in Psalm. 102. 21. Psalm. 102. 24.
what use the Psalmist there makes of the Attributes of God; I said O my God,
take me not away in the midst of my days, thy years endure from generation to
generation, thou have before times laid the foundations of the earth, and the
heavens are the work of thy hands, they shall perish, but thou shall endure,
even they all shall wax old as a Garment. The meaning is this, when a man
has proceeded to this, that he sees the vanity of the Creatures, he looks
upon them all, as that they will all wear and wax old as a Garment. A garment
that is new at the first, with long wearing, you know, will be spent, and will
break into holes, and at length be fit for nothing, but to be cast away. So,
says he, shall the whole body of the Creatures be. Now, when we consider this,
that it is a man's own case, and every Creatures, let a man help himself with
this, that God is eternal, and remains for ever, and therefore, if a man can
get to be ingraffed into him, to dwell with him, that will help him out of
that weakness, and mutabilitie, and changeableness that is in the Creature;
and therefore in Psalm. 90. says he, Psalm. 90.
Lord thou art our habitation from generation to generation. As if he should
say; When a man dwells with God, he is a safe house, a Castle, that when
generations come, and go, and times over our heads, there is a change of all
things, yet he is a Rock, he is a Castle, he is a Habitation, there is no
change in him; So that, when you find these defects in the Creature, go home
to him, and labor to see his immutabilitie, and eternity. And so, likewise,
when thou see thy inabilitie to do any thing, when thou see that
weakness in the Creature, that it is not able to bring any enterprise to
pass, Gods All-sufficiencie, proved by his providence.
then look upon his providence, and his almighty power, in that he does all
things that belong to him, he guides them.

My Beloved, the serious setting of our selves to consider the providence of
God, and his almighty power, will discover to us his All-sufficiencie more
then any thing besides. In brief, consider this (to persuade you a little of
the necessity of it, that you may be fully convinced of it, that every
particular, and every common thing, must needs be guided by him, Gods
providence, proved
and directed by him; I would ask but this question) First, are not all By the
Creation.
you will grant that, that every Creature, even the smallest, are from him,
there is no entitie but from him: Certainly, then there is an end of it: for
he made nothing but for some end; and, if there be an end of it, he must guide
it, and lead it to the end, otherwise, he should leave the building imperfect,
otherwise he should but begin a work, and leave it in the middle, otherwise
the Creature should be lost, and perish, and that through a default of his. But
there cannot be said to be any default, any want of goodness in him, in the
great builder of things, and therefore, it must needs be that he guides every
Creature under the Sun, even the smallest of the Creatures, he guides, and
directs them to their ends. Providence is nothing else, but to guide, govern,
and direct every Creature to their several ends, and businesses, to which he
has appointed them. Besides, how is it that you see things sitted one to
another as they are? Is it not the providence of God? When vousee the wheels
of a Watch fitted one to another, when you see the sheath fitted to the sword,
you say this is some Art, this is not by accident; Even so it is in nature, you
see a fitting of one thing to another, in the body, in the Creatures, in every
thing in all the senses, in the Sun with the air, in the eye with the light
and the colors, with the transparent medium.

The constant course of things.
the providence of God. Besides, the constancy of things; we see, they go
their course. Those things that come by accident, that come by chance, and not
by providence, they fall out uncertainly, now one way, and then another, but,
we see, all the works of nature, go in a certain constant course.

The necessity of one governor and disposer of things
if there be not a providence, it will quickly be dissolved; there is not any
family, but it will be so; and therefore, there is a need of government also
in the great family of the world: and if there be a government, it must needs
be by him: for by man it cannot be governed: for the preservation of every
thing is in the unity of it, and therefore, you see, any thing that is
divided, that is the dissolution of it, as when the soul is divided from the
body, and when the body is divided from it self; So, likewise, in a family, or
in a Commonwealth, when it is divided, look how far it goes from unity, so
near it comes to perishing, and the more peace, and unity, the more safety.
Now, if there were not one guider of all these, if there should be many
guiders, there would be different streams, there would be diverse well-heads,
and if there were diverse principles of things, that swerue this way, and that
way, there would be a division in the nature of things, there would not be a
unity, and by consequence, it would be the destruction of them. And therefore,
of necessity, first there must be a government, or else how could the family
stand; and if there be a government, it must not be by man; and if it be not by
man, it must be by one that is God.

Now the objections in brief; Ob.
we see many things are casual, and you may strengthen the objection out of
Eccles. 9. 11. Eccles. 9. 11.
I see (says he) that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong, nor yet riches to a man of understanding, but time, and chance befalls
every thing.

To this, Answ.
I answer, in a word, that it is true, there are chances that fall out in all
these things, that we call properly casual, or accidental, when some thing
comes between a cause, and the effect, and hinders it. As when a man is going
a journey, and an Axe-head fall off, and either wounds him, or kills him, it
comes between the effect, and the cause, between his doing, and that which he
intended; if the fire be burning, and water cast upon it, and hinders it, that
is casual, because it takes off the cause from its intention; So it is in
this, wherein the Wiseman instanceth, when a man is strong, and some accident
comes between, and hinders him from obtaining the battle, when a man has
wisdom, and some accident comes between, and hinders him from obtaining
favor; This is that which we properly call chance. Now it is true, there is
such a chance in the nature of the thing, but yet, consider this, though this
chance be contrary to the particular causes, yet it has a cause, and it rises
from the universal cause; so that it is called chance; because it thwarts, and
comes between the intention of the particular cause, but it does not differ
from the intention of the universal: for those accidental things have a
cause, as well as the things that we intend, have a cause: somewhat there is
that is the author of all causes, that is the first of all causes, and
therefore it is impossible, that any thing should be totally by accident. And
therefore, I say, whenever you find this, it is so far from being casual,
if you look into it exactly, that then the providence of God is most seen in
it of al others, so far is it from coming by chance; because those things that
are done by particular causes, according to their intention, we usually ascribe
it to them, but when there is an intercurrent action comes, that we call
chance, that belongs to the universal cause, and is to be ascribed to him, and
hence it is, that the Lord usually in the dispensing and administering of
contingent things, he turns things rather by accidental causes, by casual
things, then by those causes that have influence into their effects; because
his own hand is most seen in it, he gets the greatest glory by it, when he
turns greatest matters by a small accident, as we turn a great Ship by a
little Rudder, therein his power and his glory is seen. And therefore, I say,
when you see such a vanity in the Creatures, labor to see the more fulness in
God; if there be such an emptines, such a mutabilitie, such an instabilitie in
the Creature, look upon his immutabilitie, and his eternity, and labor to be
partakers of it. When you see such an inabilitie in the Creature, to bring its
enterprises to pass, labor to see his almighty providence, and to be
persuaded of it, to think with thy self, there is not the least thing without
this, there is not the least Creature that makes a motion, this way, or that
way, but as it is guided and directed by him.

I would willingly add but this one word concerning the trial, when we have
said so much of the All-sufficiencie of God, and of the emptines of the
Creature, Examination, or Trials of our belief of Gods All-sufficiencie.
All the question is now how far we practice this: Let every man examine his
own heart, and ask himself these questions.

First, if a man believe that All-sufficiencie that is in God, why does he
terminate his affections Beloved, if there be nothing in that, but all be in
him, we should see through the Creature, we should look beyond it. It is that
which is said of Shisack, 2 Chronicles. 12. he was but the vial, through which Gods
wrath was powered upon Israel; so it was true of Cyrus, he was but the vial,
through which Gods goodness was powered upon Israel. If you did look upon
every man, upon every friend, and every enemy, upon every Creature, he is an
instrument of good, or hurt to you, but as an empty vial in it self, through
which God powers either his goodness, and mercy, or else his wrath, it would
cause you not to stick upon the Creature, not to wrangle with men, not to hate
men, or to be angry with them: for that is but the vial: It would cause you
again not to be proud of the friendship of men, not to be secure in them, not
to trust in them, not to think your selves safe in them: for they are but
vials, through which God powers his mercy, and goodness toward you. Consider
whether you be able to do this. Look on David, when Naball sent him a rough
answer, an untoward answer, he was exceedingly moved at it: When Shemei did the
same, yea, and to his face, in a far greater measure, he was not moved, what
was the reason of it, but, because when he looked to Naball, he forgot God, he
saw not God setting Naball a-worke to give such an answer, he looked not to
Naball as a vial, but as if he had been the principal in the action in hand,
and therefore he was ready to fly upon him with impatience (as you know how
angry he was with him) but when Shemei did curse him, he had reason, he
thought, to be quiet, and not in the other case: because he looked on Shemei as
a vial: God (says he) has bid him do it, and therefore he goes to God, and
not to Shemei.

Beloved, if you do believe this All Sufficiency in God, and this emptines in
the Creature, why are you not able to do this, not to love the creature, not
to terminate I say, your affections in them, but to use this world as though
you used it not. That is; All the things in the world, all the men in the
world? for indeed you would use them, as if you did not use them, if you did
see an emptines in them, and a fulness and an All-sufficiencie in God.

Secondly; If we do believe there is an All-sufficiencie God, why do we go
out from him to take in present commodities, to avoyde present dangers? Why do
we not serve him with the loss of all these? For if he be All-sufficient, it
is no matter what thou loosest, thou have enough, if thou have him. You may see
it in Paul (to resemble it to you, to show you what I would have said) says
he, we serve the living God, we take much pains in our Ministry, we suffer
much, but have nothing but imprisonment, nothing but fastings, and whippings,
and stonings; and why do we it? for we trust in the living God, and we think
him to be All-sufficient: when he says, we trust in him, that is employed. I
say, now look to thy self, art thou able to serve him, without looking to
present commodity? Art thou able to do as they did, when they were sent
empty, and yet were willing to do the work, and were content to have no
wages given them, because they trusted in God, and thought he was sufficient?
you see, our Savior put them upon it; it is true, they lacked nothing, but yet
that was the trial. Moses, when he might have had present commodity, he left
all, he left the Court of Pharaoh, he left Egypt, and went empty away, he did
not turn aside to these present Commodities, why? because he thought the Lord
was All-sufficient. And so Abraham, he left his Fathers house, and came into a
Land, where he had not a foot; because he thought God was All-sufficient; God
speaks to him, upon that occasion, fear not Abraham, thou art in a strange
Country, where thou have no body to provide for thee, yet I will be
All-sufficient. Those that wandered up and down in sheepes-skinnes, and in
Goats-skinnes; no question, they might have had outward comforts as well as
others, if they would have took that course that others did, but they were
willing to leave all present commodities: because they trusted in God, that he
was All-sufficient. They suffered (says the Apostle Heb. 11.) the spoiling of
their goods, they lost all, and wandered up, and down, and had nothing but
dens to lie in, in stead of houses, and sheepe-skinnes, in stead of clothes.
This they did, because they thought him to be All-sufficient.

I say, Consider whether thou be able to do this, to let go present wages,
present comforts, and commodities, and not to turn aside to them: for, if God
be All-sufficient, what need is there of them? If there be enough in him, why
should you step out to them? Moreover, if God be All-sufficient, why do we
stick so much upon particular means, to say, if such means be not used, I
shall be undone, if he be All-sufficient, it is no matter what the means be,
he is able to bring it to pass. It is usual with men to say, if such a thing
sail me, I am undone, and if such an evil be not removed. What are these but
particulars? this sticking upon particulars is a sign we think him not
All-sufficient. Isa. 60. 10. See what an expression there is for matter of
means, He that walks in darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the
Lord God; he that walks in darkness, and has no light, yet, if God be
All-sufficient, put the case, there be no means at all, put the case there be
utter emptines, that there be not a spark of light, but that thou walk in
darkness and see nothing to help thee, if he be All-sufficient, trust in
him, let him that has no light, but walks in darkness, trust in the Lord:
for he is then able to help him.

Again, if we think him to be All-sufficient, when we loose any particular
means, it is but the scattering of a beam, it is but the breaking of a Bucket,
when the Sun and the fountain is the same. Why should we be troubled at it?
If we did think him to be All-sufficient, when one means is broken, cannot he
find out another, if he be All-sufficient? When he said to Paul, that all the
souls with him should be safe, you see, there were diverse means, all were not
able to swim to the shore, and the Ship was not able to bring them to shore,
but yet, by broken boards, and by one means, and another, all got to the
shore; So the Lord brings things to pass in a strange manner, sometimes one
way, sometimes another, he breaks in pieces many times the Ship, that, we
think, should bring us to shore, but casts us on such boards as we did not
expect; so he does in the means both good and evil, somewhat comes in, and
brings us help that we never thought of. An enemy comes in and does us hurt,
that we never dreamed of, and those, that we had our eye fixed upon, it may be,
do neither of them.

God be All-sufficient, if he be thus exceeding great, consider, if thou see
thine own vileness, thy ignorance, thy emptiness, in comparison of him. When
Agur looked upon God, and saw his greatness, Pro. 30. he cries out, that he had
not the understanding of a man in him. When Job saw him in his greatness, he
abhorred himself in dust, and ashes, he had spoken once, and twice, but he
would speak no more. And so Abraham, when God appeared to him, said, I am but
dust, and ashes; whether art thou able to say thus when thou look upon God
in his greatness? First, art thou able to say, I have not the understanding of a
man in me; That is; Can thou see the emptiness, and vanity of thy own
knowledge? Can thou learn not to murmur against God, in any of his ways?
Can thou learn to captivate, and bring under thy thoughts to the ways of
Gods providence? Can thou do, as Job did, saying, I have heretofore taken
exceptions, and murmured, and was discontented, and wondered at the ways of
God, and the works of his hands, I have done this once, or twice, but now I
will do so no more? Job knew God as well as we know him, but when God spoke
out of the whirle-winde, and made known his greatness to him, this was the
fruit of it to Job, though he had spoken once, or twice, that is, before that
time, yet now he would do it no more. Can thou be content to see the Lord
going all the ways that he does, setting up evil men, and putting down good
men, causing the Churches to wither, and the enemies to prosper? Can thou see
all this, and yet sanctify him in thine heart. Art thou able to say, that he
is holy in all his ways, and in this to see the greatness of God, and thy
own folly and weakness? Can thou say, that thou art but dust, and ashes, and
to say it in good earnest? Can thou look on thy self as on a vile Creature,
as Peter did, saying, Go from me: for I am a sinful man? Then I will believe,
that thou have seen God in his greatness, I will believe that thou have seen
him in his All Sufficiency, that he has represented himself by his spirit
into thy soul, in some measure, when thou see these effects in thy soul,
when thou see thy ignorance, and thy vileness, when thou see what an empty
Creature thou art, sure this is another thing, by which thou may judge,
whether thou have experience, whether thou have practiced this doctrine, that
we have delivered of the All-sufficiencie of God, and of the emptines of the
Creature.

Moreover, if God be All-sufficient, why are from it, and to knock so little
at his door by prayer, and seeking to him? for, if he be All-sufficient, thou
should be abundant in prayer, thou would take little time to look to
others, thy chief business would be to look to him, not only in praying to
him, but in serving him, and pleasing him: We knock at his door as well by
the duties of obedience, as by prayer, and seeking to him; if thou think him
to be All-sufficient, why do thou not do this?

All-sufficient, why art thou not content to be at his immediate finding? Put
the case, he deprive thee of all things else, and do with thee, as Parents do
with their Children, who give them not a penny in their purse, but tell them
they will provide for them, why art thou not content that God should do so?
What, if he strip thee of all thy wealth, of thy liberty, of thy friends, so
that thou can look for nothing but immediately at his hands, to feed thee
as he feeds the Ravens, and the Lions; if he be All-sufficient, why do thou
not trust in him, in such a case, and rest upon him?

God to be All-sufficient, why do thou not when thou have any service, or
duty to do, either belonging to God, or man, why do thou not resolve upon
the doing of it, without looking to the consequence whatsoever it be? For, my
Beloved, if he be All-sufficient, then all our care should be nothing but to
do our duty, and to leave the success to him. A servant that thinks his
Master is able, and willing to give him wages, and provide for him
sufficiently at the end of the day, or the year, or the end of his service, he
will be careful to do his work, without looking to his wages, without making
provision for himself, and so, if thou believe God to be All-sufficient, thou will seek no more but to find out what thy duty is, what rule thou ought
to walk by, what service thou owe to man in such a case, how to keep a good
conscience in such a business, in such a straight, in such a difficulty, thou will set thy wits a-worke to find out this, but when thy wit is overrunning
thy duty, and thou look to the consequence (if I do this and this, this
will befall me) that is a sign thou think not God to be All-sufficient,
thou think thy Master cannot provide for thee, but thou think I shall be
poor, when I have done his service, and therefore I will provide for my self,
I shall want comforts, I shall have enemies come in upon me; if thy Master be
a Sun, a Shield, and a Buckler, and an exceeding great reward, and thou
beleevest him to be so, thou would find out only thy duty, and it is no
matter what the consequence is; So you see the three men did, we have resolved
that we will not worship thine Image, and whereas you tell us of casting us
into a burning fiery Furnace, that we care not for, God is able to deliver us,
they did see Gods All-sufficiencie, and therefore they did the duty.
Certainly, Belovid, in any difficult case, no man will do his duty, except
he be persuaded that God is All-sufficient; Those three men would never have
refused to worship the Idol, except they could have said, and thought in their
hearts, God is able to deliver us out of thy hands, O King. This they said, and
resolved to do. And so Daniell resolved to do his duty, and not to go a
step out of the path, besides the Rule; Well; he shall be cast into the Lions
den; yet he keeps his resolution firm; it was enough for him to do his
duty, for the consequence of it, he left it to God: for he knew he was
All-sufficient. You see, God watched over them, and delivered them all. And so
likewise, in refusing to eat of the Kings meat, Daniell would not pollute
himself, it was not lawful for him being a Jew, it might have cost him life,
for ought he knew, if he had looked on the his consequence, but he resolved to
do it: Says the Text, he resolved in his heart to do it, and committed it to
God. And we see in all these three cases, God showed himself sufficient: So he
does, when we look to our duty sincerely, and faithfully, when we do it, and
look not to the consequence, he is then All-sufficient, and will show himself
to be so. And the like we see in the case of Mordecai, he thought it was a
sin to bow to Hamman, who was an Amalekite, he would not do it; Well, but
they shall all be destroyed, he, and all the Jews; He tells Hester confidently,
the Church should be delivered, but he knew not how, but, says he, if it be
not by thy hands, thou shall fare the worse for it, but certainly, says he,
deliverance shall come to the Church, one way, or other, God is All-sufficient;
Hereupon she resolves, saying in effect, whatsoever be the consequence, I will
do it, it is my duty. And, you know, God showed himself All-sufficient in
delivering her, and him, and all the people of the Jews: So, I say, if thou
would find out whether thy heart believe all this, that is delivered,
whether thou do practice it, or no; Consider, if thou can do it now or no:
Consider, what thy duty is upon every occasion, and never look to the
consequence, either to the loss of preferments, of riches, or favor: for God
is All-sufficient, he can bring it in. Be it again, on the other side, such
crosses, and losses are like to follow upon it, yet he is All-sufficient, so
that thou do it more or less according to thy opinion of his
All-sufficiencie.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE SIXTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. Walk before me, and be thou perfect.
WE have already finished the first part of these words, God is All-sufficient.

Which words contain the Covenant on Gods part, I will be All-sufficient,
which here is expressed in the general, but in other places more particularly,
as I showed you then when we handled the words:

The other part of the words contains the Covenant, or condition required on
our part; Walk before me, and be thou perfect. God will be All-sufficient unto
us, that is his promise, and he requires of us, that we should be perfect with
him, he will be All-sufficient to them that depend upon him, he will be wholly
theirs that will be wholly his.

So the maine point that we have to handle, is that which God requires on our
parts, without which we have no interest in his Covenant, namely, that we be
sincere and perfect, but before I come to handle this point, which is the
maine, I will touch an observation or two by the way.

And first from the Connection, I am God All-sufficient; therefore walk before
me, and be thou perfect (I will but touch it, because I handled the negative
part of it at large.)

This we may observe, that Every man is more or less perfect, Doct.
as he is more or less persuaded of Gods All-sufficiencie. Men are more or
less perfect, as they are persuaded of Gods All-sufficiencie.


You see, that is made the ground of our perfect walking with God, that we
believe him to be All-sufficient, and therefore, I say, as our persuasion of
that is more or less, so every man more or less is perfect with God; That is;
Look how a man's faith in Gods promises, and in his providence, is more or
less, look how he has found, by his experience, God to be more sufficient to
him, or less, so is every man's walking with God more or less perfect.

The reason of which is, Reas. 1.
partly, because it is Gods argument: when God uses any argument, It is Gods
argument.
look how far that takes place in the heart, look how far the
understanding is convinced of it, so far it prevails also with the will and
affections, and so far it prevails with the practice, and conversation of a
man's life: When God shall make this the ground of our perfectnes, so far, I
say, as a man is convinced of it, so far as he is persuaded of it, so far
it will prod^ce this effect, to make him perfect, and sincere in his walking
with God.

Again, Reas. 2.
partly, the reason of it, is, because it heales that which is the cause of all
our imperfectness, This persuasion heales self-love.
and vnevennesse, which is self-love. The reason why men walk not constantly,
and perfectly with God, is because they love themselves inordinately, they
think to provide better for themselves: when a man is fully persuaded of Gods
All-sufficiencie, it answers all those false reasonings, all those deceitful
arguments that selfeloue is ready to bring to us, upon every occasion; there
is no man departs from God, but he thinks, at that time, it is better for him
so to do: when it shall be answered him, God is All-sufficient, it is better
for thee to keep in the strait way, if thou seek thy self, by disobeying of
him, it shall be worse for thee, let all the false reasonings of selfeloue be
answered, and the heart must needs be perfect.

The Use of it, Use.
in brief, is that we should labor to be persuaded of this truth, To labor
for this persuasion.
and apply it to make use of it, upon every occasion: when any command is
presented unto us, when any thing is to be done, run to this principle, to be
persuaded of Gods All-sufficiencie, that shall help thee to do every duty,
that shall preserve thee from every sin: for example, God has commanded us
to deny our selves in our profit, in our credit, and our pleasures; and many
times it comes that we are to perform this duty in particular cases, consider
seriously then of the strength of this principle, that God is All-sufficient;
it will make thee able to do the duty thoroughly. What though thou be a looser
in thy credit? if God be All-sufficient, he is able to make it up. What though
thou be a looser in thy profit, as Amaziah was? is not he able to give thee
fourscore talents, says the Prophet to him? What though thou be a looser in
thy pleasures, that thou loose, or want the pleasures of sin for a season; is
not he able to make it up with peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost?
And so again; We are commanded to take up our daily cross, and not to take
base and sinful courses to avoid crosses, and troubles, and affl^ctions, when
we meet with them in right and straight ways, and surely, the way to perform
this duty is to be persuaded of Gods All-sufficiencie, let a man think that
God is able to defend and carry him out, that he is able to keep him in the
time of those sufferings, that it is he that keeps the keys of the prison
door, that opens, and shuts, when he pleases, it is he that makes whole, and
makes sick; the issues of life and death, belong to him: Every man's judgment,
though he seek the face of the Ruler, yet it is from hi^: let men consider,
that it is not the creature that inflicts any cross, or affliction, or
punishment upon us, but it is he that does it by the creature, and that will
enable a man to bear any cross, to pass through all variety of conditions,
and not to divert from a straight way, but to go through the storm when he
meets with it.

And so we may say of every other duty, to exercise the duties of our
particular callings, not for our own good, but for the good of others:
Beloved, this is a special thing, men loose their lives, they loose that
blessed opportunity they have to grow rich in good works, that when every day
they might add much to their treasure, to their reckoning against the day of
Judgment, whilst they serve themselves, and seek themselves altogether, it
is but time lost. Now, I say, what is the reason that men in the exercise of
their callings have such an eye to their own profit, and not to the profit of
others, whom they deal with, that they have such an eye to their own credit,
and advantage, and not to others good? it is because they think they must be
careful to provide for their own esta^e, to look to themselves* they have no
body else to do it: let a man be persuaded that God takes care for him, that
riches are as the shadow that follows the substance of a man's perfect ailking
with God, that it is he that gives them, it is he that dispenses them, it is
he that gives the reward, the wages belongs to him, the care of the work only
belongs to us; if a man would deny himself, and be a looser many times in his
calling, be content to do many things for the profit of others, to use those
talents that God that given him, not for his own, but for his Masters
advantage* I say, if he would do this, he should find God All-sufficient, and
the persuasion of his All-sufficiencie is that that strengthens a man, and
makes him constant in the performance of it. I might give you the like
instances, but I will not run any further. But this you may take for a sure
rule, there is never any duty that shall cost a man any peril, that shall
cost him any labor, any loss that a man will be willing to do, without the
persuasion of Gods All-sufficiencie, he never does it without this persuasion,
he never fayles in it but as far as he fayles in the belief of this. For
example.

Abraham when he was put on the hardest task, to leave his Country, and his
Fathres house, he was persuaded that God would be with him, and would bless
him: for God had made him a promise to do it, it was easy then to perform
it, but afterward, when he began to shrink, and to doubt of this, that God
might fail him, that he would not be God All-sufficient to him, as when he
went down into Egypt, he denied Sarah to be his wife, what was the cause of
this sin? but because he was afraid, the God could not defend him. And so
David, how many hard taskes went he through, with all cheerfulness, and
constancy? but when he began to fail of this persuasion, that God was able to
deliver him from Saul, and to bring him into the Kingdom, then he begins to
step out from that duty, and way of obedience, that he should have walked in,
to fly to Achis, etc. Therefore the way, I say, to make our hearts perfect
with God, is to increase this persuasion of Gods All-sufficiencie. Now this we
should do especially at these times, when we are to receive the Sacrament: for
what is the Sacrament, but the seal of the Covenant, on both parts? It is the
seal of the Covenant, on Gods part, he promises to be All-sufficient, and the
Sacrament seals this to you; when it is said to you, take, and eat, this is
my body, the meaning is this, Jesus Christ gives himself, and God the Father
gives him, and says, take him; That is; Take Christ, with all his: it is
certain, he is a husband, that is All-sufficient, he is a field that is full
of treasure, and so you must think with your selves, when you come to receive
the Sacrament, that Jesus Christ himself, is given to you; That is; Jesus
Christ, with all his riches, and treasure, with all his benefits, and
privileges. Now, when you have taken Christ, as it is a free gift, then
consider all those particular benefits, labor to dig that field, and to see
all the variety of treasures in it, you shall find that there is nothing that
you can desire, but you shall find it in him, you shall find an
All Sufficiency in him, both for this life, and for the life to come.

Again; As this is the Covenant, on Gods part, that is sealed to us in the
Sacrament, so you must remember, that you put to your seal likewise, to
confirm the condition of the Covenant, on your part: for so you have promised,
there is a stipulation, an engagement, remember that you keep Covenant, and
Condition with him, (for it is reciprocal): for all Covenants must be mutual,
they must be between two parties, and remember, that thou put thy seal to it,
that thou renew with God the Covenant, that thou have made to walk before him
perfectly. Now, the end of the Sacrament, is to remember this, do this, says
Christ, in remembrance of me; as if he should say; you will be ever and anon
ready to forget this Covenant.

Another point I desire to observe, before I come to handle the maine, is from
these words, walk before me, etc. it is a metaphor I find very frequently
used in Scriptures, and therefore we will not pass it over, walk before me,
and be thou perfect. Whence we will therefore observe, that There is a great
similitude between a Christians life, Doct.
and walking from place to place. A Christian life like a walk.


I find not any metaphor in the Scriptures used more frequently, and therefore
it should teach us some thing: for a metaphor, you know, is but a similitude
that is contracted to one word, it is a short similitude, folded up in a word,
and somewhat is to be taught us, some resemblance there is that we will labor
to express, and make some short use of it.

When the Lord says to Abraham, I am All-sufficient; therefore walk perfectly
before me, it is as if he had said, Abraham, I mean to be a good Master to
thee, I mean to give thee sufficient wages, thou shall want nothing thou
need; now be thou careful to do thy work, be not idle, sit not still, but
be working (for that is intimated by walking) to walk is still to be acting in
some thing, still to be working, to be in employment, and not sit still, so
that this is intimated to us, when he says, walk before me, that the whole
course of this life is like a Journey from one place to another. And again,
every particular action, is like so may steps taken to that Iourneys end, and
(mark it, I say) look what the rounds are in a Ladder, that go from the
bottom to the top, look what the paces in a Journey are, so many paces go to
make up the Journey, so does every particular act go to make up that Christian
course that every man is to fulfill: so then, as every step a man takes, tends
to some scope, or other, either East, or West, or North, or South, in general
and in particular, to some particular place, near some City, some Town, or
some Room, so every action in a man's life, it either tends in general to
East, or West, that is; to good or evil, it tends to the service of God, or to
the service of Satan, and, likewise, in particular, it tends either to this
good duty, or to avoyde this particular sin, to this or that particular
service of God, of Satan, or of our selves, every action we do.

So that not only the greater actions (mark it) but even the lesser, every
one of them, it is like a pace in a Journey, which that I may make plain to
you, you must know, that all the actions we do, either be actions that belong
to our general, or to our particular calling, or such as fit us to them. Now
take the lowest and the meanest action, your eating and drinking, your sleep
and recreation, they all are steps that tend to this Journey, that tend to this
scope, they are steps, every one of them is a step nearer to God, and to
heaven, if they be rightly used; and from him, if they be not used as they
ought. Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do it to the glory
of God. Wha^ ever you do, mark that supreme scope, so that all actions tend
to one or other of these; now you make no question, but even those common
actions are steps that lead to the Journey, even as you see, take a servant
that is set to work, or to go a Journey, that is to mow, or to drive a Cart,
even the whetting of the sith, is a part of his work, as well as his mowing
of the grass, the provendring of his horse, is a dispatching of his Journey, a
going on in it, as well as when he rides, and so the oyling of the wheel, is a
drawing on, as well as every step he takes: so, I say, it is in these common
actions, that we make less account of, our sleeping, our eating, our drinking,
our recreation, every one of them, is a step in the Journey. I speak it for
this end, that we may not neglect any action, that we may not despise the least
of our actions: for there is not one of them, but it is a pace, or a step: so
that this you must make account of; every day you finish a great part of your
space: for you do many actions, and look what actions you do, see what they
be, examine them at night: for every actions is a step, and either you step
toward God in it, or you step from him; either you step toward heaven, or
toward hell: therefore look to every action. But this is in general.

Now in particular (to bring this similitude a little nearer) you must consider
in a walk from one place to another, when you go in a Journey, you have these
particulars.

First; There must be a place, a term to which you walk, some whither,
whither a man goes.

Again; There must be a place, or term from which a man comes.

Again; There is a distance: for in a point, or a little space a man cannot
walk.

Again; There must be a ground to walk upon.

And there must be a path: for in particular Iourneys, as from Thebes to
Athens, there is a straight pathway to walk to it, etc. These particulars we
will express to you in this course of a Christian life.

That which he goes to.
terminus ad quem, as we call it, and that is to grace, we travail to grace,
we travail to the service, and glory of God, and we travail to salvation,
these I find in the Scripture to be the ends, and the aims, and the scope,
and mark, at which every man is to look in his Journey, in the course of his
life: Labor to grow in grace, which enableth us to serve God, without which we
can do nothing: Labor also, when you have it to come to the fruits, and
operations, and effects of it; that is, to spend your time in doing some thing
that may tend to Gods glory, and service. And last of all, look at the reward,
look at salvation, which is the end of that Journey, there is no question of
the two former, that the end is grace, and righteousness; there is more question
of the latter, whether a man may make salvation, and the recompense of reward,
an end, a mark, and scope, to which he travailes: but all these are our ends
you shall see Act. 26. 18. Paul Act. 26. 18.
is sent to preach to the people; and this is the scope of his preaching, he
was sent to open their eyes, that they might turn from darkness to light, from
the power of Satan to God, that they might receive the forgiveness of sins,
and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ. Mark it,
that they may turn from darkness to light, there you see the scope is light;
because, without light, a man cannot see his way, Grace helps a man in his
Journey, as light does: the next thing is, from the power of Satan unto God;
That is; from living in bondage to Satan, to serve God, to do that which
stands to his glory, and advancement, and then lastly, that they may receive
forgiveness, and inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith in me;
there is the reward: for a man's aim is likewise that he might receive the
inheritance, that he might be saved, and have heaven in the end. So likewise
you find it expressed Philip. 3. 14. Paul, Phil. 3. 14.
says he, pressed hard toward the mark, for what purpose? for the price of
the high calling of God in Christ, there you see that the aim that Paul had in
following hard to the mark, you see there was a mark that he aimed at, and
that he had expressed before to be found in the righteousness that is in
Christ, and, says he, that I might obtain the price of the high calling, the
price (that is) the wages; as a man that runs a race, there is a price
propounded to him, and when he has finished the race, he obtaines it, says
he, this is one of my ends to obtain the price: Heb. 11.
so it is said of Moses, Heb. 11. he had respect to the recompense of reward.
So, my Beloved, in the journey you must make this account, you travail toward
grace, that is the scope that you aim at, again, your end is to serve God, to
seek his glory, that all your actions may tend to it, and lastly, that you
might be saved, that you might have the inheritance with the Saints.

Now the term from which we travail is from sin, That he goes from.
from the service of Satan, and our selves, and likewise it is from damnation;
so that you shall find this difference in it, that all men, though they have
but one Iourneys end, yet there are different places, from which every of them
travaileth, according to the different sins, to which they are inclined, some
men had need to travail from covetousnes, some men again, from prodigality,
these seem to go contrary ways, yet both aim at the same Iourneys end, as
two men that intend to come to London, one comes out of Kent, another comes out
of the North, these men seem to go contrary, one goes North, and the other
South, yet both agree in their Iourneys end; so it is in this travail, some
men are subject to be timorous, and discouraged, and cowardly in their actions,
some men again to be rash, and bold, these men have contrary courses, yet they
both travail to the same mediocrity, to the same grace, to the same way of
righteousness: so, I say, the terms from which we come are exceeding
different, though the Iourneys end be the same to every man. Look what the
several inclinations of men are, even therein to part from himself, to deny
himself, to resist his personal, and particular lusts, that is the term,
from which he is to go: and so likewise it is to be considered, that we
travail from damnation, that every step that a man takes in the way of
righteousness, it is so many steps from death to life, he is so much nearer
his Iourneys end: for salvation is now nearer then when you believed, says the
Apostle; that is, look as you travail faster in the way of righteousness, so
your reward is nearer, your comfort is nearer, and so you are farther from
judgment, farther from destruction.

Now, on the other side, it is to be considered, that as this is the aim of
the godly man, to look to grace, and at the service of God, and at salvation,
that is the way, tha^ they travail; So there is another way that other men
travail, that look at sin, at destruction. I do but set one by another,
that you may learn to know the difference: there is a scope that every man
has, whatsoever a man does, though he consider it not, yet he takes every
step by virtue of that utmost end that he has. There is a generation of men
that aim at destruction, that aim at sin, at those ways that lead down to
the Chambers of death.

And, Ob.
if you object, and say, I but no man propounds pounds such an end to himself,
there is no man intends the destruction of himself.

I answer; Ans.
It is true, it is not the end of the man, but it is the end of the course, as
we say, it is not finis operantis, but it is finis operis; as a thief, that
steals, his end is not that he should come to the gallows, but his end is to
get profit to himself, but yet it is the scope of the work, though not of the
workman; so I say in this case, a man that has not this aim to serve God, to
walk toward him, though he observe it not, his aim is destruction, that is
the end of his work, that way he walks in leads down to the Chambers of
death. So you see, First, there is an end, a term to which every man goes;
And, secondly, there is a term from which every man comes.

The distance in it.
that dissimilitude between grace, and us, and between God, and us. Look
what distance, and difference there is between grace, and sin, between
righteousness, and wickedness, that is the space that every man is to go,
that is the distance that he is to pass through; so that even as in a Journey
you cast some part of the way behind you, and another part you are to pass
unto; so you are to think in this Journey: Look how much victory thou gettest
over any sin, so much of thy way thou have passed. Again; Look in what
measure any sin remains unmortified, any lust is not fully overcome, so much
of thy way thou art yet to go: so likewise, it is in the defect of graces,
that is the distance that thou have to fulfill. So in every man's particular
calling, that course that God has fixed to every man, that he has prescribed
to every particular man, to some longer, to some shorter, this is the distance
of a man's Journey. John Baptist had a shorter course, he fulfilled his course,
he preached not above three or four years. Paul fulfilled his course
likewise, a longer race, but it was that which God had appointed him; so the
dissimilitude between grace and sin; and again, the course that God has
appointed every man he must fulfill, and serve God in his time, this is the
distance and the space of this Journey.

Again; the next to this is the ground: for a The ground.
when he walks, the ground upon which he walks, is the time of this life in
this world, the latitude of this life, that God has afforded to every man,
that is the field, as it were, that he walks in: we see in the world great
variety of men, and variety of courses, that is the ground, the space
allotted to him, he may walk whither he will, he may walk which way he
pleases.

But lastly (as there must be a term to which, The path.
as there must be a distance, and a ground, so chiefly he, that walks must
have a certain path, a certain way to walk in. In a wilderness, there is
ground enough, but there is no path, but when you go to a certain place,
there must be always a certain way, a certain high way, a path that leads
to it: now the path that we have to walk in, you have it diversely expressed in
the Scriptures: Christ is said to be the way, we are said to walk in the
spirit, if you be led by the spirit, walk in the spirit, and the way of Gods
Commandments; I will ran the way of thy Commandments, says David, when
thou shall enlarge my heart: and of Zachary, and Elizabeth, it is said, they
walked in the way of Gods Commandments without reproof. These are said to be
the ways, or the paths that we walk in, they all come to one: Christ is said
to be the way: because as a man cannot come to a place, except he go in the
way that leads to it, so no man can come to God the Father without Christ; that
is; without his intercession, without his guidance, and direction, except he
lead you to the Father, that you come as sprinkled with his blood, as clothed
with his righteousness, except you come as being made accepted by his
intercession, you cannot be accepted, and besides, except you go the way that
he directs you: for he is the day star, springing from on high, that guides
our feet in the way of peace, without him you cannot come to heaven, you
cannot come to the throne of grace: so he is said to be the way: Again, the
spirit is said to be the way, walk in the spirit; That is; walk according to
the guidance of the spirit, follow the direction of the spirit; and so the way
of Gods Commandments, they are said to be the way; because they are the rules
we ought to walk by: So that the way is, when, in the name of Christ, when,
out of respect to him, we walk by the direction of the spirit, in the ways of
Gods Commandments, when we observe the rule. This is the way, this is the path.

Now, Quest.
if you ask how one should find this way?

You must know, Answ.
that though this be the way in general, yet, in particular, that which must
teach it thee, is to consider, first, there is a certain tract that God has
made for us to walk in, a certain path that he has chalked out, that which
he has described in his Word, that which all the Saints have trodden before
us, both those that lived in former times, whose examples are related to us,
and those that live among us: First, there is a tract that God himself has
made, the way of his judgments are sine vestigijs etc. but the way of his
Commandments are as a beaten tract, as a beaten road; A way that himself
has made plain, by many directions, by many way-markes that he has set, that
men might know them, and likewise by the course of all the Saints, which is
like a beaten way that is trodden by many thousands, from generation to
generation, that is one thing that you are to look ^o^see, if you be in that
way, in the old way, in the way that the Law leads to; in the way that all the
Saints have go^e in.

Next to this the question will be, Quest.
well but how shall I find it? I may be ready to miss this tract.

I answer; Answ.
there is a certain ^agacitie that God gives to a man, by which he finds out
this way: for though the way be pl^ine in it se^fe, yet, my Beloved, it is not
so (...) every man, it is hard to find out this (...) way. These steps of
Gods Commandments, I say, it is hard to find them out, except there be a
particular gift given him even as you see, there is a gift given to the dog
to find out the hare, to follow her steps, there is a certain sagacitie
given to that Creature, that another wants, by which it follows the steps of
the hare, which way soever she goes: (I may use it for a similitude, a
farre-off expression) So, I say, there is a sagacitie given to the Saints, a
certain new quality, that others want, by which they are able to find out
the steps of Gods way; so that they are able to tract him: When they are at a
loss, they will not run on vopon a false sent; but cast about, (as sometimes
they loose God, sometimes they know not which way they must follow him.) This
gift we must labor to have. Therefore David prays so often that God would teach
him the^e ways, that he would make his way plain before him, that he would
direct him, etc. As acknowledging that he was not able of himself to find it
out, except God had guided him, and directed him to it.

Similitude
that as, when a man goes a A constant course.
and walking for recreation, a walking as a man does in a Gallery, but it is a
constant course, he walks on; So likewise, the course of a Christian life, it
is a constant continued term of action; when a man does not good by a fit or
two, but when he continues in well-doing, when it is the ordinary constant
tract of his life.

Now we will briefly make some use of it, and the uses shall be but these two,
a^cording to this similitude, and the agreement of this walking with a
Christian life.

If a Christian life be of this nature, Use 1.
that it is like a walk in a Journey, that every act is a step, then, my
Beloved, it should stir us up to consider seriously, what business we have in
hand, for what purpose we came into the world, namely, to go a Journey, not
to sit still, not to be idle, we are to travail a part of this Journey every
day, and therefore the first thing we are to do, is to choose a right way: you
must know therefore, that there are many thousands (it is the common condition
of men in the Church) that think they are in a right way, and so go on in it
without examination, whereas you must know this, that every man by nature is
set in a wrong way as soon as he comes into the world, wherein he travailes,
as in a way that leads to destruction; so that, till a man begin to see his
error, till he begin to come seririously to consider, this is not the way I
should follow, and to choose a contrary, No man travailes toward heaven, no
man is in Cu^su, as we say, no man is in this Journey till then. David says,
he chose the way of Gods commandments; that is; there must be a choice: for
this must be a special consideration, no man has this without choice, and not
only so, that is not only meant, to take it into consideration, that is
natural, but then a man is said to choose, when he pitcheth upon it, when his
resolution is fixed, when he determines upon this way. Therefore, when you
hear that there is such a walk, make that use of it, choose the way of Gods
Commandments. To choose; that is, willingly to take that way, to go it
resolutely, to swear within himself, as David says, I have sworn that I
will serve thee, and walk in thy way. I say, this we should bring our heart
to, and you shall know it by this, whether you do so or no: A man, that
chooses a way, that resolves to go that way, if he be out of it at any time,
and be told, Sir you are out of the way, he is glad of the admonition, he is
willing to go in to it again: So that, I say, thou may know, whether thou
choosest the way of Gods commandments, what do thou when any suggestion
comes from the holy Ghost, that tells thee, this duty ought to be done, this
sin ought to be abstained from, art thou obedient to it? When thou art
admonished by thy friend, that tells thee, this is not the way, this is an
error, this is an obliquitie, art thou ready to turn out of it? art thou glad
of such an advertisement? When thou hear rules given thee out of the Word,
from day to day, from Sabbath to Sabbath, art thou willing to practice them,
when thy error is discovered to thee? It is a sign thou choosest the way. Let
a man resolve on the way to a Coast, to a City, when it is discovered to him
that ^e is out of the way, certainly, if it be the way that he has chosen, he
will easily be ready, and willing to return to it. Indeed, that is a sign a
man has often the way. David chose to serve the Lord, and therefore, wh^^
(...) him told him of his adultery, and murder, he quickly returned again;
So it is with all the Saints, it is not so with other men, when they are told
of going out, they go on still, because, in truth, they have not chosen the
way of Gods commandments.

Secondly; Use 2.
It is not enough to choose it in general, but likewise, you must look to
every step you take, take heed to every step in this way. My Beloved, as you
heard before, there is not an action, but it is a step, it is a pace in the way
that leads, either on the one side, or on the other, either toward hell, or
toward heaven, and therefore it is not enough to look that you walk in the
way in general, but likewise, you must ponder your steps. You see that
expression Pro. 4. says the Wiseman, Ponder thy ways, and order thy steps
aright; ponder thy ways; that is, a man is to consider every step he takes, is
this right? Does this tend toward such a Journey or not? This pondering of our
ways, is exceeding necessary, it is that which David constantly practiced
Psalm. 119. 36. I considered my ways, that I might turn^ my feet to thy
testimonies. I considered my ways; that is; Except a man look narrowly to it,
except he consider his steps, from time to time, except he reflect upon them,
and look which way they tend, he will not be able to keep the ways of Gods
Commandments.

And if you object now; Ob.
why, but is it necessary that a man must think upon every action what his end
is, when a man is busy in his study, when he is busy in his trade, when he
is busied in his particular cal^ing, is it necessary that every particular
action should be looked upon, that he should have this actual thought, whither
does this step tend?

I answer; Ans.
Beloved, it is not necessary, that it should be done upon every action, but
that it should be so far done, as is necessary, to keep us in the right
way, even as, you see, it is in a journey, when a man resolves to go from one
town to another, he chinkes not every step he takes, I am going to such a
town: for, by virtue of his first intention he takes these steps: so that
the mark and the aim that he has, is the cause of every step, though he
think not of it, every step he takes: So in the actions that we do, I say, if
the aim be right, though we think not upon every action we do, yet it is
done by virtue of it, and so God accepts of it. As, we see, an Arrow, when it
flies to the mark, or a Bowl, when it runs, there is not a new putting on,
but by virtue of the first strength, by which it was thrown out, or by which
it was shot, it passes, and goes on toward the mark, so it is in a man's
life: by virtue of the first aim that a man has, though he think not of it,
upon every particular occasion, his heart goes on, he travailes toward the
mark: therefore, I say, it is no necessary in every action. Notwithstanding,
it is necessary that it be very frequently done: because we are so ready to
go out of the way. There is a straight way, that God has chalked out to us,
and we are ready, ever and anon, to turn out, we have still some byas, or
other, upon us, that draws us out from that way. Either some false fears, or
some vain hopes, or some fancy, and inordinate appetite, some thing, or other
draws us out, that except a man look very narrowly to it, except he be ever
and anon reflecting upon his ways, he will not keep the way, therefore it is
necessary, that we be still considering, and pondering our ways, and so much
the rather, because, as the Apostle says, Know you not, that many run in a
race; As if he should say, all the world travailes toward heaven, every man
goes something that way: therefore, says he, take heed; there are but a few
notwithstanding, that get the goal, that get the price, few that obtain, few
that overcome: therefore, says he, take heed how you run. So I say, there
is much heed to be taken in this race, many go out of Egypt, many that go
from sin a certain way, but they never come to Canaan, they walk a certain
way in the Wilderness, but they come not home. Therefore, to direct you in it,
you must know this, that there is a length in this way, there is a rectitude,
and a straightnes in this way; and thirdly, there is a certain breadth in this
way. There is a length in this way, and therefore you must go hastily in it,
you must run the way of Gods Commandments, as David says: for there is a
length in it; that is; it will not be dispatched with an easy pace. God
requires every man to make have in it, he must quicken his pace in the way to
heaven. My Beloved, the cause why men go on slowly in this way, is from
halting; because they halt in this way: In other paces, sometimes we grow slow
by weariness, but in the ways of Gods Commandments, still our slacknes comes
from halting, and therefore you have that used often in the Scriptures; men are
said to halt between two opinions, that is one kind of halting, between two
Religions, he goes slowly forward in either of them, that halts between two,
he profits little, he goes slowly on. As there is a halting between two
opinions, so there is a halting between two objects, God and the world. A man
desires to serve God, and yet he desires to have vain glory, or desires to
make up an estate, etc. I say, these diverse affections, these diverse respects
to diverse objects, when a man hangs too much upon the world, when he has an
eye too much upon vainglory, when he is took up too much with pleasures, and
diverse lusts, this causes men to halt in the ways of Gods Commandments:
halting, you know, is either when one leg is sound, and another lanie, or when
we go with one leg in a higher way, and another in a lower way, it comes all
to one; that is, when the heart does not wholly look upon God, but looks much
to the world, therefore you see men much dre^ched in worldly businesses, that
are overcome with them, that are drowned in them, they go slowly on in the
ways of Gods Commandments, that go with one leg in Gods ways, and another
out of them: And so likewise when one affection, and one desire shall be good,
and another shall be lame, this causes a halting in the ways of God. And
therefore, if you would run, you must have both feet whole, and sound, without
lamenes, and both feet must he in the way* When a man is thus disposed, he
runs the ways of Gods Commandments; that is; let him find what is the cause
of his halting, and of his slacknesse, if it be worldly mindedness, the way to
quicken him in his pace, is to weane his heart from the world; if this be the
cause that makes thee slack, and dull, and heavy, and indisposed to prayer,
and to other holy duties, something thou do, and thou go in thy way, but
slowly, and dully, that is the way to heal it: And so again, if it be some
strong lust, be it what it will be, that causes thee to halt, and to go
slowly on, heal that, and thou shall be able to run the ways of Gods
Commandments. David calls it a straightning, when he could not run. Therefore,
says he, I shall run the ways of thy Commandments, when thou have enlarged
my heart. That is; Every lust is a straightning; the remooving of it gives a
liberty to the heart, every lust is as fetters, and shackles that straiten the
spirit, that are a bondage to the spirit, that take away the liberty of the
spirit: Therefore the remooving of the lust, whatsoever it is, that sets thee
free, as it were, and when thou art free, and at liberty, when there is no
impediment, thou artable to run the ways of Gods commandments.

The second is, Gods ways straight.
there is a straightness in this way, there is no way that leads to any place,
but it is straight: for, if it were crooked, it would not lead to that place.
So that every walk, every certain walk is straight, so are the ways of Gods
Commandments, they are straight; now straight is a relative word; that is, it
is between two extremes, as we say, it is straight, when a line runs between
two points, and goes not out, from either of them, that we call straightnes, if
there be any exorbitation of the line, now it is not straight but crooked, now
the way is said to be straight in regard of these two terms. A man indeed
goes from misery to happiness, and the ways of Gods Commandments, are the
straight ways that lead to that; if you walk crooked in the way, you step out
to one of the two extremes; that is; you step out from the way that leads to
happiness, you step out to some trouble, to some mischief, to some evil, to
some punishment, when you step out from the way of Gods Commandments. So that
that is to be observed, that this is a straight way; And therefore, seeing this
leads straight to happiness, every declination is a stepping out to misery.
You have reason to take it; for it is the shortest way, that is one condition:
you have two motives to take this way.

One is, Gods ways nearest.
it is the shortest way; the other is, it is the plainest way. We have a rule
in the Mathematics; Always the straightest line is the shortest, look how
much bending, and crookedness there is, so much the more length there is in
it, the straightest way is the shortest: So, if thou would go the shortest
way to happiness, keep the way of Gods Commandments, (if thou do not know
that, thou go about, thou art a looser by it) that is the nearest way. For
example; that I may a little express it to you, Jacob, when he would go
about, and not keep the straight way, when he would make have to get the
blessing, it was a going out from Gods ways; was it not a going about to his
happiness? You know how many years trouble it cost him. So David, when he
would go out of the way, in his adultery, and murder, did he not go about
toward his happiness? Was he not an exceeding great looser by it? You know how
much it cost him, what great afflictions he had, the sword never departed from
his house; what great trouble, being cast out of his Kingdom by Absalom? etc.
that was a going about to his happiness. So this is a sure rule, let there be
any crookedness in a man's ways toward God, it is a going about to
happiness. And so Asa, his heart was perfect all his days. But when he was
out of the ways of God, when he stepped out of these ways, and made to his
feet crooked paths, did he not go about for his own happiness? The Prophet
comes, and tells him, Asa, because thou have done this, from hence thou shall
have war: the case was this, Asa would needs seek to the King of Assyria,
and the King of Damascus for help, it was a sinful policy in him, it was a
going about, he should have kept the straight way, and have trusted God with it,
when he would do this, when he was crooked in his ways, it was a leading
about to his happiness, the Prophet comes and tells him, the host of the King of
Aram should escape out of his hands, and likewise he should have war all his
time, and so he had much trouble at home, and war abroad, and at length he
was given up to a sore disease that was his death. Thus he went about, and so
does every man when he finneth: for the other is the straight way.

Secondly; It is the plainest.
As it is the nearest way, so likewise it is the plainest way. When a man will
go out of it, he meets with snares, there are vanities in those ways, as it
is said, he catches the crafty in his own deceit, or in his own actions,
and enterprises, 1 Cor. 3. he catches the crafty; that is, if a man will go
out of the way of Gods Commandments by any carnal policy and wisdom, it
is not a plain way, it is a way wherein he shall meet with one trouble or
other, he shall meet with some snares there, he shall not go safely in it. So
that, my Beloved, you may take that for a sure rule, when a man goes out of
Gods ways, he is not safe, he is subject to some snare, to some (...)* where
in he may be taken: therefore let us keep the straight way, it is the best,
and it is the nearest. As it is said of Ahymaaz, he ran the way of the plain,
and so though Cushi went out before him, yet Ahsmaaz came to his journeys end
much before Cus^^; because he went the way of the plain: So he that goes
through the plain way, though he seem to have present disadvantage, and
trouble, yet when all is summed up, that will bring him soonest to his journeys
end, he shall come soonest to happiness and quiet that way, he that takes the
fairest course, by probability in carnal wisdom, and policy, and steps
out of Gods ways, though he think that the nearest way, yet he shall find
that he goes about. Let a man think with himself, by declining, I may escape
such a trouble, such a strait, such a disadvantage, that will befall other
men: perhaps thou may, but yet, I say, thou go about, thou art no gainer
by this, it shall be paid thee home in arrerages, thou shall loose it in the
long race, thou shall find, that he that goes the plain way, shall come before
thee to thy journeys end, to the happiness that we all aim at; that is certain
still, he that keeps the right way, he takes the shortest way to happiness,
he that thinks he takes a wiser course then God, and therefore will decline
those troubles, by wynded ways, that another brings vpoa^ himself by keeping
the plain way, I say, he shall find himself deceived, he goes about toward
his happiness.

The last is, A breadth in Gods ways.
as there is a length in this way, and a straightness in it, so there is a
breadth in this way, there is a latitude, or breadth, a certain proportional
breadth. The way to some man is broader then to others, and to the same man the
way in some places is broader, in some narrower. The Jews way was narrower,
then ours, there is a Christian liberty that has enlarged this way, and made
it somewhat broader to walk in: for, as the Christian liberty is more so
likewise is the way broader: We have more liberty then the Jews had in many
things, we are freed from that yoke of bondage, that strict observation of
Mosaicall Ceremonies: And so again, I say, one Christian has a narrower way
then another; that is; as a man is subject to more temptations, to more
occasions of sin, so must he make his way narrower, he may not walk in so
broad a path as another. Again, the same man in some part of his way must
choose a narrower way, in some he needs not; As, for example, a man that is
subject to run out in such a recreation, another man may walk in a broader
path in the use of that recreation, then he may: for to him it is an occasion,
he is ready to be snared, and to be transported with it: one man is apt to be
carried to drunkenness, if he see but the Wine, if he come but near it, he
must not look on the Wine in the Cup; one man is quickly set on fire with
incentiues of lust with an object, he may not come so near, nor be so bold
with them as another man may, one man is apt, if he come to such a company, to
receive some hurt, to be entangled with them, he is apt to learn their ways,
to go along with them, such a man may not be so bold to come near that
company, as another may, that is not subject to that temptation, so that there
is a breadth and a narrownes in these ways.

Now our care must be, not to go beyond this breadth: for it is a narrow way,
there are few that find it, Math. 7. Therefore, I say, we had more need look
to it, that we step not aside, that we loose not our way. Beloved, it concerns
us much to look to it; because, when we go out of Gods paths, we are still
exposed to some hazard, and to some danger, we should look to it, not only
for obedience to God, but for our own sakes: let a man be found out of the
breadth of this way; that is, let him take more liberty then he may (for it is
profitable for us to know both our liberty, and our restraint,) and he shall
find still some misery, or other shall come upon him; take heed, therefore,
least God meet thee out of the way at any time; as he said to Eliah, What do
thou here? What make thou here Eliah? indeed it was his fault, when God had
been with him so mightily, and had given him rain at his desire, to work
such miracles: again, to send fire from heaven to consume the sacrifices, and
after to slay so many Prophets of Baal, for a word of Iezabell, that was but a
weak Woman, to run from her so many miles, as far as his feet could carry
him, it proceeded from timorousness, and fear: God meets with him, and
says, What do thou here Eliah? What make thou here? As if he should say;
thou art out of the way. Though the Lord dealt mercifully with him, yet it was
his fault, he was out of the way, as sometimes fear puts us out of our way,
and sometimes again other passions, as Hagar went out of her way from he
mistress (as we see in the Chapter before the text) Hagar Sarahs maid, whence
come thou? And whither go thou? Genesis 16. 18. Genesis 16. 18.
Where he puts her in mind of that duty she did owe to Sarah, of that
particular calling she was in; As if he should say; Hagar do thou remember
what thou art? do thou remember what particular calling thou art in? Art thou
not Sarahs maid? Thou should be about Sarahs business, what do thou here
in the Wilderness, running from thy mistress? If thou be Sarahs maid, whence
come thou? And whither go thou? As if he should say; thou art out of thy
calling, thou art out of thy way.

So you must think with your selves, when any man goes out of his calling,
when he goes out of his duties of either of his callings, if God should meet
him, if an Angel should meet him, and should say, What do thou here? thou
that art a Minister, what do thou doing the thing that belongs not to such a
one to do? Thou that art a Tradesman, a Lawyer, a Student, whatsoever the
calling, and business be, that God has set a man in, when he is stepping out to
by-ways, that are not suitable to such a calling, God may say to thee, and
thou may say to thy self, What do thou here Hagar, Sarahs maid? He puts
her in mind of her calling, so must we, and so much the rather, because we are
never out of our way, but at that time we are from under Gods protection, we
are from within the pale, we have no promise of safety, it makes us exposed to
some hazard, or other, and, therefore, Beloved, be careful of this. As the
Israelites, in the Wilderness went not a step, but as far as they saw the
Cloud going before them, so, I say, go not a step, but as far as you have
a warrant, as far as you see God going before you, and this shall be for your
comfort.

But you will say, Ob.
it may be, God will lead me by these strait rules to prison, to losses, to
crosses, to disgrace, to loss of preferment, to loss of friends?

Beloved, Answ.
know this, that the Cloud, as it was a direction to them, so it was a
protection likewise, they never followed the Cloud, but they were safe, the
Cloud was a defense to them wheresoever they went: As we see, Esaias 45. The Lord
will create upon every place of Mount Sion, and upon the assemblies thereof, a
Cloud of smoke by day, and a shining flame of fire by night: for upon all the
glory there shall be a defense. Before he had said he would lead them by the
spirit, this leading of the spirit, he compares to the leading of Israel in
the Wilderness; as they were led with the Cloud, so shall you, and if you follow
the Cloud, it shall be a defense to you; so, I say, walk with God, and he will
be a defense to you: it is no matter what the ways are, he is able to bear
you out: for safety is a part of your wages; therefore that belongs to him,
your business is nothing, but to find out what your way is, and to walk in
it, the care of the work belongs to you, and the other is not your care:
therefore (to shut up this exhortation) learn to do this, to pray, that God
would show you his ways, that he will incline your hearts, that he will reach
you, as he does the Ants, and the Bees and not only show you the ways you are
to walk, but give you a secret instigation, and inclination to them, and if
you seek him, and your hearts be upright, and depend upon him, he will show
you the path, that you are to walk in: he puts in that condition, that your
hearts be sincere, and upright. Again, let us depend upon him, that we may
seek to him, and trust in him, and he will show us the way.

Having found the way, we must run.
and not be slow, and slack in it, but run the way of Gods Commandments,
that is; go apace. Now every man's pace is according to his means, and his
ability, according to the might that God has given him: for that may deceive
us; A man may think he goes fast, when he goes but slowly; because it is not
according to his ability. As, you know, a tall man when he does but walk, he
goes much faster then a child when he runs, and yet he goes but slowly;
because it is not according to his ability. Beloved, our walking is faster and
slower, according to the several means, and strength that God has given to
every one of us: some man has a larger understanding, has more grace, more
experience, better education then another; he must run faster, he must do
much more good in his own person, he must be more frequent, and servent in
holy duties, he must be more diligent in drawing others to God; another, that
has received less, though he go a slower pace, yet it may be running to him,
when the former does but walk: So, in every particular; A rich man that gives
so much, it is but a slow pace to him, when another, that is poor, gives
less, and that is a quick pace to him. And so in like cases. Therefore, I
say, let us choose out the right way, let us pray to God to direct us, to show
it to us, upon every occasion, that we may not miss it. And let us not only
walk slowly, but let us walk apace, and run the way of Gods Commandments. So
much for this first Use.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. Walk before me, and be thou perfect.
WE proceed to the second Use which remains; Use 2.
I told you the similitude lies in these two things. No man to be judged by
some particular actions.


First, in the manner of the Journey, there is a Term to which we go, there
is another from which, there is a distance, there is a path, etc.

The second Similitude was in the constancy, and continuednesse. Now our
second Consequence, or Corollarie, we must draw from the second Similitude;
between a Christian life, and a Journey from place to place: I say, it agrees
with it in this, that they are constant, there is a continued tenor of actions
in a Christian man's course: from whence, I ^ay, we draw this: If it be so, if
there be this Similitude between them; why, then let no man Judge of himself,
or of others, by a step, or two; let him not judge of himself, I say, by a few
actions, but let a man consider, what his walk is; Walk before me, and be
perfect: Let a man consider what the ordinary, and usual course of his life
is: if you should do otherwise, my Beloved, you shall find it, it you judge a
man by an action, or two, you shall see, the best of the Saints have been
subject to diverse fallings, you shall see, Noah drunk, and you shall see Lot
committing incest, you shall see Moses speaking unadvisedly with his lips,
you shall see David committing murder, and adultery, and making Vriah drunk,
many such faylings you shall see in all the Saints, you shall see Hezekiah
boasting of his treasure, you shall see David numbering his people, etc. So
that, if you judge of men by a few actions, and not by their constant course,
you shall condemn the generation of the just.

Again; It is as true on the other side, if you will judge a wicked man by a
few steps, and not by his ordinary course, you shall be as ready to
justify the wicked; you shall find Cain sacrificing, you shall find Saul
among the Prophets, you shall see Judas among the Disciples, you shall see
Herod entertaining John Baptist, you shall see him hear him gladly, doing many
things at his Preaching, and admonition, this you see frequent, and usual:
Therefore, I say, were not to be judged by a few actions, and a few paces, but
by the constant tenor of our life, by what we do in ordinary, and usual
course: for there is no man so good, but he may have some swarvings, though he
have chosen the way of Gods Commandments, yet often he may miss that way, often
he may be drawn out of that way, often he may be transported with some strong
temptation. Again, on the other side, there is scarce any man so bad, but
sometimes he may come into the way. You have men that have no constant place to
travail to, yet, for a fit, they may go into the high way, as a thief, or a
robber, you know. Therefore, let us learn hence, not to judge our own estate,
or other men's, or censure either our selves, or others by a few actions: for I
have this ground for it, that you may see the reason of the rule. A man's
constant course proceeds from the inward root, and frame of his disposition,
from those principles, that are ingrafted in him, I say, his constant course
proceeds from it. Those same by-scapings out, whether to good, or evil, they
do not proceed from the frame of the heart, but from the evil that is in the
good, and from those good things that may be in the evil. You shall see it so
in nature: Take a river, let it be dammed, and stopped up, yet let the course
of it be natural, let the vent, and stream of it be to go downward, at the
length, it will over-beare the damme, and will run over it; or let water,
that is sweet, be made brackish by the coming in of Salt water, yet, if
naturally it be sweet, at the length, it will work it our; so, I say, it is
with every man, look what the constant stream of his disposition is, look
what the frame of it is, that which is most natural, and inward to a man,
though it may be dammed up, and stopped in such a course, for a time, yet it
will break through all impediments. Though there be some brackish, some evil,
and sinful dispositions, that may break in upon them, yet they will wear
them out; So it is as true, on the other side; let a wicked man step into a
good course by some trouble, he is fallen into, or by some good familiarity,
or good education, or some good Minister, yet long he will not hold in it, he
will break through that impediment: because his natural disposition, the
stream of his heart runs another way.

Besides; 2. Cause.
As there is this ground of it, so there is another cause of it; Because the
outward occasions both for good and evil, I say, they are both forcible, and
yet transitory. Evil men, have some outward things, some outward helps, which
put them on to a good course, they are so effectual; and yet God suffers them
not always to have them, but takes them away, they are but transitory,
Therefore a man may walk in a good course, whose heart is not yet right, and
yet long he shall not do it: because those outward occasions shall be took
from him: As, for example, Ioash walked in the ways of God, all the while that
Iehoiada lived, here was the outward occasion, he was drawn with another man's
synewes, he was heated with another man's heat; and when that man was took
away, you see, he fell to his own course, and by as again; the outward
occasion was strong, but it was but for a time, and so he returned to his old
course.

The like in the case of Vzziah, he was hemmed in for a time, with Zachariah
the Prophet, but, says the text, after his days, his heart was lifted up to
destruction. And so Herod, he kept within compas^e, he was stirred up to do
many things at the Preaching of John Baptist, but he did not always continue:
for God so disposes it, in his providence, he will not suffer evil men
always to have these outward occasions of good; As it is as true, on the other
side, good men may have strong temptations, that may transport them for a fit,
but God will not suffer them always to lie upon the godly, he will not suffer
a temptation of affliction, he will not suffer the rod of the wicked to lie
always upon him, it may for a time, and he may for a fit, put out his hand to
wickedness, he may, upon some exigent, upon a sudden, when he is put to it, upon
some outward trouble, or cros^e, when his heart is shaken, and distempered,
when he is not himself, but God so disposes of it in his providence, that
they shall not always lie upon him, but they shall be remooved in due season, as
well as the helps to good shall be taken from the wicked. So, you see, that
may come to pass for a few steps, for part of the Journey, an evil man may
go right, and a good man may swerve from the straight way: Therefore, let us
neither judge our selves, nor others by it: for, if we should, we should
justify the wicked, and condemn the generation of the just. So much shall
serve for this, and for that point.

The next, and maine point, that we intended, was this, That whosoever has
interest in Gods All-sufficiencie, Doct.
must be a perfect man.

That is; He must be sincere, he must have integrity of heart; though he may
be subject to many infirmities, yet God requires this of him. If I be
All-sufficient, says he, to any (that is the scope of it) he must be perfect
with me; I am All-sufficient, therefore be thou perfect; otherwise thou have no
interest in this All-sufficiencie of mine. The point is clear, and it is a
point well known to you, I shall not need to confirm it by any other places
of Scripture, but rather spend the time in giving you the grounds of it: And
secondly, in showing to you what this entireness, and perfection, and
sincerity of heart is.

First, I will show the grounds why no man shall be saved, he shall never have
part in this All-sufficiencie of God, except he be perfect, except he have
integrity of heart.

First; Reas. 1.
Because the new Adam should otherwise not be so effectual as the old; the new
Adam should not be so powerful to communicate grace and life, as the old Adam
is to instill corruption and sin; for the finne, that has been conveyed to
us by the first Adam, has an integrity in it, it has gone over the whole
soul, there is a whole body of death, that has possessed us; Now should
there not be in those redeeming actions by Christ a contrary integrity, and
perfection, a throughout holiness, as I may call it? The plaster then should be
narrower then the sore, and the remedy should be inferior to the disease.
Beloved, you know, a leprosy is gone all over, except the holiness went all
over too from top to toe, I say, there would not be an answerablenesse in the
second Adam, he should not be able to do as much good, as the first was able
to do hurt.

Secondly; the work of Redemption should Lord should dispense with imperfect
holiness. The works of Creation, you know, were perfect, God looked upon all
his works, and he saw that they were very good. Beloved, do you think the
works of Redemption should come short of the works of Creation? Are not they
likewise perfect? when the Lord shall look on that work, shall he not say
likewise, it is very good? If you do mark the parts of it, has not Christ
redeemed us from our vain conversation? The holy Ghost, does not he mortify
every sinful lust? The blood of Christ, does it not wash every sin? The
Word, and means of grace, do they not strike at every rebellion? It is
certain, they do, and therefore, there is an integrity required in all:
otherwise, I say, there should be an imperfection.

If you object, Ob.
notwithstanding this, though Christ has redeemed us, yet, you see, there are
many imperfections left in men; and therefore, how can you say the works of
Redemption are perfect?

I answer; Answ.
They are not perfect in degrees: for they must have a time of ripening; but
that which wants any part of perfection, though it be ripened, when it wants
the root, and principle, when the frame, and first disposition is not right,
let it grow up never so fast, it will never be perfect: So this is true of the
works of Redemption, of the works of God in a man's heart, of destroying the
works of Satan, and setting up a new building, which is the work of Jesus
Christ, and the end, for which he came; I say, this is true of it, it is
perfect, it wants only growth: As, you may say, it is a perfect seed, when it
is ripe, it will be a perfect flower; or it is a perfect plant, when it grows
up, it will be a perfect tree, it is perfect in all respects. Such a perfection
is in the works of Redemption, and, if the heart of man be not entire, if the
work of grace be not throughout, if there be a defect in the principle, and
constitution of it, there should be a defect in the works of Redemption, that
cannot be.

respect to all the Commandments, that we should keep the whole Law in an
Evangelicall manner; that is; in a true endeavor; the Gospel requires that we
should love the Lord our God with all our hearts, for the truth of it; It
requires, in a word, that we should keep the whole Law, in that sense, so as
to square our lives to it; to keep it all in truth, and sincerity, though we
cannot reach the highest top, and degree of it; Now if the heart were not
perfectly holy; that is; thoughout, there could be no proportion between the
Commandment, and the faculty, and ability upon which the Commandment lies:
for it is certain, except the heart were perfectly holy, it could not keep
the whole Law, there were an impossibility, we should not reach every
Commandment. And therefore, there must be integrity and entyrenesse in the
heart, that we may be able to keep them, at the least in a Evangelicall
sincere manner, though we cannot perfectly keep the whole Law of God.

Fourthly, it is required: because otherwise there Covenant on Gods part, and
on ours: God has said, he will be All-sufficient, but he requires this again,
on our part, that we be altogether his; My beloved is mine, and I am his; and
Psalm. 18. I will walk perfectly with them that walk perfectly with me; there
are the terms of the Covenant, the Lord will have it thus far upon even
terms, there shall be an integrity on both sides, and therefore, if a man be
holy but by halues, that makes not the match, it makes not the agreement
between the Lord and us: for all, and half is not a match, but all, and all
is that which makes the match, the agreement, and sutablenesse between God,
and us; and this is another reason why it is required.

Now last of all; this perfection, and integrity nothing, it is to no purpose:
for, except you seek the Lord, and serve the Lord with a perfect heart, you
serve him not at all, you cannot serve him as God, you cannot serve him as a
Master, you cannot serve him as a Lord, as a sovereign commander, except your
hearts be perfect with him. This reason I take out of Math. 6. a place well
known, No man can serve two Masters. That is; It is true, a woman may love
many as friends, but she can love but one as a husband: A man may look to
many subordinate ends, but he can have but one vltimate end: A man may have
respects, he may affect many things in a remiss manner, but to affect many
things in the highest degree, it is impossible, it can be bestowed but upon
one: Therefore, I say, to serve him as God, it cannot be, except the heart be
wholly bestowed on him; if you will take in any thing with him, either credit,
or profit, or pleasure, now you make God an Idol, and you make that as God; so
that whatsoever a man loves, and respects or obeyes; I would ask him but this
question; Either it commands the same thing with God, when it commands under
him, and so, in yielding to that, you obey God himself, or else, it commands
somewhat different, and if you yield to that, and not to the Lord, you reject
him, and take that for God. Therefore, I say, the heart must be perfect, or
else the obedience is nothing at all. So much shall serve to show you the
grounds of this, why such a perfection, and sincerity, and integrity of
heart, is required in all those that shall be saved.

But the chiefest business will be here, What sincerity and vprightnes is.
to show you what this integrity is: the best way to find it out, is to open
to you all those expressions in the Scriptures, by which it is presented to us,
and you shall find them to be these five: And in the opening of them, we shall
sufficiently show you, what this sincerity, or perfection of heart is.

First, you shall find it often expressed by purity, Purity.
blessed are the pure in heart; and, God is good to Israel, even to them that
are of a pure heart. Now what is it to be pure? That is pure which is full of
it self, and has no other Heterogeneall thing mingled with it; So, that heart
is pure, which has no sin in it, which is holy, which has a renewed quality
of grace, which has an inward regenerate man, that will mingle with no sin,
that is full of it self, and admits not the mixture of any sin. My Beloved,
I must be warily understood here, I say, it admits not the mixture of any
sin. It is true, sin may cleave, and adhere to a man, as dross does to the
silver, but it mingles not with the regenerate part, that mingles not with it;
that is, it enters not into the frame, and constitution of a man's heart, it is
not weaved into the texture of his heart; it is no ingredient into the very
frame, and fabric of it, but though sin be there, yet the heart still casts
it out of it self, it resists it, and rejects it, and purifieth, and cleanses
it self from it, this properly is a pure heart: As in other things, you say, a
thing is pure, when it is solid, and clear, and unmixed, though it may have
some dross, and some mudd cleaving to it, you say, it is pure gold, when it is
dug out of the mineral, though there be much dross in it, and we say, it
is pure air, though, for a time, there be many fogges, and mists, and
adventitious vapors within it; So, we say, it is pure water, though there be
many inundations of mud cast into it, or that come from the spring, or
Channel, from which it runs; So a man may be said to have a pure heart; that
is, a perfect heart, though there be an adhesion of much dross, many evil
thoughts, that cleave to him, yet, I say, they mingle not with him; that is,
Beloved, it is certain, that the holiest men have a fountain of original
corruption in them, and from this fountain sins arise continually, as the
scumme in the pot, but yet, if the liquor be pure, and good, if it be right
wine, or right honey, whatsoever the liquor is, though the scumme arise, still
it purifies it self, and casts it out; this is the property of a pure heart:
with the impure, it is quite contrary, the scumme arises as in the other, but
it is sodden in, it is mingled, and confounded with it, there is not such a
segregating, such a clensing disposition in it but there is a mixing of them
together: this similitude you shall find Ezekiel. 24. 12. whence I take it, she
wearied her self with lies, etc. And her great scumme went not out of her.
There is a similitude going before of a boiling pot, into which much flesh was
put, to which he compares the Children of Israel of that time, but this is the
Conclusion that God makes, her great scumme went not out of her; As if he
should say, it is very true, the holiest men have their scumme rising in their
hearts, as well as the wickedest men, but, says the Prophet, here is the
difference, her great scum went not out of her: That is; though it arose, and
might have been cast out, it was not so, but was sodden in, and mingled
together. And therefore, says he, her scum shall be consumed with fire. That
is; God will deal with her, as we do with pottage, when the scum is sodden
into them, we cast them in the fire, and the reason is given in the words
following; for I would have purged thee, but thou would not be purged,
therefore thou shall not be purged from thy silthines, till I have caused my
wrath to light upon thee: That is; As if he should say, I put my Word to thee,
which is as fire, I used such ordinances, and means, I withheld none of them,
and with those I would have purged thee; not, Beloved, by the inward purifying
work of the spirit: for that could not efficaciously be resisted, but I would
have purged thee; that is, my Word is as fire; It is a segregating thing, that
differenceth, and puts a separation between the scum, and the liquor, as that
indeed was the end of the Prophets, to separate the precious from the vile.
Now, says the Lord, when these means were used, when thou had the
Prophets that would have separated the precious from the vile, in thy heart, as
well as to do it in the companies of men: Seeing this had no fruit, nor effect
upon thee, but still thy scum, and filthiness continued in thee, and thou wast
not purged: therefore, I will destroy thee, thou shall never be purged, but my
wrath shall light on thee: So, my Beloved, it is not the having impurities in
the heart, that makes the heart imperfect, (that is the Conclusion I grow to)
but it is the suffering of them to be mingled, even with the inward frame of
the heart.

Thus you shall find, if you would know the true difference between a pure
and perfect, and an impure and imperfect heart, it stands only in this; he
that has a pure heart, there is in him a clensing, and purifying, a
segregating disposition, that casts out whatsoever evil comes, though it be
continually rising, yet still he casts it out, though he be still falling into
some finne, yet still he is repenting, though many times he be myred, yet still
he washes himself again, he cannot endure it, he does not, as the swyne,
delight in it; but he has another, a contrary disposition, he still cleanses
himself from it: That I take to be the meaning of that, Math. 15. where it is
said, That, which comes from within the man, as adultery, fornication, etc.
they defile the man. The meaning is this, when sin rises in a man from day
to day, if he cherish sin, and entertain it, and suffer sins to dwell, and
abide in his heart quietly, without disturbance, if he suffer them to be sodden
in, as it were, now they defile the heart, But if sins arise in the heart, and
he continually resist them, he continually cast them forth, he continually
cleanses, and purifieth himself from them, such a man is not defiled with
them, not is his mind defiled, not his conscience defiled; but notwithstanding
this continual Ebullition of evils (that I may so call it) he is a man of a
pure heart, and perfect with God, and that, I say, is one of the expressions of
pureness.

And so likewise soundness, Soundness.
when a man is sound at heart, that is another expression of this perfectness.
Now a thing is said to be sound (as an Apple, you know, is said to be sound,
when it is not rotten at the core, though there be many specks in it; and a
Ship is said to be sound, when there is no leake in it, though it may have some
other flawes, and defects; And a Vessel is said to be sound, when there is no
clift in the bottom, though it may otherwise be bruised, and battered, yet, you
say, it is a sound vessel) I say, so it is in this case, when the bottom of
the heart, and the inward frame of the heart is right and sound. Though a man
be subject to many faylings, yet this is a perfect man, he has a sound heart;
whereas, on the other side, take a man, my Beloved, (that we may show you what
this rottenness at heart is) take a man, I say, who does admit a constant
neglect of any duty, or an ordinary commission of any sin, such a man may
properly be said to have a leake in the bottom of his heart, to be rotten
hearted, to be unfound at the bottom; But a man, that, though he be subject to
infirmities, yet had rather dye then omit a known duty, or to be in a known
sin, I say, this man, though he have many infirmities, yet he has a sound
heart: And the reason of it is this, because, such a man although he have some
weakness, some sickness, and infirmity hanging upon him, yet he will grow it
out, as one that is sound in his bowels will wear out his sickness, and
distemper, as it is said, if the inside be clean, the outside will follow: And
that is as true, on the other side, let the inside be rotten, though there be a
fair and a golden outside, as in an Apple often times, that does not continue
long, but rottenness will possess the outside also; That we see often in
experience, and you shall seldom see it otherwise; (I think there is scarce
an example of it) but that an hypocrite, a man of an unsound heart, though he
may carry a fair show long, yet, in the end, even the outside shall be took
away, that shall vanish also, and rottenness shall seize upon it: for that is
the nature of things, that are unsound, they stay not there, but they putrify,
and corrupt more and more; So that, you see throughout the Scriptures, still
those that were of imperfect hearts; that is, that had unfound hearts, they
were discovered before their death; as Amaziah was, he held out long, and so
was Ioash, and diverse others; It is a rule, I think, that seldom fayles:
because God has said, I will curse the name of the wicked, and it shall rot.
Now except their hypocrisy should be discovered in time, and that their
outside were removed, and made as rotten as the inside, how should his name
rot? So much shall serve for this first expression, that it is expressed by
pureness and soundness.

simplicity, and singlenes of heart; Simplicity.
he, whose heart is perfect before God, he is said Mat. 6. to have a single
eye; and Iam. 1. he, that is imperfect is said to be a double minded man,
contrary to which is (...), a man that has a simple heart, a heart without
guile, a single heart. Now, if we can find out what this singleness of heart
is, this singleness of eye, and of heart, you will find out this perfection,
that is here spoken of; Walk before me, and be thou perfect. Now a single
heart is called so from the singleness of the object, that is a single eye,
that looks but upon one object, and that is a single heart, that looks but
upon one thing: likewise that is a double eye, and a double heart, that looks
upon two objects, and is divided between two, and knows not which to choose;
like a man that is in bivio, in a double way, he stands, and looks on both,
and knows not which to take; so an imperfect hearted man, an unsound hearted
man, he stands, and looks upon God, and upon the world, and he knows not well
which to choose, sometimes he is following the one, sometimes the other, this
is his condition, he is distracted between both; such a man has a double eye,
and therefore, says the text, a wicked eye: for so it is called, if the eye be
single, all the body is light, but if the eye be wicked: (for so it must be
interpreted) if the eye be double, which is a wicked eye; So, my Beloved, an
unsound hearted man is not described to you by any thing so plainly, and
perspicuously, as by this, that his heart is not pitched upon God alone; but he
has an eye upon God, and an eye upon credit, he has an eye upon God, and an
eye upon his walth, upon his pleasures, or whatsoever it is, when there are two
objects: for, in that regard a man is said to have a heart and a heart, not as
commonly it is taken to make a show of one thing, and have another within; But
it is a heart and a heart, when there are two objects, upon which the heart is
set, that the heart is divided between two, and so is cloven asunder, as it
were: And so it is a double heart, by way of division, and not by having one
thing in show, and another within. Now then, if you will find out what a
perfect man is, I say, it is he that has a fixed resolution to cleave to God
alone, that has his eye upon him, and upon nothing besides. This is a single
heart, when a man shall resolve (for instances will best make it clear to you)
when a man shall say, as Ioshuah did, Well, says he, I see you are ready to
take diverse ways, but I am resolved for my part, for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord, that I am resolved on. So David, I have chosen the way of his
commandments, I have sworn to keep them, and that I will do: When a man is
once resolved thoroughly, when he is grounded, and has a settled resolution, an
unchanged resolution, that pitcheth him upon one, he is no longer in doubt
between two, this is a perfect hearted man, So Moses takes that resolution, I
will suffer affliction with the people of God, as if he should say, I have
chosen it, whatsoever become of me, though I be a banished man, though I live
a poor life, though I turn from Pharaohs sonne-in-Law to keep sheep in the
Wilderness, yet this is my resolution, here I have fixed my staff, this will I
do. Herein the perfection, and integrity of his heart was seen; So the three
men, Sidrach, Mesech, and Abednego, This, say they, we are resolved upon,
whether we be delivered, or not delivered, whether we dye, or live, whatsoever
come upon us, we will serve the Lord, we will not worship thine Idol. And so
I^b, (the place you know) though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; That is,
though he multiply miseries upon me, even to the very death; yet I am resolved
to serve him, my heart is there pitched, his, will I be. This is, Beloved, to
have a single eye, and a single heart; When the heart is divided, it is
imperfect, such a man is unconstant in all his ways, says James: Such a one
was Saul, and such a one was Amaziah: that indeed is the case of all
hypocrites. And to this, I add that which is said Math. 8. the fourth ground
is said to have an honest heart, (I put them together, a single heart, that I
would explain to you, they come much to one,) an honest heart stands in this,
that a man resolves to serve the Lord with patience, and with abstinence, that
is the definition, that I will give of it, he that has an honest heart, he
resolves to serve God in all things with patience, and abstinence, one of them
is expressed in the text, he brings forth fruit with patience, the other I add,
for a more full explication of it. The meaning is this, he has an upright, and
honest heart, that so pitcheth upon God, that he will not be drawn aside for
any thing: Now there are but two things that draw us aside; that is, either
persecution affliction, and trouble. And for this the honest heart has
patience, he resolves to suffer them, whatsoever they be, and therefore he is
able to go on; or, on the other side, pleasures, and diverse lusts, that drew
away the third ground, as persecution did the second; here he has a resolved
abstinence, he is content to part with them, and to be without them: therefore
he brings forth fruit when another does not; that is, another may have a fair
blade, but either persecution, or else pleasures, and diverse lusts come
between, and intercept his maturitie, that he never comes to any bearing of
fruit, to any purpose; This expression I put together with singlenes of heart,
a heart without guile, and without mixture, because there is a similitude
between them. So much fo that expression likewise.

Integrity.
Ier. 3. 10. They did not turn to me with their whole heart, but faignedly.
And very often, Thou shall serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart. So that the
wholnes of the heart, the integrity of the heart, he that has this is a
perfect man, he, that wants it is an unsound hearted man. What it is.
Now what is this Integrity, and wholnes of heart, In 3. things.
you shall see in these three, the integrity of the subject, the integrity of
the object, and the integrity of the means, whereby the subject, and the
object are joined together.

The integrity of the subject.
that I call the subject; The Integrity of the object I call the
Commandments, when he has respect to all of them; The Integrity of the
means I call that, which brings the heart, and the Commandment together; that
is, the use of all holy ordinances, and the abstinence from all occasions, that
may draw us another way. So now he is a perfect man with God that first has a
whole heart; that is, such a heart whereof every part, and faculty is
sanctified; There is no part of it, but it is seasoned with grace, there is no
wheel in all the soul, but it is turned the right way, according to that 1
These. 5. He is sanctified throughout, in body, soul, and spirit. I say, when a
man shall find every thing within him ready to praise the Lord, and to look
toward the Lord, all that is within him. There is not any thing within him, of
which he can say, the bent of it is another way. I say, such a man has an
integrity of heart: Another man, you shall find it thus always with him, that,
though in many things he wish well, and has a good meaning, and good purposes,
yet there is something, or other, has stolen away something in his heart,
something within him is not right, it may be in his fear, he cannot say he
fears God, and nothing else: for there are many things that he fears more
then God, so he cannot say of his love to God, that that is right, it may be,
it is misplaced, though many other things may be right in him, he loves riches,
he loves credit, he loves reputation, he loves his ease, and conveniencie, his
practice, and employment; So that, if God and these should come in competition,
he would be ready to violate his conscience toward him, rather then to part
with these: And so his grief, that is not principally for sin, there is
somewhat, or other, that you shall find him failing in, there is not an
integrity in the subject.

an eye to all the commandments, Integrity in the object.
whereas the perfect hearted man, there is no duty but he gives up his heart
to it: And again, there is nothing forbidden, no sin, but his heart is
averse from it, and he resists it to the uttermost. You shall see this
expression, Iam. 3. He that can guide his tongue is a perfect man, in many
things we sin all, if any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man: Iam. 3.
2. Compare this with Iam. 1. 26. If any man among you seem to be religious,
and refraineth not his tongue, but deceiues his own heart, this man's religion
is in vaire. I say, you may take but this one instance, that this is the
judgment of the holy Ghost: Should a man have an eye to every Commandment,
and should he but fail in this one thing, not bridling his tongue, but give up
his tongue to evil speeches, to let it walk loose, up and down, whither it
will, if he do but neglect this one particular, yet, says the Text, all the
rest of his Religion is but vain; Why? because there is not an Integrity in
the object, he has not an eye to the whole Law, so that, if a man fail in
this, he is not a perfect man, if either it be in the subject, or in the object.

Integrity of the means.
that is, take a man that will not use all Gods Ordinances conscionably, and in
their season; that he does not pray, and receive the Sacrament, and use the
Communion of Saints, and fasting, and every one in their season: I say, if he
do not use all the means: And again, if he do not abstain from all the
occasions, but if he venture upon evil occasions, and incentiues to lust, upon
such objects, as are ready to work upon him, I say, if there be a defect in
these, he is an imperfect, and unsound hearted man; as you may say of a man's
body, if you see those things that are essentially to a man's health, if he
fail in any of them, he will not drink, nor he will not eat, nor he does not
sleep, he fayles in the means that should make him sound; or else, if he
adventure upon the occasions that may corrupt him, he venters upon poisoning,
and infecting diet, infected, and pestilent air, etc. he cannot have a sound
body; no more can such a one have a sound soul: So, I say, that the
wholnesse, and integrity of the heart, it lies in these three put together.
First, the heart must be all sanctified: If you say, how shall we know that?
Thus: he has respect to every Commandment, he fayles not in any thing, not in
looking to his thoughts, not in looking to his speeches, he does not neglect
any affection that rises in him, at any time.

But how shall a man know that, whether he have done this?

So they hang, one upon another, that you may know the first by the second, and
the second by the third, you may know whether a man have an eye to every
Commandment, if he use all the means, and abstain from all occasions of
sin: for if thou do not this, pretend what thou will, thy heart is false; So
much for this third.

vprightnes, Uprightness.
or straightness of heart: the word, in the original answers ( Rectitudo) and
an upright man, in the original is as much as ( vir rectus) a straight man:
Mark the way of the upright, and perfect man, his latter end is good, it is
peace, Psalm. 37. That is, of a straight man: So the straightnes of the heart,
if we can find what it is, we shall know what it is to have a perfect heart
with God. Now the straightnes of a man (for so I will rather express it) in
the Concrete is seen in this, whether he has straight and upright ends: An
upright man you shall know by his aims, he has a right end; the aim, and
scope, and mark, that his eye is upon, is Gods glory, and his own salvation,
to do, and suffer the will of God, whatsoever it is; that is, to be faithful,
and diligent in his Calling, to be serviceable an profitable to others, these
are the things that are in his heart, these are the right ends, and he is said
to have a right heart, whose ends are right, that pitcheth upon right, and
straight ends, and likewise, he that goes by a straight rule: for a right end
never has a crooked rule leading to it. But, if a man would know whether he
has a right end; thou shall know it by this, there needs not any oblique way
to lead to such an end, but thou will go by a straight rule; that is, the way
of Gods Commandments is the rule that thou will walk by: Therefore if thou
find this in thy heart, that there are devices, and plottings, and windings,
and turning ways, that thou projectest to thy self to bring any end to pass,
now thou go not by a straight rule, but by a leaden Lesbian rule, by a
bended rule: whereas a right man, his eye is still upon the rule, he considers
not this, and this I will bring to pass; but he considers with himself, what
is the rule I ought to walk by; As indeed every man has some certain rule,
and principle in his heart, and all the actions that he does, proceed from
those secret rules, though himself take no notice of them. Now this is planted
in the heart of an upright man, that still he goes by a straight rule, though
he could desire many things might be brought to pass, yet if the rule will not
hold, he will not seek it. This you shall find Gal. 6. Peace on the Israel^
of God, as many as walk by this rule. They are the true Israel, that keep
the right rule; so I will commend this to describe to you a right, and straight
man, when his end is right, and his rule is right: That is; when his heart is
not a crooked heart: for it hangs all upon a string, crooked ends, and crooked
ways, and a crooked heart. He that has a right heart; that is, not a
perverse, and froward heart; as we see Pro. 17. 18. A froward heart (as the
translation is, that is, a crooked heart) it finds no good. A man is then said
to have a crooked heart, when if you will lay to him any straight rule; that
is, give him any right precepts, tell him this you ought to do, this is the
just course* this is the way you ought to hold, you shall never bring a crooked
heart, and a straight line together, his heart will still be starting aside
from it, it will not cleave to it, it will not accommodate it self to that:
for his heart is crooked. Therefore, Beloved, when we give straight Counsels
to them that have ^rooked hearts, we do but loose our labor. If it were a
straight heart, straight Counsel, and it would soon agree: such an expression
you see Psalm. 125. He that seeks himself in crooked ways, I will lead him
forth with the workers of iniquity. That is, when the inward bent of a man's
heart is crooked, when it will not entertain straight, or right Counsels, but
i^ is still jarring, and disagreeing with them, such a man God rejects*
Therefor (says he) he will lead him forth with the workers of Iniquity;
that is, he will reckon him as a worker of Iniquity, and so will he deal with
him.

Approoving a man's self to Gods sight*
that I find in Scripture, to set forth this perfection of heart, is, to do
every thing in Gods sight: When thou have an eye upon the Lord, as well as he
has an eye upon thee. So you shall find, 1 Cor. 2. As of sincerity in the
^ight o^ God, where the second is an explication o^ the first, and so here,
Walk before me, and be perfect: That is, if a man walk before God, and
approve himself to him, he is a perfect man, for that shows the difference
between perfection and soundness of heart, (...) the one is truly such as
will (...) trial, such as will endure even the eye of God himself, when that
which is (...) to the vrmost trial; that is able to say ^o God; Lord thou
know mine Innocence, as David did, and Lord, I beseech thee, search m^
reins, and my heart; when one (...) say, as Hezekiah, Lord, thou know, that
I have walked with an upright heart.

Now, I say, when a man is so entire, that there is such truth in him, that
bring him to what touchstone you will, let him be brought to the light, he
knows his works are right, he is not afraid, let God himself look into his
heart, that has pure eyes, that can search every cra^nie of it, to whom every
thing is naked, yet he shall find him true; that is, he does every thing, if
God look to the most inward retired thoughts, he does all in Gods fight, he
approues himself to him, such a one has a perfect heart* So much shall serve
now for the opening of this to you, what it is to be a perfect man; Beloved, I
will apply it very briefly.

If this be perfection* Use 1.
now you have seen the ground why God requires it, To examine our selves.
and that no man can be saved without it, let us make this use of it, to try
our selves; let a man examine himself whether he be a perfect man, or no: you
will say, how shall we do it? Indeed, my Beloved, I confess it is a hard
thing to do: for men are children in understanding; and, as children are apt
to be deceived with gilded things, they see the outside to be fair, they see
a fair piece of gold, but they are not able to find out the base metal,
that is hid within; So it is our case, for the most part, we are not able to
find out this truth, whether our hearts be imperfect, and unsound, and rotten,
or no: Therefore we had need of help, I will name one or two.

And this is one rule (I take but such as I find in Scripture) that is a rule
that our Savior gives, 1. Trial.
by which you may try your selves; says he to the young man, when he comes to
profess to him, that he had done thus and thus from his youth, says he, if
thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou have: As if he should say;
would thou know now if thou be perfect (those are the words) that is,
whether thou have a sound heart, or no, go sell all that thou have: That is,
thou shall know it by this, that is the meaning of the Rule, Go sell, etc. Let
a man look round about him; if there be any thing in the world, any evil, any
calamity, that he is not willing to suffer; if again, there be any blessing,
any comfort, that he is not willing to part with, I dare boldly affirm it,
that such a man is an unsound hearted man: for example; put the case that such
a thing befall him, as imprisonment, that a man says thus with himself, I
will endure other things, but for that, I have a crazie body, that will not
bear it, I have a wife, and children, that must be maintained, I have debts to
pay, etc. that is a thing that I cannot bear, and endure: let a man have but
such a resolution as this, I will not bear this, such a man will prove an
vn^ound hearted man, if he be put to trial. And whenever the heart is not
sound, God will bring one to it, at one time or other: or again, put the case
a man say thus, I will endure any thing else, but to be despised, but to be
contemned, to be disgraced, to loose my reputation with my neighbors, to be a
singular man, ^o be an Owl for every body to wonder at, this is a thing I can
never endure, let this man be put upon it at any time, to do any strange
thing; that is, a thing that seems strange to worldly men, that shall bring
the censure of them upon it, let him be put to pass through evil report, as
sometimes he must be, let him be put to walk in the ways of righteousness,
it sometimes seems strange to them that you do not thus and thus, such a man
will deal unsoundly, he will discover himself to be rotten hearted.

So again, a man that says thus with himself, I will not loose my practice,
I will not loose my employments, I will not loose my trade, I will not loose my
dealing with my Customers; this is my Plowe, this is it, that maintains both
me and mine, though I suffer many things, ye this is that I cannot bear, it
would break me asunder, etc. I say, let any man say thus in his heart (I do
but give you Instances, that you may understand what I would say) such a man
will deal unsoundly, and imperfectly, when he is put to it, let it be any
thing in the world, I will not stand to give further instances. Let a man
examine himself, and think what is near, and dear unto him, except he be
inwardly willing to part with it, that he can say, if any of the ways of God
fall cross with this; If I be any whit hazarded in the keeping of a good
conscience, by keeping this, I will part with it: I say, except thou can say
this, it is certain thou have a rotten heart; And the like I may say for
suffering; If a man say, such a great man's favor I will not loose, my making,
or my marring depends upon it, if there be any such case, be it what it will
be, thou art an unsound hearted man; and that is the meaning of that; If any
man will be my Disciple, he must deny himself, and take up his daily Cross:
As if he should say, if a man will not deny himself, in every thing, if he
will not take up every Cross (he may take up to himself a profession to be a
Disciple, he may make as many pretenses, and shows, as he will, to be my
Disciple, but a true and a genuine Disciple he cannot be) he cannot be my
Disciple, except he deny himself in every thing, and take up every Cross, and
therefore let a man examine himself in that, whether he be thus prepared to
part with every thing, if thou will be perfect, says the Lord (that is the
place I ^ake it from) then sell all that thou have, that was the trial, he was
put to, and it is a trial by which you shall judge of your selves.

So likewi^e, 2. Trial.
you shall find another trial of that, Math. 6. and the last; Be you
therefore perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. There is another way of
finding out this perfectness of heart, whether it be in us or no, you must be
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: no less will serve the turn; if
you be not so perfect, as he is perfect, you cannot be saved, you are unsound
hearted.

You will say to me, this is very hard, Ob.
who is able to be perfect, as his heavenly Father is perfect?

Beloved; Answ.
the meaning of this, is not that you should reach his perfection; for, who can
ever do it? but the meaning of it is this, there must be as great a length, as
great a breadth, and latitude in your perfection as in his, your perfection
must answer his. How shall we know that? Gods perfection is known by his
Commandments* Look how largely the perfection of God is set forth in the
Scriptures, so large your obedience must be. If it come short in any thing, if
it be not as long, and as broad, as it were, it is unsound, and (...), and
imperfect obedience, that shall be cast away as evil, and counterfeit: for you
must be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, says Christ, he gives this
as a reason of all that he had delivered before, (you shall see in a word in
particular) says he, you have thought it enough to love your friends, but,
says he, it is not enough, you must love your enemies, you must bless those
that curse you, and speak well of those that speak evil of you. And when a
man shall object* but this is a hard thing? that is the Conclusion, says he,
you must be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; he does thus, he
causes his Sun to shine upon the good, and the bad, he causes his rain to
fall upon them, and your perfection must be as large as his: And so again,
perhaps thou art one that wilt abstain from swearing greater oaths, but that
is not enough, thou must not swear by thy hairs, thou art not able to make
one white, or black, much less, my Brethren, must we swear by our truth, and
by our faith, which is more worth then hairs. So again, perhaps thou art one
that wilt not commit Adultery, but if thou cherish sinful lusts, contemplati^e
fornication, and uncleanness in thy heart, thou fallest short, in that thy
perfection is not so broad, as the Lords; that is, that his law requires, that
says, thou shall not lust: And so again; perhaps thou say, he has done me
wrong, and I will do him no injustice, but an eye for an eye, thou requirest
justice according to retaliation, and proportion: But that is not enough, but
thou must forgive perfectly: if he have done thee two or three or four
wrongs, thou must bear them, and leave revenge perfectly to God: if you
object, this is hard, who can do it? He says, be perfect, etc. so you see the
meaning of it. If you would find out now, whether your hearts be perfect or
no, consider whether the latitude of them be such, whether it be thus broad,
that is (that I may express it fully to you) whether you walk so exactly,
that you have not only an eye to the maine points of every Commandments, but
you observe the least particle of every Commandment, the least Iota, the least
prick, and point, that you find in every Commandment.

Except you do this, I say, your hearts are not perfect: the scope of the
Chapter is to require the exact keeping of every Commandment, to the least,
and to the smallest things. And there are these three reasons put together, to
confirm it.

One is; for, says he, every Jot of the Law, is of so much worth, though you
think it a small thing, That it were better that heaven and earth should
perish, then that it should. It is of greater price then the whole world.
Therefore the Lord will not have the least jot of the Law to perish.

Again; says he, the Pharisees would keep the great Commandments, the
principal point, and part of every Commandment; but the particles of it, the
nicer points of it, they would not keep. And, says he, except your
righteousness go beyond theirs, except you go further then theirs, you shall
never be saved.

Then the last is, that I named to you before, except you be perfect, etc.
there must be such a latitude, for the extension of your perfection, though not
for the intention, and degrees of it, as is in your heavenly Father, you cannot
be saved else. Therefore, if you say, this is a hard condition; Beloved, you
must know this, that Jesus Christ has given to all those that shall be saved
grace for grace, that look as he requires perfection of obedience, in a
latitude answerable to all the Commandments, to all the particles of them,
even a perfection answerable to his own perfection; so he has given us grace
for grace, that is, he has given us an inward ability of graces which answer
every Commandment; he has given us grace for grace, as the Father gives lim
for lim, part for part, there is not a little finger, not a toe, but the Father
gives it the Son, and the Son has given it to us, Moses brought the Law,
but grace comes by him; and when he would show what grace it is, it is grace of
such a latitude, that it enables you to be holy, as he is holy in all manner of
conversation, there is another expression like that to be perfect as etc.
Therefore, my Beloved, if you would have the testimony of sincerity, and of
perfection to your selves, take heed you neglect not the smallest things, I
know how usually it is found fault with, when men are so curious to look to
every m^ate (it is to be more nice then wise) it is too much straightness, and
too much preciseness, and exactness: I beseech you, consider the ground, I
will be hold to say this; that man that neglects the smallest thing, say it be
vain speech upon the Sabbath day, say it be the neglect, or overly performance
of prayer from day to day, though he will not omit the maine duty; though it
be (...) vain speech; or vain thoughts, though it be that which the best are
continually subject unto, yet, if it be so that he have not a continual eye to
them, so that he neglect not the smallest of these things, or if you can name
any lesser Commandment, I say, let any man's heart be of this constitution,
that he neglects them, that he has not a special eye to the observance of
them, a special care to keep them, he is unsound, and rotten at the heart, he
shall never be saved contin^ing such; for the confirmation of it, I will name
but that one place, Pro. 19. 16. He that keeps the Commandments, keeps his
own soul, but he that despi^eth his wa^, shall dye for it: That is, he that
keeps the Commandments every way, that looks to all the Commandments, and
every particle of them, and sees how far they reach, as they are particles of
the Commandment.

The Commandment says, thou shall not kill, to be angry with thy brother, to
admit an inward distemper of malice and envy in thy hear^* this small thing,
though it be but a transient passion, yet thou must make a special conseience
of it. And so, thou shall not commit adultery; That is the maine of the
Commandment, yet, if thou have an adulterous eye, an adulterous tongue, or
adulterous thoughts in thee, these are the touches of uncleanness, the
tinctures of it, I say, except thou make conscience of these, and keep the
command thus far in this extent, and thus exactly, thou do not keep thine
own soul, but he that thus keeps the Commandment* keeps his soul, for,
says he, he that despises his way, that is the word I mean to urge, he shall
dye for it; that is, he that thinks thus with himself; Alas, these are poor,
and small things, they are things of little moment, and therefore he despises
them; Well, says he, he that despises the least thing, he that despises any
of his ways; that is, the least particle of any Commandment, you see what he
says, he does not say, he shall be afflicted for it, but he shall dye for it.
Therefore I pronounce this out of that place as well as the rest, that he that
despises any of his ways, any part of Gods Commandment, seem the duty to
be of never so little moment, unless he repent, and amend, he shall dye for
it; for now thou despisest some of thy ways: Beloved, a godly man, though he
fail much, yet this is an inseparable property of a perfect heart, still he
has an eye upon every thing, he does not despise the least of his ways, the
least step, the least particle, the least tincture of the Commandment, but
he has respect to all.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE EIGHTH SERMON.
G^NESIS 17. 1. Walk before me, and be thou perferct.
We now proceed to the rest of the properties of this perfection, that you may
try your selves by them; And we will hold the same course we did, in opening
to you the nature of this perfection: that is; we will open to you those
places of Scripture, wherein the Scripture expresses the proper effects of a
perfect heart: And therefore, to that second we will add this as a third that
will keep you from misunderstanding it: 3. Property, He purifieth himself.
that is; we must be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect; that property
of perfection you shall find, 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
1 Ioh. 3. 3. He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is
pure. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
So likewise 2 Cor. 7. Since we^ have such promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all pollution of flesh and spirit. That is; those that have these
promises, and believe them, will be still cleansing of themselves: Contrary to
which is that generation spoken of Prou. 30. 12. Pro. 30. 12.
There is a generation that are pure in their own Eyes, but yet they cleanse
not themselves from their filthiness. So that, my beloved, to have a purified
disposition, to have a heart and a spirit ready to cleanse it self, this is to
have a perfect heart: So that a Godly man, he may be many times defiled with
sin and uncleanness, he may have his heart many times muddy and imp^re, he
may have it clouded and ouercast with passions and unruly affections, but yet
it cleeres up again, and he comes out of them all with more brightness, and
with more cleerenesse and pureness of heart. The substance of it is this* we
deny not that a godly man may fall into many sins, into many impurities, into
many defilements* but yet he rises out of them again by an assiduous and
daily repentance, and still he grows up daily to more and more perfection, as
David, and Hezekias, and the rest; whereas, on the other side, a man that has
an imperfect and unsound heart, though he be recovered out of a sin again,
and again, yet he returns to it, as it is said, 2. Pet. 2. 14. ^ Pet. 2. 14.
men that have eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease to sin: that which is
said of that sin there, they cannot cease to sin, that is, though they make
many Covenants with God to leave their sin of uncleanness, yet they have
eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease to sin, I say, it is true of any
other sin, to which an vnsound-hearted man is given up, he cannot cease to
sin, as Pro. 19. 19. A man of much anger shall suffer punishment, though he be
delivered, his anger shall come again: that is, though he be often punished
with his anger, for his distempered anger and passion, though he find many
evil effects of it, and so be delivered from it by many purposes to return to
it no more, yet, says he, his anger will come again and again; So that it is
true which is said in the general, Let the fool be beaten in a mortar, yet he
will return aga^^e to his folly and wickedness, it cannot be beaten out of him:
it is the nature of an unsound hearted man, though he be often delivered, he
will return again, and again. Jeroboam, though he were admonished, yet still
he will return: the Israelites, though they were often quieted, and
satisfied, yet being a stiff-necked people, they still rebelled and murmured
against God; so did Phoroah: so that you may take this for a sure r^le, that,
take a man whose heart is not sound, and all the miracles in the world, all the
preaching, all the admoni^ions, all the mercies, all the afflictions, all the
experience that he can gai^e by all the passages of Gods providence toward
him, and about him, will no^ keep him from returning to his si^ne, but still
he falls back to it again and again, it gets strength still; but with a man
that ha^h a sound heart, that is perfect, it is not so, he does not easily
return again, but though he do fall for a time, (as I deny not but he is
many times overtaken with the same infirmity) yet he still cleanses himself,

But, 4. Object.
you will object, take the holiest man, may he not relapse many times into
sin, may he not fall into the same sin again and again, yea, even into
gross and great transgressions?

Beloved, Ans.
I cannot deny but he may, (for we must not take away the right^ousnes from
those that are perfect, whilst we seek to exclude those that are hypocrites
and vnsound-hearted, and therefore I say) I deny not that there may be many
relapses into the same sin, though the heart be perfect and sincere; and
therefore to show you clearly the difference, we must spend a little time in
this point. 4. Differences between the relapses of sound and vnsound-hearted
men.
There are these four differences between the turning again of a man whose
heart is unsound, and between the relapses that are incident to a man whose
heart is perfect with God.

First, 1. Difference.
you shall find this difference between them, that a man whose heart is
perfect with God, though he do relapse into sin, yet still he gets ground of
his sin, even by every relapse; mark it; I say, he gets ground of sin, and
grace gathers strength by it; whereas, on the other side, an vnsound-hearted
man, the oftener he falls, the more sin gathers strength, and even the
goodness, he seemed to have had, is lessened more and more, till, at length,
it be quite abolished. This is a point much to be observed, and the ground of
it is this; because any grace, where it is a proper grace, where it is a right
grace, let it be wounded by any relapse, by any transgression, I say, it
gathers ^trength, even by that relapse, it is the nature of true grace so to
do; It gathers strength even from the contrary, as fire does when it is
compassed about with coldness, by an Antiperistasis, so it is with grace: It
is a common saying that you have, and true, as you commonly understand it, that
Virtue grows stronger when a man falls into affliction: but more true, if thus
taken, that grace gathers strength, when it self has received a wound, when
the grace it self is weakened, as thou think, it gathers more strength: As
for example, let a sound-hearted man, whose grace is true and right, and
genuine, and not counterfeit, let him fall into any transgression that gives a
wound to his graces, say he fall into an act of intemperance of anger and
passion, he gathers more strength by it; even these graces they grow brighter
by it: It is not so with other men, the more they fall; the weaker they grow;
David, when once he had committed the sin of cutting off the lap of Saul's
garment; none was more careful then he was afterward, he would not offer him
the least violence: And so Peter, when that grace of Courage and boldness for
the Truth, had once received a wound by his denying of Christ, you see what
strength he gathered by it, he grew af^e^wards ^he boldest of all the
Apostles, as you see Acts 4. Acts 4. 12.
So it is generally with all the Saints; even those wo^ds, by which it is
expres^sed in the Scripture, discover as much unto us; Hezekiah, when he was
fallen into the sin of pride and boasting of his Treasure, says the Text, he
humbled himself; you shall fi^de, 2. Chron. 32. 25. 2 Chro. 32. 25.
the words there used, are, the Lord tried Hezekiah, the Lord left him, that he
might (...) him, and know all that was in his heart: The like phrase is used of
Peter's falling, Satan desires to winnow thee, but I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith do not fail: And, now mark it, when they do fall into any sin,
it is to them as a trial to the Gold, and as a winnowing to the Corn; every
sin, every temptation, every fall, though Satan intend to burn out the good
metal, yet the issue still is this, they lose nothing by their falls, but
their dross, the chafe is still winnowed out; every sin, they fall into,
discouers that corruption that before they took no nocice of; as Hezehiah knew
not the pride, before, that was in his heart, but that action discovered it to
him, so it was thereby cleansed and emptied forth: So likewise Peter's
cowardlinesse and fearfulness was discovered by that act, he knew it more,
and therefore he was more watchful against it, he gathered more strength
against it: so that this is the nature of the relapses of the Godly, that still
they empty their hearts more and more of those sins that they fall into:
again; ^he graces, to which they give a wound, still gather more strength; but
with others it is not so, still they are weakened by their relapses, the good
things, they seemed to have, are still lessened, and suffer diminution, till at
length they be quite abolished, that is one difference.

The second is; 2. Difference.
though a godly man fall back to sin again and again, yet he never falls
back to the allowance of any sin: there is a great difference, my beloved,
between these two, between returning to the act of a sin, and the allowance
of it: Another man does not only return to the sin, but he returns
likewise to the continuance in it, he is ready, in the end, either to excuse
the sin, to find out some device and excuse for it, or else he is ready to
say, I see it is impossible for me to overcome it, I see there is no remedy, I
must give up my self to it: This you shall see in the relapses of Saul; Saul
took a resolution more ^hen once, that he would pe^secute David no more; and
no doubt this resolution was exceeding hearty for the time; but, you see, he
did not only return to the act, but to a continuance in it, and an allowance
of himself in it. So likewise did Pharaoh, he resolved many times that he
would let the People go, and made that promise to Mos^s and to ^he Lord, that
he would let them go; but, you see, he returned again, not only to the
sin, but to such an allowance of it, that he excused himself in it, he
thought rather, he had erred in his purpose of letting them go, and so
continued still to retain them. This you shall find in all the falls of
Hypocrites, in all their relapses, that in the end (howsoever for a time they
may resume their purposes again) they wear them out, and they step back to a
resolution to continue in that sin; they think thus with themselves, I see
it is a sin that preuailes against me, I am not able to resist it, it is too
strong for me, and therefore I will go no more about it.

Thirdly; 3. Difference.
as there is a difference in this; so there is a difference in their manner of
ouercomming, and in their manner of returning, when they arise out of a sin,
when they preserve themselves from it after a relapse, by which you may judge
likewise; for you may judge the one by the other: A man whose heart is unsound,
may take to himself a strong and fixed resolution, by which he may resist the
sin, and yet this bank may be borne down by the violence of Temptation:
But, in a godly man the resistance is otherwise, and accordingly the relapse is
of a different nature: for the resistance is after this manner, it is as when
you see one stream resist another, as you see in Rivers that are subject to
ebbing and flowing, there runs a contrary stream that ouer-beares it; so it
is in those that are sound-hearted, there is a strong inclination, that carries
them another way, such as that expressed, Gal. 5. 17. the spirit lusts
against the flesh: so that, if you mark the manner of their ouercomming, the
manner of their rising out of their relapses, you shall find them to be in
this manner; put the case the flesh, for some brunt, for some fit, have gotten
the better, notwithstanding, says he, the spirit lusts against it, and suffers
not the flesh to do what it would; that is, there is a contrary stream within
him, which resists those desires of the flesh, that binds them again, and
leads them captive, as, before, the spirit was led captive: In others it is
not so; there may be a certain fixed resolution, which may resist a strong
temptation, as a Bank or a Rock resist a strong billow: but there is a great
deal of difference between this and those risings out of relapses that are
done by a contrary stream, by the lusting of the spirit: for they have no such
spirit in them, to lust against the flesh, and so to bind it, as it were, to
overcome it, that they return no more to those sins to which before they
were given up.

Last of all, 4. Difference.
there is this difference between them, that he that has a perfect heart,
he that is sound-hearted, while he is himself, he never relapseth into any
sin; mark it, while he is himself, which note I take out of Romans 7.
Romans 7. 20.
a place which you know: It is no longer I, but sin that dwells in me:
that is, as if he should say, I, while I am my self, never fall into any
sin; but when I am distempered, when I am overcome, and ouerruled by sin,
that dwells in me, then I sin and fall back: But, otherwise, I say, a
godly man, while he is himself, never relapseth into any sin, he cannot
sin, because he is borne of God, he keeps himself that the evil one touch
him not; the ground of which is, because, while he is himself, He that is in
him is stronger then all the world: 1 Ioh. 4. 4.
1 Ioh. 4. 4. He that is in you, is stronger, etc. that is, if he be upon
even terms, still he gets the victory. But, my beloved, now let there be an
inaequality, let him not be himself, let there be some violent transportation
from the flesh, so that he is led Cap^iue b^ it, now he is overcome: for he is
not himself in such a case; i^ is, as Paul says of ^imselfe, the good I would
do, that do I not; and the evil that I would not do, that do I: tha^, as
you see in a combat between two, suppose that one that were the stronger,
were it upon aequall terms, would carry the victory; notwithstanding, when his
adue^sary gets the hill, and has the wind on him, he ouercomes him, and leads
him captive: So it is in this case; ^he Spirit, the regenerate part, though it
might and would always get the better, were it upon aequall term^s with the
^^^sh; yet, when the flesh shall get the hill, as it were, get upon the hill of
temptation, and shall have wind to drive ^he smoke upon the eyes and face of
the Combatant, that is, to blind him; in such a case, upon such a
disadvantage, he is overcome, and falls into sin: And therefore you see how
the Apostle expresses it, Romans 7. 22.
Romans 7. 22. I delight (says he) in the Law of God, according to the inward
man: as if he should say, That is my constant course; might I do what I would,
That would I always be doing; That is my inclination, there is my delight; b^t
ye^ (says he) I see a law of my members, rebelling against the law of my
mind, leading me capti^e to the law of sin; that is, there is a strong power
within me, that sometimes distempers me, and puts me out of my self: that he
calls a law; because it is commanding and powerful like a law; and the law of
my members, (whereas the other is called the law of my mind) because, though
it be through the whole soul, yet principally the force and vigor of it is
seen in the members, that is, in the inferior parts of the soul: says the
Apostle, when I am thus distempered and put besides my self, when there is
such a law rebelling against the law of my mind, in such a case, I am
overcome, and led captive; but, when I am my self, I sin not, it is the
sin that dwells in me. So much shall serve, to have showed you the differences
between those relapses which godly men are subject to, and those turnings and
fallings back into a continuance in sin, to which other men are subject:
For, my beloved, it must not seem strange to us; for both are alike subject to
infirmities, both are subject to return, as you see, a sheep may fall into
the mire as soon as a swine, for the commission of sin, and so likewise for
the omission of duties: an Appletree may have a fit of barrennes and
unfruitfulness, as well as a Crabtree, or any other; but the difference is great
in the manner of them, as we showed: But still the maine difference is to be
remembered, that he that has a perfect heart, is still clensing and purifying
himself; the other do not that, but so fall back to sin, that they wallow
in it, as a Swine does in the mire. So much shall serve for this.

A fourth property of a perfect heart you shall find expressed Phil. 3. 4
Property, He pres^eth to the mark that is before him.
if you take the words together, from the 12 Verse to the 15: (for, I say, the
course we will hold, shall be, to open to you those places where the Scripture
sets down, Phil. 3. 12. 15.
the Characters and properties of A perf^ct heart) not as though I had already
attained it, or were already perfect, but I follow after, if I may comprehend
that, for which I am also comprehended by Jesus Christ, etc. I press hard to
the ma^ke, for the price of the high Calling of God, in Christ Jesus; Let
therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded; the meaning of it is this,
says the Apostle, this is my course: I am not yet attained to perfection, but,
says he, this I do, I aim at the utmost, even at the price of the high
Calling of God in Jesus Christ: I aim at the utmost, even at the top of
perfection, and again, says he, I follow hard to it: And, says he, not only
I, but as many as are perfect, let them be thus minded, where, by the perfect,
he means, you see, not one that has already a perfect holiness, but one that
is sound hearted: for, he had said before, not as if I were already perfect;
and yet here he says, Let us, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: so you
shall find here these two property of a perfect man, Which co^nsists
of one whose heart is perfect with God.

First, 1. In aiming at the highest degree of holiness.
he aims at the highest degree of holiness, he looks at the very mark it
self, he looks at the top, at the standard, at the utmost exact line of
holiness, and he labors to square himself to it, though he cannot reach
it, yet it is his endeavor, he propounds not to himself a shorter iournies end
then he should do, but his aim is even at the very top of perfection, at a
perfect conformity to the Image of Christ; for that is it the Apostle here
speaks of, that we may be conformable to the Death and resurrection of Jesus
Christ, this was his aim: An unsound heart aims not at perfect holiness.
whereas, on the other side, another does not so, but he sets a certain
compass, a certain limit to himself, there he fixes his staff, he does
not intend to go any further, he does not intend to grow up to full holiness,
as it is expressed, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
2 Cor. 7. 1. he does not intend to be holy, as the Lord is holy, in all
manner of conversation, this is not his intent, this is not the thing he aims
at. So herein they differ; he that has a perfect heart, he follows hard
after the mark, he aims at the very top of perfection; and the ground of
this difference is, partly, because a man that is vnsound-hearted, will not be
at so much cost and pains for heaven, He will not be at the cost.
as to aim at the top of perfection; he thinks th^s with himself, that to
be so strait laced, that he must be exact in every thing; to observe all his
speeches, that he may not speak freely; and to give an account of all his
time, and of all his actions, that he may not walk in many things according
to his own fantasies, according to his own delight and pleasure, he thinks,
if he must be tied to this, that he may not, at any time, give the bridle to
his humor, and to his inordinate appetite, but still he must be so restrained
and fe^tered, and pinioned, as it were, to walk by an exact r^le, that all his
actions, and all his steps may be pondered; he thinks with himself, it is
more then ever he shall be able to do; he does not indeed prize Christ and
Heaven at such a rate, that he will be thus exact and perfect; and therefore he
aims not at it, he never goes about it: And partly again; 2. He aims not at
God.
because God indeed is not his aim, but his own safety, his own happiness
and security, his own escaping of Hell and Judgment: therefore he does not
seek simply to please GOD, and keep his Commandments, but he seeks so much
perfection as will ser^e his own turn; and therefore he does with it, even as
a lazy scholar does, that intends not simply to excel in learning, but would
have as much learning as should pass through examination, and get a Degree; or
as a man that labors not simply to get an excellency in the Art of
Arithmeticke, but would have so much only as would keep a Merchants book; or
as a Lawyer that would have so much Law only as will serve his turn, as will
serve his practice: I say, when a man aims at this, you do not say knowledge
is his aim; for were it so, he would desire to know whatsoever is knowable,
he would set no limits to himself, were knowledge his aim simply: but we may
truly say of such a man, it is not learning, but it is his trade, his degree,
or some such particular thing, that is his aim: So it is with a man whose
heart is unsound, and not perfect with God: God himself is not his aim, and
therefore he does not desire to keep his Commandments perfectly and exactly;
for did he so, he would set no limits to himself; he would do as Paul does
here, he would aim at the utmost degree of perfection; but such men's aim is
their own profit, their own advantage, their security and deliverance from
Hell and from Judgments: that is, they do not care for holiness simply
considered, but so far as it may serve such a turn, as it may deliver them
from such a Judgment, as it is a bridge to lead theem over to such a benefit
to themselves.

And the last ground of this difference between them, 3. He wants light.
that they aim not at the utmost degree, is, because an vnsound-hearted man
ha^h not so much light in him, as to discover to him, to show to him the utmost
degree of perfection. A man that has but a moral light, a natural, common
light, is able to see g^osse Evils, and common duties that are contrary to
them; but exactness of perfection that is required, he sees not; or, if he
do discern it practiced by others, yet in his judgment he disallowes it,
he thinks it a thing more then needs: Whereas a man that is sound-hearted,
one that is perfect, he approues it, he sees an excellency in it, he admires
it in others, and would feign imitate it himself: and hence is the difference,
that they aim not at perfection; it is not their scope, they desire not the
utmost, the highest degree of holiness; whereas a man that has a sound heart,
still he labors to add to that which is wanting, in his faith, in his love,
in his obedience: and this is one diffe^ence, that he that is perfect, says
he, is thus minded.

The second is; 2. A perfect heart follows hard to the mark.
he follows hard, he does not only make the mark his utmost aim, but he
follows after it hard; that is, it is the property of a man that is perfect,
that he does not loyter in the way, but he follows hard after the mark;
though he be subject to many decays, to many sweruings and declinings, yet,
still he makes them up again, still he repaires those breaches in his heart;
and, though many times he step out of the way, still he recouers himself
again; so that his constant and ordinary work is, every day to make his heart
perf^ct; where he finds any crookedn^sse, to set it straight again; where he
finds any defect, that he labors to supply; this is ^is ordinary and constant
course: So, beloved, you shall find this difference between a man that is
imperfect, and another that is sound hearted, that he still amends his heart,
he still makes it up, he still brings it to a good temper, that is his work
from day to day, that he sets it right and straight before God in all things:
and you shall see, Man. 18. 1, 2, 3.
Mat. 18. 1. such an expression; there the Disciples ask Christ this question;
Master, (say they) who shall be the greatest in the Kingdom of God? Our
Sauio^r takes a little child, and sets him up amongst them, and says, except
you be converted as one of these little children, you shall not enter into the
Kingdom of God. The meaning is this; I see there is pride arising in your
hearts, you are looking after great things for your selves, that arises of a
self-conceit you have; I tell you, (says he) Except you convert from this
evil, except you turn your selves from it, except you become as this child,
and empty your selves of this pride, and become humble, as this child, become
little in your own eyes, as this child is, you shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. So that the meaning of it is this; that a man who is
sound-hearted, he is still following hard, he is still making his heart perfect
from day to day, he is still turning to God again and again, as it is said,
Lam. 3. 40.
Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord:
that is, it is his constant work: My beloved* this is the nature of a man's
heart, still there is something or other rising amiss in it, as you see weeds
in a field. Simile.
As it is in a Corn field, except you weed it, and till it, and plow it, and
manure it, and never give it over, it will be ouer-growne with weeds, and wax
fallow again, and not be fit to bear Corn with any constancy; so it is with
our hearts; except we still plow them, and weed them, and watch over them,
they will be ready to grow fallow, they will be ready to be ouer-growne:
therefore, I say, it is the property of a man that is perfect, he is still
returning, and making up the breaches, and defects; as we see, 2 Ioh. 8. 2,
Ioh. 8.
Let us look to our selves, that we lose not the things that we have wrought,
but that we may receive a full reward: Mark, let us look to our selves, that
we lose not the things we have wrought; as if he should say, even those that
are perfect, that are sound-hearted, there is this property in them, (though he
deliver it by way of Exhortation, yet is a property that never is separate from
them) they still look to themselves, that they lose not the things they have
wrought: and see, my beloved, there is great reason for it: for a man may lose
all that he has wrought, he may lose his reward altogether, as you see, Reu.
3. 11. Reu. 3. 11.
Take heed, hold that thou have, lest another take thy Crown. You know; Ioash
went far, and so did Iehu, and so did those Israelites in the Wilderness;
and yet they lost their reward, for not looking to themselves: but this is for
those that may fall quite away: But for the Elect, that can never fall quite
away, this diligence is required, and is proper to them; they still look to
themselves, lest they lose that which they have wrought, lest they should not
receive a full reward: for, though they cannot lose their reward altogether,
yet they may lose a part of their reward; as, you see, David did, because he
did not look narrowly to himself, he did not follow hard to the mark, (for
in some things they may fail, though it be their property to look to
themselves; that I express to you by the way: I say, part of their reward they
may lose, for) the Sword departed not from his house: if, like those builders 2
Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 3. 12.
you build hay and stubble, then you shall be saved, if your hearts be
upright, yet as by fire: that is, you shall be scorched by the fire, it shall
have some impression upon you, something or other upon your name, or some other
judgment; somewhat you shall have; but this is their property, They look to
themselves, that they lose not the things they have wrought, but that they may
receive a full reward: For still they are apt to fall back from the degree
they have attained: And, again, the sinful lusts they thought they had
mortified are ready to return: now he that is perfect, is thus minded, he not
only aims at the utmost, but from day to day, he makes up the defects that
he finds in his heart, and again, labors to bring down and to mortify
those lusts that are renewed, and begin to gather a new strength, and to bud
forth again; this is their property: so, I say, if thou would k^ow it,
mark what thy aim is, whether thou aim at the vtm^st degree of holiness, or
whether thou set li^its to they self; and likewise, whether thy constant
course be, to make thy heart perfect with GOD, from day to day, and to walk
exactly with him; whether thou be careful to husband thy time, that thou
may have leisure to do it: for, my beloved, a man cannot do a thing
exactly, except he have time to do it in: And therefore. Ephesians. 5. Ephesians. 5. 15.
16.
Walk exactly, not as foolish, b^t as wise, redeeming the time: As if he
should say, if you would walk exactly, redeem the time, it is your wisdom;
for else you lose all your labor: walk exactly, and not as fools; for else
you had as good do nothing at all; be so far wise, that you do not lose the
things you work; and to do this, redeem the time, that you may have leisure
to do it: I say, consider, whether yo^ be willing so to husband time, to gain
so much leisure from your other calling and affairs, that you can spend time
to search your hearts, in trying your ways, in setting all things straight
within you, that you may walk perfectly with GOD from day to day. So much for
this property likewise; So many as are perfect, le^ them be like minded.

The next property of this perfectness of heart, 5 Property, With a whole
heart.
you shall find in those two places compared together, Ier. 3. 10. Ier. 3. 10.
They have not returned to me with their whole heart, but feignedly; if you
compare that with Hosea 7. 14. Hos. 7. 14.
the Lord there complains, though they did return and sanctify a Fast, and
did seek him very devoutly, says he, you returned not to the most high, but
against me have you rebelled. The meaning of both places is this; they have not
sought me^ with their whole heart, but feignedly; the word feignedly shows,
that by whole heart, he means there, a true heart: So that, as you would
judge now of an vnsound-hearted friend; you say, he is not perfect, he is not
sound, he is not true, when his actions carry a show and appearance of love,
and his heart does not answer it; there is a dissonancy between the appearance
he makes, and his heart: his heart is known by this, he loves not the person
of his friend; he may observe him, for some other respects, but his person he
does not inwardly respect: So, if a man would know whether his heart be perfect
with God, let him consider whether he do not as false-hearted men are wont to
do, that observe other men out of respects, because they see those parties
have power to do them good or hurt, therefore they are diligent to observe
them; as the Apostle says, They have the persons of men in admiration because
of advantage: that is, they have them in admiration, they are very obsequio^s
to them, ready to do them offices of friendship; but it is for their own
advantage, not because they love their friends, they are nor aff^cted to their
persons. Contrary to this is singleness of heart; when we love not in word
only, in deed and in truth, when we love with a pure love, such a man, we say,
comes to be perfect with his friend: and so it is in this case, when a man
looks on God, as one that has power to do him good and evil, as one that
has power to advance him, or to cast him down, and out of these respects he
serves him, and obeyes him, and will do many things for his sake; but yet he
does not serve him with a single heart; that is, he does not inwardly love the
person of God, he does not look on him as he is separate from all punishments
and rewards, as he is sequestered from all such respects, so as to be hearty to
him. This was the fault of the Jews; says he* they returned again; but to
whom was it? to their corn, to their oil, and not to the most high: they
returned, and were very de^out to keep the Fast, ready to hear, but against
me they rebelled. The meaning of it is this, the Jews returned to the Lord,
they were careful to please him, but it was because they desired freedom from
the Famine, and War, and other Calamities* and therefore they served the
Lord, but they did not lay hold on God himself, upon the graces and comforts
of the Spirit, upon aeternall life, these were not the things they did inwardly
respect; and therefore, God himself they loved not, to him they did not
return, (as you shall see, because I will use that exppession of laying hold
upon God, and upon aeternall life, 1 Timothy 6. 1 Timothy 6. 12.
) when the Apostle Paul had spoken there of diverse men that were contentious,
he puts these two properties together; they are exceeding contentious, and
covetous, they reckon gain godliness; but thou, says he, do not so; but
fight the good fight of faith: do not contend with such a kind of contention,
and in such a manner as they do: and again, says he, when they lay hold on
wealth and preferment, and such advantages, do thou lay hold upon aeternall
life. I say, this was the case of the Jews, they laid hold of such benefits as
a carnal man is capable of, such as indeed they conceived to come from the
Lords hand only, and therefore they returned unto him; but they did not lay
hold upon God himself, upon aeternall life, upon the spiritual privileges
and promises of grace, and therefore they returned to him but feignedly; that
is, they did not seek the face of God, that which is required, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my People humble themselves, and seek my face: that is,
seek my presence; this they did not: Now with those that have sound hearts it
is not so, but they seek the Lord himself; they are thus minded, that if they
may have the Lord himself, though they be stripped of all things else, they
do not much heed it; though they pass through evil report, though they lose
their estates, though they be put in what condition they can be, yet they are
content to have the Lord above for their portion, for they look on him as an
exceeding great reward: as long as they may have his love, as long as they may
have him, though alone, they care for nothing else: thus they are affected when
God puts them to it, as you see, Naomi put Ruth and her other daughter to it,
says she, Will thou go with me? I have nothing for thee, Gods hand is gone
out against me, I have no more sons in my womb; or, if I had, thou would
never stay until they were of age: when they were put to it thus, one daughter
forsook her, namely Orphah, and returned back to her people; but Ruth gave
her this answer; Be it so; ^yet whither thou go, I will go, I will dwell
where thou dwell, I will never forsake thee: So it is with the Saints, they
choose the Lord, though alone, they cleave to him alone, they reckon it reward
enough, if the^ may have him, as you see Abraham did, as GOD said to him, I my
self will be thy exceeding great reward; he would not so much as take any
thing from the King of Sodom, Why? because, says he, it shall never be said
that he has made Abraham rich: GOD alone shall make me rich, he is reward
enough, he is alsufficient, I will not take any of these things in with him: So
all the Saints are thus minded, they are contented with GOD alone, because they
look on him as an alsufficient reward, they have a good opinion of him, and
therefore they forsake him not; whereas others have been in admiration of him,
but for advantage; when they have gotten what they would have, and are
delivered from what they fear, they start aside as a broken Bow, Hosea 7. 16.
Hosea 7. the place before named, as you see Rehoboam, 2 Chro. 12. 1.
2 Chronicles. 12. 1. Says the Text, the Lord helped him till he was strong, and
when he was strong, he and all Israel departed from following the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 26. 7. 15.
And so Vzziah, 2 Chro. 26. It is said, the Lord helped him until he was
mighty, and what then? when he had gotten what he would have, his heart was
listed up to his destruction: that is, he served GOD, as it were, a slippery
trick; then he departed from him, when he had gotten what he desired, which
was a sign he did not return to the Lord, or that he did serve him with his
whole heart, but feignedly; he did not seek the Lord himself, he did not
seek his face and presence. And the ground of all this is, because they have
no constant fixed good opinion of GOD, but they think well of God for fits,
and for times, as we see the Is^aelites did; they would ^ollow GOD for such a
time in the Wilderness, after he had refreshed them, and delivered them; but
as soon as new trouble came, when they wanted bread, and water, and flesh,
presently they murmured again, and grew discontented. And so Ioram, King of
Israel, when he was pressed with famine, says he, I will wait no longer upon
the Lord, but he would needs take away Elisha's head, the man of GOD, that
exho^ted him to wai^e on GOD. Thus it is with men, they have no constant good
opinion of GOD; but it is not so with the Saints; they have known the LORD
himself, he has showed his own self to them, that good opinion they have
of him, is fixed and established; it is the Lord himself that has taught it
^^em; and that which they have been confirmed in by long experience, and
therefore they will never forsake him, no^ part from him; it is he himself
whom they have chosen. And this is the next difference between an
vnsound-hearted man, and he that has a perfect heart, that he seeks the Lord
himself, his heart is perfect with him, when another returns not to the most
high, but returns to serve him for other ends, and for other respects* but
against the Lord himself, when he has served his turn, he is ready to rebel.

The next property you shall find, 6 Property, He accounts the Gospel
wisdom.
1 Cor. 2. 6. 1 Cor. 2. 6.
Howbeit we speak wisdom to those that are perfect, not the wisdom of this
world, or of the Princes of this world, but the wisdom of God in a mystery,
even the hidden wisdom that GOD has ordained before the World to our gl^rie:
Here is another property the Holy Ghost sets down of a perfect-hearted man;
the Apostle, when he had said, I come not among you with the excellency of
wisdom, or the words of man, but my aim is, my desire is, as to know Christ
crucified alone, so to teach nothing else to you, and to preach to you in the
plain evidence of the Spirit, and of power; whereas it might be objected, I
but Paul, every man thinks not so, many men think you would do better, if
you would preach as other men do, and be curious and quaint of Oratory: says
he, these things, as I deliver them, whatsoever they may seem to other men,
yet to those that are perfect they seem wisdom; though others may despise it,
and reckon it foolishness, yet to the perfect it is wisdom. So that, I gather
hence, A perfect man in this is distinguished from another that is not
sound-hearted, that he has eyes to see the wisdom of the Holy Ghost, he
knows wisdom. Now a perfect man is there so called, in opposition to him that
is merely animalis, that has only a reasonable soul, and no more; for that
is the word, the same word that is used in another place of this Chapter, the
natural man, it is translated, but the word in the Original signifies a man
that has only natural abilities and endowments, and natural perfections,
such a man is reckoned an imperfect man, a man that is not sound: But, says
the Apostle, to a man that is perfect, that is, to a man that has, besides the
strength of natural gifts, the sanctifying Spirit that enlightneth him, that
the Spirit of God possesses and informs his soul, it ioynes with his soul,
it is dwelling in him; such a one is a perfect man, says he, and you shall
know him by this, he discernes the wisdom of GOD, he judges aright of it: so
that, my beloved, the meaning of it is this, there is a certain wisdom of
God, there are certain things, that no natural man in the world reaches or
relishes: take the hypocrite, that goes the furthest in the profession of
holiness, even as far as the second or third ground, even as far as those
Heb. 6. Heb. 6^^ 5.
that were much enlightened, and had tasted of the power of the world to come,
yet this wisdom that he speaks of here (we speak the wisdom of GOD)
consists of such things as they never knew; certain things that the most
knowing man that lives in the Church of God, that is not regenerate, can never
know them, as he says, Verse 9. such as eye never saw, and^. signifying thus
much, the eye and the ear have the senses by which knowledge is gathered; yet
man's eye and his ear never saw, etc. and his heart, that is more active then
either of them, never understood them. You will say, what are these things?
They are expressed by di^ers names in this Chapter; they are called the wisdom
of God, they are called the wisdom of GOD hid in a mystery, the deep things
of God, the things of the Spirit of God, the things that are given us of God
for our glory: Beloved, these are things that no vnsound-hearted man did ever
sound; and therefore I will be bold to say to you, if ever you knew th^se
things, if ever you reckoned these things wisdom, certainly your hearts are
perfect, you are not mere natural men, but you have received the Spirit of
^od, that is, the sanctifying and enlighning Spirit of God.

But you will say, Q^^st.
How can it be, that a natural man should never know these things?

B^loued, A^s.
I say, it may be very well: for they are things that no Minister in the world
can teach you; we may propound them to you, and you may hear them seven years
and seven; you may read the very same things in the Scriptures, and in other
Books, a thousand times over, and yet, for all this, not understand them: It
is the wisdom of God in a mystery, and they are the deep things of God: As a
man may look on a Trade, and never see the mystery of it, he may look on
artificial things, pictures, or any thing else, and yet not see the Art by
which they are made; as a man may look on a Letter, and yet not understand the
sense, something there is that he sees, and something that he sees not, not it
enters not into his heart; (and therefore it is said, seeing they see not;
which argues that there is something that they see.) Thus there are some
things, there is a wisdom of GOD, that an vnsound-hearted man can never know,
it can never enter into his heart: which wisdom therefore if thou have,
certainly thou art a perfect man.

You will say, 2. Quest.
How shall a man know whether he know this wisdom or no, whether he thus
judge of the ways of God?

I answer; Ans.
You shall know whether the w^sdome you have be such as belongs to perfect
men, Four Marks whereby to know this wisdom.
or no, by these four things, which I will deliver distinctly unto you.

First, 1. It humbles him.
you shall find this, that, when this knowledge is discovered ^o a man, it
exceedingly humbles him, all other knowledge does not so, it rather puffes him
up: But this brings a man exceedingly out of conceit with himself, it makes
him to stand amazed at himself; that is the property of this wisdom, which
shows it self to the perfect: and the reason is, because it is a sanctified
discovering wisdom; a wisdom, which that Spirit that gives it, enables him to
make this use of, that he uses it as a Lanthorue to his feet, as a light to
discover the crookedness of his ways, to find out the defects, to which he
is subject, both in his heart and in his conversation; therefore this wisdom
discouers him, and opens him to himself; whereas all the knowledge of any
natural man, or that any hypocrite has in `the World besides, opens him not
to himself properly, but rather lifts him up, he uses it to reprove others,
he uses it for other purposes, he holds it as a light to other men's feet, he
makes not this use of it, to search the inside of his own heart, he searches
not every defect and crannie of his soul with it, and he finds not out
himself what he is. Therefore, you see, as soon as they have been enlightened
with this wisdom, ( Paul and others) how they were confounded in themselves,
how unworthily they thought of themselves: that is the property of this
wisdom, first to humble.

Another property is, 2. He knows things as he ought*
He that has that wisdom revealed to him, that is proper only to the perfect,
those things that he knows, he knows them as he ought to know them; whereas
another man, though he know exceeding much, yet he knows nothing as he
ought to know, as we see, 1 Cor. 8. 2.
1 Cor. 8. 2. He that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he
ought to know it, says the Apostle; he knows not sin as he ought to know
it, he knows not the promises of grace, he knows not aeternall life, he
knows not these as he ought to know them: for, did he; he would be wrought
upon by them; if he did know GOD as he ought, he would fear GOD with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his strength; so, if he did know
sin as he ought, he would make it his chiefest sorrow, he would abhor it,
he would not come near it, he would cleanse himself from it, he would fly
from it, as from a Serpent, upon all occasions: So, did he know remission of
sins; he would not esteem so lightly of it as he does, but he would seek
it earnestly, even as a condemned man does his Pardon: So that is the
difference; they know not these things as they ought to know them; for,
beloved, this is to be observed, when any man is converted to God by the
revelation of this wisdom, he does not always know n^w things, he has not
new things revealed unto him, more then he knew before, but the same things he
knows now as he ought to know; whereas before, though he knew them, he knew
them not as he ought to know them; he never knew sin what it was, he never
knew what grace was, all those promises and threatenings, all that wisdom of
God, revealed in the Book of GOD, in the holy Scriptures, he never knew it as
he ought, therefore, it is not profitable to him, to bring him home, and work
a change: that is the second difference.

Thirdly; 3. He discerns things that differ.
Wisdom to the perfect, is such a wisdom, as enables him to distinguish of
things that differ, he is able to discern between good and evil, as you shall
see an expression of it, Heb. ^. but strong meat belongs to those that are
perfect; (for so it ought to be translated, and so it is in the Original) the
old Translation, by reason of custom, and the new, by reason of use, but
neither is so full as the Original, by reason of habit, in respect that they
have their senses exercised to dis^erne both good and evil: that is, he that
has this true wisdom, he has such a distinguishing faculty, that, as the
taste discernes of meat, or as a man that is accustomed to taste Wine, can
easily discern between good and bad, so, (not by mere custom, as other men
have it, but) by a certain wisdom that is infused into you, you are able to
discern between good and evil, even as the senses do; (for that is the
scope of the place;) (...)
As the senses discern between color and color, between taste and taste,
so there is an ability in those that are perfest, to discern between good and
evil: so that, take such a man to whom this wisdom is revealed, you shall
find such an aptness in him to discern between good and evil, that is, he
knows the voice of the shepherd, he knows and discernes between that which
is good, and between that which is counterfeit; he knows moral goods and
evils, what is to be chosen, and what to be refused; this he knows, such a
distinguishing faculty he has, this is proper to those that are perfect; the
like you shall have expressed, Romans 12. 2.
Romans 12. be renewed in the Spirit of your mind, that you may discern the
good will of God: that is, that you may distinguish between the good will that
is truly perfect, and that which is not his will: This property will follow a
mind that is renewed, he will be able to discern what another cannot.

Lastly; 4. His judgment is changed
that I may conclude; He, to whom this wisdom is revealed, he that is perfect,
there is a wondrous change in his judgment; that which before seemed
foolishness to him, now he reckons it to be the true wisdom; and that which
before was the greatest wisdom, now it appears to be follishnesse; as a
Child, when he is grown to years, and is perfect, the things that before he
magnified, now he disregards them; and the things that before he made no
account of, now they are prized and esteemed; such a difference there is, such
a change in the judgment, when once this wisdom is revealed. So it is in
other things: take a young beginner in any thing, a young Scholar, he indgeth
otherwise of the exercise of what he learnes, then when he is grown to
maturity; as we see, a man that is unacquainted with Music, that has no
skill in it, the common tunes like him best; but when he grows a skillful
Musician, he cares not for them; those that have more perfect Music in them,
those he regards, when he has a more skillful ear: so, it is the meaning of
the Apostle, we speak wisdom to those that are perfect, as if he should say,
they are able to discern things, their judgment is another kind of judgment
then yours is, or then their own was before; that which they could find no
relish in, no taste, when they are perfect once, they find a more excellent
use in it then others: So that this change of judgment, judging otherwise both
of the persons and of the things, argues they are perfect. And this is the last
sign, that I will now name to you, of this property here spoken of, We speak
wisdom to those that are perfect: that is, it is the property of those that
are perfect, to reckon that wisdom to be wisdom indeed.

So much shall serve for this time.

FINIS.
THE NINTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 1. Walk before me, and be thou perfer^t.
BEfore; we delivered to you certain properties or adjuncts, which are not
disjoined from this sincerity and integrity of heart: That which we have now
to do, is to show you the effects of it, Effects of sincerity.
what operation it has in the heart.

First, 1. It exalts God.
you shall find this, to be one proper effect of it, that it teaches a man to
exalt God in all his ways, to lift up GOD in all his ways, above himself,
above his own ends, above any thing that tends to his own happiness: for
indeed herein is sincerity of heart seen, when a man prefers God before
himself in all things: for hollownesse and unsoundness of heart is in this,
when one prefers himself before God: it is a sure rule, and it is practiced by
all the Saints, Psalm. 148. 13.
which you have Psalm. 148. 13, Thy Name, O Lord, (says the Propher there) is
only to be exalted. The meaning is this, when a man has any business to do,
when he has any design or project in his thoughts, he is not to think how
he shall advance himself, or any end of his own, but, (says he) O LORD, thy
Name only, thy Name only is to be exalted. Such an expression you shall
find, Prou. 4. 8. speaking of wisdom, Prou, 4. 8.
and describing the sincerity of their hearts that sought it; it is expressed
by this phrase, exalt her, and she shall exalt thee: that is, look not to thy
self, to the way that thine own heart shall suggest to thee, but what way
wisdom and godliness shall propound, exalt and prefer those ways before
thine own, and let wisdom alone for exalting of thee, take thou no care for
that, exalt her: And it is a phrase frequently used in the Scriptures, that God
is to be exalted, 1. In matter of honor.
to be lift up; the meaning of it is this, as when a man takes another and
sets him upon his shoulders, that he only might be preheminent, that he only
might appear and be exposed to view, and himself stand in the croude, and
not be seen; so when a man exalts God in all his ways, that he may have
advancement, and honor, and pre-eminence, though himself appear to be no
body; this is to exalt God, and this is the proper effect of sincerity and
integrity of heart: another man, whose heart is not sound, howsoever he may
exalt God in many things, he may exalt him in many Commandments, he may
seem to seek him, and to seek him diligently, yet he does all in such a
manner that he may exalt himself, and his own ends above the Lord: you shall
best see it in particulars; the Pharisees did many good works, but (says the
Text) they did them to be seen of men: that is, they had an eye to
themselves, that themselves might be exalted in what they did, that they might
be heard, that they might be seen: and so Iehu; though he were employed in an
honorable service, and he did it diligently, which was to avenge the quarrel
of God against the House of Achab, and so did it, that he went through with his
work, yet he had an eye upon himself all the while: Come and see (says he)
my Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, etc. as if he should say, indeed, I do all
this for God; but he secretly intimates in the speech, before he was aware,
that it was the appearance and pre-eminence of himself, that he might have the
praise of the zeal and diligence that he showed in the work, he exalted
himself. Look upon the Saints now, and you shall see a quite contrary
disposition. John Baptist takes this resolution to himself, says he, let me
even decrease, that is my condition, I am content to do so, and let Jesus
Christ increase; so he be exalted and honored, I am content to decrease, I am
content to wither in my honor and reputation which I have had, so the Lord may
receive advantage by it: So likewise Paul's is an excellent example, 2 Cor. 4. 5.
2 Cor. 4. 5. says he, I do not preach my self, but the Lord Jesus, and my
self your servant for his sake. I do not preach my self; the meaning is
this; says he, in my preaching, my aim is not that I might set forth my
self, that men might look on me, on my wi^, on my learning, on my eloquence;
no, says he, I desire that I might be concealed, as it were, that I might be
obscured and hidden in the World, and that Jesus christ might only appear,
that he might be seen, that those that hear me, may have their thoughts and
affections carried to him alone; I am but a spokesman, but the friend of the
Bridegroom, I would have your affections bestowed on him, therefore I set out
him altogether; for his sake I am your servant, and I carry my self as a
servant, that still my Master may have honor. This Paul did, and thus he
exalted the Lord. And so Moses, when the Spirit of God was poured upon many of
the people, that they grew up to some ripeness of gifts, and so seemed to be
more equal with him, Moses seemed to be obscured by this means, in the
opinion of Iosuah, who comes and tells him, Do thou not see what these men
do? Moses answered again, he was very well contented, so God might have
honor, that himself should be somewhat obscured and lessened; Do thou envy
for my sake? And this is the disposition of all the Saints, that look what
Ioab did in the case of Rabbah the City, when he besieged it, and was ready to
take it, he sent to David, saying, come thou and besiege it, lest the victory
be attributed to me; the same the Saints are exceeding careful of, that God
might still have the pre-eminence, that still, whatsoever victory they have,
whatsoever work they do, it might be attributed to God, and not to
themselves, this is their constant disposition to exalt him: Therefore you see
how jealous the Apostles were of it, Act. 3. 12. when the people were ready to
exalt them for that Miracle they had wrought, say they, in much indignation,
Why look you on us, Act. 3. 12.
as if we by our godliness had done the work, to make this man whole? No, say
they, the Lord has done it, that he might exalt his Son. They were careful
to prefer, and to exalt him: and herein indeed our sincerity consists. This
is an instance for matter of honor, that, in any matter of credit, it is the
disposition of those whose hearts are upright, who walk before God perfectly,
to exalt the Lord, and to set him above themselves.

So likewise it is in all matters of advantage, 2. In matter of profit.
and profit: the heart of an upright man says thus; so God and the Church may
be gainers, it is no matter though I be a loser; so God may have honor, and
his people be saved, and the work go on, and the Gospel may have free
passage, it is no matter what becomes of me. You see, this disposition was in
Moses and in Paul: says Moses, Let my name be blotted out of the Book of
life, let me lose all my reward and recompense, so the Church of GOD may be
safe: and so Paul, though I be separate from christ, yet, so the Church of the
Jews may be safe, so christ may be honored in their worshipping of him, and
cleaving fast to him, it is no matter; there is that scope in it. So likewise
Acts 20. 24. there is an excellent expression, Act. 20. 24.
says the Apostle, I pass not, my life is not dear to me, so the
ministration be fulfilled, that I have received, to testify the grace of GOD:
that is, though I be a loser every way; though my life be in danger and in
hazard, though many other afflictions may befall me, of diverse kinds, I pass
not for them, so the Ministration may be fulfilled, so the Lord may be exalted,
so the grace of GOD may be testified, I pass not, I heed it not, I regard it
not: When another man, beloved, whose heart is not sound and upright with God,
says thus within himself, It is no matter though such a Church, though such a
People, though such a Kingdom, or such a Nation perish, so I may be safe, so I
may enjoy my comforts, my ease, my profit, my liberty, this in the heart of
every natural man: But a man whose heart is perfect with God, still exalts
him, both in matters of credit, and likewise in matter of profit and advantage.

Last of all; 3. In matter of pleasure.
in any matter of pleasure: He finds his heart disposed after the same manner;
he says thus with himself; I care not though my own desire of pleasure and
ease be crossed, so men may be pleased in that which is good for edification;
as we see that disposition in Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 33. 1 Cor. 10. 33.
Says he, I please all men in all things. Says he, I have liberty to eat
flesh, and I desire to use that liberty, it is as acceptable to me as to any
other, notwithstanding, I will even deprive my self of that liberty, to please
men; not in this only, but in all things else; and why? for, says he, I
seek not my self, and my own profit, but the profit of many, that they might
be saved; and that is the reason of it: And why did he seek the profit of
many? We see in the 31. Verse he gives this rule, Whether you eat or drink,
etc. do all to the glory of God: for this cause, says he, I do not please
my self, but others; I please other men in all things, because I would
glorify GOD: that is, in pleasing them, God is advanced, he is preferred and
exalted: therefore, says he, I please not my self, but I please others in all
things. So, I say, that is one effect, and the first that I name to you; That
it is the property of sincerity and integrity of heart, to set a man aworke to
exalt God, to prefer GOD before himself, in all occasions.

A second effect arising from sincerity of heart, 2. effect, Nothing moves a
man, but Gods command.
from this perfectness of heart, is this; he whose heart is perfect with GOD,
you shall find in him this disposition, that he is not moved to his maine
actions ordinarily, but by virtue of some command from GOD; if he have not
some such motive, he stands still, and stirs not. The ground of this is,
because while a man seeks himself, while a man is vnsoundhearted, while he is
full of himself, (as every man is till he be regenrate, till his heart be
changed) come and tell such a man, inform him, and say to him, Sir, this will
make for your profit, or this is for your credit, this will be for your
advantage, it presently moves him, and sets him aworke: for his end is to seek
himself,: but let his heart be changed, and be perfect with GOD, to seek
him, now motives drawn from these respects, do not so much work upon him;
but let a commandment come from GOD, let this be presented to him, this is
the will of God, this is for GODS glory, this he will have performed by thee;
these are the motives that work upon him in the general fashion and course of
his life: other respects, that were most preualent with him before, they move
him not now; but, when they are suggested, as in former time, he stands still,
as it were, as a Ship that is becalmed, that has no wind to move it: but when
a Commandment comes from God, that Command fills the Sails, it fills the
faculties of the soul, that moves it to and fro, that indeed is the ground,
that sets this man aworke, in all the Actions, and in all the courses of his
life. you shall see that metaphor used Col. 4. 12. col. 4. 12.
(it is Epaphras prayer for the people, that Paul here expresses) Epaphras a
se^ant of christ, one of you, saluteth you, and always strives for you in
prayer, that you may stand perfect, and filled with all the will of the Lord.
Mark, this is the thing he prays for, that they might stand perfect: Why? how
should it be known they were perfect? Says he, this is the effect it will
produce, you shall be filed in all the will of the Lord: that is, as the word
signifies in the Original, when a man is filled with the Commandment, even
as the sail of a Ship is filled with wind, so when a man finds this
disposition in himself, that the principal motive, that which sets him aworke
upon all occasions, is some Commandment from God, and not selfe-respects, it
is an argument that he is perfect, that he is filled with the will of the Lord:
otherwise, he would stand still as a Ship, when the Sails have no wind to
drive them: this is an argument of perfectness and integrity of heart. Psalm*
119. 6.
The like expression you shall find Psalm. 119. 6. then I shall not be
confounded, says David, when I have respect (mark the phrase; for it is the
phrase that he chooses to ^xpresse his sincerity by) when I have respect to
thy Commandments. That is, says he, the time was, and it is so with other
men, that when a Commandment of GOD comes, they little heed it, they little
regard it: if other motives come, which propound honor, credit, and
ad^ancement, and profit to themselves, those things they respect; but, says
he, herein is my sincerity seen, and upon that ground I desire I may not be
confounded, that I have now respect to thy Commandments: even as you see, a
man that has some princip all friend, that he regards above all the world
besides, it may be, when many others come and speak to him, and make suite to
him to have something done, he regards them not; but, if such a friend speaks,
he has respect to him: or, as a servant, if another man bid him go, and bid
him do, he stands still; but, if his Masters command come once, he goes about
it presently: for he has respect unto him: this is David's meaning: for, says
he, LORD, I have respect to thy Commandments; other things move me not so
much; but, if any Commandment come from thee, I have respect unto it, and I
presently go and execute it: and in this regard he is said to be a man after
Gods own heart, Act. 13. 22.
as we see in Act. 13. 22. I have found, says the Lord, a man after mine own
heart: that is, a man of a sincere, of an upright heart, a man in whose heart
is integrity and sincerity, a man without guile, and he proves it by this,
says he, He will do whatsoever I will: that is, if my will be known to him,
that will he do, that is the motive that leads him, that is the thing that
stirs him upon all occasions: for that is the effect by which he is described
to be a man after Gods own heart, he will do whatsoever I will. Now,
beloved, you may examine your selves by this, whether you have those effects
that arise from sincerity and integrity of heart; consider what mooues you to
every action. Certainly there is no man that goes about any business, but
there is some motive that sets him aworke: Is it by virtue of the Commandment
that thou go about all thy occasions? Is it that that moves thee? Have thou
that respect to Gods Commandments, that when other commandments come, thou
regardest them little, but thou have still an eye to that? as David says, as
that is another expression of his sincerity, Psalm* 123. 2.
says he, Mine eyes wait on thee, as the eyes of the handmaid wait on her
Mistress; that is, I am still looking to thee, to thy Word, to thy Commandment,
any beck or nod from thee moves me, as the Maid waits upon her Mistress, to
see what her will is. I say, this is the disposition of all the Saints; and
therefore take heed of being deceived in this; beloved, it falls out ofttimes,
that you shall find them both implicated and inuolued together, (and therein
commonly we are deceived;) a Commandment comes from God, and respects of our
own concur; (mark it well, that I may take away this deceit) as, for
example; perhaps there is a service which the Lord himself commands; a man may
be very diligent in this work; but it may be, there is not only a
Commandment of GOD to move him, but there is much applause, there is a
certain luster and splendor that follows diligence, in a good action, in
some great business. He^re now is a double motive; here is a Commandment from
God, and withal, there is credit and esteem from men. As I say of doing, so
likewise of suffering; it may be a man is to suffer, and it is GODS will to
have him suffer, and he suffers for the keeping of a good conscience; but
withal there is somewhat more mingled with it, there is esteem from men: and
so for other actions; diligence in a man's calling, it is true, is the
Commandment of GOD, and the work is the LORDS, he does it for him, he ought
to be diligent; but withal, there is profit and reputation follows it, there
is advantage comes to himself; here, you see, there are more respects then
one; here is the Commandment of GOD, and other respects likewise: and so for
hearing the Word; it is true, it is GODS Commandment to hear, and a man
comes, it may be, out of some respect to that Commandment; but withal, there
may be other respects mingled; a man may come to feed his understanding with
new notions, with nouelty, he may come to see wit and learning, or to know the
humor and the spirit of the Preacher, other respects may be mingled.

Now, Quest.
you will say, how then shall a man know whether it be the Commandment that
moves him, if that be the proper effect of sincerity?

Beloved, Ans.
it is easy to know it by this; take a man whose heart is not sound, whose
heart is impure, who is hollow toward the LORD, and take out the other
respects, and leave the naked Commandment alone, and he will stand still, he
moves not; let other respects be took away, let the work want that outward
glory, and he stands still, he goes not about it so diligently: let the
suffering be sequestered from the praise of men, which accompanies it, let
there be nothing but a bare Command, yea suppose sometimes they incur
discredit with men, as sometimes they do, in suffering, there is only a naked
Commandment to encourage them to it, I say, if the heart be unsound, it
stands still, and moves not: but when the heart is upright, take away the
Commandment, and leave the other respects, and it stands still on the other
side; by which you may know, that it is not respect to men's commandments that
moves a man, because when that is took out, when there is not the will of God
signified in it, when he thinks with himself, this is not for GODS glory, I
have no warrant from GOD to do it, though there be other respects to my own
credit and profit, the heart stands still, as a Mill does, when it has no
water nor no wind to drive it. This is an argument of sincerity, when still the
Commandment moves it.

But this objection may be made, Quest.
May not a man be moved with other respects, may he not be moved with regard to
credit and advancement that may follow upon the performance of good duties?

I answer, Ans.
he may in the second place, he may not primarily be moved with it, it is the
Commandment that must set him on work; but when he is upon the way, these
respects may carry him on with more facility and alacrity: as a servant, that
is commanded to go a journey, if there be concurrence of other things, if he
have a good way, and good weather, and good company, and money in his purse, it
is his advantage, he does it the more willingly and cheerfully; but if there
be none of these, it is enough that it is his Masters business, that is enough
to set him aworke. You know Paul had many hard taskes, when he went to
Macedonia, and upon other occasions, you know what his entertainment was, and
yet it was his Masters work, it was his Commandment: for it is a sure rule,
that as we ought to use all Gods Ordinances, so also may we use all Gods
Arguments. It is an Argument that himself uses, that we may have respect to
the recompense, The reward of the fear of God, and humility, is riches, and
honor, and life, etc.

If you ask, Quest.
But how shall a man know when he does it thus in the first place, when he is
moved with the Commandment?

I answer; Ans.
you shall know it by this: A servant that seeks his masters profit
altogether, with the neglect of his own, it is an argument that he serves him
not out of selfe-respects, but that which he is primarily moved with, is regard
to his Master. Indeed, here is the difference: A servant that trusts not his
Master, so mannageth his business, as a Factor that still has an eye upon
himself: ^or he trusts not his Master: Another, that trusts him, that thinks
thus with himself, my Master is wise to observe, and he is willing and able to
recompense me* that servant looks not to himself and his own ends, but he
does his Masters business faithfully, and he cares not so it may be for his
Masters advantage: for he loves his Master, and he thinks his own good and
prosperity consists more in his Masters then in his own; this is that that
moves him, and therefore without respect to himself, he serves him he does his
business faithfully, he looks what may be for his advantage, and not for his
own. So much for this second effect.

A third effect that arises from this sincerity or integrity of heart, 3.
Effect, He serves GOD with all h^s might.
is to serve the Lord, to do his will with all a man's might, to do it
exceeding diligently, not only to have respect to his Commandment, but to do
it with all a man's might and strength: when a man does it remissely, it is a
sign he does it feynedly; when he does it diligently, it is a sign he does it
with a perfect heart. A servant, when he slubbers over his work, and does but
eye-seruice, it is an argument that he does it not with his whole heart, but
feynedly: for when he does it hear^tily, he does it painefully, he does it
thoroughly, and exactly, and with all his strength. The ground of it is this,
because, when a man does any thing truly, and in good earnest, when he does it
for it self, he does it always exceeding diligently, they are never disjoined.
When a man does a thing for a respect, he does it so far as that respect
requires, so much diligence he uses, and no more: you may see it in other
things; if a man have money but for his use, he will seek so much as will
serve such a turn, and no more; but if he does it for money it self, if he
love riches, he will do it with all his might, he sets himself to it with
all his strength. You have an excellent place for the expression of this, 1
Pet. 1. 22.
in 1 Pet. 1. 22. says the A postle, Seeing your hearts are purified to love
one another, without feyning, see that you love one another with a pure heart,
fervently. The meaning is this, Let a man's love be sincere, without feyning;
let it be with a pure heart, without respects, without dissimulation, and this
property it will have, you will love one another fervently. Beloved, these
cannot be disjoined, when one serves the Lord with a perfect heart, when his
eye is upon him, when he does trust to him, without any other by-respects, he
will do it exceeding diligently. Therefore that expression you find so often in
the Scriptures, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy soul, with all
thy heart, and with all thy strength, it is not an expression of the degrees of
love; that is not the sole scope of that place, but it is an expression of the
sincerity of a man's love; as if he should say, herein is the sincerity of a
man's love, this is an argument that a man loves God truly, and not for
respects, when he loves him with all his heart, and with all his might: it is
so in all things; when you do any thing for it self, you will do it with all
your might.

Besides, The intention is divided, when things are done re^iss^ly.
there is this further ground of it; you shall find this, that all
remissness, when a man does a thing remissely, and ouerly, and perfunctorily,
itargues always a divided intention, it is an argument that the whole mind is
not set on it, but that the intention is distracted, and bestowed on other
things: whence that common saying is, He that will be excellent in every thing,
is so in nothing: because his intentions are divided. So, beloved, you know,
this is the property of sincerity, to have a single eye, to have the heart set
upon one object, to look to GOD alone; If a man do so, the heart is sincere,
and he that looks upon GOD alone, he must needs do it with all diligence:
whenever a man minds one thing, he will do it with all his might, because
all the faculties, the intention, the thoughts, and affections of the soul,
they are then concenterate, and united, and drawn together into one point,
they are still running in one channel: and therefore a man that has a sincere
heart, that chooses GOD alone, that says thus with himself, I have but one
Master to serve, I have but one to fear, I have GOD alone to look to, my
business is with him in heaven, I think him to be alsufficient, and an
exceeding great reward: I say, this will always accompany such a heart, such a
resolution, that he serves him with all diligence; if there be any work of his
to be done, he will do it with all his might: for that is the disposition of
a man's mind, when once he is able to say as Da^id says, Psalm. 27. 4.
Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek, to
see the beauty of the Lord, to live in his Temple, etc. Why one thing I have
desired, and that will I seek with all diligence? when a man desires but one
thing, his mind will be exceeding intent upon it; and therefore if you would
find out now what is a proper effect of sincerity, you shall find this always
to be in those, whose hearts are upright with God, that they give themselves up
to his service; I say, they give themselves up to do it with all diligence:
therefore for a man that says this, I hope my heart is upright with God, and
yet you see him exceeding busy with other things, the work of God he does
ouerly, he slubbers it over, he, does it negligently, as a servant that does
eye-seruice; but for businesses of his own, he is exceeding intent upon them,
he is overwhelmed with them, in following pleasures, and diverse lusts, his
mind is exceeding much taken up in things of that kind; I say, he does but
dissemble, when he says he has prepared his whole heart to seek the Lord,
that he walks before him perfectly, it cannot be: a man whose heart is
upright, has this disposition in him, that his speeches, his thoughts and his
actions, are still busied about things that belong to the Kingdom of God,
holiness is the element he lives in, he would still be doing something (...)
^ends that way, by his good will he would be doing nothing else: I say, thus he
serves the LORD with all his might, and that is an argument he has a sincere
and upright heart. You have a common saying, when a man does a thing exceeding
diligently, he does it for his life: now a man whose heart is upright, his
opinion is changed of his own happiness, of his life and safety; whereas,
before, he conceived it t^ consist in other things* now he knows it whol^ly
consists in the favor of God, in pleasing him, and in enjoying of him; and
therefore when he reckons that his life consists therein, he does exceeding
diligently whatsoever work tends to him, and to his glory. This is the third
effect that arriseth from sincerity, and perfection of heart.

A fourth effect is this; 4. Effect, Every grace has its perfect work.
a heart that is entire, and upright, and perfect with GOD, you shall find
thus disposed, he s^ffers every grace to have his perfect work: that is a
sign the heart is sound, and entire, and perfect, when the graces of God are
not restrained, when they are not dammed, and barred up, but are suff^red to
have their perfect work; as it is said of patience, you shall see that
expression, Iam. 1. 2, 3, 4.
Iam. 1. Let patience have her perfect work. Re^oyce (says the Apostle there)
when you fall into t^oubles of diu^r^ sorts, rejoice, knowing that the (...) of
your faith brings forth patience, and let patience have her perfect work, that
you may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. Where you see, that this is put
down, as an effect that arises from perfectness, and integrity of heart,
when we suffer the graces of God, as patience in particular, to have their
perfect work. Now, patience is said to have its perfect work, when it endures
all kind of trials: for that is the scope of the Apostle. Rejoice (says the
Apostle) when you fall into trials of diners sorts: that is, trials that
concern you in soul, in body, in name, and in state, trials of every sort,
and every kind: if patience be perfect, (and it will be perfect, if it be in a
heart that is perfect, and entire, it will have a perfect work) it will make
us stay no where: So that, beloved, patience has then its perfect work, when
it will suffer any thing, be it death, be it disgrace, be it imprisonment, or
poverty, be it loss of friends, be it what it will be, afflictions of any
kind; name all sorts of trouble that you can devise, if patience have a
perfect work, it will bear all of them. When the heart is sound, beloved,
then this grace, or any other, has a perfect work: therefore you see, men
whose hearts are not sound, nature will stand some where; a man perhaps will
bear many things for Religion, but if it come to death, there he shrinkes; a
man will endure much, but if it come to disgrace, to discredit, to loss of
reputation, there his patience has not a perfect work; and therefore he gives
over. As patience must have a perfect work, which is seen in suffering, so
likewise it is seen in doing. So you see that expression, Heb. 17. 1.
Heb. 17. 1. Seeing we have such a cloud of witnesses, says the Apostle, let
us run the race with patience that is set before us. The meaning of it is
this: says he, if patience have a perfect work, it will carry you through the
whole race to the iournies end; but if otherwise, a man will run so far, or
so far; but when he meets with such a rub, with such a bar, by the way,
there he will make a stand, when he comes to thick way, or to thornie way, or
to rough way, there he will not run; and why? because patience has not a
perfect work. Therefore, says he, run with patience the race that is set
before you. So, beloved, a man's heart is then entire, when every grace (I
instance now in this) has his perfect work.

If you object; Object.
But you see sometimes patience, even in the best of the Saints, has not a
perfect work, but is sometimes interrupted?

I answer, Ans.
it is true, you see it was so in Job; though he were a man of an upright
heart, ( God bears that witness to him, he was a just man, one that feared
God) and likewise this grace was perfect in him, (as that witness is given
him, Iam. 5. 11. Iam. 5. 11.
You know the patience of Job,) yet, notwithstanding this, it seemed to be
interrupted, it seemed not to have its perfect work. Beloved, to this I
answer; that it did not rise from the hollownesse of his heart, or the
imperfection of the grace, but it arises many times from some other
impediment, some other accident, from some distemper that may arise in the
soul, that sometime or other may hinder even a perfect grace, from having a
perfect work; as you see in the works of nature, there may be a perfect
Spring, and yet sometimes it may be hindered from running, by some outward
impediment, it may some way or other be dammed up: so, it may be a perfect
Drug, fit and apt enough to work, and yet some impediment there may be that
may hinder it, and choke it, and dead the virtue of it for a time, but it is
but for a fit; ordinarily, and in ordinary course, every grace will have its
perfect work; and as I say of patience, so likewise, you see, in all other
graces, (to give you another instance, the same the Apostle gives there of
faith) faith, when it arises, when it dwells in a heart that is entire, that is
perfect, it has a perfect work: when it is otherwise, it works but
imperfectly, and but by halues. I will give you an experiment of it; you shall
see two notable examples of it, one in Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8,
9.
you shall find there what work faith had in him; you see, in the 8, 9, 10.
Verses, Amaziah was to go to war against the Edomites, he hired 100000. of
Israel, that was half his Army, to go and assist him in the battle: there
comes a Prophet from the LORD* and tells him, Amaziah, know this, the Lord is
not with Israel, and therefore separate these men, and send them home; if thou
do not, thou shall fall before the enemy: for in the Lord there is power to
help, Men may do much, and yet want saving grace.
or to cast down; Amaziah believed the Prophet: so that, you see, faith had a
great work in him; but says he, I am not able to hyre any more. That is no
matter, (said the Prophet) go with those thou have; and he was content to do
so, he went on to the Battle; and in the next verse, he was encouraged to
go on: it was a great work of faith, to send back half his Army, and to
go on so much encouraged notwithstanding; yet after, in the same Chapter you
shall find, though faith went thus far in him, and carried him through so
difficult a case, yet it had not its perfect work: for immediately after he
had overcome the Edomites, he set up their Gods, and a Prophet comes and tells
him, Amaziah, art thou so foolish, to set up the Gods of the Edomites, that
were not able to deliver their own people? Says the Text, Verse. 16.
he would not hearken to the Prophet, but bade him cease, and the Prophet
ceased. So you see, faith had a work in him, and a great work; but herein he
had an unsound heart, as it is said, Verse 2. he walked before the LORD, in
the way of his Fathers, but not with a perfect heart. And you shall find this
very Story, that I have now named, brought in as an evidence that his heart
was not sound, that his faith had not a perfect work: so far his faith went,
thus far he did by virtue of that faith that he had, but a perfect work his
faith had not. Another example is in Rehoboam, 2 Chro, 11. 2, 3, 4.
2 Chronicles. 11. When the Kingdom was divided, and given to Jeroboam, and the
ten Tribes had made that defection from Rehoboam, he gathered together
ninescore thousand fighting men to go up against Israel: but, says the Text,
the Word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, a man of God, saying, Speak to
Rehoboam, the son of solomon, King of Judah, and to all Israel, and Judah,
and Benjamin, saying, Thus says the Lord, You shall not go up to fight
against your brethren, return every man to his house: for this thing is done
by me. They obeyed therefore the Word of the Lord, and returned from going
against Jeroboam. You see here a very great work of faith, that caused him to
give over, to sit down, to be content to lose so great a part of his Kingdom,
and to look no more after it; that, when he had an Army ready of valiant
men, yet he was conteut to sit down; though he were a man that was not
sound-hearted, yet faith had thus far a work in him; and not only for this
time, but for three years after, he cleaued to the Lord, and served him in
all things: and yet, for all this, it had not its perfect work, it carried him
not through: for afterward he departed from the Lord. Beloved, this is a sign
of an unsound heart, when faith shall go so far, when it shall enable a man
to do many things, and yet for all this, it has not its perfect work. We see
the contrary in Abraham, Romans 4. 19.
Romans 4. 19. when he was put to it, when God had made him a promise, that he
should be the Father of many Nations, says the Text, he was not weak in the
faith. The meaning is, he was not unsound, but was perfect in the faith. What
did he do? How did that appear? Says he, he went through, when the Lord
came with such a promise, he considered not his own body, that was dead: for
he was a hundred years old; nor he considered not the deadness of Sarahs
womb: but (says he) he belee^ned that he was able that had promised. This is
given as an evidence of the truth of his faith; he made not a stand in such a
difficult case: for he was not unsound, but he was perfect in the faith. So
likewise, when he came to offer his son; here in the perfection of his faith
was seen. And beloved, by this you may know whether your hearts be right; if
you suffer every grace to have its perfect work, when your faith does not
pick and choose, and take here a promise, and leave there another; here to
believe a threatening, another not to believe; here to take hold on a
Commandment, to believe that this is the will of GOD, in another case not to
believe: for so doing is a sign of an unsound heart.

If you object, Object.
But faith many times has not a perfect work in the Saints, as Moses, at the
waters of strife, says the Text, he failed through vnbeli^fe: and again,
David, when he fled from Saul, to Achis, we see his faith there had not its
perfect work: so likewise, Peter, when the waves began to arise, to swell,
and he began to sink, his faith had not a perfect work.

To this I answer, Ans.
that faith may have a perfect work, that is, there may be an aptness in it,
that ordinarily it goes through the work, though, by some accident, it may be
hindered: for (mark the faith of those) we see David, though he failed at this
time, yet at other times he did not; no more did Moses, nor Peter, which is an
argument that it rose not from unsoundness, from hollownesse of the grace, or
of their hearts: True grace may be interrupted.
but from some interueniall impediment, some passion; as it was a passion in
Moses, he was distempered; and so it was a fear, a mist that was cast before
the eyes of Peter at that time. Now you know a man may be said to have a
perfect eye, and yet, for all that, in a mist he may not be able to see as at
other times; and a man may be said to have a perfect hand, and yet a fit of a
Palsy may make it shake, and make it v^fit for any thing: so a man may have a
perfect taste, able to distinguish one thing from another, yet when he is in
an Ague, in such a fit he takes things amiss; things that are wholesome, seem
bitter to him: so in the graces of the Spirit, there may be sometimes much
imp^rfection admitted, when a man is in the mist, when he is in the fit, when
some distemper, some passion or affection, has ouercast and ouerclouded the
soul, as it were, and possessed he palate; these may be defects, and yet the
grace may be perfect. But you shall know it by this; ordinarily it is not so,
it is but by accident; and therefore it comes to pass but now and then. And as
we say of the grace of faith, so (to give you another instance) truth, or the
knowledge of truth: this great grace, if the heart be sound, will have a
perfect work; it will go through, it will not make a stand here and there,
as it does in those that are unsound, as you see, Romans 1. 18. Romans 1. 18.
it is given there as a sign of an unrighteous man, when they withold the
truth in unrighteousness; that is, when the truth is not suffered to have a
perfect work; when there is truth, and they suffer it perhaps to inform their
understandings, but they suffer it to go no further; when they suffer it not
to walk abroad into all the corners of the soul, into all the inward rooms
of it; or, if they do that, yet they suffer it not to come into the outward
Courts of their conversation, it is a sign that this grace has not a perfect
work, but is restrained: and such an expression you shall find, 2 Pet. 3. 5.
2 Pet. 3. 5. This they willingly know not, (mark) that the heavens were of
old, etc. He speaks there of certain Atheists, that were mockers, and
despisers, that were ready to say, Where is the promise of his coming? do not
all things continue alike, since the time of the Fathers? The Apostle answers
them thus; says he, they have truth in them, there is light enough, GOD has
borne witness to himself in their own consciences; there are many things
that they might object against these temptations of Atheism: but, says he,
they willingly will not know them; that is, they will not take them into
consideration; as if he should say, their will, because they will not be
troubled, because they will live loosely, it suffers them not to understand,
and to enquire into these things, that they might know them; these things they
willingly know not. So, beloved, it is an argument that the knowledge of God,
and the knowledge of the truth has not a perfect work, when there is
something that a man willingly will not know, when a man shall wink with his
eyes, as it is said, Mat. 13. 15. Mat. 13. 15.
They wink with their eyes, that they might not understand with their hearts,
and be converted, that I should heal them. They wink with their eyes; that
is, when the light shines to them, they will not see it; when the conscience
suggests something, when there is somewhat intimated, and whispered to the
hearts of men, their will runs a loose course; therefore they will not suffer
their understandings to be informed, they will not see all the light: whereas a
man whose heart is perfect, if the light begin to appear, if he see it
through a creuice, he opens the windows of his soul, and lets it in, even into
every corner of it; and the ground is, because his heart is sound, he desires
to make his heart perfect, he is not willing to spare it in any thing, he
desires not there should be any exempt place in his heart, or in his life, or
any of his courses; for he sees, Ioh. 3. 21. Ioh. 3. 21.
He that death evil, comes not to the light: but he that loves the truth, he
whose heart is sound, that is not an hypocrite, he comes to the light, he comes
to be enlightened in what he does, he comes to the light, that his deeds might
be made manifest; that is, that it might be evident that his works are
according to Gods will; he desires not that the light should be kept off. This
is another instance. Patience will have her perfect work, and the knowledge of
the truth will have its perfect work: so I may say of all other graces.
Temperance will have its perfect work, if the heart be sincere and sound; that
is, it will restrain every inordinate appetite, it will cause a man to for
bear every inordinate delight, every inordinate pleasure; it will make him
withdraw himself from excess in every thing, in diet, in sports, in ease,
etc. So likewise chastity, holiness, and pureness, it cleanses the heart
from all kind of uncleanness, if it have its perfect work; it suffers none
of that leaven to remain in soul, or body either; neither in the eye, not in
the thought. This is another effect of an upright heart, of one that is perfect
with GOD, that every grace has its perfect work: and by this thou may know,
whether thy heart be sound, or no.

I will add but one more exceeding briefly, 5. Property, or effect, The
Sp^^it is quieted,
and so conclude. This is a fi^th effect, that arises from integrity, and
sincerity of heart; It breeds in us (...), and a quietness of spirit, as you
may see, Iam. 3. Iam. 3. 17.
vlt. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy full of good fruits. That wisdom
is first pure, and then peaceable: As if he should say, The purity of wisdom,
the perfectness, the entirenesse, the sincerity which holy wisdom brings
forth, it is seen in this effect, it will make the heart peaceable; it is
first pure, and then peaceable. His meaning is, that peaceablenesse is an
effect of the pureness and entyrenesse of the heart: so that, when any man's
heart is perfect with GOD, you shall find this effect rising from it, that his
heart is quiet, and humble, and gentle, and peaceable toward men; full of
love, and of mercy, and of good fruits, and of good actions, and works: but
when the heart is impure, and unfound, and hollow, it is awkward, and froward,
and contentious, and implacable toward men; they are not full of mercy, but
full of wrath; they are not full of good fruits, and good works and actions,
but they are like the ^aging Sea, that casts up mire and dirt upon those with
whom they have to do. So that this is the effect of a pure heart, it breeds a
quietness, a peaceablenesse of spirit; whereas the other bring forth tumult,
and a turbulent disposition: they are easy to be entreated, to be handled,
says the Text; whereas the other, whose heart is unsound, they are, as David
says of the wicked, they are as thorns, that they cannot ^asily be handled,
a man cannot easily deal with them, they are not easily entreated. So, my
beloved, this frowardness, this waspishnesse of spirit, this implacablenesse,
is a sign of an unsound heart, of an impure heart, of a heart that is not
perfect with the Lord: as you see, the Devils are the most impure Spirits of
any other, the most full of malice, and of envy, and revenge, of all other.
Jesus Christ, on the other side, as he had the most pure heart, so he was the
most gentle of all others: he returned not rebuke for rebuke, but he was as a
sheep before the shearers, etc. Use a Wolf or a Tiger never so kindly, they
will be still implacable and greedy; use Sheep never so roughly, they will
still be meek and gentle: so it is with the Saints, because their hearts are
pure: I say, the ground of it is this, because an unsound heart breeds in it
continually strong lusts, and eager desires; and eager desires are vnyeelding,
and unruly, and that is the cause of contention, and implacablenesse with men:
whereas when the heart is cleansed, when it is pure, and perfect, it is emptyed
of these strong and domineering lusts, it grows to a quietness of spirit; to
be quiet within, and when it is quiet within, i^ will be peaceable toward
others without. When it is quiet thus, the spirit is ready to see GOD, and to
yield to GOD in his providence, in all unkindness, and in all the evil
dealings of men; they are neither ready to murmur against GOD, nor to fret
against men: for quietness follows a pure heart, as unquietness and
awkwardnesse and frowardness follows impurity and imperfection of heart. So
much shall serve for this.

FINIS.
THE TENTH SERMON.
G^NESIS 17. 1, 2. Walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my
Covenant betwenne me and thee.
I Will not repeat what has been delivered, but come to that which remains,
and so proceed to the second Verse. Last effect of sincerite, To see God.
The last effect therefore of this sincerity, or integrity of heart, is that
which we find expressed, Mat. 5. 8.
Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. That is,
this arises always as an inseparable effect of pureness of heart, that it is
able to see God; to see him here, and it shall see him face to face hereafter.
When the heart is yet unsound and impure, it is not able to see him; but when a
man's spirit is cleansed from that dross, from that corruption, a man is grown
pure, and entire, and faithful, he is able then to see God, that before he
could not do; that is, he is able to see God in his attributes, 1. In his
attributes.
as Moses saw him that was invisible; that is, he saw in him more then he could
see in Pharaoh, he saw him in his power to recompense him; he saw him in his
wrath, and fearfulness, if he had disobeyed him; he saw him in his goodness
and mercy, and therefore he chose him rather then Pharaoh, or his favor.

Again, 2. In his works of providence.
they are able to see him in his works, as Jacob did; it is said of him, he
was a plain man, and he was able to see the LORD, he was able to see him in
the works of his providence, he was able to see him when he got the goods of
Laban; says he, God has took the goods from your Father, and has given
them to me; it is his speech to his wives: he did see him, when he met with
Esau, (says the Text) he saw the face of God, when he saw the face of Esau;
he saw him in his cattle, and in his children that he had gotten: these are
the cattle, and these are the wives, and the children, and the bands, that God
of his goodness has given me: he was able to see God in all these; he saw
him in all his works of providence and goodness: so likewise in all his
chastisements. David saw God in the cursing of Shimei; It is the LORD that has
bid him do it: And so Job, he saw God, it is he that has given, and he that
has taken away, he ouerlooked those that were the im^mediate instruments.

Thirdly, 3. In his guidance and direction.
they see him in his guidance and direction, they are able to see the fiery
cloudy Pillar, which way they are led by him; they are able to see which way he
would have them go, upon all occasions, when others walk in darkness, and
they see not the way that God would lead them.

Lastly, 4. In his Ordinances.
they see him in his ordinances, they see God in the preaching of the Word,
they receive it not as the word of man, but, as it is indeed, the word of God:
they see him in the Sacraments, for they are able to discern the Lords body,
that is, they able to see Christ crucisied, to esteem him, and to set that
price upon him as they ought, and so they come prepared; this they are able to
do, because they are pure: but when the heart is yet unsound and impure, they
are not able to see God clearly; a sight and a knowledge they have, but it is
another kind of knowledge. So much shall serve for that point.

And I will make my Covenant, etc. These words contain a further and a greater
favor expressed to Abraham, then the former words do: it was a great merc^ to
him, to express thus much to him, I am all-sufficient, I am able to help thee,
I am thy exceeding great reward, I am able to be a Sun* and a Shield unto
thee, to fill thee with all comfort, and to deliver thee from all evil: but
yet this which is here added, is a mercy of a much higher nature, (says the
Lord) I will make my Covenant between me and thee; that is, I will not only
tell thee what I am able to do, I will not only express to thee in general,
that I will deal well with thee, that I have a willingness and ability to
recompense thee, if thou walk before me, and serve me, and be perfect; but I
am willing to enter into Covenant with thee, that is, I will bind my self, I
will engage my self, I will enter into bond, as it were, I will not be at
li^erty any more, but I am willing even to make a Covenant, a compact and
agreement with thee. Genesis 17. 7.
I will make my* Covenant between me and thee: that is the general. You
shall find it expressed more at large, Verse. 7. Moreover I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a GOD to thee, and to thy seed after thee:
that is, as if he should say, First, I am not only willing, to make it with
thee, but with thy seed.

Secondly, I will not make a temporary Covenant, but an everlasting Covenant,
there shall be a mutual engagement between us, and it shall continue for
ever, both to thy self and to thy posterity: in particular, it is added I will
multiply thee exceedingly, that is but a branch of the Covenant, I will make
thee a Father of many Nations, thou shall have a Son, and his children shall
grow in number as the stars of heaven, and as the dust of the earth; that is
but a particular: whence, this is the point that we have to observe, that God
enters into Covenant with all those that are faithful. Doct.


For it was not with Abra^am, as he was Abraham, but as he was a faithful
man; and therefore all the faithful are reckoned to be the seed of Abraham.
For the opening of this to you, which is one of the maine points in Divinity, I
will show you these five things:

First, what this Covenant is.

Secondly, with whom it is made.

Thirdly, how we shall know whether we be in the Covenant or no.

Fourthly, what the breach of this Covenant is.

Lastly, the reasons why God is willing to make a Covenant with men.

1. What this Covenant is. Twofold Covenant, 1. of works, 2. of grace.
You must know Covenant, there is a Covenant of works, and a Covenant of
grace: The Covenant of works runs in these terms, Do this, and thou shall
live, and I will be thy GOD. This is the Covenant that was made with Adam, and
the Covenant that is expressed by Moses in the Moral Law, Do this, and line.
The second is the Covenant of Grace, and tha^ ^unnes in these terms* Thou
shall b^leeue, thou shall take my Son for thy Lord, and thy Sauioar, and ^hou
shall likewise receive the gift of righteousness, which was wrought by him,
for an absolution of thy sinues, for a reconci. liation with me, and thereupon
thou shall grow up into love, and obedience toward me, then I will be thy God,
and thou shall be my people. This is the Covenant of grace, Thou shall believe,
and take my Son, and accept of the gift of righteousness, A threesold
difference between them.
and I will be thy God. The difference between them you shall find, 2 Cor. 3.
where you shall see 3. differences, to reduce them to those heads, I will not
trouble you with particular places, lest I stay too long upon them.

The first Covenant was a Ministration of the Letter; 1. Difference.
that is, in the first Covenant, there was no more heard nor seen, but the
naked Commandment, it was written in Tables of stone, and presented to them,
there went; with it no aptness, no disposition to keep it; they heard what
the Law was, they saw what God required, but there was no more and those that
were decla^ers of it, were but the Ministeri of the letter, and not of the
Spirit.

Secondly, 2. Difference.
this Covenant, it brings only a servile fear, and an enmity; for when a man
looks upon the Author of this Covenant, and he hears no more but the Law, and
what it requires; he looks upon God as a hard Master, as an enemy; again, he
looks upon his Law as a hard and cruel Law, as a heavy yoke, as an
unsupportable bondage, and therefore he hates i^, and wishes there were no such
law; he runs from it, as a Bond-slaue runs from his master, as far as it is
in his power. This is that which is said Gal. 4. Gal. 4. 24.
Hagar gendreth to bondage: that is, the Covenant of works it begets bondmen
and slaves, and not sons, and freemen: and likewise that, Heb. 12. 18. Heb.
12. 18.
says the Apostle, You are not come to Mount Sinai, to the burning of fire, to
clouds, to darkness, and tempest, to the sound of a Trumpet, so that Moses
himself did quake and tremble. That is, when a man looks upon this Covenant
of works, it causes in him a fear, and an enmity: that is the 2. difference.

The third is, 3. Difference.
That it is a ministration of death, as it is called, 2 Cor. 3. a ministration
of death, that is, it propounds a curse to all those that do not keep it, and
it shows no means to avoid it; and therefore a man is affected to it, and to
God the Author of it, as one is to an enemy that seeks his destruction; and
therefore the ministratio^ of it is said to be the ministratio^ of death. The
reason of all this is, not because there is any ill in the Law, it is a
ministration of the letter, it begets fear and emity, it is a ministratio^ of
death; I say this arises not from hence, that the Law of God is a cruel
deadly Law: for the Law is good, but it arises from the weakness and the
infirmity of the flesh: As for example, if you would take a Pot^ers vessel,
and dash it against a firm wall; the reason why the wall is the destruction of
the vessel, is not any infirmity or weakness in the wall, for it is the
excellency and virtue of the wall to be hard, it should be so; but it is the
weakness, and fragility, and brit^lenesse of the Vessel, and thence comes it
to be broken asu^der: and so in this case, the reason why this Law, or
Covenant of works (is a ministration of death, and of enmity, is not because
there is any imperfection in the Law, it arises rather from the perfection of
it, but) is from the weakness of the flesh, that is not able to keep the Law;
it is the excellency of the Law, that it is so perfect, that a man is not able
to keep it; and so it arises from the weakness and in^irmity of the flesh,
that is not able to observe this Law.

Now, on the other side, as this is the Covenant of works, so you shall find
that the Covenant of grace,

First, is a ministration of the Spirit, and not of the letter.

Secondly, a ministration of love, not of enmity; of freedom, not of bondage;
it is a ministration of righteousness, as it is there called the ministration
of righteousness; for if the ministration of condemnation were glorious, much
more shall the ministration of righteonsnesse exceed in glory.

Thirdly, a ministration of life and justification, and not a ministration of
death and condemnation. The ground of this, and how it is thus, we shall show
show you, by expressing to you, he order how these depend, and follow one upon
the other: when a man has looked upon the Covenant of works, and sees death
in it, sees a strict Law that he is not able to keep; then come^ the Covenant
of grace, and shows to him a righteousness to satisfy this Law, that
himself never wrought, shows him a way of obtaining pardon and remission for
the sins that he has committed against this Law, by the death and
satisfaction of another; when he sees this, he sees withal the goodness and
mercy of GOD, giving this to him, for his salvation, out of his free grace and
mercy; when he sees this, the opinion of a sinner is changed: mark; I say,
his opinion, his disposition and affection is altered, he looks not upon God
now as upon a hard and cruel Master, but he looks upon him now as a God
exceeding full of mercy and compassion; whence this follows, that his heart
melts toward the Lord, it relents, it comes to be a soft heart, that is easy
and tractable, it is not haled now to the Commandment, but out of an ingenuity
and willingness, he comes and serves the LORD with alac^ity and
cheerefuln^sse: this disposition is wrought upon him, because now he sees
another way, his apprehension is altered, even as a servant, when it is
revealed to him that he is a son, and that those hard taskes that are laid on
him, are the best way to lead him to happiness, they are but rules of
direction, for his own wealth, and for his own advantage, he does them now
with all willingness, the case is altered, he looks not now upon the Law of
GOD as an enemy, or as a hard bondage, but he looks upon all the Law of God,
as a wholesome and profitable rule of direction, that he is willing to keep
for his own comfort: now when the heart is thus softened, then the Spirit of
God is sent into his heart, and writes the Law of GOD in his inward parts, as
you shall see, if you compare these two places together, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. Heb.
8. 8, 9, 10.
Behold, says the Lord, I will make a new Covenant, and this is the Testament
that I will make with the House of Israel: After those days, says the Lord, I
will put my Laws into their minds, and in their hearts will I write them, and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people: If you compare it with that 2
Cor. 3. 2, 3. You are our Epistle written in our hearts, which is understood
and read of all men, in that you are manifest to be the Epistle of Christ,
manifested by us, and written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living
God, not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshy Tables of the heart. The meaning
of it is this, when the heart is once softened, The Metaphor of writing the Law
in man's heart, explained 3. ways.
God sends his Spirit to write his Laws in the heart: which Me^aphor will be
expressed to you in these three things:

wax, and take it away again, you find in the wax the same impression that
was upon the seal; you shall see in it, stamp answering to stamp, character
to character, print to print; so it is in the hearts of the faithful, after
they are once thus sof^ned, the Spirit of God writes the Law in their hearts,
so that there is a Law within, answerable to the Law without, that is, an
inward aptness, answering every particular of the Law, an inward disposition,
whereby a man is inclined to keep the Law in all points; which Law within, is
called the law of the mind: therefore, if you add to this, that Romans 7. I see
a law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, so there is a Law
in the mind within, answerable to the Law of GOD without; it answers it, as
Lead answers the mould, after it is cast into it; it answers it, as Tallie
answers to Tallie, as Indenture answers to Indenture, so it agrees with it in
all things; that is, there is an aptness put into the mind, that it is able,
and willing, and disposed in some measure to keep every Commandment, that
answers to all the particular Commandments of the Law of GOD; this is to
have the Law of GOD written in the mind: and this is that which is first meant
by it, there is a Law within, answerable to the Law without in all things.

The 2. thing meant by it is, that it is not only as when letters are ingraued
in Marble, you know, they continue there, they are not easily worn out, and
that is meant by it, I will plant my Law in thy heart, it shall never out
again, there I will write it, there it shall continue: so that is the second
thing that is meant by it, it shall be natural to you; for that is meant by
this, when it is said, it shall be printed, it shall be graven and written in
the heart; and likewise it shall be perpetual, it shall never wear out
again, as things that are written in the dust, but it shall be written so as
it shall never again be obliterated.

Christ that writes the Epistle, the Epistle is his, for these works he does
in it, it is he that takes the pen, it is he that handles it, and uses it, it
is he that puts ink into the pen, it is he that applies it; so that though the
Minister be the immediate writer of these Laws in the heart, yet the ink is
the Holy Ghost, and it comes originally from Christ; and besides, they are not
left to themselves, but the LORD must concur with them immediately; we are
but coeworkers with him, he holds our hands, as it were, when we write the
Epistle in any man's heart, it is he that guides the pen, it is he that puts
ink into it, it comes originally from him, and therefore the Epistle is his.
Besides, this is further to be considered in this Metaphor, that God will
write his Laws in our hearts, that we may see these Laws, we may read them,
and understand them: for when a thing is written, God may see it, and man may
see it; a man himself may see it, and others also may read it: God sees it
himself, for he has written it: man sees it, for he is able to see the Law
in his mind, he is able to see that habitual disposition that is infused into
him: and others are able to see it; for, says he, you are our Epistle, evident
to all men; that is, they see the fruits and effects of it, as you may see
letters graven in stone, so they see this Law written in your hearts. So,
beloved, you see now what this Covenant of Grace is, and how it differs from
the Covenant of Works; it is the ministration, not of the letter, but of the
Spirit, because it does not only present the o^tward letter of the
Commandment, but there is a Law written within, and that is done by virtue of
the Spirit. So that the order is this; first, it reueales righteousness;
secondly, it softens the heart, it is the ministration of the Spirit; and
thirdly, it is a ministration of love, it is a ministration of freedom, and
not of bondage and enmity: for when the Law is thus written, a man is not haled
to it, he comes not to it as a bond-slaue, to do his work, but he comes
willingly, he finds he has some ability to do it, he finds a delight in it,
as Paul says, I delight in the Law of God according to the inward man. So you
^ee the difference between the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Works.
Now this Covenant of Grace is two^old, Covenant of Grace twofold
it is either the Old Testament or the New: they both agree in substance, they
differ only in the manner of the administration; that, which is called the New
Testament, Heb. 7. 8* 9. which is opposed to the Old Testament, for substance,
is the same Covenant, they are both the Covenant of Grace, only they differ in
the manner; and you shall find these 6. Six differences between them.
differences between them.



Christ, and that satisfaction he gave to his Father by his death, and likewise
the inward sanctification of the Spirit, signified by the washing of water, and
also the works and the prayers of the Saints, that are sweet as Incense: now
(says the Text, Gal. 4.) Gal. 4.
these were clements, and rudiments that God used to them as children; that is,
as children have their A, B, C, their first elements, so GOD did show to the
^ew^s ^hese spiritual mysteries, not in themselves, but in these types and
shadows they were able to see the^ from day to day: for therein was their
weakness, they were not so able as to conceive spiritual things without a
mediate view; they saw the blood shed, and again, they saw the washings, and
the rites, these were in their eye; whereas now in the time of the Gospel,
these things are taught to us, these we comprehend in our minds, we serve the
Lord in spirit and in truth, but there is not that visible sight, that was a
help to their weakness; so that these differ, as the Image, and the substance
it self, even as you see things in prospectiue shows, and in painting, that
are different from the things themselves, when you come to see Countries, and
Cities, and Mountains, and Woods, it is another thing. And this is the second
difference between the Testaments, the one was expressed but in types and
shadows, the other has the substance it self.

Thirdly they differ in this; the Old Testament Heb. 8. 18.) Heb. 8. 18.
for the Commandment that went before was dissanulled because of the weakness
and unprofitableness thereof: for the Law made nothing perfect, but the
bringing in of a better hope makes perfect, by which we draw near to GOD;
that is, this was able of it self to do nothing, further then as it did lead
to that which was effectual, therefore it waxed old, and vanished away; so he
puts them together; it was weak and unprofitable, and therefore it continued
no^, it had an end, as you know, the second proved eff^ct^all to take a way
sin, and to sanctifi^ us, and therefore it is an everlasting Covenant, the
Testament that continues for ever.

Ex. 2^.
as we see, Exodus 24. it is called the blood of the Covenant* wherewith the
Book of the Covenant was sprinkled, that is, the shedding of the blood of
beasts confirmed the Covenant; but this is confirmed by the death of Christ
himself, and accordingly, it has new seals put to it, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, when the Old Testament had other seals, Circumcision, and the
Passover.

Heb. 8. 10. Heb. 8. 10.
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, etc.
And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest of
them. That is, they shall know much more, and that which they do know, they
shall know in another manner: they shall know it more distinctly, more
particularly. Moreover, as the knowldege is greater, so the promises are better
promises, Heb. 8. 6. Heb. 8. 6.
high Priest has obtained a more excellent office, in as much as he is the
Mediator of a better Testament, established upon better promises. The meaning
of it is this, the promises which were made in the Old Testament, (though the
promise of salvation was not excluded, yet) the maine of them, the most
appearing and insisted on, were, they should have the Land of Canaan, and they
should have an outward prosperity, you see the old Testament much insists upon
that; the New Testament meddles little with them, but with promises of
salvation, remission of sins, sanctification by the Spirit: therefore, says
the Apostle here, it is established upon better promises. And again, there is
a larger effusion of the Spirit, the Spirit is now powered on us in a greater
measure, then it was distilled by drops, now the Lord has dispensed it in a
greater abundance to the sons of men, in the time of the Gospel, there is
greater measure of grace, and it follows upon the other, Grace and truth come
by Jesus Christ; that is, because there was more truth, and more knowledge,
there went likewise more grace with it; as there is a greater reu^lation, so
likewise there goes more grace: that is a sure rule, that al knowledge, when it
is increased, when it is saving knowledge taught by GOD, it carries grace
proportionably with it. This is the fifth difference.

Moses was the Mediator of the Old Testament, that is, it was he that declared
it, it was he again that was the executioner of it; but we have a high
Priest, that has obtained a more excellent office, in as much as he is the
Mediator of a better Testament; that is, now Christ is the Mediator of the
Covenant, it is he that declares the Covenant; and, secondly, it is he, that
by the interuention of a certain Compact, of certain Articles of agreement,
has reconciled the disagreeing parties, he has gone between them, as it were,
and has undertaken for both sides; he has undertaken on Gods part, these and
these things shall be done, all his promises are Yea, and Amen, in him: and
again he has undertaken on our part, to give satisfaction by his death, and
likewise to make us obedient to his Father: This he does, this is to be a
Mediator of the Covenant. I will not stand longer on this; I come briefly to
make some use of it, and leave the other 4 things (that is, With who^ this
Covenant is made; How a man shall know whether he be within the Covenant; When
this Covenant is broken; and The reason why God will make this Covenant with
men) to another occasion.

Now this use we will make of it: Use 1.
First, we may consider hence the great goodness of GOD, that he is willing to
enter into Covenant with mortal men. My beloved, it is a thing that is not
sufficiently considered of us, how great a mercy it is, that the glorious GOD
of Heaven and Earth should be willing to enter into Covenant, that he should be
willing to indent with us, as it were, that he should be willing to make
himself a debtor to us. If we consider it, it is an exceeding great mercy,
when we think^ thus with our selves, he is in heaven, and we are on earth;
he the glorious GOD, w^e dust and ashes; he the Creator, and we but
creatures; and yet he is willing to enter into Covenant, which implies kind of
equality* between us; as when Jonathan and David made a Covenant, though there
was a difference, the one was a Kings son, yet, notwithstanding* when the
Covenant of friendship was made, there did arise a kind of eq^ality between
them; so it is between the LORD and us, when he is once willing to enter into
Covenant with us. Beloved, this should teach us to magnify the mercy of God,
and to be ready to say, as David did, What am I, or what is my Fathers House,
that I should be raised hitherto, that I should enter into Covenant with the
great GOD, that he should come to a Campact and agreement with me, that he
should tie himself, and bind himself to become (...) You know, (...) small
thing to enter into Covenant with GOD, to be in Covenant with the King of
Kings: we commonly reckon it a great adua^^age to have alliance* to be in
confederation with strong Princes. You see what a Covenant there was between
Iehoshaphat and Acha^, see how Iehoshaphat expresses himself, Truly, says
he* there is a League between us, (What then?) therefore my horses are thy
horses, and my people are thy people; and so it is betwe^ne God and us* when
there is a Covenant between us, then his strength is our strength, and his
Armies are our Armies, we have interest, in all; there is an offensive and a
defensine League; and when we seek to him, and put him in mind of it, he can
not deny us. The people of Rome had other parts and Nations, that were allies
with them, and if they were to fight, at any time, the Romans were bound in
honor to defend them, and to assist them, and they did it, with as much
diligence, as they defended their own City of Rome. If we do implore GOD^
aid, do you think that God will break his Covenant? Will he not (...) up
himself, to scatter his and our (...) Certainly he will. This great benefit
you have; therefore you have cause to magnify your ^elues in this Condition;
and to bless the Lord, to magnify him for his great goodness, that he would
e^ter into Covenant with you; this was the greatest favor that ever he showed
to Abraham, and it is the very scope of this place; Abraham, I am willing to
enter into Covenant, to tie my self, to enter into bond; and therefore, since
the LORD is not ashamed to make us his people, let us not be ashamed to call
him our God, to profess it, and make it good upon all occasions. This is the
first use.

Secondly, Use 2.
from this difference of the Covenants, you have these two things to obse^ue:
First, in that the Covenant of Grace only, is the ministration of the Spirit,
when the other is but the ministration of the letter, it should teach us thus
much, to labor to grow to assurance of the forgiveness of our sins. If a
man would desire to change his course, to have his heart renewed, to be made a
new creature, to be translated from death to life; beloved, the way is not to
consider presently the Commandment, for a man to think with himself, this I
ought to do, and I will set about it, I have made a Covenant, I have resolved
with my self to do it, but the way is, to labor to get assurance of
forgiveness, to labor to apprehend the Covenant of Grace: for by that means
thy heart shall be softened, there shall be an infusion of the Spirit, that
shall write the Law of God in thy inward parts: all those places of Scripture
make this good, wherein it is said, faith purifieth the heart, and by the
promises we are made partakers of the godly nature, as 2. Pet. 1. 4. 2 Pet. 1.
4.
and likewise, Heb. 9. 14. Heb. 9. 14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, which, through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without fault to God, purge your conscience from dead works,
to serve the living GOD. The meaning is this, if a man would have his
conscience purged from dead works, let him labor for faith, whereby he may
be justified, let him labor to be sprinkled with the blood of Christ, to have
assurance of the forgiveness and pardon of his sins, through that blood,
then he shall have that Spirit put into his heart, that eternal Spirit, that
shall purge and cleanse his conscience from dead works. So likewise, Gal. 3.
Gal. 3.
Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the Law? Did you not rather
receive it by the hearing of ^aith preached? And so, Gal. 5. Gal. 5.
Faith that works by love; that is, it is faith that brings forth love, and
love sets us on work. All these show thus much unto us, that the best way to
heal any strong lust, the best way to change our hearts, to get victory over
any sin, that it may not have dominion over us, to have our conscience cleansed
from dead works, to he made partakers of the divine nature, is to grow up in
the* assurance of the love of God to us in Christ, to get assurance of pardon
and forgiveness: for, beloved, know this, if the heart do no more but look
to the Commandment, if you hear only that there are such duties to be done,
and consider them, and you compare your own heart and the Commandment
together, there grows a quarrel between the heart and the Commandment, an
ex^l^eration between them, and an enmi^y, they look one upon another as
enemies; but when the heart is softened, and reconciled to God, it closes with
the Commandment, as the soft clay does with the mould, and is ready to receive
any impression; but, till then, it rebels against the Commandment, and stands
out as a hard stone, that receives no impression; and therefore the way is not
^o go about to reform our lives as moral men, to think with thy self, there
are these duties, I must take a course to keep them, and enter into vows in
particular courses with my self to do them: no, my beloved, the way is to get
assurance of forgiveness, to labor to be partaker of the Covenant of Grace:
your hearts will then be softened, when you have received the Spirit, that has
wrought in your hearts a disposition answerable to the Law without, when the
Law is put into your minds. And this is the first difference.

The 2. 2. Difference.
is, in regard of the difference of the two Testaments, the second Testament
being stablished upon better promises. Quest.
What is the reason that the New Testament is said to be stablished upon
better promises? Beloved, Ans.
you shall find this to be the condition of the New Testament, you shall find
in it very little expression of the promises of this life; look in all the
Epi^tles of paul, and the other Epistles, look to all the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and you shall see the things that are i^erated still they are these;
You shall be saved, you shall have your sins forgiven, you shall be
justified, you shall be sanctified, you shall receive the adoption of sons,
you shall receive the high price of your calling, etc. These are the things
that Paul every where magnifies, as the condition that exceeds, and goes beyond
the conditions in our forefathers times: Now this great Mystery is revealed,
now these great riches are opened, that before were hid. Whence you may gather
this much, that grace and spiritual things, spiritual privileges, things
belonging to the Kingdom of God, and of jesus Christ, exceed much all outward
and temporal happiness: Quest.
Why are they otherwise called better promises? Ans.
There are many other places, I know, to show the vanity of outward things, and
to prefer spiritual things before them; but let this be added to the rest;
this Covenant is established on better promises; labor then to work your
hearts fully to that persuasion, namely, to think with your selves, it is
better to be rich in grace, better to have the privileges of Jesus Christ,
then to be rich in this world, Reu. 2. Re^. 2.
I know thy poverty, but thou art rich. You must think with your selves, this
is the great riches; and therefore the Apostle exhorts rich men, that
they-change these other riches they enjoy, to spiritual riches. Now a man will
never be exhorted to change, except it be for the better. Charge those that
are rich in the world, that they be rich in good works: let them so use their
riches, so dispense them, so manage them, that they may turn to other riches.
When a man is rich in knowledge, as it is said of the Corinthians, that they
were rich in all knowledge, and in every grace, These are the better promises,
this is the better and more glorious condition. So that, if there should be a
Census of men, as one may so say, if there should be an estimation of men, as
there was wont to be amongst the Romans, they were put into several
conditions, and one was worth thus much, and another so much. Indeed, If God
should make such a Census; as every man is richer in grace, as he excels in
these better privileges, as he has had these better promises fulfilled more
or less to him, so he should be reckoned a more excellent man, and so should
every man esteem both of himself and others: and there is very great reason
for it; because when a man is rich in grace, rich in spiritual blessings, when
he has the spiritual promises, he has Go^^ Image renewed in him, he has God
to be his friend, who is the Governor of the world, and he is rich (as I
said) whom God favors; he has grace that heales his soul, which is that that
makes his happiness: It is that, which is the inward fashioning of every man's
appreh^^sion* that makes him happy, that brings comfort to him. Now they are
these better promises, they are the graces, the consolations of the Spirit, the
work of the Holy Ghost, the virtue of regeneration; I say, it is that that
fashions the heart, and the inward apprehension; it is tha^ that heales the
soul, and adornes it; it is that tha^ puts it into another, a fitter
condition, and it far goes beyond all other ^emporall felicity; that reaches
not to the inward man, it makes (...) is the Governor of the world to be his
friend; other friends he may have, tha^ may make him potent upon the earth, but
God, in whose hand is his life, and all his ways, it mak^s not^ him his
friend. Beloved, learn thus to judge of the condition of the Church. You
think the Church is in a miserable* estate, when you see it a little under
hatches, when you see in down, when you see it harrowed, and plowed by the
enemies; the condition of the Church in the New Testament is to be so; they
have a poor ou^side, yet (...); they have a sorrowful ou^side, though always
rejoicing* as (...) himself, and all the Apostles were herein exemplary for
after Ages of the Church, yet we must not think, because the Church is down
a little because i^ wants that outward prosperity that before it enjoyed, that
therefore it is the worse, It is a true observation of one, when there were but
wooden Chalices, then there w^r^ golden Priests; and in after time* when there
were golden Chali^es* they had wooden Priests: so it is, when the Church is in
a lower condition, commonly it prospers best; and indeed, properly the
prosperity of the Church consists in these better promises, the* outward peace
is not so proper and so peculiar to it. And, as of the Church, so I may say of
every particular man: Think not, beloved, with your selves, when your outward
condition is base and low, that it is more miserable; your happiness stands in
better promises: when a man has Gai^s prosperity, that is, when his soul
prospers, that is his best condition; and commonly his soul prospers best,
when his outward estate fares the worst: the winter of his outward condition is
usually the spring time of his soul; we should learn to judge thus. You know,
it is an obseruable thing, that the promises of outward prosperity were made to
the Church of God, whiles it was yet in its infancy, while it was weak; so
that this you may observe from it, that it is a sign of childishness, and
weakness, and infirmity, that a man is not grown perfect, that he is not
grown to maturity, to think outward prosperity to be the better condition.
The Jews had these promises, but in regard of their infancy, and when the
Church grew up to a greater height, when it grew to manbood (as it were) we
have little mention of any such promises as these; the promises are quite of
another nature; and therefore when you are able to outgrow those opinions, when
you are able to look on things with another eye, when you think this outward
prosperity to be but a trifle, in comparison of the better promises, it is a
sign you are grown up to more strenght. You see, Solomon, when he came to
himself, when his wisdom returned to him, (as I may so say) you see how he
looked on all outward things, how he goes through all the particulars, they are
vanity and vexation of spirit. Solomon, when he was old, when he had the
wisdom of experience joined together with that infused wisdom that he had
from the Holy Ghost, made this the sum of all, that outward prosperity is
mere vanity, an extreme vanity, a vanity that he could not enough express,
and only he magnifies these better promises; this he magnifies as the better
condition, to fear God and keep his Commandments, etc.

FINIS.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 2. And I will make my Covenant betwenne me and thee.
THe third Use (which we did but touch upon the last day, 3. Use.
and mean at this time somewhat to enlarge) is, To mortify sin, by applying
the promise of free pardon.
that if the Covenant of the Law, and likewise the Old Testament, as it
consists in types and shadows, be but a ministration of the letter, a
ministration of bondage, and a ministration of enmity: But this new Covenant,
this Covenant of Grace, is the ministration of the Spirit, the ministration of
love, the ministration of freedom, the ministration of righteousness, and the
ministration of life: then, beloues, we may gather this from it, that if a man
will obtain the Spirit, and thereby mortify the deeds of the body, if he
would be delivered from the bondage of sin and of death; then let him make
use of, and apply to himself the Covenant of Grace, the free promises of the
pardon and remission of sins, let him apply them, that is the way to get the
Spirit, that is the way to mortify the deeds of the flesh, that is the way to
get his heart changed, that is the way to be made a new creature. For the
better understanding of which, this is to he observed, that which keeps every
man off, that which keeps men in a condition of strangeness from the life of
God, is, because they see such difficulties in the commandments of GOD, as
they are not able to keep, when they look upon the Commandment, and on the
stubbornness of their own hearts, and the indisposition that is in them to
yield obedience, they think there is no hope, and therefore they never go
about it: for they see the Commandment, and they find in their own heart no
disposition to keep it, but an aptness to rise in rebellion against it; I say,
this keeps men off from the life of God: But, on the other side, when a man
looks upon the promises, he begins to see the Covenant that his sins shall
be put a way, he begins to see the goodness, and the mercy, and the tender
compassion of God toward him; he begins to see a possibility of fulfilling
the Law, in such a manner as GOD now requires; then his heart melts, he
becomes not only applyable to the Commandment, but is ready to delight in it;
this a man gets by applying his heart to the Covenant of grace, or by applying
the Covenant of Grace to himself; that very applying of the promises of
forgiveness, I say, it begets a disposition in the heart, which the Scriptures
call a new life; that even as you see the Sun, when it applies its beams to
a fitly disposed matter, and stays upon it, when it pitcheth its beams upon
it with any continuance, it begins to beget life and motion in it, and makes it
a living creature: so does the Covenant of Grace, when it is applied to the
heart of a man, it begins to beget life in him, and to make him a new creature,
it makes him another man: there is that power in the Covenant of Grace, in the
promises of the pardon and forgiveness of sins, that it begets another life in
a man, it makes him a new creature, it makes him a living creature to GOD,
which before he was not; the ground of which you shall see, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 2 Cor.
3. 6.
He has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but
of the Spirit: for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. Mark it, the
meaning of it is this, when the Covenant of works is delivered to you, that is,
when you hear the Law, the Commands, the duty you cannot perform, there is no
more delivered to you but the bare letter, that is, you know the duty, and no
more. And what does this duty do? what do these Commandments and precepts
do, when they are applied to the heart of man? Says he, they kill. Now that
which kills, fights before it kills, and that which fights must needs be an
enemy: so then the Commandment is an Enemy, that is, every man esteems it as
an enemy to himself, and therefore has an enemy-like affection to it again;
that is, he hates it, he would be rid of it, he wishes there were no such Law
or Commandment, he desires it should be dealt with as he would have an enemy
dealt with, he would have it utterly taken away; when they grow in enmity one
with another, as indeed they do, the naked Commandment and the heart are at
enmity: for the Commandment would have one thing, and the heart would have
another; there are contrary wills, and there is a striving between them, the
one striving this way, the other that way, the one resisting the other, and in
the end, the Law and the Commandment gets the victory; because the sting of
the Law is sin: now the Law is the cause of sin, as a straight Rule is the
cause of crookedness; for without the Law there should be no sin: now it
causes sin; for if there were no Law, you know there could be no fear, no
transgression; because there could be nothing against which the transgression
should come, this sin is the death of a man, so now the letter kills: But come
now to the Covenant of Grace, says the Text, it is the ministration of the
Spirit, and the Spirit gives life; that is, when a man looks on the Covenant
of Grace, he looks not on it now as an enemy, as he did before upon the
Commandment, but he sees in it much love, and much friendship to wards him; he
sees God intends not any hurt, any evil to him, as he apprehended before; he
sees God exceeding kind, and merciful, and willing to put away all his
sins, and willing to accept the sincerity of his obedience, though there be
not a perfection of obedience; now he begins to change his opinion, both of God
and of all his Laws, and precepts; when he sees Gods kindness toward him,
and his compassion and readiness to forgive him, then his heart begins to
relent toward the Lord again, he begins to magnify Gods goodness, and to
condemn himself, he believes those promises, and thence he grows up in love
toward GOD; I say, he grows up in faith, and love, and in this act of faith
is the Spirit infused into his heart; this Spirit being thus infused, writes
the Law in his inward pa^ts, that is it that breeds in him a holy disposition,
that inables him in some measure to keep the Law, it prints in him all those
graces that give him strength to observe the Commandments that God has given
him: so, my beloved, if a man will go about this great work, to change his
heart, and to change his life, let him not go about it as a moral man; that
is, let him not only consider what Commandments there are, what the rectitude
is that the LORD requires, and how to bring his heart to it; but let him go
about it as a Christian, that is, let him believe the promises of pardon in the
blood of Christ, and the very believing of those promises, will be able to
cleanse and purge the heart from dead works: (in that place* we then named, and
we could do no more but name it) you shall find it, Heb. 9. 14. Heb. 9. 14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, which by the eternal Spirit offered
himself without fault to God, purge your consciences from dead works, to
serve the living God. The meaning of it is this, when a man has once applied
the blood of Christ for his justification, this effect will follow upon it,
there will accompany it a certain vigor, a certain virtue, a certain power
and strength, which will also purge his conscience from dead works; that is,
there shall go a power of the Holy Ghost together with this blood, that shall
not only forbid him, and show him that he ought not to do such and such
evil things, but it shall cleanse his conscience from those roots of dead
works, those corrupt lusts, and sinful affections, that are in him, that
dispose him to that evil; he shall find this power growing upon him, if he
do but apply the blood, that is, if he apply the promise of pardon and
forgiveness through the blood of Jesus Christ. The like you shall see, Gal. 3.
5. Gal. 3. ^.
He that ministers to you the Spirit, and works miracles amongst you, does he
do it through the works of the Law, or through the hearing of faith preached?
That is, says the Apostle, if I should only deliver to you the Commandments,
and the Precepts, and the Rules, by which you ought to walk, I might preach
long enough to you, but you should never have ability to keep any of these;
says he, you may observe those that preach the Law to you, did you receive the
Spirit then? no, but when I preached to you the promises of pardon and
forgiveness, then you received the Spirit, it was conveyed into your hearts.

Now, A double infusion of the Spirit.
I take it, there is a double meaning of this infusion of the Spirit here: in
the time of the Apostles, there was a miraculous infusion and giving of the
Holy Ghost, that when they preached to them, as Peter to Cornelius, and Paul to
others, and laid their hands on them, the Holy Ghost fell on them; that is,
they were filled presently with an immediate infusion of knowledge; they had,
some the gift of tongues, some extraordinary manifestation of the Spirit; says
the Apostle, when this was done, was it done by the preaching of the Law? was
it not done by the preaching of Christ, and by offering to you the pardon and
forgiveness of sins through him? Therefore you see how he expresses it; He
therefore that minist^eth the Spirit to you, and works miracles among you, how
does he work these miracles? he does them not by the works of the Law, but
by the hearing of faith preached; that is, by our preaching of it, and your
hearing it: So, my beloved, look how the S^i^it was then conueighed to men,
after the same manner it must now be conveyed to us: so that believing the
promises is the way to get the heart healed; when a man has any strong lust to
conflict wi^hall, he must not think, that setting himself with strong vows
and resolu^ions to resist it, is the way to begin with: no, the way is to get
assurance of pardon, to get ass^rance of Gods love to himself, in Christ, to
labor to get communion between Christ and himself, to labor to delight in
God, as he will when there once are ^ermes of reconciliation between them, and
when this is done, his heart will grow to an application of the Commandment,
it will cloze with the Commandment: Whereas before it resisted it, and
rebelled against it, it will cleave to it, and love it, and delight in it, and
will receive an impression from it: this I take likewise to be the meaning of
that 2. Pet. 1. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Hereby (says he) we have most gracious promises, and are thereby made
partakers of the Divine nature: that by them we shall be partakers of the godly
nature; that is, by believing the promises of pardon, we are thereby made
par^akers of the godly nature; there is a renewing, there is a change of the
nature, a man is made another nature, even while he is looking upon the
promise of pardon and remission, the promises of the New Covenant, that offer
Jesus Christ, and the gift of righteousness through him, even by believing
those promises it is wrought.

That it is so, you may compare this with that Romans 6. where this objection is
made, If there be a promise of pardon, and of grace, through Christ, then
belike we may live as we list? No, says the Apostle, do you but believe those
promises of grace, and the care is easy for the rest, in 1, 2, 3. Romans 6. 1,
2, 3.
Verses, What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may
abound? God forbid: Shall we that are dead to sin live yet therein? Know you
not, that as ma^y as are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his
death? The meaning is this, if once you receive Jesus Christ, and the pardon
and remission of sins through him, you cannot be so baptized into him, but
you must be baptized into his death; that is, of necessity, sin must be
crucified in you, you must be dead to sin, as he was dead; you cannot be
baptized into him for justification, but you must be baptized likewise for
morti^ication of the flesh, and for resurrection to newness of life; Know you
not, that all that are baptized into Jesus Christ, that is, that are baptized
into him for reconciliation with God, of necessity they must also be baptized
into his death? Therefore, says he, you are dead to sin, by being thus
baptized with Christ, it is impossible you should live in in it. So, I say,
beloved, he that has the strongest faith, he that believes in the greatest
degree the promi^es of pardon and remission, I dare boldly say, he has the
holiest heart, and the holiest life: for that is the root of it, it arises
from that root, sanctification arises from justification, the blood of Christ
has in it a power, not only to wash us from the guil^ of sin, but to
cleanse, and to purge us likewise from the power, and stain of sin: And
therefore, I say, the best way to get a great degree of sanctification, and of
mortification of sinful lusts* the best way to get a greater measure of the
graces of the Spirit, to grow up to greater holiness of conversation, is to
labor to grow in faith, in the belief of those promises of the Gospel: for
there is no other reason in the world, why in the New Testament there is an
infusion of the Spirit that gives life, but because now there are more evident
promises of pardon, and forgiveness, and reconciliation with GOD, which by the
Covenant of works could not be. And so much shall serve for this.

The fourth, Use. 4.
and maine Use, that we are to make of this, from this description of the
Covenant, is to learn to know the ground upon which we expect salvation, and
the fulfilling of all the promises; the ground of all is this Covenant. My
beloved, it is the greatest point that ever we had yet opportunity to deliver
to you, yea, it is the maine point that the Ministers of the Gospel can
deliver at any time, neither can they deliver a point of greater moment, nor
can you hear any, then the description of this Covenant of Grace: this is that
you must lay up for the foundation of all your comforts, it has been the
corner stone upon which the Saints have been built, from the beginning of the
world, unto this day: there is no ground you have to believe you shall be
saved, there is no ground to believe that any promise of God shall be made good
to you, to believe that you shall have the price of the high Calling of God in
Jesus Christ, and those glorious Riches of the inheritance prepared for us in
him; I say, there is no other ground at all, but upon this Covenant; all that
we teach you from day to day, are but conclusions drawn from this Covenant,
they are all built upon this: therefore, if ever you had cause to attend any
thing, you have reason to attend to this; I say, this Covenant between GOD and
us. And therefore we will labor to open to you now more clearly, and
distinctly, this Covenant; though a difficult thing it is, to deliver to you
clearly what it is, and those that belong to it; yet you must know it, for it
is the ground of all you hope for, it is that that every man is built upon, you
have no other ground but this, GOD has made a Covenant with you, and you are
in Covenant with him: therefore, that I may show it to you, we will proceed
from the very first preaching of the Covenant to Adam. When the Serpent had
overcome the Woman, and supplanted her and the Man, and had thrown them from
their happiness, God himself first preached the Gospel to them, and that in
these terms, after he had charged them with their sin, and had humbled them,
(for that method he uses) he shows Eve what she had done, and says to Adam,
Have thou eaten of the tree, of which I said thou shall not eat? he shows
them their sin, and after that the curse; then he begins to tell them he
will not leave them without hope; it is true, says he, the Serpent is your
enemy, and has overcome you; but, says he, you shall not be slaves to him,
and captiued to him for ever; but you shall resist him, and be an enemy to him,
I will put enmity between the Serpent and the Woman, and you shall fight
together, there shall be a war between you, and this shall be the issue of
the war, the Serpent shall afflict you, and hurt you something, but thou
shall overcome him, and bruise his head, thou shall be the death of him, thou
shall have the victory over him. The Woman might ask, But how can this be?
Alas, I am weak, I find my self too weak already in the Battle, he is too
strong for me? Says he, I will give thee a certain seed, one that shall
be borne of thee, and he shall be an enemy to the Serpent and his seed; that
is, to all evil men, that are called his seed, because they are like him:
there shall be enmity between them two, and he shall fight the Battrell for
thee; and in that Battle between him and the Serpent, this shall be the
issue, the Serpent shall bruise his heel, that is, he shall prevail so far
as to cause men to crucify him, which is but as the bruising of the heel;
but, says he, he shall break his head, he shall utterly destroy him, and
overcome him for thee: so thou shall prevail again, and be set in the place,
and enjoy all the promises. The Church continued in the virtue of this promise,
this preaching of the Gospel, until Abraham's time, and then GOD begins to
manifest his Covenant again; he calls forth Abraham and tells him he means
to make a Covenant with him, he tells him that he will bless him, and that
all the Nations of the world should be blessed in him: one while it is said
thus; another while, all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in thy
seed. Beloved, there are many difficulties in this, how the promise should be
made to the seed? how again it should be made to Abraham himself? (for it is
said to be made to both) how all Nations are blessed in Abraham, and yet it is
said, they shall be blessed in thy seed?

Again, the condition of the Covenant, which he requires of Abraham, is the
same thing that God makes a part likewise of his own Covenant.

Besides, GODS Covenant seems not to be the giving of the M^siah, but the
giving of the promised Land, giving him a son, and making him a great Nation;
many difficulties there are in this: Therefore, that you may understand them
distinctly, I will deliver it thus to you; not in the method wherein it is set
down, but so as I shall make it much clearer and perspicuous to you, and best
to be vnderstoost by you: therefore you shall observe in GODS preaching the
Gospel to Abraham;

First, the Covenant.

Secondly, the conditions of it.

Thirdly, the confirma^ion of it.

Fourthly, the parts of the Covenant.

Fifthly, the objections the Jews might be ready to make against it. And
showing those five, we shall open it fully unto you.

First, The Covenant 1. The Covenant.
that GOD made with Abraham, was after this manner: Abraham, says the LORD, I
will give thee a seed, and in that seed, both thou thy self, and all the
Nations of the Earth shall be blessed; and the question is, how this shall be
done? Says the Lord, he shall bless thee, he shall have power in his hands
to bless thee; for I will make him a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. All the
blessings that the people ever had, they were conveyed to them by these three,
by their Priests, by their Prophets, and by their Kings: says he, this promise
I have made to that seed, that be shall be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King;
yea, says he, that seed of mine that I shall send, that shall be borne of
thee, he shall be my Son, and my Heir, and in him likewise thou shall be
made an heir, and a son; an heir of all the World, as he is a Son, as he
is endowed with all spiritual privileges belonging to him; yea, thou shall
not only have this, but, says he, thou shall even have the Spirit of the
Son, and be made like to him, thou shall be made a Prophet, as he is a
Prophet, he shall ^each thee so, by infusing of the same Spirit that dwells in
himself, he shall ^each thee such knowledge, that thou shall be a Prophet, as
he: Yea, he shall make thee a Priest, as himself; thine own person shall be
accepted as well as what thou do: yea, he shall make thee a King, as he is a
King; that is, thou shall have the spirit of a King, to rule over all thy
sinful lusts and dispositions, thou shall have the peace of a King, the joy,
the comfort, the riches of a King, and the victory of a King, I will deliver
thee from all thine enemies: and for a Type of this, (for the Covenant was made
after Melchizedeck came to him, as we may see, Chap. 14.) thou shall see a
r^semblance of it, in that Melchizedeck has done to thee, he came to thee,
and blessed thee, and he was a King, a a Priest, and a Prophet; he was the
King of peace, and the Priest of the most high God; and what was the blessing
that Melchizedeck brought to Abraham? Says he, The LORD bless thee; he
blessed him, that is, he bade him go on, and prosper, he wished that all
blessings might come upon him, that he might overcome his enemies, etc. that
he might have blessings of all sorts, they are not set down particularly; and
in a word, he made him heir of all things: for, says he, I am the Priest of
the most high God, possessor of Heaven and Earth, and here I have brought thee
Bread and Wine, that is, an earnest, a little for the whole, to show this to
thee, that GOD has made thee heir of all things: And thereupon, when the King
of Sodom^ presently offered him the riches that he had taken, when he came
back from the Victory, No, says Abraham, I will not take them; for it is the
LORD that blesses me, it is he that shall make me rich, it is he that is my
exceeding great reward, it is he that has entered into Covenant with me; and
therefore, says he, it shall never be said that the King of Sodom has made
Abraham rich* I have received all from him, and I will restore all to him:
therefore, you see, he paid Tithes to Melchizedeck, he gave him the tenth of
all that he had: So is it now, says God, that Mesiah, that promised ^eed, is a
Priest after the order of Melchizedeck; he is a King, he shall come and bless
thee, after that manner he shall make thee heir of all things, only thou
shall do him homage, says he, as thou did to Melchizedeck; What was that
homage? That thou shall give him the tenth of all thou have, that is, by that
thou shall show thine homage, thou shall show that thou art bound to yield him
obedience, thou shall show upon what tenure thou hold all that thou have;
thou give him that as a rent, acknowledging him to be the Lord, of whom thou
have received all things, and to whom thou owe all things: therefore Abraham
would take nothing of any else, he would take nothing of the King of Sodom,
nor he would do nothing for the King of Sodom, that is, not to him, nor any
man, but as from God, as a means under him. Beloved, this is the great
Covenant that the Lord made with Abraham: So you see how the promise is made to
the seed: for the promise was made thus to the seed, God had promised that he
should be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, I have sworn, says he, thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedeck: again, I will give unto him
the Kingdom of David. Thus the promises come after in the Old Testament: So
the promise is made to the seed, and again it is the seed that blesses him.
This is the promise.

Now for the Condition that God required of Abraham, 2. The Condition of the
Covenant, which is faith.
it was this, Thou shall believe this, thou shall believe that such a Mesiah
shall be sent into the World: Art thou able to believe this, Abraham? He
answers, Yes. Well, says the Lord, I will put thee to the trial, I will see
whether thou can believe this, or no; and, withal, I will give thee a sign
or evidence that I am able to perform it: says he, I will give thee a Son:
It is true, thou art as a dead man, thou art almost a hundred years old, and
the womb of Sarah is dead: I will promise thee a Son, art thou able to
believe it? Again, thou see the Land of Canaan, thou have not one foot in
it, I will give this land from the length and breadth of it, for thy
possession: Art thou able to believe this? says the Text, Abraham did believe,
and God accounted that faith of his for righteousness; that is, he accepted
him for it: for that faith he reckoned him a man fit to make a Covenant with
all, he accounted him a righteous person; that is, he was willing to enter
into Covenant with him, because he believed him. Beloved, this was not directly
the believing of the Mesiah, (he did not intend the Mesiah) but it was the
believing that he should have a son. You see, the Text is plain, Genesis 15.
when God had said to Abraham, that he would be his exceeding great reward,
says Abraham, I go childlesse, and the Steward of my house will be my heir.
Says the LORD to him, Verse 4. This man shall not be thine heir, but one that
shall come out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir. Go look upon the
Stars, if thou be able to number them, then thou shall number the seed that
thou* shall have. Says the Text, Verse 6. Abraham believed, and he accounted
that to him for righteousness So likewise he adds, in the Verses following,
again he said, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Vr of the Chaldees, to
give thee this Land to inherit it. So, my beloved, this was the promise. Now,
when Abraham had believed this, says the Lord to him, This faith of thine,
that is, not this particular act by which thou beleeuest that thou shall have a
son, that shall be thine immediate heir, but that habit, that grace of
faith, that b^leeuing disposition in thee, whereby thou art able to believe
this promise, says he, with the same faith thou also belieuest the promise of
the Messiah, that a certain seed^ shall be given thee, in whom all the Nations
of the Earth shall be blessed. Says he, this faith of thi^e I take for the
condition of the Covenant on thy part, I will for this reckon thee as
righteous, I will account thee as a man fit to be entered into Covenant withal.
Again, the Lord tryes him afterward, when Isaac was grown, Verse 22. Go,
says he, and kill thy son: Abraham was able to keep it, he went, and
meant to have done it in good earnest; so there was the same ground for
believing now, that there was before: So, says he, GOD could have raised him
from the dead when I had killed him, as well as make me, when I was dead, and
Sarahs womb, when that was dead, to bring forth a son: God can as well raise
him from the dead, as he could give him me from a dead womb at first. We
see, that God upon this renewes the Covenant again, and renewes it with an
Oath; sure, says he, I will perform my Covenant, since I see that thou
beleeuest, and fear me, and preferrest me before thine only son: these
are but the concomitants of his faith. So, my beloved, it was this act of
Abraham, by which he did believe the promise of God, that made him partaker of
the Covenant. And if you ask now what is the condition that makes every man
partaker of this Covenant of grace? It is nothing but only faith, ability to
believe it, that GOD would send such a Messiah, before the Law, and that he
has exhibited, and sent him since: for you must know this, that all the
promises, the very giving of Isaac, the giving of the promised Land, all these
were but shadows, as it were, of the great promise, of the maine Covenant in
Christ. So likewise, that act of Abraham's faith, whereby he believed that he
should have a son, and believed that GOD would give his children possession
of that Land where he had not a foot, was but likewise a branch, and a shadow,
and a pledge, as it were, of the maine act of faith, whereby he believed the
promised seed should be given him, in whom himself, and all the Nations of the
Earth should be blessed. So then we have found out this, what the Condition
is that God requires of every man to be made partaker of his Covenant; it is
nothing but to believe in God; that is, God says, I will give my Son to you;
to us a Son is given, etc. that shall be the promised seed, and I will make
him a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, to bless you; he shall give you
remission of sins, etc. he shall teach you, and instruct you to mortify your
lusts, and shall make you partakers of his Kingdom; he shall make you heirs,
and sons; this is a very great promise, can you believe this? If a man will
but believe GOD now, I say, it makes him partaker of the Covenant, this puts
him within the Covenant: you will say, this is very strange; how can it be,
that so small a condition as this, that to bel^eue, should make a man partaker
of the Covenant? that upon which all the promises hang initially, is nothing
but believing. You see Abraham did no more but believe GOD, when he told him
he should have a son, you see how much GOD made of that: So it is with us,
if we do but believe this, God will make as much of it, he will make good all
the promises of the Covenant to us: But, I say, this has need of a reason why
it is suspended only upon faith, and belief; the reason is this, mark it
well, Reasons why faith is the Condition.
it is a point of exceeding great moment.

First, though there were nothing but faith, Covenant? Let him, if he can
believe truly, and do this, but it is impossible, let him believe, and the
other will follow. Behold Abraham himself, (to give you an instance of it) he
believed GOD, and it was accounted to him for righteousness; I say, it was
enough for him to believe GOD: For that draws after it inherent righteousness
of sanctification, and holiness of life: for, says the Text, Romans 4. Abraham
is said to believe GOD, when he said he should have a son, he gave him
glory, that is the ground, which draws with it all other graces, after this
manner; he that believes GOD, has a good opinion of him, he loves him; he
that loves him, must needs be full of good works. Besides, he that believes
him, when GOD shall say to him, I am thy exceeding great reward, see that thou
keep close to me, thou shall have an eye upon me, and walk with me from
day to day. Let a man believe that GOD is alsufficient, that he will be a Sun
and a Shield to him, and his exceeding great reward, he will be ready to do
it. Abraham did so, when God called him from his Fathers house, and from his
kindred, he was ready to do so; when GOD would have him to offer up his only
son, he was ready to do it: for he believed GOD, he believed his promise,
and his ability, and willingness to help him; he believed his Almighty
power, and therefore whatsoever GOD bid him do, he would do it; he preferred
GOD before his own ease, before his own profit, before his only son whom
he loved: Let any man believe as Abraham did, and of necessity it will produce
good works; let a man believe truly, and truth of belief will bring forth
truth of holiness: and therefore we hear what S. James says, Iam. 2. says
he* Abraham was justified by faith; it is true: but, says he, Abraham's faith
had works joined with it: for it was not a dead, a counterfeit faith, but a
true faith, and being a true faith, you see, Abraham had works as well as
faith: for when GOD bade him offer his son, he did it: Was not that an
exceeding great work? says the Apostle there: So say I, no wonder that it is
by faith, that the LORD requires no more but to believe: for when a man
believes, works will follow, it will breed holiness of life; let him believe
GOD to be an exceeding great reward, that he is a Sun and a Shield, he will
follow GOD wheresoever he leads him; let him believe the promise of GOD, when
he describes himself, he must needs have a good opinion of him, and love
him, and be exceeding fruitful in good works, and obedience to him;
therefore that is one reason for it.

A second reason of it is, 2. Reason.
because it could not be done by obedience to the Law; it was impossible to
have made the sons of men partakers of the Covenant, that way: for if it
could have been done by the Law, and by the Commandment, it should have
been; but the LORD tried that in Adam, he gave Adam a Commandment, and
ability to keep it, (so he made him perfectly innocent,) yet Adam did not
keep it. Put the case that GOD should have tried him the second time, and have
given him a Commandment again, and not have required the Condition of faith,
but of obedience, he would have broken it, as he did before; and therefore it
could not be by the Law: Therefore it must needs be by faith, and the
promises, otherwise it could never have been sure. Adam brake it; surely, if
he brake it, we should have broken it, if it had been any other way but by
faith: and therefore we see what the Apostle says, Galat. 3. 21. Is the Law
then against the promise of GOD? Gal. 3. 21.
GOD forbid: for if there had been a Law given that could have given life,
surely rig^teousnesse had been by the Law: If Adam had stood and had kept the
Law, and if men could have entered into Covenant, and have kept it, Christ had
been spared, the Covenant of Grace had been spared; if righteousness had
been by the Law, there had needed no Messiah, there had needed no Covenant of
Grace; and therefore, through the infirmity of the flesh, (Adams flesh, that
would not keep the Law, and ours, that is not able to keep it) there was no
other way to make mankind partaker of the Covenant of Grace, but only by
faith, by believing GOD, and by taking the promise, and the gift of
Righteousness, through Jesus Christ: for it could never else in likelihood
have been sure to the seed. This is the way to make it sure, when there is no
more but an ac^eptation required, and not exact obedience to the Commandment.

Thirdly, 3. Reason.
it is by faith: because nothing else can answer the Covenant, but faith: you
see, the Covenant is not a Commandment, Do this, and live, but the Covenant
is a promise, I will give thee, It runs all upon promises, I will give thee a
seed, and in that seed thou shall be blessed. I will give thee this good
Land, etc. so that the Covenant of Grace stands on GODS part all in promises:
Now you know that it is faith that answers the promise: for the promise is to
believed; if the Covenant had stood in precepts, and Commandments, and rules
of the Law, then it must have been answered by works, and obedience, and
therefore it could not be by obedience: for that holds not proportion, there is
not agreement between them; but since the Covenant consists of promises, that
must needs be by believing, and not by works.

Fourthly, 4. Reason.
and lastly, it is by faith, because the Lord would have it by free grace, and
not of debt: for, says he, If I should give a Law, and rules to men, and
promise them life upon it, when they had performed the work, they would
challenge it of debt: no, says the LORD, it is an inheritance, I do not use
to deal with my children, as men do with their servants, that I should give
them work to do, and when they have done it, I should give them wages, then
they would come and challenge it a my hands by way of debt: no, says the Lord,
this is an inheritance, and you are my sons, and you shall have it given you
freely, and given you as it becomes a Father to give it, so you shall take it;
therefore, that it might be of free grace, and not of debt, therefore it is by
faith, and not by works. And that is added, likewise, if it had been by
works, men would have been ready to boast* and have said, I have done this, I
am able to keep the Law, therefore the promise of eternal life shall be made
good to me, I shall receive it as wages, men would boast in themselves: No,
says the LORD, no creature shall boast in it self: for that puts every man
further from the LORD, the more a man rejoices in himself, the more he stands
upon his own bottom, the more he is divorced from GOD, and separated from
him: but, says he, he that rejoices, let him rejoice in the LORD: for that
fits a man for the LORD, and therefore I will have it by faith, it shall not
be by works. So, beloved, you see now what is the Condition. Surely, look
how Abraham was made partaker of the Covenant, so every one of us must be;
Abraham was made partaker of it by says, so shall every man be made partaker
of it by faith, and no otherwise. Abraham believed God, when he had a promise,
and because he believed him, (not that particular act of faith but) that grace
of faith, whereby he believed this, and the other promises of the Messiah, was
counted to him for righteousness: and so for this cause, because we believe
the promises, and the Covenant of Grace, therefore the LORD accepts us, and
accounts us righteous; and because this seems strange to the sons of men,
therefore we see with how much ado Paul labors to make it good, what strong
objections were against it in all times. I have showed the reason. Now when you
read Romans 3. and 4. and Gal. 3. and 4. you may know the better the meaning of
those places. Well, so you see the Covenant; secondly, you see the Condition;
now you hear that there is such a Covenant as this.

The third thing is the confirmation of the Covenant; 3. The confirmation of
the Covenant.
when a man hears that GOD will vouchsafe so much favor unto mankind, a man
is ready to say as Gedion did, alas my family is poor in Manasses, I am the
least in all my Fathers house, And who am I, that I should be raised up
hitherto? that such a promise as this should be made to me, that I should go,
and save Israel? etc. I say, after the same manner a man might be ready to
object, Alas, what are we the sons of men, that the great GOD of Heaven and
Earth should enter into such a Covenant with us, that he should make us such
promises as these, that he should make us heirs of the World, that he should
bless us in that manner, to make us sons, to make us Kings and Priests?
Says the LORD, I confess it is a Covenant that needs confirmation: therefore
the LORD has confirmed it all these ways; the LORD has confirmed it, first,
by his promise; says he, you have my sure word for it; if that be not enough,
I will confirm it by an Oath, and because he had no greater to swear by, he
says, by my self have I sworn, that I will make it good: this is not enough,
but he confirms it by the blood of Christ himself; the Mediator shall come,
and confirm this Testament, and when the Testament is confirmed by the death
of the Testator, there is no more altering of that; Gal. 3. 15.
says he, Gal. 3. A man's Testament no man changes, after once it is
confirmed: and when the Testator is dead, Heb. 9. then the Testament is
confirmed: so it is confirmed by the blood, by the death of the Testator. This
is not enough, but he has added seals unto it, he has confirmed it
likewise by them; says he, I will add the seal of Circumcision, and of the
Passover. For Circumcision, says the LORD, Go, and circumcise your selves,
and when I see the Circumcision, I will remember my Covenant, and make it good
to you; that, as he said of the Bow, he set the Bow in the Cloud, says he, I
will make my Covenant, that I will never destroy the Earth again with rain,
this Bow shall be the witness of the Covenant, and when I look upon it, I
will remember my Covenant; after this manner are the signs and seals of the
Covenant; says he, Circumcise your selves, and when I see that, I will
remember my Covenant, and will spare you, and I will make good to you all the
promises of it: So likewise the Passover, says he, See that ^ou keep it,
take the Lamb, and sprinkle the blood, etc. Says he, when I see it, I will
remember my Covenant. Where, beloved, this is to be observed, that these signs
or seals of the Covenant, not only confirm the promises on our part, but
they signify that faith, that condition which is required on our part: for
when the LORD comes, and looks into his Church, and sees a great company in
it, sees his House full, and he comes, and asks, What do you in my House?
What do a number of those that profess themselves to be within the compass
of the Covenant there? Their answer is, LORD, we believe, we are among those
that keep the Condition. If you believe, where is your Circumcision? It may be
you have that outward Circumcision in the flesh, but where is the Circumcision
of the heart? for, if you did believe indeed, it would work a change in the
heart, as faith, I told you, that is indeed a lively faith, works a change,
it c^ts off sinful lusts, it makes a man deny himself, and cleave to God, and
serve him with a perfect heart. So again, after that manner does the second
sign of the Covenant, which is the Passover, when the LORD shall ask, Do
you believe? Yes, here is the sprinkling of the blood of the Lamb. But where
is the true sprinkling upon the heart and conscience? here is the outward
Passover, the outward profession, you come and take the sign and the seal,
but where is the inward sprinkling? Therefore you see what was required in the
Passover; says he, when you eat the Lamb, etc. have you tasted of the
sweet of the Lamb, have you ever tasted of the sweetness that is in Jesus
Christ, so that you can love him, and delight in him? are you clad like those
that went out of Egypt, with their staves in their hands, and their feet shod;
that is, are you ready to go out of Egypt; that is, from sin and
wickedness; from the state of vnregeneracie, wherein you were before? Again,
has your soul tasted of the sour herbs, of that bondage, that now you are
weary of all the bondage of sin and Satan, that you desire exceedingly to go
from it, that you reckon the contrary condition a condition of freedom,
wherein you are willing and desirous to continue? says the LORD, when I look
upon these signs, I will remember my Covenant; only see that your Circumision
be not in the letter, as we see, Romans 2. but see that you be circumcised in
your hearts; that there be not only a Passover, but see that you keep the
Passover with sincerity, see that all leaven be cleansed out of your hearts,
that is, that your hearts be empty of the dominion of every sin; see that you
have tasted of the sowrenesse of that bondage, that you be willing to be rid
of it, see that you be willing to travel out of Egypt, to another, to a
further Country; see that this be real, not in profession and show, but in
deed; and, says the LORD, I will remember my Covenant; and these are the
confirmations of the Covenant, says the Lord, you shall not need to doubt it,
I have sworn, it is repeated, Heb. 6. besides, it is confirmed with blood,
with the death of the Testator, and there is none that alters the Will of the
dead, when he is dead, they add nothing to it, nor taks nothing from it:
besides, I have confirmed it with seals, and therefore it stands unalterable.
These three things we have observed now in this Covenant.

FINIS.
THE TWELFTH SERMON.
G^NESIS 17. 2. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee. And I will
multiply thee exceedingly.
YOU have heard what the Covenant is in the general.

The fourth thing is, What the particular branches, and parts, or gifts, and
privileges of this Covenant are; and those we will reduce unto three heads.

Now the three parts of the Covenant are answerable to the three Offices of
Christ: for, we told you, it is Christ* himself, to whom the promises are
immediately made; he is a Priest, a King, and a Prophet; it is he that makes
good all the parts of the Covenant, and he does ^t according to all his three
Offices; remission of sins, he gives as a Priest: The other Priests were but
a shadow of this Priesthood of Christ, he is the great High Priest, that is
holy, and harmless, and undefiled, that is higher then the heavens; the great
High Priest, that is en^red (says the Text) into the very heavens themselves;
he that sits at the right hand of God, and is now present with him; he that is
not entered in by the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, but by his own blood. This
is such a High Priest, as is able indeed to give remission of sins; and
therefore, says the Apostle, Heb. 10. 22. Seeing we have such an high Priest,
doub^ not, but now come with full assurance of faith, when you see such an High
Priest as this: if they were able to believe, that had but a weak man to be
their Priest, before the coming of Christ, that offered for his own sins,
as well as for the sins of others, that often repeated his Sacrifice, that
that had but the blood of Bulls and Goats, that did but enter into the
Tabernacle; says he, when you see Jesus Christ himself come, that has no
Si^ne of his own, that offered one perfect Sacrifice, that he needs not to
repeat, that entered not into the Tabernacle, but into the Heaven it self,
that did this with his own blood, and not with the blood of beasts, says he,
draw near now ^with assurance of faith: that is, Why should you make question
now? you have great ground of assuring your selves, that your sins shall be
forgiven; now you may trust perfectly to the grace reueiled through him. This
is the first.

The second is, I will teach you knowledge, and that he does as a Prophet; you
shall no more teach every man his brother, but all shall be taught of me.
Beloved, it is another kind of teaching, when the LORD teaches us knowledge,
then that is that we can have from the hands of men; Christ is another kind
of Prophet, you come not to hear him speak, to hear him teaching as a man
hears other Lectures, where his understanding is informed, but he is such a
Prophet, as enlightens every man within, that comes into the world; that is,
every man that is enlightened, is enlightened by him, he is such a Prophet, as
baptizeth you with the Holy Ghost, he is such a Prophet that makes men's hearts
to burn within them when he speaks to them; such a Prophet as says to
Matthew and Leuy, Follow me, and they do it; such a Prophet as says to his
Ministers, G^e teach all Nations, and I will be with you, and I will make you
able Ministers, not of the letter, but of the Spirit; there is no man in the
world can say this, but this great Prophet; and this is the Prophet that the
Lord has raised up, the Prophet that he promised he would raise another like
Moses, that great Prophet that should teach men after another fashion, then all
the Prophets before were ever able to do. And that is the second part of the
Covenant.

Beloved, we may know many things, but it is a hard thing to know as we ought
to know. It is said of an unregenerate man, 2 Cor. 8. He knows nothing as he
ought to know. For example, thou may know sin, and know it most exactly,
but if this do not work upon thy heart, if the sin lie not exceeding heavy
upon thee, if it breed not in thee godly sorrow, for it, if it does not amaze
thee, as it were, with the filthiness and vileness of it, it is, because thou
do not yet know it, as thou ought to know it: And how shall a man do
then? Go to CHRIST, he is the Prophet, that is, he teaches a man to see
things so, that his heart, his will and affections shall likewise be moved with
it: You are to consider the Covenant when you go to the LORD; and therefore
that man that says, I can look upon my sin with dry eyes, I can look upon
it, and never be affected with it, this is because he is taught but with the
teaching of men; he must remember that this is a part of the Covenant, and God
has bound himself by an Oath to perform it. Jesus Christ, as he is a
Prophet, God has sent him to teach thee all things belonging to salvation, and
so to teach thee, that thou shall be in a right manner affected with it. And so
likewise put the case thou know God, thou see him in his attributes, thou
hear him often described, and art able to describe him to others, but for
all this, thou find not thy heart affectioned toward him, thou see not
that excellency and beauty that is in him, so that thy heart is not enamoured
with him, thou can not say thou love him with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, What will thou do in this case? Go to
Christ the Prophet, and beseech him that he would teach thee to know the LORD,
this is his promise; if thou pray to him, and he do not do it, urge him with
this, it is a part of his Covenant, that he has confirmed by Oath, and must
do it, and, beloved, be assured of this, if we seek, and be earnest with
him, he will teach us to know the Lord, and to know him so, that we shall love
him with all our soul, and with all our strength. The like may I say of any
thing else; put the case afflictions come upon thee, and thou be not able to
be patient under such afflictions, suppose that it be a matter of disgrace and
discredit, that so wounds thee, that thy heart cannot be at rest, what is the
reason of this? thou call to mind, it may be, all the rules of patience,
that should teach thee to bear afflictions; well, and yet thou art not able to
do it: the cause is, because thou do not yet know these outward temptations,
these outward evils, as thou ought to know them, if thou did, they would
seem small to thine eyes, sin would be an exceeding great grief, but these
would be but trifles and flea-bitings, in comparison of the other: go to
Christ now, and beseech him to show thee what is the nature of these outward
crosses and losses, that thou may be taught of him once: he is the great
Prophet, that teaches a man so, he so presents things in their own colors
to the understanding, that the will and affections follow and apprehend them
aright; go to him, and beseech him that thou may know them as thou ought,
and thou shall find, that thou shall be able to bea^e the greatest cross with
patience, it shall be nothing then to thee, it will appear to be a small
matter, when he has taught thee to judge aright, thou shall not be deceived in
it.

So likewise, for pleasure, when a man finds his heart so wedded to any sinful
lust, to any evil haunt, wher^in his heart is held inordinately, that it
cannot divorce it self from it, go to Christ, he is the great Prophet. Thus
we may do, beloved, with the rest. This is the second part of the Covenant.

The third part of the Covenant is, that which he will perform to us, as he is
King, and it consists in these 3. things.

You know the Office of a King is to guide and rule; now, if thou find thy
heart unruly, if thou find thy self subject to unruly affections, to sinful
inordinate lusts, which thou can not master, it is a part of his Kingdom,
now to set up his own government in thy heart, to put his Law into thy mind,
and to write it in thy inward parts, that so thou may be indeed subject to
the Kingdom of Christ in a willing manner. When a man sees nothing (as we
said before) but the outward letter of the Law, he will never be subject, he
will never yield obedience, but Christ comes as a King now, and puts an inward
disposition into the mind, that shall answer the letter without, and so he
makes a man subject to his government. Beloved, that Phrase is to be marked,
Heb. 2. 10. Says the Lord, I will put my Law into their mind^; there are Laws
out of men's minds, Laws without, that every man may see; but it is another
thing to have the Law put into a man's mind: for example, this is the Law
without, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength. To answer which, you shall see, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
I will circumcise thy heart, and then thou shall be able to love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. That
is, I will put this affection, or this grace of love within thy heart, it shall
not be without only, but I will put it within, that there shall be a grace
within, a habit of love within, answerable to the Commandment without; this is
to put the Law into the mind: and so likewise, Ier. 32. 40. you know, this is
the Commandment of the LORD, You shall fear the LORD, and keep his
Ordinances, and his Statutes, and his Commandments to do them. Well, says
the Lord there, I will make a Covenant with you: and what will I do? I will
put my fear into your hearts. I will not only give you this precept, that
thou shall look on without, Thou shall fear me, and keep my Commandments,
but I will put the affections of fear into thy heart, there it shall be, and
then thou shall easily fear me, and keep my Commandments; thou shall fear
to disobey me, thou shall fear and tremble at my Word, and take heed how thou
do any thing contrary to my mind: and beloved, when this is done, he makes
indeed Kings, as he makes us Priests and Prophets: for when a man is thus
taught, he is a Prophet, other men need not to teach him, for he is a
spiritual man then, and is able to judge of all things; I say, when this
government is set up, and the Law is put into his mind, when it is put into
his inward parts; I say, when this is done, then he makes us Kings: for when
men have so much strength within themselves, that they can guide and rule
themselves* and walk in the way of righteousness, now they are made Kings,
and such Kings the Lord makes all those that come to him. This is the first
part of this Kingdom.

The second part is, to give us abundance of all things, to give us peace: for
the Office of a King, you know, is to keep his people in peace, as it is said
of Saul, he clothed them with scarlet* that is, he made his people to abound
with wealth, and peace, and quietness: this the Lord does likewise, and this
is a part of his spiritual Kingdom. Now his Kingdom is spiritual; therefore
the maine work of it is to give us inward peace and joy; you may have troubles
in the world, but my Kingdom is not of this world, and therefore we are not
so much to expect an outward worldly peace, though we have likewise a promise
of that, but in me you shall have inward peace, says he, the Kingdom of God
is in righteousness, that is the first part, when God works righteousness, as
I have named before, the second is peace, and joy, so that that is a part of
the Covenant, GOD, promised inward peace and joy; beloved, when you want it,
know it is a part of the Covenant, you may go to GOD, and beseech him to fill
your hearts with this peace that passes vnvnderstanding, and with this joy
which is unspeakable, and glorious; go, and beseech him to enrich your hearts
with those spiritual riches that belong to salvation, this is a part of his
Kingdom, and that which he has promised to us: now this is not all, but
likewise an outward peace he promises, he has promised we shall be heirs of
all things, all things are yours, he has promised outward riches, we are
heirs of all the world; so that it is likewise a part of his Covenant, when a
man wants any outward comfort, any outward help, any blessings, or
deliverance, he may go to Christ, that is the King of all Kings, as he is
Lord of all things, as he himself is heir of all things, and beseech him to
grant it unto him: for it is a part of his Covenant.

And the third and last is, that we shall overcome our enemies, that is the
third branch of this Kingdom; And that which was promised to Abraham, thou
shall possess the gates of thine Enemes* when he renewed his Covenant, upon
the offering of his son, and you shall find it, Luke 1. 74. repeated again,
this is the great promise that God has made, that being delivered from the
hands of all our enemies, we might serve him in righteousness and holiness
all the days of our life. Now as his Kingdom is spiritual, so the chief
part of this Kingdom stands in ouercoming our spiritual enemies; and
therefore you may challenge this Covenant at his hands, when you are to wrestle
with Satan, or any temptation and lust, LORD, have thou not said that thou will
deliver me out of the hands of all mine enemies? Is it not a part of thy
Covenant? But, beloved, that is not all neither, there is a promise, and that
is a part of the Covenant likewise, that we shall overcome our outward
enemies, thou shall possess the gate of thine enemies, so far as it is good
for us, as far as God sees it meet, he dispenses these in a different
manner, but yet it is a part of the Covenant, and therefore a man may go and
challenge this at Gods hands; LORD, if it be good, if it be fit, and meet for
me to have it, thou have promised it, I shall have victory over them also. So
now you see what the Covenant is: But now there is one maine general, that
likewise is a branch of this Covenant, that is general to all the three, that
is the giving of the Spirit, it is a branch of the Covenant, as we see, Joel
2. which is repeated, Act. 2. I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh in
those days, and your young men shall see visions, etc. Beloved, know that this
was a part of the Covenant that was made with Abraham, It was expressed to
Abraham in general, I will bless thee, afterward there were several
branches of it; now one thing was expressed, as part of the Covenant, and then
another; among the branches, this was one, I will power out my Spirit upon all
flesh, which is that which you have likewise, Esaias 44. 3. I will power out my
Spirit as water upon the dry ground, and you shall grow as the grass, and as
the Willow by the Rivers of water. Whereof that this is the meaning, Peter
makes it good, Acts 2. and so likewise our Savior Christ, the great promise
that he made to them was, I will bapize you with the Holy Ghost, this promise
was made before he departed in the flesh, but it was fulfilled after, when he
powered forth his Spirit. Beloved, this is that great part of the Covenant, that
which comprehends the life of all the other three, that which enabled us to do
all the rest, that which makes us Kings, and Priests, and Prophets, this
pouring out of the Spirit upon us, even as Christ himself was anointed with
the Spirit without measure, that he might be able to teach us, that he might
be a Prophet, a King, and a Priest, that which enabled him to perform all
those Offices, was the effusion of the spirit upon him without measure:
Beloved, that which makes us able to be partakers of those three parts of the
Covenant, is likewise the same Spirit, wherewith we are anoyn^ed according to
our measure. So much shall serve for this, namely what the particular branch^s,
and parts, and privileges of the Covenant are.

The fifth and last is, 5. Objections against it.
the objections that are made against this Covenant. There were two great
objections that Paul every where met with, (for our scope is, that when we put
all this together, that we have delivered about this Covenant, you may read at
leisure Romans 3. 4. and Gal. 3. 4. and all the promises made to Abraham, and
when you have this before you, will be able then to understand i^) I say, there
are two great objections that Paul every where met with.

The one is from the Law, 1. Object.
Is it not said every where, Those that obey the Commandment shall live, and
every promise is made still to them that fear the LORD, and keep his
Commandments? and therefore it is by the Law.

Nay, Ans.
says the Apostle, Gal. 3. it is impossible that it should be by the Law: for
the Law was given 430. years after the promise, and Covenant was established
with Abraham long before it; it cannot be now, that that which comes after can
dissannull that which went before: but besides there is another great reason,
and that is this, says the Apostle, you were never able to keep the Law, you
could never be saved, if you would have it by the Law, to what end is the Law
given then? By reason of transgression, that you might learn to know how
impossible it is for you to come to God, to be partaker of the Covenant any
other way, then by faith; says he, you might remember that Adam, when he was
in innocence and perfection, was much stronger then you, yet did not keep the
Law; but, because that was easy for people to forget, the Law was given again
by Moses, upon Mount Sinai, that the LORD by that means might reminde you of
the Commandment, and of your sins, and of the curse belonging to you; and
therefore, says he, when the Law was delivered, it was so terrible, that
Moses himself did tremble; and therefore, said the People, Lord, do not thou
speak to us any more, deliver not the Law to us any more, but let Moses come,
and be as a Mediator between us, let him speak; for we are not able to see
these fires, these burnings, we are not able to see this and live. The meaning
of it is this, the Law, if any man look on it, it is so terrible, when GOD
comes to speak to a man in his Law, and in his Commandments, that there is
nothing to be expected but death: that same fearfulness at Mount Sinai, was
but only an expression of that fear which the Law of God puts upon every man's
conscience; and therefore, when the people then desired a Mediator, that might
speak, and that GOD might speak no more, another thing was signified by it,
that no man is able to come to God by yielding obedience to the Law, but he
must needs have a Mediator to go between GOD and him.

The other objection is from the Ceremonies of the Law; 2. Object.
they were ready to say, We have a Priest, we have Sacrifices, we have diverse
washings and Rites, etc, we were wont to be saved by them, why may we not so
still?

The answer to it is, Ans.
That these were but the oldnesse of the letter; for indeed all these did but
cloathe the Covenant of Grace; the Covenant of Grace was delivered to the
Jews, the Ceremonies did indeed but set it out, they were but types and
shadows, by which it was expressed to the Jews: the Jews, by reason of
their ignorance, were not able to see the body for the clothes, they were not
able to see the signification of the Spirit for the letter, they were not able
to see the sword for the sheath, the kernel for the shell; that is, they could
not see Christ himself, the inward promises, but stuck in the outward bark,
and rind of Ceremonies, in the shell of them, and so they became unprofitable;
but indeed those Rites did nothing, but cloathe the Covenant of Grace, and set
it forth to them. So much shall serve for the dispatching of those five things.

Now hence you see how those difficulties may be answered, that I mentioned
before. For example, it is said, the promise is made to the seed, yet the
promise is made to us, Object.
and yet again the Covenant is made with Abraham, How can all these stand
together? Ans.
The promises that are made to the seed, that is to Christ himself, those are
these promises: Thou shall be a Priest for ever, and I will give thee the
Kingdom of David, thou shall sit in that Throne, thou shall be a Prince of
peace, and the government shall be upon thy shoulder; likewise thou shall be a
Prophet to my people, thou shall open the prison to the Capti^e, thou shall be
anointed, etc. and then shall go and preach to them: These are the promises
that are made unto the seed.

The promises that are made to us, though they be of the same Covenant, yet
they differ in this, the active part is committed to the Messiah, to the seed
it self; but the passive part, those are the promises that belong to us, You
shall be taught, you shall be made Prophets, likewise, you shall have your
sins forgiven, you shall have the effect of his Priesthood made good unto
you, you shall be subject to his government, by an inherent righteousness that
he shall work in you; for you shall be made Kings; So the promise is made to
us. How is the promise made to Abraham? for it is said, In thee all the Nations
of the Earth shall be blessed.

The meaning of this is, they are deriuatiue promises, the primitive and
Original was made to Jesus Christ; but why is it said then, that in Abraham
all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed? the meaning of it is this, there
was none that was ever partaker of these promises, but the children of Abraham,
and therefore they were derived from Abraham to all the men in the world
besides, that ever have been since. Now what is it to be a child of Abraham?
not to be borne of Abraham according to the flesh, but to be like Abraham; you
are the children of the Devil, Why? You are like him. So that all that have
faith, are the children of Abraham: but more is meant then that; I say, all
that do partake of this promised Messiah, are derived from Abraham, either
derived from him, or grafted into him, one of these two; all that were saved
before the coming of Christ, were either such as descended from him, or were
ingrafted into the same Nation. But what do you say of the Gentiles, that are
now come in? How do they receive from Abraham? How can it be said, in Abraham
shall all the Nations of the world be blessed? Beloved, Romans 11. 17.
you know it is said, Romans 11. that the natural branches were broken off, and
the wild Olive is ingrafted in: that is the reason likewise why the Law comes
from Sion, the Lord will have the Gentiles to be ingrafted into the stock, as
it were, he will have the Law to proceed from Jerusalem, he will have them put
into that Famely as the proselytes, and so were all Nations: for they received
it from Jerusalem: for they had the Oracles of God committed to them, all the
Nations in the world received them from them, they drew that sap of knowledge
from them, so that they were grafted in: thus all the Nations in the world were
blessed in Abraham, and Abraham was blessed in the seed it self. But yet one
objection is behind, that is, how comes this to pass, Object.
that to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and to walk in the ways of
the LORD, in the way of regeneration, should be a part of the Covenant on our
part, you shall repent and believe, and be renewed, and then you shall be
forgiven, etc. you shall have the Kingdom, and yet, for all this, you see it
is a part of the Covenant on Gods part, says the LORD, I will give you a new
heart, and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will give you, etc. there is an
expression of the Covenant, and yet it is a condition that is required on our
part?

Beloved, to this I answer briefly, Ans.
the condition that is required of us, as part of the Covenant, is the doing of
this, the action, the performance of these things, it is to repent, to serve
the LORD in newness of life, but the ability by which we are able to perform
these, is a part of the Covenant on the LORDS part, to have new hea^t^ and new
spirits, whereby we are able to repent, and to bring forth fruit worthy of
amendment of life; I say, the inward abil^ty, the change of the heart, the
renewing of us in the spir^t of our minds, the wr^ting of the Law in the
inward pa^ts, that is a branch of Gods Covenant, but the doing of this, the
bringing forth the fruit of these inward abilities, of these inward habits and
graces, that are planted in us by the power of Christ, that thing is required
in us. As, for example, the very habit of faith, the very grace and power of
believing, that God has promised to give, it belongs to him, but to believe,
to take the promises, to accept of Jesus Christ, and to receive him, and the
gift of righteousness by him, this is required as a condition on our part. And
so much shall serve for the opening of this, and for this point.

The next question we had to propound to you, Quest.
was this, How a man should know whether he be within the Covenant, or no? Ans.
You shall know it by this, How did Abraham know whether he was in the
Covenant, or how will you know whether Abraham, or any other were? says the
Text, Abraham believed God, and therefore God reckoned him as a man that was
righteous, and accepted him to be a partaker of the Covenant: and so, if thou
believe, it is certain then, thou art within the Covenant; but how shall a man
know that? Gal. 5. 5. Neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. If thou can find this now,
that thou art able to take Jesus Christ, to take him as a LORD and Sauio^r,
thou art able to believe all the Covenant of Grace, thou art by that put into
the Covenant.

But how shall a man know whether this faith be right or no? for, you know,
there is a false, dead, and counterfeit faith: if it be right, thou shall find
it to be of a working and lively nature, but many times we may be deceived in
that. A woman many times thinks she is with child, but if she find no motion
nor stirring, it is an argument she was deceived: So, when a man thinks that
he has faith in his heart, but yet he finds no life, no motion, no stirring,
there is no work proceeding from his faith* it is an argument he was mistaken,
he was deceived in it: for, if it be a right faith, it will work, there will
be life and motion in it. As Abraham's faith, you see, it enabled him to do
whatsoever GOD appointed him, to offer his son, to excommunicate Ismael, when
GOD bid him cast him out, though he loved Ismael exceeding dearly, yet he did
it, and did it readily; so, whatsoever God bade him do; here was a working
faith.

But yet a little further, a man may be yet deceived in this, a man's faith may
work, and an Hypocrite may do many works, if it be but bare working, a man
may be deceived, and therefore this is added further, it works by love.
Beloved, a man may do exceeding many duties, as you know, he may suffer
Martyrdom, he may give all to the poor, he may be a very diligent Preacher
of the Gospel: for Paul says, I may speak with the tongue of men and Angels,
I may give my goods to the poor, I may give my body to be burned* and yet if
these great works be done, without love, they are nothing. But, on the other
side, if you find this, that you do but the least work, if it be but to give
a cup of cold water, and do it out of love, if you abstain from one sin, if
you overcome any one lust whatsoever, that is dear and near to you, because
you love Jesus Christ, if you set your selves upon any work, upon any
employment and endeavor, and thy heart witnesses this to thee, it is because
I love the LORD, and desire exceedingly to please him, he is one that I would
feign have communion with, my delight is in him, therefore I do these works:
for it is my meat and drink to do his will; now thou art on a sure ground,
now thou may know thou art within the Covenant: for thou beleeuest as Abraham
did, and therefore thou art within the Covenant, as he was; thou may know
it, because thy faith works, and then thou may know that it works right,
because it is done by love. Well, yet there is another way to know this, that
is in thy seed (says the Text) shall all the Nations of the world be
blessed, if a man be then ingrafted into this seed, into the Messiah once,
then he shall be blessed, if once he belong to him. Well, how shall a man know
that.

If thou have received the Spirit of the Son: for whosoever is in Christ, has
received the Spirit of Christ, if he have not received the Spirit of Christ, he
is not in him. Consider whether you have received the Spirit of the Son, the
Spirit of the promised seed, that is, thou art made like Christ by the Spirit:
for the Spirit will assimulate thee, and renew this Image in thee, he makes
thee such another in some degree, as he is; yea, he will not only do this,
but he will witness to thee, that he is thy God, and that thou art of those
that are partakers of the Covenant, and therefore that is the way to find it
out, that is the thing I intend to insist upon, to find out whether you have
this Spirit, you shall find it, this is the great mark that the Apostle Paul
insists upon, still in all his Epistles, by which a man may know whether he be
within the Covenant, or no, still it is this, we have received the Spirit, and
the Spirit seals us to the day of redemption, we are established and sealed by
the Spirit of promise, and we have received the Spirit, which is an earnest,
etc. Now to know whether you have the Spirit, I will commend these two places
of Scripture to you to consider: one is, Romans 8. 15. You have not received the
spirit of bondage, to fear again, but the spirit of Adoption, whereby you cry
Abba Father; the same spirit bears witness with our spirits, that we are the
sons of GOD. The other you shall find, 1 John 5. 8. And there are three that
bear record in Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three
agree in one. If you would find out whether you have the spirit of the Son,
or no, you shall know it by these three: In the Antecedents, the Concomitants,
and the Consequents.

The Antecedent is the Spirit of bondage; beloved, that of necessity must go
before, so that if thou never had the spirit of bondage, certainly thou have
not yet received the spirit of the Son: for the Apostle speaks of it here,
as the common condition to all Christians, they do not receive the spirit of
bondage again; you had it once, but now you have the spirit of Adoption: I
say, every man must have this spirit of bondage, and the ground of it is this,
because no man can come to Christ, except the Law be a Schoolmaster to bring
him to Christ; now the Law is not a Schoolmaster, it teaches no man, except
the spirit of bondage work fear, except the spirit of bondage put an edge
upon the Law, put a Sword into the hand of the Law, to prick the heart, to
wound the heart, Act. 2.
as it is said, Acts 2. this is the spirit of bondage, Beloved, you may hear
the Law, and the threatenings and curses, applied to you 10000. times over, and
yet no fear be bred in you, except the spirit of bondage join with it, that
makes it effectual. Now in the Law are included judgments and afflictions,
which are but the execution of the Law, sometimes it goes with the Law it
self, sometimes with the judgment and afflictions, it is the spirits of
bondage that must go with both; as for example, when it thundered and rained in
Wheat-haruest, 1 Samuel 12, 1 Samuel 12. 18.
the people feared exceegingly; and Ezra 10. Ezra. 10. 9.
when there was an exceeding great rain, the people did exceedingly tremble,
and, you know, in that Earthquake, though all were safe, Act. 16. Act. 16.
and there was no cause why he should be so unquiet, yet we see how the Jailer
was amazed, his heart was wounded, this was not for these particular
Judgments, there might be a great rain, there might be a great Earthquake,
and thunder in Wheat-haruest, and yet men's hearts little moved, but there went
a spirit of bondage, that bred a fear in them, this is that, I say, no man can
come to Christ without the Law, either in it self, or in afflictions, which
are but the executioners of it, and these are not effectual without the spirit
of bondage: and there is a very great reason for it; because, otherwise we
should never know the love of Christ, he that has not known what the meaning
of this spirit of bondage is, what these fears are, what these terrors of
conscience are in some measure, knows not what Christ has suffered for him,
or what deliverance he has had by him; besides, he will not be applyable to
Christ: But I will not stand more upon this. Have thou not had the spirit of
bondage? I say, surely, if thou have not t^sted of this, Christ, has not sown
the seed of grace in thy heart: does any man sow before he has plowed? does
any man make a new impression before there be an obl^t^ration of the old?
Beloved, before the heart be me^ted with (...) the spirit of bondage, there is
no sense of a new spirit, to make a new impression upon it; I confess it is
different, it is sometimes more, sometimes less, but all have it, more or
less; sometimes the Medicine goes so close with the revealing of sin, and of
Judgment, that it is not so much discerned; sometimes again, God means to
bestow upon some men a great measure of grace, and therefore he gives them a
greater measure of the spirit of bondage, because God means to teach them more
to prize Christ, he means more to baptize them with the baptism of the Holy
Ghost, and therefore he baptizeth them with a greater measure of the spirit of
bondage, they shall drink deeper of that spirit, because his intention is,
that they shall drink deeper of the spirit of Adoption: and therefore Christ
takes it for an argument concerning the Woman, when he saw she loved exceeding
much, surely she had a great measure of the spirit of bondage, she was much
wounded for her sins, there had been exceeding much forgiven her, in her
apprehension; and so was Paul exceedingly wounded, you know. This must go
before.

The things which go together with it, are these three, the testimony of the
blood, of the water, and of our own spirits.

First, beloved, there is the testimony of the blood* there are three that
bear record in the Earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood, though the
spirit be set first, as it is usual amongst the Hebrews, and in the
Scriptures, to put the last first, if a man would know now, whether he be in
Christ, whether he has received the promised seed, or no, let him consider
first, whether he has believed in the blood, that is, there is a word of
promise, that says thus to us, there is a Sacrifice that is offered, there is
the blood of the Lambeshed from the beginning of the world, and this blood
shall wash thee from all thy sins, when a man stands to consider this
promise, beloved, this promise bath two things in it, there is the truth of it,
and the goodness of it; a man does, with Abraham, believe the truth of it, he
believes God, and says, it is true, I believe it, but withal, there is a
goodness in it, and therefore, as the understanding says, it is true, so the
will says, it is good, and therefore he takes it, and embraces it, and is
exceeding greedy of it: for when the spirit of bondage makes a man fear, it
empties a man of all righteousness, as a man empties a Caske, that there is
nothing left in it, when it pulls away all other props and stays from it, it
leaves a man in this case, that he sees nothing in the world to save him, but
the blood of Christ; when a man sees this, he takes fast hold of that, he will
not let it go for any thing; and though it be told him, you shall have many
troubles and crosses, you must part with all you have, you shall have somewhat
hereafter, but you shall have little for the present; he cares not though it
costs him his life, so he may have this blood to wash away his sins, it is
enough, this he lays fast hold upon.

Beloved, when a man does this, at that very hour he is entered into Covenant,
he is translated from death to life, he has now received the promised seed,
and he shall be blessed, for God has said it, and sworn it, and it cannot be
otherwise; and this is the testimony of the blood, when a man can say, I know I
have taken and applied the blood of Christ, I rest upon it, I believe that my
sins are forgiven, I graspe it, I receive it, this is the testimony of the
blood.

Now, when a man has took the blood, What? shall he continue in filthiness
now, and walk after the lusts, of his former ignorance? No, the Lord comes not
by blood only, but by water also, that is, by sanctification, that is, he
sends the Spirit of sanctification, that cleanses and washes his servants,
that washes away not only the outward filthiness, but the evil nature, the
swinish nature, that they desire no more to wallow in the mire, as before: for
the Lord will not have a sluttish Church, and therefore, Ephesians. 5.
Ephesians. 5. he washes his Church, and cleanses it; he washes every man in the
Church from top to toe; there is not one place in the soul, not one place in
the conversation, but it is rensed in this water; and then, when a man comes to
find this, that he has not only found the blood of Christ applied to him by
faith, but has found that he has been able to purify himself, and by the
work of Christ's Spirit joining with him, when he goes about to purge himself,
that helps to cleanse his conscience from dead works. There is the second
testimony.

Now follows the testimony of our own spirits, that gathers conclusions from
both these, and says thus, Since I have received the blood, and seeing I am
able to purify my self, I conclude, I am in a good estate, I am a partaker of
the Covenant: if a man could say this truly, it is said, whosoever believes,
shall be saved, but I believe, this is the testimony of the blood only; but
when a man can say, I do labor to purify my self, I desire nothing in the
world so much, I do it in good earnest, this is the testimony of the water to
this sign, and testimony of the blood, which shows that it is true, it is a
linely hope: for he that has a lively hope, he purifies himself, 1 Ioh. 3.
But some man may say, 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
This testimony of a man's own spirit may deceive him. I answer, it cannot,
because though it be called the testimony of our own spirit, yet it is a
spirit enlightened, it is a spirit sanctified with the Spirit of Christ, and
then that Rule is true, 1 Ioh* 3. If our own heart condemn not; 1 Ioh. 3.
that is, if the heart of a man enlightened, if the heart of a man with which
the Holy Ghost ioynes, if the heart of a man sanctified do not condemn him,
if he have the testimony of this Spirit, he shall be saved, he needs not doubt
it, he has boldness toward GOD, then again he must consider this work,
the testimony of the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and these three agree in
one; it is not the testimony of the Spirit alone, but it is the testimony of
the water joined with it; if it were but the testimony of one, indeed the
ground were not good, but they all agree in one; and therefore if thou have one
sure to thee, it is enough. These are the things which go before, and
accompany it.

Now follows the testimony of Gods spirit; which we shall see described,
besides the places I named to you, Ephesians. 1. 13.
Ephesians. 1. Wherein after you believed, you were sealed with the spirit of
promise. My beloved, when a man has believed, and took lesus Christ;
secondly, when he has washed and purified himself, that is, he has gone
about this work, and so his own spirit gathers a testimony hence, that he is
in a good estate; after he has thus believed, then, says he, comes the Holy
Ghost, and seals the same things unto you; that is, the LORD leaves a man
alone a while, as it were, to champ upon the bridle, as I may say, he lets a
man alone to some doubts and fears, that so he may purge himself the more
carefully; but after a time, when a man has put to his seal that God is true,
then the LORD seals him again with the spirit of promise, that is, the LORD
sends the spirit into his heart, and that spirit gives witness to him, and
when he has put to his seal, that GOD is true, then the LORD puts to his
seal, and assures him that he has received him to mercy. You will say, What
is this seal, or witness of the Spirit? My beloved, it is a thing that we
cannot express, it is a certain divine impression of light, a certain
inexpressible assurance that we are the sons of God, a certain secret
manifestation, that God has received us, and put away our sins; I say, it is
such a thing, that no man knows, but they that have it; you shall find it
expressed by all these places of Scripture, R^u. 3. 20.
Reu. 3. If any man will open to me, I will come in and sup with him; that is,
when the Lord enters into a kind of familiarity with a man, when he vouchsafes
him so much favor, as to come and suppe and dine with him, as it were, Reu. 2.
17.
and to dwell with him* and so, Re^. 2. 17. To him that overcomes will I give
of the hidden Mannah; I will give a white stone with a new name written in it,
that no man knows but he that has it; that is, there shall be a secret privy
token, as it were, of my love given him, a secret mark of it, that there is no
man in the world knows besides: Io^. 14. 21.
So, Ioh. 14. 21. If any man love me, and keep my Commandments, I will show
my self to him; that is, he shall have an extraordinary manifestation of my
self, he shall have such an expression of love and peace, that shall fill his
heart with peace and joy, such a thing that no man knows but himself.
Beloved, this is the testimony of the Spirit. I confess, it is a wondrous
thing, and if there were not some Christians that did feel it, and know it,
you might believe there were no such thing, that it were but a fancy or
enthusiasme; but, beloved, it is certain, there are a generation of men, that
know what this seal of the Lord is; indeed you must remember this, to
distinguish it from all fancies and delusions, this Spirit comes after you have
the water and the blood, after you are believers, after you have purged your
selves; and therefore if any man have such flashes of light and joy, that
witness that he has received the promise, and that he is in the Covenant,
and for all this he have not the things that go before it, now thou may take
it for a delusion; I will come and sup with him; but with whom? with him that
first opens to me. If thou open thy heart to the Lord, whenever he knocks,
and comes to thee. And so, To him that ouercomes, I will give of the hidden
Mannah. If thou be one that art able to overcome temptations, and unruly
affections, and sinful lusts, thou may conclude, it is a true testimony that
thou ar^ not deceived; but if thou be one that art overcome with every base
lust, with every temptation, thou art deceived, if thou art persuaded thou art
in a good estate, this is not the witness of the Spirit; for it is to him that
ouercomes. So again, to him that loves me, and keeps my Commandments, etc.
Now if thou be one that breaks the Commandments of God, that find'st not that
holy fire in thy breast, that find'st not thy heart affectioned to him, and yet
thou have t^ese great flashes of assurance, and t^inkst thy state good,
beloved, you deceive your selves, whose case soever it is, the Lord has not
showed himself to thee, b^t it is a delusion, a fancy, and therefore, I say,
consider it; and this is the consequent of it, that he that has it is able to
pray. So I will conclude all, he is able to cry Abba Father. If thou have such
an assurance of a good estate, and yet art not able to pray, thou art deceived
likewise: for that is the property of the Spirit, it makes a man cry to God,
and call him Father. You will say, Is this such a matter? every man can pray.
Beloved, it is another thing then the world i^agines it to be* he that has
this spirit, is mighty in prayer, he is able to wrestle with God, as Jacob did,
by the spirit of Adoption, he had power with God, as it is said there, and he
is able to prevail with the Lord, and why? because he can speak to him, as to
a Father, he can continue in prayer, and watch there eunt^ with all
perseverance; he can speak to him, as one that he is well acquainted with; he
can not only speak remiss^ly, but he can cry Abba Father, that shows feruency
in his prayer; there is no man in the world that is able to do it besides. We
see a description of other men, Esaias 33. 14. when they are troubled, they are
not able to pray indeed, they may have forms of prayer, that they may use in
times of peace, but, beloved let any great trouble come upon them, let them be
put to it, and then you shall find they are not able to do it, but they run
away from God as fast as they can, at that time, they are not able to come and
say, Thou art my Father, I beseech thee hear me, I beseech thee pity me, and
forgive me: no, but they tremble at Gods presence, as the Thief does at the
presence of the Judge; the sinners in Sion are afraid in that day when God
comes, at the day of visitation, the sinners in Sion are afraid, etc. for who
shall dwell with deu^ouring fire? That is, they tremble at such a day, when the
day of death comes, when God begins to show himself to them, in the
fierceness of his wrath, when he begins to come near them in the day of
visitation, then they fly from him, as one would fly from devouring fire, they
fly not to him, as one would fly to a merciful Father, that is ready to hear
them, and help them, but they fly from him as fast as they can, as one would
fly from everlasting burni^g. The like place you have, Job 27. 8, 9, 10.
Job 27. 8, 9, 10. For what hope has the Hypocrite when he has heaped up
riches, when God shall come and pull away his soul? Will God hear his prayer
when he cries, etc.? Will he call upon God at all times? A wicked man may make
some show of prayer to God in time of health, and in time of peace, but at that
time, says he, when he has spent his time in gathering up riches, in heaping
up them, and GOD comes upon him suddenly, and shall pull away his soul, he
tears and rends it from him, (for so the word signifies in the Original) that
is, he is not willing to resign it into Gods hands, as the righteous man does,
but he is busy about his wealth, and God surprizeth him, and rends his soul
from him. What will he do in this case? What? will he pray? says Job, No, he
gives two reasons. He has ^o delight in the Lord, he neuerloued the Lord,
there is no such love between the Lord and him, as there is between the
Father and the Child, between the H^sband and the Wife, he never had the
spirit of a son, he cannot pray, for he delights not in God.

But he does pray sometimes? Object.


Yea, for some fit, Ans.
he may be in some extremity, he may cry as a Thief at the Bar may cry to
the Judge, as he does sometimes exceeding hard, not because he loves the Judge,
but it is a cry that comes from extremity, and it is but in extremity, and by
that the falsenesse and hypocrisy of them is known: So an Hypocrite may cry in
the time of extremity, but it is a cry, it is not a prayer, and it is but in
the time of extremity, it is not at all times that he does it, he is not able
to do it; for the Lord is a stranger to hi^, he looks upon the Lord, as upon
a terrible Judge; and therefore if you would know whether you have the spirit
of the Son; As first thou shall know it by that which went before; and as,
secondly, thou shall know it by that which goes together with it, the testimony
of the blood, the testimony of the water, and of thine own spirit,

So thou may know it thirdly by this, by the Consequents, it makes thee able
to pray, and in the time of extremity it makes thee able to go to God as to a
Father, when another flies away from him, as from everlasting burnings.

So much shall serve for this time.

FINIS.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
GENESIS 17. 2. And Iwill make my Covenant between me and thee. And I will
multiply thee exceedingly.
THE point which we were in handling, Ways to know whether we are in the
Covenant, or no.
was this, How a man may know whether he be in the Covenant or no? I told you,
there are 3. ways to know it. Let a man consider how Abraham came into the
Covenant; Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.
If thou believe, then thou art within the Covenant; but it must be a faith that
works by love; if it be a faith which works not, it is but a dead faith, and
if it do work, yet if it work not by love, the Lord regard^th it not* it is
true, it is faith that lays hold upon the Covenant, but it works by love;
faith is the point of the Compass, that fastens upon the Covenant, but love is
the other part, that goes about, that does all the business, it is that which
keeps the Commandments, it is that which quickens us to every good work.

Covenant, or no, is, to consider whether we have taken the promised seed; for
in him shall all the nations of the world be blessed. How shall we know that?
If we have the Spirit of the Son, that is known by the Spirit it self, the
Spirit bears witness; the witness of the Spirit, as I told you, it is known
by that which goes before it, by that which accompanies it, and that which
follows after. This is the point, that we were in handling, and we were
broken off in the midst of it; we will recall it a little, and deliver it
somewhat more distinctly to you, than we could do then for haste.

First, I say, whosoever has the Spirit of the Son, he must have, before it,
Romans 8. 15.
the spirit of bondage: Romans 8. 15. You have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear, but you have received the spirit of Adoption. As if he should
say, there are none, but first they receive the spirit of bondage: for there is
no man can come to Christ, except the Law be his Schoolmaster, and the Law is
not effectual without the spirit of bondage, neither the Law, in the
threatenings, nor the judgments, which are the executioners of those
threatenings: you may hear the Law opened unto you a hundred and a hundred
times; that is, the particular sins, of which a man is guilty, described;
yea, the particular judgments; yea, the LORD may follow you with afflictions
and crosses, yet except there be a spirit of bondage to work together with
these, it will never molifie an obdurate heart.

And therefore, my belo^ed, you must make this account, if you have never been
affrighted with the terror of God, if you have never bin put into any fear by
this spirit of bondage, be assuted that you have not yet the spirit of
Adoption. If men would have looked to the brazen Serpent, without being stung
of the fiery Serpents, God would have spared the spirit of bondage; but,
beloved, who does it? who is able to do it? We be all in a dead sleep, and,
except we be wakned with the terrors of the Almighty, there is no man would
seek after Jesus Christ; we may preach the Gospel long enough, and men, for
the most part, turn the deaf ear to us, till the LORD open their ears by
afflictions, and especially by the spirit of bondage: it cannot be, but there
must be some precedent work, we will not come home to the Lord without it.
We do all as the Woman that had the bloody issue, as long as she had money in
her purse, or that there were Physicians to go to, that she had ability to
have them, she would not come to Christ, but when she had spent all, when she
saw there was no more hope, then she comes to Christ, and was healed of her
bloody issue: so do we, so long as we can live in sin, we consider not the
greatness, nor the dearness of the disease; but if we can but subsist with
them, we go on, we come not to Christ, but when we are spoiled of all by the
spirit of bondage, when we are put in fear of death, that is it that brings
us home to Jesus Christ, and therefore we must make an account of it as a
general rule, there must be such a spirit of bondage to bring us home: we do
in this case as Ioab did with Absolon, when he lived in the Cour^, in ease and
pleasure, he would not come to Absolon, he might send again, and again, but
he would not come at him, till his Corn was set on fire, and that brought
him: beloved, except there be some such cross as may make an impression upon
us, such a cross as has the spirit of bondage joined with it, to cause it to
wound our spirits, (as it is said, they were pricked in their hearts when they
heard Peter) I say, we would not come home unto the LORD, we must have such
an avenger of blood, to pursue us, before we seek to the City of refuge. And
therefore consider, whether thou have tasted of this spirit; and therefore you
may observe this by the way, that when God does write bitter things against a
man, it is not a just cause of deiection: for this is a sign that God is
beginning a good work in thee, seek not to put it off, and to think, it is a
miserable thing to be under such a bondage as this: no, but make this use of
it, let it bring thee home to Jesus Christ. And here, by the way, that men may
not be deceived in this, and say, Object.
Alas, I have not had this spirit of bondage, and fear, and therefore I fear
I am not right.

My beloved, Ans.
you must know for what end the Lord sends it: he sends it for these two ends,
and by that you shall know whether you have it or no: for if thou have the end
once, if the effect be wrought, no doubt but thou have had the cause that
produces that effect.

One end is to bring us home to Christ; if thou find thou have took Jesus
Christ, it is certain, there has been a work of the spirit of bondage upon
thy heart, if thou find thou art willing to take him upon any conditions, thou
art willing to deny thy self, thou art willing to serve him, to love him, and
to obey him.

And a second end is, GOD sends this Spirit of bondage, that thou might know
the bitterness of sin, and learn to abstain from it* that thou may
learn to tremble at his Word, for the time to come, I look to him that is of
a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my Word: that even so as parents do
with their children, they would never afflict and correct their children for
that which is past, but their end is for the time to come, that they may not
commit the same fault again; otherwise the parent would not lay any affliction
upon the child; and, beloved, know that the Lord has this very end in sending
the spirit of bondage, thou must not think it is for thy sins past, that
there may be a kind of satisfaction made for them, that is not the end, but
the end is, that thou might know the bitterness of sin for the time to
come, that thou being scorched once with it, thou might not easily meddle
with it again; and therefore if thou find this to be thy case, thou have so
far tasted of the terrors of the Almighty, that thou dare not adventure
upon sin, thou stand in awe of the LORD, that thou dare not be so bold
with sin as thou have been, that thou dare not meddle with the occasions
of it, that thou dare not come near it; I say, if thou find such a
tenderness of conscience in thy self, if thou find that that sin is made
terrible to thee, that thou did despise before, (for it is the property of
a carnal man to despise his ways) I say, if this be wrought in thee, defer
not, make not dainty of applying the promises, because thou have not received
the spirit of bondage: for thou have, thou have the effect, therefore thou
need not doubt, but that thou have the thing. This is it that goes before:
that which goes together with it, I showed you; then is the witness of the
blood, and of the water, and of our own spirit; there be three that bear
witness in Earth, 1 Io^. 4. the spirit, and the water, and the blood; by
spirit there, is meant our own spirit enlightened; by blood is meant
Justification; by water is meant sanctification; so that that goes together
with the witness of the spirit.

The first is the witness of the blood; that is, when a man is humbled, when a
man is broken with the spirit of bondage, then he begins to make out for a
pardon: when he sees he is arrested, as it were, when he is shut up, as that
phrase is used, Gal. 3.
Gal. 3. and sees what a debt is required of him, and he is not able to pay the
least farthing, now he begins to look out for a surety, now he begins to
hunger and thirst exceedingly after Christ, now he is not content only to
watch with him, to serve him, and to obey him, but he is willing to part with
his life, and all that he has, upon that condition. Now when a man is in this
case, then the Lord begins to show him the blood of his Son, he begins to
open a little crevis of light, and to show him the New Testament in his blood
that is, the New Testament confirmed in his blood, shed for many, for the
remission of sins. I say, he begins then to look upon the promises, to
consider such promises as these, Come to me, all ye that are weary, etc. and,
If any man sin, we have an Advocate; and, Let whosoever will, come, and take
of the waters of life freely; and, Go and preach to every creature under
heaven, and t^ll them, if they will believe, and take my Son, they shall be
saved. I say, these are all promises made in the blood of Jesus Christ. now he
begins to consider these promises, and he begins first to think, What? are
these promises true? Yes, surely they are most true, they are confirmed wit^ an
oath, they are confirmed with the blood, with the death of the Testator: a man's
Covenant, after it is once made, and the Testator is dead, Gal. 3. no man adds
to it, or takes from it. Now when a man considers this, Are these the promises
of the LORD? has he confirmed them with an Oath? are they confirmed with the
blood of the Testator? Certainly, they are most true, I cannot doubt of them:
but then he begins to consider, As they are true, how fit are they for me?
what is the goodness of them? They are also exceeding good, there is nothing in
the world so excellent, so precious, so sweet, and so comfortable, as these
promises be: I say, when he has done these two, when the understanding says
they are true, and believes them, and when the will says they are good, and
embraces them, at that very instant, salvation is come to thy house, and to
thy heart; I say, Christ Jesus is come to thee, at that very instant, he has
made a Covenant with thee, though perhaps thou see him not at that time, (as
Mary could not see him, but ^ooke him for the Gardner) but, I say, at that time
thou art t^anslated from the Covenant of Works, to the Covenant of Grace.

But you will say, Quest.
How comes this blood to be a witness?

Beloved, Ans.
it is a witness in this manner; when a man's spirit shall consider the
promises, and ponder them well, and shall say this with himself, Well, I have
applied these promises, b^t upon what warrant? upon what ground have I done it?
every body will be ready to apply the promises of mercy and forgiveness, but
what warrant have I to apply them? To know that, upon good ground, I lay hold
of these promises? then a man considers with himself the promises, they are
sure, they are clearly and distinctly set down in the Word; he considers to
whom these promises are offered, to those that are vnrig^ t^ous; the LORD
justifies the unrighteous, even to Publicans and Harlots, to sinners; such
they were that came to CHRIST, to such the promises were offered. Well, I know
I am an unrighteous man, and th^r^fore the want of sor^ow and con^rition, and
the want of holiness, and the want of tenderness of heart in the beginning
shall not exclude me: for they are promises that are made to the unrighteous,
to the unclean and polluted, to the hard-hearted, such they are at the first
to whom the promises are made; but what does the Lord require of those? That
they thi^st: all that thirst, come, I find an ext^^me thirst, I would dye that
I might have Christ, and his righteousness: Is this all? No, it is required
further, that when thou art come in, thou take this resolution, now I will
serve him, now I will love him, now I will obey him, I will be content to take
Jesus Christ, for better for worse, I will be content to deny my self, to take
up my Cross, to follow him, in all his ways. When a man's spirit has pondred
this well, when he has looked on the blood of JESUS CHRIST, and the promises,
and sees himself qualified, upon this, he says, surely these promises belong
to me; this is the witness of the blood: then follows the witness of the
water; for the blood has a double virtue in it, it has not only the virtue
to deliver us from the guilt of sin, to cause the LORD to pass over us, when
he sees the sprinkling of the blood upon our hearts, and upon our persons, but
there is this more, it has a clensing virtue in it, cleanses the conscience
from dead works; and so has faith, it has not only a virtue in it, to
receive, and to digest and to take the promises, but it has an ability to
work; as the hand, you know, has two offices, it has an office to receive,
and to take, and likewise it has ability to work: Beloved, these are never
disioyned, the blood never washes from sin, but likewise it cleanses the
conscience from dead works; faith never receives the promise, but it works
likewise; indeed for the ^eceiuing part, we receive all alike precious faith;
but for the working part, there is much difference: you know, a weak hand is
able to receive, as well as a stronger, but a stronger can do more work:
therefore, as faith grows more, so it works more. Some man has a more
working faith then others, though, as it is a receiving faith he has it alike:
therefore thou may consider this with thy self, if I have the testimony of
the blood, I have also the testimony of the water, that is a sanctification
joined with justification; Christ came not by blood only, but by water also:
if the spirit of a man look on this now, and can say, I see, I am renewed in
the spirit of my mind, I see I am washed from my filthiness, I see my
conscience is in some measure cleansed from dead works, then he may conclude
with himself, surely I am in the state of grace, I am in the Covenant. And
this, beloved, is the witness of our own spirits, and the witness of the
water, and of the blood. But when this is done, it may be the LORD continues,
yet, at some fits, to write bitter things against thee, he seems to cast thee
off, he seems to wound thee sometimes, with the wounds of an enemy. This the
LORD many times does, that he may put vsto it; he turns the deaf ear, that
he may try what we will do: when the spirit of a man has now these
testimonies, and yet has not rest, though it have them on good ground, (for I
mean not the naked spirit of a man, but his spirit enlightened and sanctified
by the Holy Ghost) yet when he hat^ good ground, and says thus with himself,
Yet for all this, I will trust in him, I have his sure Word for it, I have his
promise, I know that heaven and earth shall pass, rather then any promise of
his shall pass: now when the Lord sees a man believing thus, and trusting him
upon his bate word, then the Lord goes a step further with him, and seals the
same things to him, with the spirit of promise, that is, (as I showed before
out of Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after you bel^^ued, you were sealed with the spirit
of promise) when you put to your seal that God is true, God then comes and
puts to his seal, he gives you the spirit of promise, and assures you that it
is so; that is, he does by his own Spir^t say to a man's soul, that he is his
salvation. My beloved, this is a certain expression of the Holy Ghost to the
soul of a man, that we know not how to express to you: therefore it is called
the hidden Manna^: it is called a white stone, with a new name written in it,
that no man knows but he that has it, a certain manifestation of Christ to
the soul, a certain divine light, a certain secret token of his love,
whereby Christ manifests himself to the soul of a man, that which the
Scriptures call supping with him; I will come and sup with him; Rev. 3. and
Job. 14. 21. I and my Father will come to him, and I will manisest my own
self unto him; this is the witness of the Spirit, that when the witness of
our own spirit is somewhat obscure, we may then say, Lord, thou now speak
plainly, now there is no question. My beloved, this is the witness of the
Spirit; that thou be not mistaken in it, still remember this, that it is given
to those that overcome; if thou be overcome of every thing* of every small
temptation, if thou be overcome with a blast of praise, with a little pelf,
and wealth, do thou think now thou have got the white stone tha^ Christ
gives as the witness of his Spirit? No, my beloved, it is to those that
overcome, and so it is to those that open: if thou be a stubborn servant,
that Christ may come again and again, and knock at the door, and tell thee
of such a sin, that thou lie in, and of such a duty that thou neglectest,
and yet thou carriest thy self like a stubborn servant, that will not hear
him, or if thou do, thou will not go about thy wo^ke, that he has appointed
thee; do thou think he will come in, and sup with thee, when thou will not
open to him? No, my beloved, it is not Christ that sups with thee* but it is a
delusion of Satan* but how shall we know this? These are the things that
accompany the Spirit; Six consequents of the Spirit.
but now for the Consequents of it, they are (...) First there follows a
spirit of prayer, 1. A spirit of prayer*
that goes together with it, prayer in the perfection of it is not a lip
labor; no, it is not a putting up of petitions, be they never so exceellent;
it is not a crying to the Lord: for other men may do so, but it is when a man
can come to God with considence, because he knows him to be his Father,
because he has been acquainted with him, because he has received the
Spirit of the Son, that tells him in plain terms, he is his Father: when a
man can come with holy affections to the Lord, this is the spirit of prayer; a
wicked man, as we showed out of Job 27. when God comes to him, and rends, and
tears his soul from him; that is, he parts with his soul unwillingly, when
God pulls on the one side, and he on the other, when GOD pulls away his soul,
says he, will the LORD hear him, when he cries to the Almighty? No: for he
does not pray, it is indeed a cry, a man in extremity may cry hard, as a thief
at the Bar, he cries hard, not because he loves the Judge, or has any
confidence in him, if it were not fot that extremity, he would not do it at
all, says he, he prays not, he does not delight in the Almighty, he goes
not to him as to a father, and it appears hence, that were there not such an
extremity, he would not pray, for he will not pray at all times.

Secondly, 2. Love.
it breeds love; wheresoever the witness of the Spirit is, always there
follows it love, toward God, and Jesus Christ: for it cannot be otherwise,
all love comes from knowledge; now when a man has seen Jesus Christ indeed,
that is, when the Lord has showed him his own self to him, when he has
drawn near to a man in the witness of his Spirit, when he has manifested
himself, it cannot be but a man must love him. What is the reason that we
shall love him perfectly in heaven, but because we shall know him fully? any
man that knows him in part here, loves him in part; and therefore, if you
have ever known the LORD, that he has thus showed himself, it cannot be but
thou shall love him. Besides, love comes from kindness, and goodness of one
that has showed love to us; love begets love, as fire begets fire. Now when
this was thy case, when thou wast a man expecting nothing but death, and hell,
and the wrath of God, and the Lord has come, and spoke kindly unto thee, as it
were, the LORD has come and spoken to thee, when thou wast to die, and has
said, thou shall live, when he has overcome thee with kindness, as it were,
it cannot be now but that thy heart should be affectioned toward him, as David
says Psalm 18. Lord I love thee dearly; for, when I was in distress thou
did hear me; so when a man has felt the terrors of the Almighty, when he
has lain under the spirit of bondage, for a time, when he expected nothing but
death, and condemnation, and the Lord has showed mercy and loving kindness
unto him, love will follow.

Thirdly, 3. Cl^nsing a man's self.
thou shall find this follow upon it, likewise; if thou have the spirit of
Adoption, it will set thee a work, to cleanse thy self, as, 2. Cor. 7. 1. see
a notable place for this purpose; says he, if you have such promises, that
is, the promises of grace, and of forgiveness, and of the pardon of sin, if
you have applied them indeed by the spirit of Adoption, then you will cleanse
your selves from all pollution of flesh and spirit. So, beloved, by this thou
may know whether thou have the spirit of adoption, whether thou have applied
the Covenant of Grace, and the promises of it, indeed, and in good earn^st;
this will certainly follow, thou will cleanse thy self: but if thou find now,
that thou wallowest in thy lusts, in thy filthiness, that thou art not yet
washed from thy sins, and from thy swinish nature, be assured thou have not
yet applied the promises, thou have not yet the spirit of Adoption, be assured,
if thou have any hope, it is not a true and lively hope, it is but a false and
dead hope: for, if it were a true and a lively hope, 1 Ioh. 3. it would set
thee aworke to purge thy self, and therefore Heb. 10. 22. you see the
difference there, between the assurance of faith, and of presumption, Draw
near in assurance of faith: What then? having your hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and your bodies washed in pure water. If it be assurance of
faith, it has always this following with it, the heart is sprinkled from an
evil conscience; but if it be a presumptuous, a false assurance, upon false
grounds, there follows no such clensing, no such watchfulness. Beloved, this
is a sure rule that will not deceive you you, those that have but false flashes
of comfort, they grow secure after them, these breed carelessness, they are
more bold to commit sin, they walk loosely, and are apt and ^eady to say, I
doubt not but it shall be well enough with me; but those that have assurance
indeed, it makes them much more diligent, and sollicitous, and careful to
please the L^^d in all things; for it is as a feast to them, when Christ leads
them into his Sellar, as it were, and makes a man's heart glad with Flaggons of
Wine, that is, with the consolations of the Spirit; I say, it quickens him, and
makes him zealous, and ready to every good work, when he has once tasted of
this Wine, his case is like Elihuds, he cannot hold in, but he must break
forth into good works, into holiness of life. A man walks in the strength of
such a testimony of the Spirit for many days, for so many years, so far it
is from making a man remiss in the ways of God.

Fourthly, 4. Peace.
that which accompanies it, is peace, and Joy, Romans 15. 13. the Apostle prays
that they may be filled with peace and i^y, through belee^i^g; as if he should
say, if you believe once indeed, joy will follow; and therefore you know it is
called the joy of the Holy Ghost, that is, when once a man receives this
witness of the Spirit, there follows a wondrous quiet, and peaceablenesse,
and calmness in the heart. Beloved, it is with every son of Adam, as it was
with Adam; when he had lost the Image of GOD, there followed troub^e and
horror in his conscience, till that Image was recovered, his heart was never
fully at peace, but as soon as that was recovered, the heart recouers the
former joy that Adam had, that former quiet, and peace, and comfort, that Adam
had in that innocence, he has it in a measure: So, when the LORD returns
again to a man's spirit; that it is his returning, and no delusion, I say,
there arises a certain peace in the soul, and a joy that no worldly man ever
tasted of* that they never understood, nor knew the meaning of; a certain
peace, and joy that goes beyond all worldly joy whatsoever, that which Da^id
called the s^ining of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. and, beloved, one good look
of God, is worth more then all the wealth in the world, yea, then the very
corporal presence of I^SVS CHRIST; and therefore CHRIST tells his Disciples*
that they should be great gainers by losing of him: for, says he, you shall
get this by it, I will send the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, and he shall fill
you with peace, and joy, and this shall be much better for you, then if I
should be with you still; it is better, beloved, that Christ should dwell in
our hearts then in our houses; it is better the LORD should be with us, with
his spiritual comforts, then with his corporal presence; and this comfort, I
say, every man receives, as soon as he receives the Spirit, he receives
peace that pass^th all understanding. But now in the fifth place, when a (...)
has received this joy, and this peace, when h^ i^ lift up into the third
heaven, as it were, What follows upon this? Will he be lift up, and puffed up
with all this? Oh no, it is impossible: and therefore in the fifth place, this
accompanies it, there follows an exceeding great humility, 5. Humility.
a man is never so humble, as after he has received the spirit of promise;
beloved, it is very exceeding certain, that no men in the world are so vile in
their own eyes, as those to whom the Holy Ghost has borne this witness:
there is a place for it, that puts this out of all doubt, Ezekiel. 36. 31. when
the Lord says, he will power out his Spirit on them, and give them a new
heart, and a new spirit; then, says he, then at that time, when you have
received the spirit of Adoption, and I have made my Co^e^ant with you, then you
shall consider your own deeds that were not good, and you shall acknowledge
your selves worthy to be destroyed for your iniq^ities and tra^sgressions; the
new Translation is, (...) shall loath y^^r sel^es, that is, a man shall be
exceeding vile in his own eyes. Beloved, presumption always puffes up a man,
it brings him into better conceit with himself; but this puts him quite out
of conceit with himself; the nearer the LO^D draws to any man, the more
rottenness he finds in his bones, as, we see, when the Lord came near unto
Io^, then he abhorred himself in dust and ashes: because the Lord comes
always with a bright light, as the Sun does, that shows to a man the
corr^ptions that be in him, that he never saw before, that he wonders at
himself, that he has lived so long with himself, and yet knows himself no
better: this is the ca^e of every man, when the LORD comes home to him, it
humbl^th him exceedingly; and therefore consider whether thou be thus vile in
thine own eyes, whether the spirit of humility have gone together with it.

And last of all, 6. Not to receive the spirit ^f bondag^ again.
to end this point, this will follow upon it, though it be a negative, those
that have the spirit of Adoption, they never receive the spirit of bondage
again, Romans 8. 16. You have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear: as if he should say, this is the condition of all the Saints, you have
tas^^d of it, that is the common condition, and tha^ you must look for; and
says he, this testimony you have, (for it is the Apostles scope to give them
a testimony of their good estate, that they were within the Co^^nant, that they
were under grace, says he) by this you shall know it, you have not received
the spirit of bondage ag^ine, as if he should say, should you ever receive the
spirit of bondage again* you were not under grace: for it is impossible. So
likewise, you see an excellent place for this, Gal. 3. 25. Wherefore the Law is
a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be made righteous by
faith: But after faith co^es, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. There is
no man comes to Christ, but the spirit of bondage is first a Schoolmaster to
bring him, that is, the Law must set him hard taskes, that he is not able to
perfor^e, and then he sues to Christ, as a weak Scholar does to a
Schoolmaster, and desires him to perform it for him, this brings him to
Christ; but, says he, when you are once come to Christ, when faith comes, we
are no more under a Schoolmaster, a man never comes under the Law again. But
you will object, Was it not Jobs case? did not the Lord write bitter things
against him, and he was a just man, and one that feared God? Was it not David's
case? was not his bones broken, as he complains, after the committing of the
sin of adultery? Do not many find by experience, that GOD has wounded them
sometimes with the wounds of an enemy, and has seemed to cast them off, even
after they have received the spirit of Adoption? Beloved, to this I answer, it
is very true, there are some awakings that a man may have, a man may be put
into a great fear after he has received the spirit of Adoption, he may
tremble exceedingly at the wrath of God; I say, all this he may do, yet he
never receives the spirit of bondage again, that is, he never comes to this,
to be to God, as a servant is to a hard Master, but always this persuasion is in
him, that God is his Father, and still he has the affection of a son, and
still he has that opinion, that God is his Father, that affection never wears
out of him, he never comes again to look on God, as the Thief looks on the
Judge, he never comes to be such a stranger to the Lord, so as to fly from
him: for the spirit of bondage is nothing but this, when it makes a man to
fear the Lord, and to tremble at him exceedingly, as a man does at the wrath
of a Judge, that thinks he will condemn him; though he may in his extremity
say, Lord, why have thou forsaken me? yet there goes a secret spirit of
Adoption, that never leaves him altogether, although there be some mixture with
this, to awaken him, and to quicken him, and to cause him to come home to
Christ: for that is the end. Still as a man is brought home by the spirit of
bondage at the first; so, my beloved, when a man steps out from Christ, and
begins to grow wanton, when he will r^nne out from the LORD JESUS, and will
not keep close, the Lord sends the same Spirit again to bring him in; the
Spirit does its work again; but as he was never wholly out, so he never has
the full work of the spirit of bondage. So, you see, this is the 2. means to
know whether we be in the Covenant.

Now follows the third means of knowing whether we be in the Covenant, and
t^^t is this, you see this is a part of the Covenant, Heb. 8. You shall know me
from the greatest to the least, and I will teach you, you shall no more teach
one another his neighbo^r, Third way of knowing whither we be in the Covenant,
is by our k^owledge, which has ^ properties.
and it shall be such a knowledge, that withal, you shall have my Law written
in your hearts: and in another place, I will circumcise your hearts. Beloved,
then this is the third way, and the last, by which we may know, that we are
within the Covenant, Is there such a knowledge of GOD wrought in you? Has
Christ so taught you? Mark it well, that from that knowledge these two things
follow; one, that your heart is circumcised, that the lusts of your former
ignorance, that reigned in you before, be dissolved: Secondly, it is such a
knowledge, as breeds in you a forwardness and willingness to serve the Lord
in all things? Is the Law of God thus written in your hearts? Have you had
experience of this? Then certainly you are within the Covenant. There is a
double knowledge, there is a knowledge that men have, that know much, but are
not affected according to the things they know, no^ do they practice according
to the things they know; this a knowledge that the Minister may teach them, but
it is not the knowledge that Jesus Christ teaches.

But there is a second knowledge, that which Christ teaches as he is a
Prophet, when he teaches a man so to know sin, 1. It circumseth the heart.
id est, subdueth Iusts.
and every thing else, that withal, the lust, the dominion of sin is
dissolved by that knowledge; that this knowledge circumciseth the heart, it
cuts off those lusts that did cleave to us before. If thou find this effect of
thy knowledge, now Jesus Christ has taught thee this knowledge. You know, The
old man is corrupt, Ephesians. 4. 22. through lusts, that come from error, and the
new man is renewed through holiness, that comes from truth. There are certain
lusts in the old man, that proceed from error: now those lusts we see what
they are, Job. 2. all lusts are referred to those three heads, the lusts of the
eye, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life. Now if thou would know
whether Christ has taught thee or no, whether thou have this evidence of being
in the Coue^ant with him, consider whether the truth be so far taught thee,
that these lusts are dissolved by it; for Jesus Christ came into the world to
dissolve lusts; as the lusts arise from error, so they are dissolved by truth:
Beloved, the root from which every lust grows, is some error, some mistake;
well, take away the foundation of it, and the lust dies. Now, when Christ
^eaches the ^ight knowledge, when he reueales his truth to us, as a Prophet*
he takes away the root, the bottom and foundation of a lust, and when the
foundation is taken away, the work of the Devil is dissolved in us, it falls
to the ground.

As for example, to give you an instance of it, in those three lusts to which
all the l^sts in the world are referred: the lust of the eyes, 1 Lust of the
eyes.
that is when a man looks upon wealth, and and riches, and whatsoever a man
looks upon* it is but the sight of the eye, Ecclesiast. 5. What is the reason
that men love riches? that they seek them, and heap them up above measure? It
is because a man is deceived, he thinks there is such a worth in riches, and
that they will stand him in such a stead, he has a high opinion of them, and
thence comes a man to desire them so much; from hence arises this lust of the
eye: Now, when Christ teaches a man that there is no such thing in riches, he
is but deceived, he teaches him to look on them as Paul did. he thinks
they are but dross and dung, but empty wi^hering Flowers, Iam. 1. As the
Flowers, so does the rich man fade in all his ways; ^iches are no better; he
teaches a man that they are nothing; Why will thou set thy heart upon that
which is nothing? Pro. 23. All the men in the world are not able to teach this,
till Christ Jesus has taught it to a man, but when he has taught it him, I
say, the lust is dissolved, there is an end of it, he does no more seek
wealth in that manner as he did, he sets no more that price upon it as he
did, he thinks how he may do good with it, how h^e may make good use of it,
how he may ^edeeme time now from worldly things to better things: for now he
heedes them not, as Paul, What do you tell me of money? I heed it not, but
to further your reckoning; I rejoice that I may ^urther your reckoning against
the Day of Judgment.

And so for pride of life, that is honor, 2 Pride of life.
and dignity, and esteem, and place of prefermen^, and applause of men, all
things of that nature; What is the reason that this lust rules and captiuates a
man? Beloved, it is because he thinks that there is an excellency in these
things, but when CHRIST has taught him, when he has written the New Covenant
within him, when he has written his Law in his heart, when he has taught
him with his own teaching, he begins to see a vanity in all these things,
as the Apostle says; the praise of men is empty glory, the applause of men,
that pleased him before, he looks now upon it, as a bubble blown with the
breath of men, an empty thing; he esteems it a thing that quickly lives and
dies, and vanishes he seeks no more after it. And so for the lusts of the
flesh; when a man before thought it the only life for a man to satisfy the
flesh, and the desires of it, now he begins to look on it after another
manner, he begins to see the filthiness and the bit^ernesse of those sins,
he begins to see, that fleshly lusts fight against the soul, as enemies, he
looks upon them as things more bit^er then death, more sharp then a two-edged
Sword. Now when GOD has enlightened a man thus, and has written his Law in
his heart, and has taught him that he judges so of his sins, and lusts,
now his sins and lusts are dissolved in him, his heart is circumcised. now
they are cut off, now the building of Satan is pulled down; and yet beloved,
this is but one part of this Covenant.

There is not only this, but likewise there follows this, further, when
Christ has written his Law in the heart, that man has not only his heart
weaned from all the finfull lusts that before he delighted in, but there
follows a wondrous forwardness and propensnesse to the Law of God, to keep
it; there is a wondrous desire to grow in grace, to do the duties of new
obedience, that by his good will he would live in another Element. But in
doing the duties, and using the means, by which he may receive strength to do
them; beloved, when that Law is out of the heart, when we look upon the
letter of the Law, there is no such matter; but when it is put into the heart,
when it is written within, there is an inward disposition and pro^enesse put
into the heart. If you look upon the Law without, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, and shall fear him, etc. it is a hard Law, who can keep it? but when
thou have it put into thy heart, that is the grace of love, (for that is to put
the Law into the heart, when there is such a habit planted in the heart, a
habit of fear, and of every good grace) then there is a great pronenesse and
aptness in a man, and willingness to keep the Law; and therefore in that
place, 1. Tim. 1. 9. The Law is not given to the righteous, they are a Law to
them selves. Beloved, if thou fi^dest this to be thy case, that thou need
not the Law to set thee on with terrors, and the threatenings of it, but thou
art now a Law to to thy self; that is, thou find in thy self such an
inward aptenesse and propensnesse to keep the Law of God, that, if thou were
put to thy choice, if there were no necessity laid upon thee, if there were no
threatening, no Hell, yet thou delightest in God, and desire exceedingly to
have communion with him, there is nothing seems to be so beautiful as Grace,
as the Image of God renewed in thy soul; I say, this will be thy disposition,
and this is for a man to be a Law to himself: for you know this common nature
is between the Image of the old Adam, and the Image of the new, between the
flesh and the spirit, between those lusts that remain in thee, when thou art
under the Covenant of Works, and between this Covenant of Grace, and feruency
in well doing; I say, common nature is between these two, Simile.
as a Bowl between two byasses: Now the LORD, when he comes to write his Law
in the heart, he does not only knock off the old by as of sinful lusts, that
carried him out, but he sets a new by as upon thy soul, that bows and bends
thee to the ways of God, that still there is a strong inclination that carries
thee on that way, besides the Commandment; that thou do not every thing as
of necessity a man before this time, it may be, prayed, it may be he was
constant in prayer, he would not let a morning or an evening go without it, it
may be he would do every other duty, but he did it as a task, as a man that
dares not omit it, there is a natural conscience in him, that will be upon him
if he do; he fears God will become his enemy, he shall taste of fearful
Judgments if he neglect it, all this while he does it out of fear: but one
that has the Law written in his heart, that is a Law to himself, that has a
new byas put upon his heart; I say, it still bends and inclines him to it, he
cannot do otherwise, he longs after it exceedingly, he is exceeding forward
to it, the inward inclination of his mind stands to i^. This is the third way,
whereby you may know whether you be in the Co^enant, or no, if you find that
Christ has thus taught you, and has written his Law in your hearts, if you
be thus enlightened with knowledge, that both the lusts of the former ignorance
are dissolved, and likewise there comes in the room of them, a wondrous
pronenesse and propensenesse to well donig, when there is a certain
connaturalnesse between good duties and thy heart, when thou can say indeed,
as P^ul, I delight in the Law of God, in the inward man, and, if I might have
my desire, if GOD would give me my wish, as he did to Solomon, that which I
would desire above all things in the world, is, that I may have a greater
measure of the Spirit, that my sinful lusts may be more and more mortified,
that I may excel more in grace and holiness, that his Image may be more
renewed in me, and that it may shine more bright in all the parts of it: I
say, when ^hou find this, be assured thou art in the Co^enant. So much,
beloved, for that point.

I will add a second, which is this, from this between the old Co^enant and
the new, the Old Testament was made with the Jews only, it was shut up within
the compass of that Nation; the New Co^enant is enlarged to the Gentiles,
there is now an open door for them to come in, there are now better promises,
more knowledge, a larger effusion of the Spirit, both for intention, and for
the extent of it, it is to many more; and, beloved, were it not for this
Co^enant, all you now that hear this Covenant of Grace preached unto you, and
have heard it often, you had never heard it, but this benefit you have by the
New Testament, that now this good news is come to your ears; Beloved, this
God brings home to the Gentiles, and they have their several times, and this
is the season that GOD has brought it home to you, even when you hear these
promises of Grace made. And what use should you make of it? surely this.

Take heed of refusing the acceptable time, Take the present opportunity.
take heed of not coming in when the door of Grace is open; take heed of
doing as the foolish Virgins did, they would come, and came, but they stayed
still the door was shut upon them: Beloved, there is a certain acceptable
time, as we say to you, when God offers grace, and after he offers it no more,
as we told you, the time of this life is the time that we can propound, we
know no other; but there are certain secret times, that God reserues to
himself, that none knows, but himself, and when that time is past over, he
offers it no more. You know, those in the Wilderness, they lived many years
after, and therefore it was not the time of this life to them, after God had
sworn in his wrath: therefore, I say, take heed of deferring; it is an
exceeding dangerous thing; beloved, delay in all things is dangerous, but
procrastination in taking the offer of Grace, is the most dangerous thing in
the world: beloved, we know not what we do when we do it. I beseech you,
consider it seriously, it is that that deceiues all the world, they think to
do it to morrow, to morrow, though they be not come in, yet they will do it,
and do it speedily: take heed you be not deceived in this, I will do it now,
and now, Modo, and modo, etc. The Chariot wheels, when they run, the second
runs near the first all the day long, but never ouertakes it; as in a
Clock, the second minute follows the first, but it never ouertakes it; so it
is with us, this doing of it, now, and now, and to morrow, and to morrow, these
little distances deceive us and delude us: we think to do it in a short time,
and by reason of the neerenesse and vicinity of the time, that we shall do it
easily, that we can take hold of that time; but it is not so, we are deceived
and deluded with it: as Grasse-hoppers and Butter flies deceive children, when
they think to lay their hand upon them, they hoppe a little further, and a
little further, that in the conclusion, they take them not at all; so it is
with us, we coozen our selves in that manner, we lose our life, we lose our
opportunity of taking grace, because we think it to be so near, we think
we can take it the next week, or the next month, and out of this we are
confident it is in our power, we may take it. No, my beloved, for the most part
we are deceived, when we think it so near, it may fly away, so that thou
shall never have part in it. you see how God dealt with men in the first
Covenant, I mean in the time of the Old Testament, you see, when they would
not take the offer, how God swear in his wrath, that they should not enter into
his rest; and I am f^lly persuaded, that in this New Testament, in these days
of Grace, the Lord is much more quick and peremptory in rejecting men, and
casting them off, the time is shorter, he will not wait so long as he was wont
to do in those times, he will sooner swear in his wrath now that you shall
not enter in to his rest; that I speak upon this ground, says he, if the
Lord would do this for the Law of Moses, how much more, if we neglect so
great salvation, as was preached by the Son himself? as the mercy is much
greater now in the new Covenant, then it was then, so the wrath and danger is
greater in refusing: therefore when we consider what a hazard it is, my
beloved, me thinks, the doubt, and the brittlenesse of this life, the
vnsearchablenes, and certainety of Gods seasons, and times, that he has put
into his own power, the liberty of the Spirit, that breaths where and when
it lists, the exceeding danger that we precipitate our selves into, when we
lose the opportunity once, me thinks these should move us to come in, and to
take heed of refusing the offer at any time; those expressions you shall find
so often in the Scripture, that God stands and knocks; that he waits, and
stretches forth his hands; that he will gather us, as a hen gathers her
chickens; signify these two things to us: First, how exceeding ready God is to
receive us, if we come in, while the acceptable time lasts.

Again, withal, how dangerous it is to refuse it: for who knows how long the
LORD will wait? who knows when he will cease waiting, and shut up the door of
grace to us? and then when the day of peace is gone, it is no more to be
recovered, when the acceptable time is past. I beseech you therefore, consider
and apply it, take heed of refusing, when you hear yet this Covenant of Grace
is offered, your doors are now open, you may come in, if you will; take heed
of staying till the acceptable time is past, lest the Lord swear in his wrath
(at a time when you think not) that thou shall never enter into his rest. So
much shall serve for this. Beloved, that which I intended most was this, the
reason why this Covenant is made, the reason why God makes a Covenant with man;
which was chiefly, that we might have strong consolations, that we might know
his good will toward us, that he might not only do us good, but that he
make it manifest to us. Of this likewise we should have made some use, which
is the laying hold of the Covenant, the promises of free Justification, the
promises of Sanctification, and the promises of such blessings as belong to
this present life, those are the three parts of the Covenant: we should have
showed how we should lay hold of them, that when the Lord has promised once,
when faith has a promise to cloze with, when it has such a ground to set
footing upon, then to apply them, and if the Lord defer to perform them, then
to put him to it, for the fulfilling of them; and so we should do for the
promise of Justification, the promise of forgiveness of sins, that you have
cause to make use of this time when you receive the Sacrament: For what do
you? You come to renew your Covenant with God, that we have now spoken of: for
it is the seal of the Covenant; there is a Covenant that God makes with you,
and a Covenant that you make with him: when you consider this, you should
strengthen your faith, go to him, and say, Lord, thou have promised to forgive
me my sins, and to remember them no more; Lord, it is a part of thy Covenant;
Lord, it is thy Covenant that thou have put thy seal to; (for the seal is put
to it for that very purpose, that when you see the Bread and Wine, you might
think of these seals, as signs of the Covenant) you have Gods own Word,
besides, as you have his Word, that the rain shall no more drown the Earth,
God has set his Bow in the Cloud, that when he looks, he may remember the
Covenant: so likewise, you shall sprinckle the door posts with the blood of
the Lamb, that when the destroying Angel shall come and see the blood, he
may pass you over: beloved, after the same manner, for the same end, God has
appointed the Sacrament, now when you receive those elements of Bread and Wine,
Take, eat, this is my body; and drink, this is my blood, which was shed for
you, and for many: you may go to God upon the same ground, and say to him,
Lord, thou have made a Covenant with me, to forgive me, to receive me to thy
mercy; Lord, these are the seals of thy Covenant, that if thou forget them,
thou have said, that if we do but show thee those signs, (for it is the seal
that God himself has put to it) thou will remember thy Covenant, and make it
good: therefore is is an exceeding great confirming to you, when you look upon
them, when you may say to the Lord, Lord, here is thy seal, that thy self
has put, I beseech thee, look upon it, and remember thy Covenant that thou
have made. And as we should do thus for the promises of Justification, so for
the promises of Sanctification: suppose there be a strong lust hang upon thee,
an hereditary disease, a lust that is natural to thee, that thou think thou
shall never be able to overcome, yet God has promised to break the dominion
of every sin, that he will crucify the flesh, with the affections of it,
that he will sanctify thee throughout. Beloved, you must believe those
promises of Sanctification, as well as of Justification: for certainly, where
the Scripture has a mouth to speak, faith has an ear to hear, and a hand
to receive: therefore when you grapple with a strong lust, go to the Lord, and
say to him, I am not able to keep this Commandment, I feel this temptation
is too strong for me, I find such strong natural inclinations, that I am not
able to out-wrestle; Lord, it is a part of thy Co^enant, thou have said thou will circumcise my heart, thou have said, thou will put thy Law into my inward
parts, thou have said, thou will dissolve these lusts, I beseech thee to do
it; Lord, thou art able to do it, as Christ was able to heal hereditary
diseases, so the Spirit is able to heal the hereditary diseases of the soul,
those that are most natural to us, those that are bred and borne with us, and
therefore trust him. And so likewise for any other blessing, go to him
whatsoever blessing thou need, it is a part of Gods Co^enant, he says to
Abraham, I will bless thee, and I will be thy God; that is, let a man look
round about, and see what blessings he needs, what evil he would be
delivered from, and let him go to the Lord, and say, Lord, it is a part of thy
Covenant, to give me such a blessing, to guide me, to deliver me from such a
cross and calamity; urge the Lord, and tell him, it is his Covenant. For
example, if a man be in some great trouble, that he has some sore disease,
some sore affliction, as imprisonment, or evil ^eport, fear of death, or
whatsoever; go to the Lord, and say, Lord, thou have said that the rod of the
wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, thou will aff^ict but in
measu^e, thou will not break my bones, as a Father, though he cha^ten his
child, ^ee will not break the bones of his child; the ^od of the wicked to
some men, is the breaking of the bones, they know not what to do, thou have
said thou will chastise us according to our strength, and thou will chastise us
for our good; when it is too much, thou will s^ay thy hand. As for evil
report, a man may go to the LORD, and say, LORD, thou have said thou will
bless the name of the righteous, thou will honor them that honor thee. And
so for every other particular case, be it what it will be, lay hold on the
promise, and comfort thy self with it: it is a great mat^er, beloved, when you
consider this, that God is entered into Covenant with you, when you have
promises once; therefore, if thou find a promise from GOD, beloved, build upon
this ground, be assured that thou art one within the Covenant: secondly, if
thou find a pr^mise in Scripture, never let thy hold go, but the assured of
this, that the Lord will surely do it, though he defer long, yet he will do
it, it cannot be but he will perform it, etc. So much shall serve for this
time.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON.
G^NESIS 17. 2. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee. And I will
multiply thee exceedingly.
YOU remember how far we are proceeded in this point* for my purpose is not
to repeat any thing of that which has been delivered: only this we must
call to remembran^e, that the maine difference which is between the Old
Testament and the New, it stands in this, that the Old Testament was hi^ with
shadows, and types; in the New T^^stament, there is a more cle^re (...) of
all things; The things that were ^id, ((...)) Paul) from the beginning of the
world, are ^ow revealed unto us; that is, the great difference between them,
it lies in this, that there is a greater abundance of knowledge discovered to
the sons of men, now, in the time of the Gospel, then there was in the time
of the Old Testament, and from hence it is, that now God makes a Covenant with
us, and we do not break it; Heb. 8.
but, says he, Heb. 8. I made a Covenant with your Fathers, when I took them
by the hand, and led them out of the Land of Egypt; but they broke my Covenant;
And what was the reason? Because their knowledge was exceeding slender, and
therefore their grace and strength were exceeding little, and therefore they
were not able to keep the Covenant, there is no other reason and ground, why
the Covenant is better now, as it is said to be a better Covenant, Heb. 8. 6.
stablished upon better promises; I say, there is no other ground for it, but
this, the difference of knowledge between the two Ce^enants; for, for substance
they are the same, only in the administration of them, the glorious Mysteries
of the Gospel are more openly and more clearly revealed to us in the New
Testament, then in the Old.

Whence we will only make this use, Use.
that, if we would have the benefit of the New Covenant, To labor for
knowledge.
we must labor to get the knowledge of it; otherwise it is no advantage to
you at all, that you are borne in the time of the New Covenant, in the time of
the Gospel, except knowledge abound, except you take the benefit of it, except
you labor to understand the unsearchable riches of Christ, that are unfolded
to us in the Covenant of Grace. What is the reason why the Apostle, Gal. 4. 9.
Gal. 4. calls the Old Testament, those teachings that the people had then,
impotent and beggarly rudiments? The reason is, because their knowledge was
exceeding little, therefore it brought little profit to them, they were
beggarly, they had little riches in them, and they were impotent, they could
communicate little power, and strength, and efficacy to the inward man: On the
other side now, the New Covenant is strong, and rich, and lively, and
effectual; and the reason is, because there is more knowledge in it, we are
taught to know GOD better, and to know the whole mystery of the Gospel better.

Therefore, Growing in kdowledge increases grace
I say, if you would be strengthened in grace, if we would be enabled to keep
the Covenant more then they were, labor to grow in knowledge, let it not be
unuseful unto you, whatsoever is delivered, but make benefit of it. You see
what riches of knowledge are delivered to us in Paul's Epistles, let none of
this be lost, it is thy benefit, that this is now discovered to thee, that was
hid from all the world aforetimes. It is that benefit that the Apostle Paul so
exceedingly magnifies, that to us, this mystery is revealed, that we have this
grace to make known to principalities and powers, the manifest wisdom of God,
the unsearchable rich^s Christ: make this use of it, grow in know^edge, and
thou shall grow in grace, by that (...), the strength thou gettest in grace, it
is ^^om ^he abundance of knowledge: beloved, this is an exceeding useful
point. Those are ^he complaints ordinary amongst men, they would feign do
otherwise, they would abstain from such sins, and they would observe such
^^uties, they intend it, and desire it, and purpose it, but they are not able
to perform it. What is the reason of that? Because they want grace and
strength, that is the immediate cause. But what is the cause they want grace?
Because they ^ake not pains to grow in knowledge. Beloved, that place, 2. Pet.
3. 17.
2 Pet. 3. see how they are put together; Take heed you be not plucked away
with the error of the wicked, but grow in grace. How shall we do that? Grow
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I deny not but a man may
have much knowledge, and want Grace: but, on the other side, look how much
grace a man has, so much knowledge he must have of necessity. Though there may
be much wood that is not kindled, yet look how much fire there is, so much
fuel there must needs be. Knowledge is the Oil, wherein the flame of ^he
Spirit lives, and you cannot have more Grace then you have knowledge, though
you ^ay have abundance of empty and vnprofita^le knowledge, without grace.
Therefore, if (...) would have the fruit of this Covenant, la^our to grow in
knowledge. Ioh. 1. 17. that place is excellent for this purpose; The Law
continued till John Baptist, the Law came by Moses, but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ. Mark it, grace and truth. What was the reason there was more
grace dispersed by Jesus Christ than by Moses? The reason is, because there was
more truth reucaled to the sons of men by CHRIST, then there was by Moses;
truth was hid in Moses time under vailes, and shadows, but was manifest in
the time of Jesus Christ. Now because truth was more revealed by him, hence it
was, that there was a greater communication of grace, a larger effusion of the
Spirit, because there is more truth: but that place comes as near to this
purpose, that you shall find, 2 Cor. 3. 16.
2 Cor. 3. you shall see there an expression of the difference between the two
Covenants: Nevertheless when their hearts shall be turned to the Lord, the
veil shall be taken from before their eyes. He said before, To this day when
Moses is read, there is a veil laid over their hearts, but when their hearts
shall be turned to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away: And what then?
They shall behold as in a glass the glory of God, with open face, and be
transformed and changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord. The meaning is this; says he, in the time of the Old
Testament there was a veil, that covered their hearts, and their eyes, that
they were not able to see the truth clearly; but now, says he, that veil is
took away, and we see the truth with open face, even as you see an Image in ^
Glass. But what is the benefit of this knowl^d^e? Now the veil is taken away,
we know much more, says he, by seeing with open face, we are transformed into
the same Image, that is, by the knowing of it, by looking upon it, by renewing
those truths that are delivered in the Gospel, by seeing the ways of GOD, and
the Image of GOD there described, and set forth to us; by this knowledge we are
transformed and changed into the same Image, from glory to glory; that is, from
one glorious degree of that Image to another; not that the very knowledge shall
do it, but it pleases the LORD to accompany that knowledge by the Spirit;
this is done, says he, as by the Spirit of the LORD. So, my beloved, the way
to grow in grace, and in strength, to receive that immediate benefit of the
Covenant, is to grow in knowledge, Ioh. 17. 17.
Ioh. 17. it is a part of Christ's prayer, verse. 17. Sancti^ie them with thy
truth, thy Word is truth. The meaning is this* as if he should have said, Oh
Lord, I know, that the way to sanctify them, the way to increase grace and
holiness in their hearts, is to reveal more truth to them; now, Lord, I
beseech thee, reveal thy Word to them; for thy Word is that truth, teach them
to know thy Word, acquaint them with it more and more; for by that means they
shall get grace and sanctification. So then, if you would receive the strength
of the Covenant, you must labor to grow in knowldge, labor to understand it
more and more: for, beloved, this is a very sure rule, there is not a new
notion that a man gets, there is not a beam of truth, of new truth, there is
not a further enlargement of knowledge, and illumination, but it brings some
riches of grace with it, it comes not empty, but it comes loaded with
something, it has some power, and strength, and it gives a new vigor to the
inward man; and therefore if thou would abound in grace, study the
Scriptures, much attend to them, much meditate in them day and night, labor
still to get some new spark of knowledge, some new light out of them, and thou
shall find this, that grace will follow, as it is the Apostles exhortation to
Timothy, says he Give attendance to reading, and to learning, so thou shall
save thy self, and shall be able also to save others. The meaning is, the way
to get that grace that will save a man, is to give much attendance to reading
and to learning: for, beloved, whatsoever it is that begets a man, the increase
of that likewise edifies and builds him up further. First, we are begotten by
the word of truth, it is the revelation of the truth of GOD to a man at the
first, that renewes him in the spirit of his mind, it changes his judgment,
it makes him think all things in a clean other fashion then he was wont to
do: thus he is begotten to God, and he is made a new man, a new creature: now
the increasing of the same truth, that is it that builds us up further: for
whatsoever begets, the increase of that also edifies; and hence it is that
Solomon so exceedingly magnifies wisdom and knowledge: above all getting,
says he, get that. There are many things that are precious in the world,
Pearl, Gold, and Silver, but this is beyond them all. Why do you think the
Wiseman would magnify wisdom so much? Because this wisdom brings grace with
it; and therefore when Christ is said to be the light of the world, he is said
likewise to be the life: the light he was, 1 Ioh. 4. and, Ioh. 8. he is the
true light, that lightens every man. And what is that light? Why, it is that
light that brings life together with it, Therefore, Ephesians. 5. 14.
Ephesians. 5. 14. Arise thou that sleep, etc. and Christ shall give thee light.
Now, you know, life is contrary to death, but the Apostle expresses it thus,
CHRIST shall give thee light; because when a man has much light, he shall
withal have much life and grace: and therefore this I will commend to you, as
one of the principal means of all other to grow strong in grace, and in the
inward man, to grow much in knowledge. Beloved, it is another thing then we
are aware of: if we were fully persuaded that it were a thing so excellent,
that it would bring so much grace with it, certainly we would study it more
then we do: 2 Pet. 2. 20.
2 Pet. 2. 20. says he, You have escaped the filthiness of the world,
through the knowledge of Christ. That is, that that delivers you from the
bondage of sin, that which enables you to escape the filthiness that is in
the world, when other men are yet tangled with it, it is because you know that,
that other men are ignorant of, it is through the knowledge of Christ, if you
have escaped; and, 2 Pet. 1. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 2.
Grace be multiplied through the knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus
Christ. Grace be multiplied through that knowledge, as if he should say,
multiply you that knowledge, and this is that means whereby Grace shall be
multiplied to you.

That you may see the ground of all this, there is no grace that any man has,
but it passes in through the understanding: For example, What is the reason
that any man loves GOD more then another, but because God is presented to his
understanding in another manner then he is to another? he knows God better
then others; and so for other graces. Why is one man patient, when another is
not, but because his understanding is enlightened to judge otherwise of the
evil he suffers, than another does? he reckons them not so great and
intolerable evils, he sees another hand of providence, he sees another end in
it. And so, What is the reason one is temperate, and sober, and meek, when
another is not, but because he has another judgment of pleasures and
delights? he looks upon them, as on things that are enemies to his soul, he
sees a vanity and an emptiness in them, that another does not; I say, all the
grace that a man has, it passes through the understanding; and therefore if a
man would be strong in grace, let him labor to get much light, to get much
truth, much knowledge in his mind: for certainly all the difference between
Christians, the difference of stature between men in Christianity, the
difference of degrees, as one man has a higher degree of faith, and another a
lower degree, it follows from hence, that one is more enlightened, he has more
knowledge, he has more truth revealed to him, which truth carries grace with
it.

What is the reason that Paul exceeded other men in grace?

Because there was more truth revealed to him then to other men: but still
remember that I deny not, but that there may be much knowledge without grace;
but this is a sure rule, there cannot be much grace without knowledge. the
reason why any man is strong in grace, and able to do that which another is
not able to do, that he is able to go through those troubles, and those
crosses that another shrinkes at, he is able to overcome those lusts that
another is not able to grapple with, it is still the strength of his knowledge,
that he has more understanding of things, that he is better and more
enlightened: Ioh. 16. when the Apostles were to come into the world, and CHRIST
tells them what entertainment they should have, they begin to be exceeding
fearful, alas, what shall we do in the world, when we have such things to
do? we have men to wrestle with, that shall think they shall do God service
when they put us in prison; ^aith he, fear not, I will send my Spirit along
with you, and he shall help you to work, he shall co^^ince the world of
^inne, of righteousness, and of Judgment. The meaning is this, it is true,
when you come into the world, you shall find men's opinions exceeding false,
you shall find Satan building up strong holds, in their deceipts and errors,
and their evil imaginations that they have of things; and, says he, if you
should go alone without my Spirit, truly you might besiege the City, you might
use your spiritual Armor, but you should do no good; but I will send my
Spirit that shall convince, (the word in the Original signifies the refuting
of an opinion that men had before drunk in, and were possessed of) the end of
the Spirit is to sanctify men; now what is that way that the Spirit uses to
sanctify men? It is to wear out those old opinions, to confute them, to let
men know they were exceedingly deceived. Alas, they did not know that they were
so exceedingly sinful as they be, but when the Spirit comes, he shows them
what natures they have, and what lives they have lived, they know they are
other creatures then they imagined themselves to be: for the Holy Ghost refutes
that opinion, and conuinceth them of sin, and of judgment* that is, the
Spirit shall show men the beauty and the glory of sanctification, of spiritual
privileges, and shall make them in love with it: so judgment is to be taken,
as you have it taken in that place, where it is said of Christ, he shall not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Fl^x, till he bring forth
Judgment to victory* for it shall not cease till he have brought forth
Judgment to victory: that is* by Judgment is meant holiness, and beginning
of grace or sanctification, he calls the first part, that does but begin to
smoke, Judgment: says he, the Lord shall not put it out, but shall blow that
spark, he shall put new fuel to that spark till it overcome, till he have
brought forth this beginning of Judgment, or integrity, or sanctification, to
victory; that is, to get the victory over sinful lusts: now this is done by
conuincing, by dealing with the understanding, it is the work of the Holy
Ghost, with the minds of men. Now, beloved, the use you may make of it is this*
If this be the way by which the Holy Ghost sanctifies, and infuseth, and
communicates to the hearts of men, the graces of his new Covenant, if it be by
the altering of the opinions of men's understanding, the way then that thou must
take to grow excellent, to grow strong in grace, is to grow much in knowledge,
to study the Scriptures much, and therefore let not this exhortation be in
vain to you, make this use of it, still to meditate in the Law of God day and
night, still to do somewhat therein, to be trading therein, to be busied in
speaking, or reading, or in thinking on it.

Beloved, if you do but take any piece of this word, and stay upon it, as the
Be does upon the Flower, and will not off till you have got somewhat out of
it; if you be still digging in this Mine, here is enough, it is a large, it is
a deep Mine, this would make you rich in knowledge, and if you be rich in
knowledge, it will make you rich in grace likewise: it is the expression that
is used, 1 Cor. 1. 5.
1 Cor. 1. Therefore be assured of this, we have many businesses to do in this
world, and every man bestows himself on something, he spends his time, and
places his intentions some where: now there is nothing in the world that you
can bestow it so profitably on, as to get n^w light daily; get new truths: if
a man gather knowledge of other things, they are but trifles; and yet that is a
thousand times beyond the gathering of wealth, but yet that is nothing to the
other knowledge, it is beggarly, and impotent, and poor, as the Apostle says:
for the things themselves are poor. Is there any thing in the world can help
a man to happiness to any purpose? if the things cannot do it, the knowledge
cannot be better then the thing. I say, the best natural thing you can do is
to gather wisdom, that will serve for this present life, but to get that
wisdom that will build you up in grace, that will make you strong in CHRIST,
that is far more to be chosen; remember that which Solomon says, that it is
above Pearls, and that is not enough to express it; but, says he, go
through all the precious things in the world, it goes beyond them; Why? because
it exceedingly increases grace; And what is the profit of it? It makes God to
set a high esteem of you, it makes the mighty God, who is able only to do
thee good, to delight in thee, it makes him ready to do thee much good; which
I gather out of that Heb. 8. says the LORD there, When I took your Fathers by
the hand, and led them out of Egypt, says he they broke my Covenant, and I
regarded them not, says the LORD; mark it, but I will make another kind of
Covenant with you. Now, by the rule of contraries, these men had little
knowledge, and by that means, they had no strength, and therefore they broke
the Covenant of the LORD, and therefore the Lord regarded them not, but cast
them away, as you refuse things: on the other side now, there is much
knowledge, that brings men much grace, that makes them keep the Covenant of
God in a greater measure; if he regarded not them that brake the Covenant,
certainly now he will regard them that keep the Covenant, those that are his
peculiar people, the men of his delight, the men whom he loves, upon whom he
means to bestow all his favors, they are favorites to the Court of heaven;
this you shall have, if you excel in grace, there are many other benefits, but
still, I say, remember this; if thou would have much grace, read the
Scriptures exceeding much, make it thy chiefest study from day to day enquire
into them, if thou can live under a good Minister, that is lively, and
powerful, and enlightening, set a higher price upon him then thou have done; if
thou have an estate, spare nothing for thy souls good: for if wisdom be
better then Gold, and Silver, why should you not part with them for it? and so
by conference be doing something. We see, Psalm. 1. (...)
what they are that are pronounced blessed, that meditate in the Law of God day
and night; it is upon this ground, when a man meditates, that is, when he
delights in it, (he will not meditate in it else) grace will follow: for there
is no man bleffed, except he has grace, and the proposition should not be
sure, except a man do settle himself to meditate day and night, it brings
ability to keep the Law; and therefore, Ios. ^. 8. you shall find it so
expressed, says the Lord to Iosuah, Let not the Law depart out of thy mouth,
but meditate in it day and night, that thou may observe and do it, that so
thou may make thy ways to prosper, then thou shall have good success.
Mark, if a man be still taken up in doing something, in the things that belong
to the Kingdom of God, that he make that the element that he lives in, as it
were, that he make it his chief and principal study, that he busy himself
about it from time to time, as much as possibly he can get leisure, that he
prefer it before all things else, doing it both day and night, by this he
shall be more abl^ to keep the Law, he shall be more able to observe it, and
when that is observed, it makes way for prosperity, then God will bless thee,
and give thee good success. So much shall serve for this.

The next thing to be considered, which we propounded, is, When the Covenant
is dissolved.

You must know, When the Covenant (...) broken.
that the Covenant is then dissolved, when that is dissolved that did make the
Covenant. Look what it is that puts a man into the Covenant of Grace at the
first, when that is taken away, then the Covenant is disannulled between God
and us, but till then the Covenant remains sure. Now, what is it that makes
the Covenant? Mark it, This is that that makes the Covenant, when Jesus Christ
offers himself to us, and makes known his consent, he is the promised seed,
in whom all the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed; when we again come,
and take this promised seed, and give our consent, and make him our LORD, and
we be subject to him to be his; when we say to the promised seed, he shall be
my God and my Governor, and I will be among his people, and be subject to him;
I say, when the heart gives a full consent to this, when the heart has thus
took the promised seed, and received him, and looks for all from him, now
the Covenant and Contract is made between them. Now, beloved, as long as this
union continues between CHRIST and us, the Covenant is not disannulled; so
that, in a word, the Covenant is never nullified, until thou have chosen to
thy self another husband, till thou have taken to thy self another Lord. In a
marriage, there may be many failings of a Wife toward her Husband, many
neglects, many disobediences, many fits of passion, many offenses she may give
him, but till she commit adultery, the bond co^tinues sure, there is no divorce
between them; the Covenant of God still remains between them, there is no
dissolution of the Covenant: Beloved, so it is here, thou committest many
transgressions, thou offendest God often, thou failest much in thy service thou
owe him, but till thou shall commit spiritual adultery, till thou leave him,
as it were, and shall select and choose to thy self another Master, another
Lord, another Husband, the Covenant remains sure between you, there is no
dissolution of the Covenant. Beloved, this is a point exceeding full of
comfort: thou must not think, that upon every sin the Covenant is
overthrown between GOD and thee: no, the Covenant remains sure, the bond is
not untied as yet, though thou fail exceeding much, though thou fall into many
actual rebellions against him, yet the Covenant is not dissolved.

But you will say to me, Object.
If this be to break the Couenan^, to choose another Husband, I hope there are
none of us that are breakers of the Covenant then, we have not chosen another
GOD, we are willing enough to serve the Lord? Ans.
Beloved, the rule is exceeding true, if thou deceive not thy self in applying
it: therefore I say this to thee, take heed* thou deceive not thy self: it is
certain the Covenant remains sure, notwithstanding all infirmities, as long
as thy heart cleaues to thine Husband, as long as thou take not another in
his stead: therefore if thou will not be deceived, Two rules to know whether we
have broken the Covenant.
as many do deceive themselves, I will give thee but these two rules to know
it by.

The first is an immediate examination of thine own heart, 1 Rule. ^ooke to
thy heart.
look narrowly to this, if there be any creature in the world, any pleasure,
any profit, any matter of credit, or honor, or whatsoever the thing be, any
delight, or sport, or inclination, or lust, wherewith thy heart commits
adultery, certainly thou have chosen another Husband, whatsoever thou
pretendest: If there be any sin that thou art in league with, wherewith thou
art entered into Covenant, as I may so say, thou have broken the Covenant with
thy first Husband, as you shall see an expression thereof, Iam. 4.
Iam. 4. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, if you love the world, you love not
GOD. That is, if there be any thing in the world that you love in that manner,
it is enmity to GOD, the Covenant is broken. Now, you will say, How shall we
know this? You shall know it by this, if it di^ert, and put out, and quench the
love to your Husband. You shall see a wife often times, her heart is stolen from
her husband, she comes to be in his presence from day to day^ to do all
service to him, she performs, it may be, every duty, as carefully, and as
diligently as the best wife in the world, and yet for all this her heart is
gone, here is but a shadow of performance, she does them, but not with love,
and delight, she does them not with cheerfulness and willingness, she would
be free: if thou find this thy case, that thou art so in love, that thy heart
is stolen away with any thing in the world, with matter of estate, pleasures,
or whatsoever it is, any outward excellency that thy heart is set upon, any
haunt, any delight, any lust that has dominion in thy soul, that thou have
made a league with it, so that thou come indeed to perform holy duties
from day to day, but they have no taste, no relish, thou do them not with
liveliness and quickness, thou do them as one that must do them of
necessity and preforce; but thou delightest not in thy Husband; thou come
before him, but thou delightest not in his company, thou d^lightest not in his
presence, but the love of other things, worldly mindedness, quenches that
delight, it is certain thou have committed adultery, thou have chosen another
husband.

You must know this, beloved, that a godly man that is once entered into the
Covenant, though he fail exceedingly in many things, yet his delight is still
in the LORD, he desires exceedingly to please him, he had rather be in his
company, he had rather have communion with him, then with any other in the
world besides; he had rather be doing service to him then to any other; he
had rather be employed in any thing that ^ends to him; so that if it could be,
(I make that supposition) if there were such a proposition as there was in the
old Law, every seventh year, those that had served an Apprentiship, that were
bondslaues, they might go free, yet we see some so loved their Masters, that
they would not go free, but would be their servants for ever, and they were
bored through the ^are, and were their servants: for, says the Text, they loved
their Masters, and would stay with them. Beloved, so it is in this case, take a
man that commits adultery with any thing in the world, let him have such a
Proclamation, that he might go free, he would, were it not for the loss of
heaven, and for going to hell, (but suppose it were free to him) he would go
free with all his heart, he would choose another Master, and would be free from
that bondage, (for so he accounts it;) but he that loves the LORD, will not
go free if he might: for he reckons that service the greatest freedom, and
delight, he had rather live in His Family, then in any service in the world;
it is not a service, but a friendship; it is a marriage, he lives as a son in
the Family, and therefore he is willing to continue: for, beloved, as soon as a
man is gotten into the Co^enant once, (this is the ground of it) there is such
a disposition put into his heart, there is such a disposition grafted in him
and rooted in his inward parts, that he longs after the LORD, as look what
disposition and inclination there is in the Loadstone, in lingering after the
Iron, if you pull it from it a thousand times, still it looks after it, and it
cannot choose, it is the disposition of the Iron: so, such a disposition there
is in the servants of the Lord, to choose him for their Lord, and Husband; and
it is not an empty choice, that c^^sists only in affection, or in the naked
resolution of the mind, but it is such a choice as has strong affections
running together with it, a strong inclination carrying the soul to him, so
that though he be hindered many times, and often in his life, unruly lusts
come, and make a separation between the LORD and him, yet he cannot abide to
be long from him; it is the Lord that he loves, he cannot for his heart
choose another Master, he cannot choose another Husband, another Lord, another
friend, but it is he with whom he will dwell, live, and dye: if this be thy
case, know, that thy continual failings make not a breach of the Covenant: for
thou know that thy heart has not chosen another Husband: for though thou be
forced sometimes, through the violence of temptation to serve another, yet thy
heart cleaues to thy right Master, it cleaues to him, it inclines to him, it
bends that way: this is one way to find it, look to thy heart immediately.

If thou can not do it by this, if this be too obscure a rule for thee, (I
will add but this for the making of it plain) Look to the effects. 2. Rule.
Look to the effects.
Thou pretendest, I have not chosen another husband, I have chosen the Lord for
my God, and him will I serve. It is very well, it is a good profession, but
take heed you be on a sure ground. Now, says our Savior, Ioh. 8. You
pretend that you are the children of Abraham, that you have him for your
Father, and not the Devil, but I say unto you, he that commits sin, is
the servant of sin: and so likewise, Know you not, that to whomsoever you
obey, his ser^ants you are, to whom you obey? Romans 6. And again, 2 Pet. 2. Of
whomsoever a man is overcome, to that he is in bondage. Look to it now, art
thou overcome with sin? do thou obey sin, when it comes with a command
upon thee? do thou commit sin? Certainly thou have chosen another husband,
thou do but deceive t^y self.

Alas* you will say, Object.
is it every committing of sin?

No, Ans.
beloved, that is not the meaning of it, but take heed of this, when a sin is
drawn out as a thread in the course of thy life, now intruth thou obeyest it,
now thou art overcome of it, now it has dominion whenever it commands thee;
when there is, I say, a tract of sin, when a man is still given to such a
way, to such an infirmity, (I cannot properly call it an infirmity) that you
may say it is such a man's trade, he walks in it, now a man obeyes sin, he is
overcome of it, it has gotten the victory over him; as we use to say of men,
he is a worldly-minded man, go to him when you will, you shall find him so
disposed, you shall find him in all his carriage to show himself to be such
a man, this sin it runs as a thread through his whole life, still he minds
earthly things, he is taken up about them, he disrelisheth the Word, he does
not mind it, he does not delight to read it, or to hear it, he does not
love the company of the Saints, and the like; and so for any other sin. If
this will not serve the turn, thou may judge it by one sin, but that is
somewhat more difficult: I will give you 3. examples, you shall see Adam, and
Balaam, and Saul, you shall see every one of them in one sin break the
Covenant, and if you can find yours the same case, you shall know whether you
have broken it by one miscarriage. Take Saul first, he was commanded to go and
kill the Amalekits, and God would have him destroy them utterly; Saul goes
about his Commandment, he seems to keep it exceeding well, and where he
failed in it, he seemed to have a fair excuse, says he, I did but save the
King, the whole body of the people was destroyed: again, he saved but a few of
the fattest of the cattle, and for what purpose? not for his own profit, to
make him rich, but to offer sacrifice to the Lord, and he hoped there was no
failing in this. Well, says Samuel, thou have cast away the Lord, thou have
chosen another God. Samuel charged him with no less; for, says he, thy sin
is as witchcraft, it is as Idolatry, that is, thou have now cast God quite
away, thou have chosen to thy self another Lord, another Husband to obey, How
shall this be made good? The meaning is this, when a man receives a
Commandment from God, (mark it) when a man knows it is the Lords will, that
I should walk thus, and thus before him, that I should abstain from such and
such sins, I cannot deny but this is his Commandment; well, when a man comes
to the keeping of it, and his heart finds out excuses, and says in such and
such a case, I hope I may be somewhat excused from a strict performance of it;
I say, when the heart at any time deliberates, and yet that word is not
sufficient to express it, but when the heart works according to its own
proper inclination, and then disobeyes the Lord in any Commandment, certainly
then it casts God away. Beloved, it is not such disobedience, as when a man is
transported with a strong affection, a strong temptation, when he is not
himself for a time, and his sin be discovered, he easily returns, and will
be the same man he was; but, I say, when a man deliberately commits sin, when
a man considers himself well, and he is not transported with the strength of
temptation, but his heart works at liberty, so that he acts himself, in this
case he does as Saul did, he casts God away, and God sent him word that he had
cast him away.

The like was the case of Balaam, he carried it exceeding fairly, I will not,
if Balaac will give me his house full of gold, curse the people: I cannot do
that which God has not said to me, yet Balaam desired much to do it, he
thought he would make trial, he would go as far as he could, God saw it,
and found it out, and you see what judgment was given upon him, and this was
presently discovered, he gave advice to Balaac to put a stumbling block before
the children of Isra^l, that is, by offering with the Moabites, and committing
fornication with their women; and so, says he, I shall be able to curse them,
when they have committed sin once, then I may curse them to purpose. I say,
there was the natural, the proper inclination of Balaams heart, it was not a
thing that he was drawn to; but when his heart was left to it self, to go
which way it would, that way it went: it is not so with a man that is in the
Covenant: for grace, it still preuailes, and has power over him, it is that
which has dominion and possession, it is that which is the Lord of the house,
and whenever he is lest simply to himself, that his heart works which way
it would, certainly then he pleases God, he cannot, he does not sin against
him. I cannot stay to press this further, but rather come to make some use of
it; but this remember, so long as a man does not choose another Husband, so long
the Covenant is not broken* though the failings be exceeding many.

The use we are to make of it is this, Use.
If there be this comfort, that though a mandoe commit many sins, yet, so
long as he has the Lord for his husband, as long as he is not willing to choose
another Master, still the Covenant is sure; Beloved, then comfort your selves
with these words, and make use of the Covenant, and apply the promises of the
Covenant, say this with thy self, it is very true, I am sinful, I provoke God
from day to day, yet, for all this, I am not out of the Covenant, and therefore
the promises of the Covenant belong to me, and therefore, notwithstanding my
sins, I will go boldly to the Throne of Grace, and I will lay claim to the
promises, and to all the parts of the Covenant, for they belong to me. Beloved,
this use you should make of it, when you hear the Covenant is not broken.

Now the promises of the Covenant are of 3. sorts; the promises of
justification, the promises of sanctification, and the promises of blessings of
all sorts, that belong to this life, and to the life to come. This threefold
use then thou should make of it, First, put the case there lies upon thy
heart the conscience of any sin that thou have committed, that troubles thee,
thou art afraid that this sin should make a s^paration between God and thee,
thou have yet no assurance of the forgiveness of it, but the conscience of the
sin lies upon thee, as that expression you have Heb. 10. Heb. 10.
what will thou do in such a case? Go to the Lord, and say to him, Lord,
notwithstanding this, I know I am in Covenant with thee, and Lord, this is one
part of thy Covenant, that thou will remember our sins no more, but, when
they are sought they shall not be found. My beloved, as you have heard before,
they are the very words of the Covenant. I say, if thou come to the Lord thus,
and bring Christ in thine arms, (for that is the nature of ^aith, faith first
seizes upon the dead body, as the Vul^ures and as the Eagles do first seize
upon the body; so faith first seizes upon Christ) I say, if thou can go to
him, and say, Lord, I have thy Son, he has offered himself to me, he is
freely offered, and I have took him, and all thy promises in him are Yea and
Amen, and this is one of thy promises, that thou will forgive me: if one plead
the Covenant hard with God, and tell him it is a part of his Covenant, and he
must be just, he cannot be a Couenant-breaker; do you think that God will
break his Covenant with thee, or any man? he cannot deny thee, he will put
away thy sins: strengthen thy self with this: for this Covenant is continual,
the Mediator of this Covenant is Jesus Christ, who is such an High Priest that
is able perfectly to save those that come unto him, when a man has commit^ed
the greatest sin, and sees but the blood of Bulls and Goats, he might think
thus with himself, alas, what can this poor and beggarly Ceremony do, to
deliver me from the conscience of my sin? Well, says the Apostle, we have
another kind of Sacrifice, and another kind of Priest, Heb. 7.
Heb. 7. We have such an High Priest, as is able perfectly to save those that
come to him: And why? For, says he, he is gone, not into the Tabernacle, as
the other Priests, but he is entered into the very heavens. Besides, says he,
he goes not once a year, as they did, but he lives for ever to make
intercession for us, he is not gone with the blood of Bulls and Goats, but
with his own blood, he is a High Priest, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated
from sinners, higher then the heavens, and therefore doubt not but he is able
perfectly to save those that come unto him.

Beloved, consider this, it is the very Use that the Apostle makes, Heb. 10.
22. Heb. 10. 28.
says he, seeing these things are so, since we have such an High Priest as we
have described, since it is the very Sacrifice of his blood it self, let us
draw near in the assurance of faith; that is, if the conscience of any sin
lie upon us, let us not go to God with a quarter wind, or with a half wind,
but with a full assurance of faith, let us make no question, but trust
perfectly to the grace that is revealed. You must think so of Jesus Christ,
he would have you think so, and conceive of him, that he is now in heaven,
that he is able perfectly to sau^ you, that there is nothing you have
committed, that can do you hurt; he is like a friend in the Court; if a man
were sure that he had one that were never from the King, that has his ear
continually, that is always in his presence, that is such a Favorite, of such
power with him, that certainly he can deny him nothing, a man would be secure:
put the case there were some whispering fellows that would be ready to inform
against him, yet, says he, I have one there, that will be ready to take care
for me. My beloved, this is thy very case. Christ Jesus is gone to Heaven, it
is a thousand times better for thee, that he should be there, then that he
should be here in this world still, there he is thy Attorney, as it were, he
takes care of thee, he sees all the accusations that are brought against thee,
and he is ready to answer for thee, says the Text, he makes intercession, if
there come any thing that tends to make a breach between God and thee, he is
the Mediator for thee, he dwells there for that end, if there be any offense,
any breach comes, that he may make it up between God and thee; consider this,
and when thou have committed a sin, go to this high Priest, that is able to
save thee perfectly, and remember that it is a part of his Covenant, and so
labor to grow up in full assurance of faith, that no conscience of sin may
lie upon thee, to make a separation between God and thee: for, beloved, you
ought to trust perfectly to the grace that is revealed through him.

And as I say for sin, so in the second place you are to make use of the
Covenant, as put the case there be some strong lust, some violent temptation,
that thou art not able to outwrestle, it is too strong for thee, thou would
feign be rid of it, but thou art not able, why what shall thou do in this
case? remember that it is a part of the Lords Covenant, that he will deliver
thee from all thine enemies, that thou may serve him in righteousness and
holiness all the days of thy life. It is a part of his Covenant to remember
it, he has sworn to remember it, he has said he will write his Law in thy
heart, and that can never be, without he obliterate all old writing, he has
said he will give the Holy Ghost, he has promised to give thee a new heart,
and a new spirit* now consider this, it is a part of his Covenant, go to the
Lord, and beseech him to make good his Covenant, this is the way for thee to
overcome it; if thou go about it any other way, thou shall never be able to
out-wrestle it. Beloved, for a man to think thus with himself, to say, I have
received grace, I hope I have some strength, therefore I will be bold to
venture upon such a temptation; or, at least, I hope by my promises, by my
vows, and prayers, and reading, one way one way or other to master it, and
overcome it, this is not the way; thou must go to GOD, and make use of this
Covenant, and beseech him to give thee strength: for, mark it, GOD would not
take this upon him, to give us new hearts, and new spirits, to sanctify us, to
make us new creatures, to crucify the flesh, to weaken the dominion of sin,
he would not take this upon him, and make a promise, if we were able to do
it: but he knows it is in his own power, and he must do it for us; and
therefore in such a case we must go to him, and beseech him to do it: for
know this, when a man is in CHRIST once, when he is in the Covenant, he lives
by a principle without himself, and not by one within himself, as Paul says,
I live by Jesus Christ, that is, he is without me, and it is he still that
gives me strength, therefore go to him.

If you ask the reason, why will the LORD have it so? why may not a man have a
sufficient habitual strength in himself, by which he may be able to
out-wrestle lusts, and to overcome temptations? The reason is, because no flesh
shall rejoice in it self; and therefore Christ is made sanctification; that
is, you derive it from him, from day to day, from time to time, that you might
not rejoice in your selves, but in him: therefore let no man go about such a
business in his own strength: for a man to think, beloved, by virtue of that
habitual grace he has received, to be able to overcome sin, and to work
righteousness, it is all one as if a man should say thus with himself, I see my
house is full of light, now I will shut up my doors and windows, I hope to
have light enough; when he has done so, you know, the light perishes
presently, because the Sun is shut out, that which gives light: I say, so it
is, when a man thinks, now I am some body, I have now gotten some strength,
now, I hope, I may walk with some confidence more then before; this is to shut
up the windows, as it were. No, thou must have continual dependence upon
Christ, otherwise, if thou go to overcome any sin, and think to do it with
thy own strength, it shall be too strong for thee: for you wrestle with
spiritual things, and without a strength from one without thee, they will be
too strong for thee: go to the Lord, and say, Lord, I confess, I am able to
do nothing of my self, but I bring my heart to thee, as an empty Caske,
beseeching thee to fill it with grace; Lord, I want much grace, Jesus Christ is
full of grace, and has filled himself for that purpose, that he might
communicate it to us: I say, in such a case, now, if thou go to the Lord, and
beseech him to make good his Covenant, tell him thou restest upon his strength,
thou go against sin, as Iosuah went against the Ca^^^ites, not because he
was able to overcome them: for they were Giants, and had cities walled up to
heaven; but he went in the Lords strength; I say, if a man go in this manner,
be assured that the Lord will not fail thee, he will give thee ability to
overcome.

The third case is, when any outward trouble lies upon a man, let him go and
remember it is a part of Gods Covenant to bless him, To bless him with what?
Withal kind of blessings, and to be a Buckler to him; there is no evil in the
world, but God has promised to be a Buckler to shield him, and to defend him
from it: put the case thou lie under any pressure, any calamity, any cross,
any disease, any affliction of mind, or of body, or estate, or of name, why
go to God now, and tell him it is a part of his Covenant to deliver thee, and
labor to find out, if thou can, beside the general Covenant, some
particular. The Lord has said, if thou be in trouble, call upon me, and I
will deliver thee; if thou be in a strait, in extremity, the Lord has said he
will work thy works for thee, and so yo^ may go to him in particulars. But
when fait^ has once gotten a promise, be sure that thou keep thy hold, plead
hard with the Lord, and tell him it is a part of his Covenant, and it is
impossible that he should deny thee; do as the woman of Canaan, when thou art
on a sure ground, take no denial, though the Lord may defer long, yet he
will do it, he cannot choose; for it is a part of his Covenant. Beloved,
therefore in this case, do, as you see two Metaphors used in Scripture, they
are excellent for this purpose, Esaias 66. 11. there is a Commandment of the
Lord for the children of Israel, that they should suck, and be satisfied with
the breasts of consolation, etc. the words are obscure, as they are read to you,
but the Original makes them exceeding clear; there are two Metaphors used,
one is to milk consolation out of the promises, the meaning is this, that the
promises are full of comfort, as a dugge is full of milk; now, if thou be
ready to faint, go and milk out consolation out of the promises, that will
relieve thee, that will stay thy heart; go, says he, and suck, draw out
consolation from the dugges, from the promises, (for that is the meaning) which
he calls the breasts of consolation (for he repeates the promise presently
after,) thus says the Lord, behold, I will extend peace over her like a Flood,
etc. The other Metaphor is to extor^, to oppress the promises, that, as a rich
man oppresses a poor man, and gets out of him all that he is worth, he leaves
him worth nothing, he plays the extortioner with him; after that manner deal
thou with the promises, for they are rich, there is a price in them, be thou as
an extortioner to them, take out whatsoever thou need, or wring it out of
the promises, as it were. Now when a man is poor and needy, let him go to the
rich promises, and be as an oppressor to them, that is, consider the promises
to the utmost, see the utmost riches that is contained in them, and they will
make thee rich again; draw out the utmost of that milk that is in them, and
it will exceedingly revive and comfort thee: for example, (that I may a little
open it to you) Jacob, when Esau met him, and his heart began to faint, (for,
says the Text, he feared exceedingly) his heart began to fail him now, and
what did he? he did go and suck consolation out of the promises: for thus he
reasons with the Lord, Lord, thou have said thou will do me good; now he
stays himsel^e up with this, and he got so much strength with this milk,
that he was able to wrestle with the Lord all night, and would not let him go
without a blessing; this promise sustained him, from whence he sucked
consolation and strength for thou have said thou will do me good, therefore I
am resolved, I am sure I am upon good ground* I will not let thee go without a
blessing. And so Abraham, when he was to offer his only son, what should he
do now? here he was dessolate, poor, and needy, certainly his heart could
not but be ready to fail, and what should sustain him in this case? there was
a promise, you see, Heb. 11.
Heb. 11. he was sure God had made a promise, and hae said unto him, this is
Isaac, and this Isaac I will multiply, and with him I will establish my
Covenant, and his seed shall be as the Stars of heaven; says Abraham, God
promised it, and though I should kill him, God can put a new life into him; he
went, you know how far from his house where he dwelt* surely he sustained
himself by the promise, he rested upon this promise, he drew consolation from
it, and he drew it to the full, there was much milk in that promise, and that
sustained and comforted him. I might give you many instances. So David, when
he comforted himself at Ziglag, what was it that he comforted himself in?
Surely David remembered this, the Lord has anointed me King over Israel, he
has said that I shall be King, and shall sit in the Throne of Saul; it is
true, I have lost all that I have, and the Soldiers that should be my
strength, are now at this instant ready to stone me; yet he remembered this
promise, and comforted himself in the Lord, that is, in the promise that the
Lord had made to him, whereof this was the maine that he had to comfort
himself with.

Beloved, learn to do this when you are in any strait, if there be any thing
that you need, remember this, if thou can but get a promise, if faith can but
get this footing, the LORD has made it a part of his Covenant, and there is
his hand and seal to it, the Sacrament that thou receiuest from time to time,
is but a seal of that Covenant, and if he seem to forget it for a time, ^e
will remember it, he cannot forget it long, be assured he will perform it, it
is impossible but he should, let not your hearts fail, if thou have a promise,
he will do it in due season, although not in thy season, yet he will do it in
the best manner, though not in that manner and fashion that thou imaginest.

Beloved, one thing more we should have added, that is, to exhort men to enter
into Covenant; this I should have pressed to you, the miserable condition of a
man that is without it, and the happiness of the man that is within it, with
this we^should have concluded the point. Beloved, consider this, in what a
miserable condition men are without the Covenant; it is enough that is said,
Ephesians. 2.
Ephesians. 2. without God in the world, and without the Covenant, they are put
together, they are aliens and strangers from the Covenant, without the
Covenant, without God in the world: is it a small thing to be without God, and
without the Covenant? when thou con^iderest this Book, and the many precious
promises in it, that we spoke of before, and thou have not right to one of
these promises, if thou be without the Covenant; when thou art in a strait, if
thou be a stranger to God if thou be out of the Covenant with him, what will thou do? whither will thou go? we are subject to 1000. straits; you know what
a weak creature man is, what need he has of assistance; What will thou do
in the time of extremity? thou can not go to GOD, thou art not in the
Covenant with him, but thy case is as that of Zedekiahs, Micaiah tells him, thou
shall go from chamber to chamber; so thou shall go from place to place, GOD
will not receive thee: for thou art not in Covenant with him. But is that all,
that thou shall want the comfort of God? No, know, if thou be not in Covenant
with GOD, he is thine enemy: if thou come near to him for refuge and comfort,
he will be to thee as a devouring fire, and when thou come to him, thou
shall be as soft wax to the scorching flame, as stubble to the fire; and not
only so, but thou shall come to everlasting burnings, such fire as shall never
go out; such the Lord shall be to thee, if thou be not in the Covenant with
him. You will say to me, this is to come, if it may be well for the present, I
shall bear it the better, I will go one step further therefore. If thou be out
of Covenant with GOD, all the creatures are at enmity with thee, there is never
a creature in heaven or earth, but it has liberty to do thee hurt: for if thou
be out of League with GOD, thou art out of the protection of the Law, if any
creature do thee mischief, it shall never be required at his hands, but there
is a liberty given them, Satan may hurt thee, men may hurt thee, beasts may
hurt thee, all the insensible creatures may hurt thee; for there is no
prohibition. Besides, thou have no Shield, nor Buckler to defend thee from
them: for thou art not in Covenant with GOD, he is no Buckler to thee: all this
is the case of every man that is out of the Covenant; and this is not a small
thing, to be out of the pales of Gods protection, to have every creat^re ready
to do a man a showed turn, and he to have no immunity, nothing to deliver him;
it is not so with the Saints, all the creatures are at peace with them.

To draw this a little nearer, if there be any thing in the body, or out of
the body, that troubles us, if there be imaginations in the mind, that be to
the soul, as the Gout is to the body, if thou be in Covenant with God, all
these are at peace with thee: for all these are at Gods command, it is a part
of his Covenant; when thou art in Covenant and League with him, thou art in
League with them, and therefore they shall never do thee hurt. Be assured of
that, when thou art within the Covenant, there is no creature in heaven or
earth can do thee hurt: for thou art at peace with it, it is not an enemy, and
that which is not an enemy, it never does hurt; but if thou be not in Covenant
with God, now these have a power to hurt thee, there is no prohibition upon
them, there is no restraint, but they may do thee hurt, they are enemies to
thee, both those things, and whatsoever else is in heaven or Earth; Satan, and
every creature has power to do thee hurt: when thou walk in the way, when
thou sit in thy house, wheresoever thou art, thou walk in thee midst
of 1000. dangers, because thou art not in Covenant with God, therefore thou art
exposed to the enmity of all the creatures.

But this objection will be made, Object.
Yea, but many or those that are within the Covenant, receive hu^t from the
creatures, and many of those that are out of the Covenant, live peaceable and
quiet lives?

I will answer it in a word; Ans.
It is very true, they may be exercised, though all the host of heaven and
earth be at peace with them, and there is not any creature can do them the
least hurt; no, they neither will, nor can go about it, to lift up their hand
against them; yet they may be exercised with many afflictions, but there is a
very great difference between these two, the same disease, the same grief,
the same apprehension, lies on the heart, and wounds the spirits of the one
man, but to the other that is in Covenant, it is a rod in the hand of a father,
enabling him to keep his Covenant the better, it is as a Medicine in the hand
of a Physician, to heal him, to comfort him, to do him good; that very
disease to another is as a sword in the hand of an enemy, as poison in the hand
of the destroyer to hurt him. As, for example, the Devil had power to vex
Saul, and to vex Job, here was the same instrument, the Devil had power over
both, but there was a great deal of difference, you know, he had power over
Saul as an enemy, he had power over Job as a friend: and so likewise Judas had
a messenger of Satan, to fill his heart, and Paul had a messenger of Satan too,
to solicit him, and to trouble him, and to join with his lusts, to make them
as pricks in his sides, but there is much difference; to the one he had a
restraint, the Lord says to the De^ill, What have thou to do with Job? thou
shall ^oe thus far, and no further, thou shall not hurt ^ob To Paul there was a
restraint too, thou shall go th^s far, for what purpose* as there was a
restraint, so there was another end likewise, so far it shall go, as till it
has humbled him; Job and Paul were humbled by it, a jot further it cannot go:
for the devil in truth, though he be hostile to them in affection, yet cannot
hurt them in action, because God only uses him to do them good, and to humble
them; Job was the better, and Paul was an exceeding gainer by it, but Saul and
Judas were great Iosets; so there is a great difference between these two. The
Shepherd sets his Dog upon the Sheep to bring them in, another man sets his
Mastiffe on another creature to worry it, and to destroy it; the Lord sets the
creature upon his own servants, but as the Shepherd sends out his Dog, to
bring them in; as soon as they are brought in, he rates the Dog, and will not
suffer him to do them the least hurt. A man will not have his servants, nor
children, nor his friends hurt, but he will rate the Dog when he falls upon
them; so the Lord does with every creature whatsoever, when it comes to hurt
them, he rebuker it, as he did the storms and winds: on the other side, when a
man is out of Co^enant with GOD, then God vnlooseth the collar of the creature,
as it were, and sets him upon such a man, and says unto him, go and worry such
a man, wound him, be an enemy to him, hurt him. This objection is so to be
answered, that those that are within the Covenant, they are often molested and
troubled, the creatures seem to hurt them, though they be in League and at
peace with them, and can do them no hurt.

Secondly it is objected, Object.
that others that are out of the Covenant, they live in peace?

Beloved, Ans.
I beseech you, consider this, and it is profitable to consider, that he that
belongs not to the Covenant, he may live in his fathers house, he may sit at
Table with the children, he may have the same maintenance, the same clothing,
the same usage, the same liberty, the same privileges of the family as the
children have, and yet for all this, this is one that belongs not to the
Covenant, but one whom God intends to cast out. Ismael, you know, lived in the
family, as well as Isaac, and was as well used as Isaac, till the time came
that God would cast him out; and therefore deceive not thy self with out ward
peace, to say, God and the creature are at peace with me; for I have prosperity
in all that I do. No, it may be, the time of casting out is not yet come, but
in due time, when the right season shall come, then Ismael shall be cast out,
and every one with whom the Covenant indeed is not established. Caine remained
for a time, but he was cast out, and made a Vagabond upon the earth. Saul
remained for a time in the house, but in due season God cast him off: so, I
say, God may nourish, and cherish, and defend thee, as if thou were one of his
own children, but he will cast thee off in the end. We have a notable example
for it, in his dealing with the children of Israel, they were such as belonged
not to the Covenant, a great part of them, and yet see how he used those very
men; Deuteronomy. 32.
Deuteronomy. 32. it is said, he carried them on Eagles wings; that is the
expression, that is, the Lord carried them so safely as the Eagle carries her
young on the top of her wings, that no Foul can reach them, but she is above
all Fowls, and stronger then all Fowls, and flies higher, and so they were
safe as on Eagles wings, nothing could reach them; After that manner I carried
you out of Egypt, I kept you so safe: besides, I did not only defend you, but
fed you with the finest Wheat, with the purest Oil, with the liquor of the
Grape; and yet notwithstanding all this, these men were such as God hated, such
as were not in League, as belonged not to the Covenant: deceive not thy self,
God may do all this, and yet cast thee out; he may feed the with riches in
abundance, and yet if thou be not a son, if the Covenant be not established
with thee, thou shall be cast out; the son abides for ever, but he with whom
the Covenant is not made, though he may continue in the Family for a while, he
shall not abide long, but shall be cast forth.

FINIS.
FOUR SERMONS, WHEREIN CERTAIN Objections against the point of GODS
ALL-SVFFICIENCIE, (handled in the five first Sermons of the former Treatise)
are Answered.
ECCLESIASTES 9. 1. 2. 3. 4. I have surely set my heart to all this, to declare
this, that the just, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God,
and no man knows either love, or hatred, by all that is before him: for all
things come alike to all, and the same condition is to the just, as to the
wicked, and to the good, and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sac^ificeth not; as is the good, so is the sinner,
he that swears, as he that fears an oath, etc.
WE have purposely chosen this text, that we might answer some objectio^s,
which might be made against the All Sufficiency of God, which we spoke of
lately to you; for this might be objected; If God be All-sufficient, Ob.
what is the reason of this dispensation of things that we see in the world,
that there be righteous men, to whom it is according to the work of the
wicked, and there be wicked men again, to whom it is according to the work of
the righteous?

Here you have this answer made, Answ.
That for a time all things come alike to all, there is the same condition to
the one, as to the other: the reason of which you shall see when we come to the
handling of the words. But in brief, to open them to you: you shall ^inde,
that this was the occasion of them. In the 16. verse of the former Chapter,
says the Wiseman, Eccles. 8. 16.
I have applied my heart unto wised^me, and to behold the business that is done
upon the earth, in which I had no rest, either day or night, I was so intent
upon them. Well; what is the conclusion? Says he, I found this, I was not able
to find out the reason of Gods works; I beheld the works of God, that man
cannot find out the works that are wrought under the Sun, yea though a wise
man think to know it, he cannot find it: That is, when I see how God
dispenses things, I am not able to find out the reason, and not I only, but
no man is able to find it, no, says he, though he be a wise man; no, although
he search never so diligently, he cannot find out the reason of Gods ways, the
reason of his providence, of his dispensing of prosperity to the wicked, and
adversity to the godly; yet these two Conclusions notwithstanding he found,
which he expres^eth in the first verse.

the just, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of the Lord: That
is, although I see not the reason why God does it, yet this I find, it is the
Lord that disposes all things, both to men, and all their works; All the
events that fall out, both good, and evil, I find this, that they are in the
hand of God.

The second thing he found is, That all things These be the two things, that
the wiseman professes he found out, and from hence he gathers two
Consectaries.

One is, Consectarie.
That there is no man able to know love, or That is, by all that he sees done
to himself, or by all that he sees God do to other men; he is not able to
judge by that, who it is that God loves, or who it is he hates.

A second Consectarie from it, Consectarie.
is expressed in Eccles. 9. 3.
says he, This is an evil I have seen under the Sun, that there is one
condition to all: That is, the sons of men when they have seen this carriage
of things, this administration, and dispensation of good and evil, thus
premiscuously, to men of all sorts; therefore, says he, The hearts of men are
full of evil, and madness is in their hearts while they live: That is,
therefore they seek not God, but the creature, therefore they do not depend
upon him, but seek to secondaric means; What is the issue of it? therefore
they go down to the dead: That is, they perish for ever. So much briefly for
the meaning of the words. Now before he comes to deliver these two conclusions,
he makes this Preamble; I have given my heart, says he, to all this, or I bend
my self with all my might to this, even to declare these two things; that all
things are in the hand of God, etc. whence we will gather this (in that Solomon
says, that he bent himself, with all his might, to declare both to himself,
and to others, that all things are in the hands of God;) that It is a very hard
thing, Doct.
to be persuaded of Gods All-sufficiencie. It is a hard thing to be pers^aded
of Gods All-sufficiencie.


It is a very hard thing to be persuaded, that all things are in the hands of
God, it is a hard thing to persuade our selves, it is a hard thing to persuade
others, that is, I shall not deliver the point fully to you, except God
himself teach you, except God himself declare it; it is so hard for a man to
see all things in the hands of G^d, to know that he is able to do all, that,
except God teach it to a man, he is not able to know it, that is, he is not
able to know it to purpose, he is not able to know it so, as to have the use of
it, he is not able to know it in a practical manner, except the Lord teach it
him.

The ground of which is: because, The holy Ghost must persuade
it belongs to the holy Ghost to persuade, it belongs to God to persuade, not
only to persuade this truth to the hearts of men, but also to persuade all
saving truths of what nature soever; And therefore we see when Christ sends
out his Disciples, his Apostles, he bids them, Go, preach the Word to the
Jews, and Gentiles; and whereas they might object in that case; Ob.
How shall we be able to persuade men, that bring a strange doctrine, and
strange news to them, a strange thing that was never heard of?

Christ answers them thus, Answ.
I will send my spirit with you, John 16.
and he shall convince the world of sin, of righteous^esse, and of ludgement;
As if he should say, I confesle you are not able to do it, that is a work
that only belongs to the holy Ghost, and he shall convince men of their
miserable estate out of Christ, he shall convince them of that righteousness
that they are to have by Christ, he shall also convince them of holiness, and
sanctification, under Christ's government. Thus, says he, the holy Ghost shall
do; you are not able to perform it. And so when the Lord makes the promise,
that the people should serve him, and fear him: The question is, how they
should be able to do it; shall the Prophets be able to persuade them? shall
the Apostles in their times be able to persuade them? No; says he, They shall
all be taught of God; As if he should say, without his teaching it will be all
in vain; but if the Lord teach them once, they shall be persuaded effectually,
they shall not only know what their duty is, but they shall be ready to
perform it.

The reason of which is;

First, Reas. 1.
because God only is the general, God only wise, and therefore able to
persuade.
and universal worker, he only is universally wise, he only knows all
things, and therefore he only is able to teach all things; men know but in
part, and therefore they are able to teach but in part, (now he that is
persuaded of a thing but in part, though he may acknowledge the thing to be
good, yet his heart is not wrought to practice it; for there is something yet
behind, some objections, that are not yet answered.) It is only God that has
an universal light, that is a general worker, and therefore he is said to be
only wise; for a man is not said to be wise, except he know all things that
belongs to such a business; If there be any part, or corner of it hid from him,
he is not wise, that is, he is not able to proceed aright, he is subject to
error: but God, who has abundance of light, God, that knows all things, is
only wise, and therefore his is only able to persuade. Hence it is that men
are able to persuade, that such graces are good, that such ways are excellent
in themselves, that it is good to take such courses, but yet to answer all the
secret objections of the heart, to persuade fully, to turn all the wheels of
the soul, this is that, that a man is not able to do, to enlighten all the
corners of the heart, he is not able to convince fully.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
God is only able to do it; because he only knows all the windings and
turnings of the heart of man. God only knows the several turnings of the
heart.
It is said in Ier. 17. 9. that the heart of man is exceeding deceit full, who
can know it? That is, no man in the world can know his own heart, Ier. 17. 9.
much less can any man else know it, there are so many windings, so many
turnings in it, there is such a labyrinth in the heart, such a depth in it,
that no man is able to search his own heart, to find out the bottom of it: oh
but who is able to do it? Says he, in the next words, it is God that
searches the heart and tries the reins: That is, he only knows the
several inclinations of the will, and therefore he only is able to persuade.

You know, Simile.
if a man make a key to undo such a lock, he must know all the wards of it,
or else he may make a key that will not undo it, he may endeavor, and not be
able to turn the lock; So the Lord that only knows all the wards, all the
secret passages; all the windings, and turnings of the heart of man; he only
is able to suit it, and to ^it it with such arguments, as shall be effectual
to persuade. You see when he would persuade Moses to go down into Egypt,
there was a secret objection that Moses had in his heart, if he went thither
that he should loose his life; God that knew Moses heart, knew where that
objection lay, where it stuck with him, he was able to bring arguments to
persuade him, go thy way (said the Lord;) for they are dead that sought thy
life.

Last of all, Reas. 3.
God is only able to do it, because he is able to mend the heart where it is
amiss: God only can amend the heart.
A man perhaps may be able to show an object, and to bring it to light: but
what if the eye be amiss? the man is not able to see and to discern for all
that; If a man^ oye be blind, if there be any west in it, he is not able to
remove it; So a man may propound arguments, but to make the heart capable of
those arguments, he may propound reasons and persuasions, but to make the heart
apprehensiue of them, it is above the power of the Creature: and therefore it
is God only that re^^^^ us in the spirit of our minds: he that has made the
eye, and so he that made the will, and the understanding, he only can heal the
breaches of them, he only can elevate them, and put a supernatural light into
them, and make them fit to apprehend those spiritual reasons, of any kind,
that he objects and propounds to the hearts of men: So that God only is able
to persuade, as of all other truths, so of this, that all things are in his
hands; that he is All-sufficient.

We may make this use of it: Use.
we see the reason, why one man is able to see and to trust to this
All-sufficiencie of God, Why one man trusts God, and not another.
and another is not. The reason is, because Christ has revealed it to one man
and not to another: God has taught it to one man and not to another. We see it
in common experience; A wise, learned, witty, and able man, that can discern
more then many others of the vanity of outward things, of the All-sufficiencie,
and fullness that is in God, yet when he comes to the practice of it, he is
able to do nothing: On the other side, we shall find in experience, that
many poor Christians, that are able to say little, yet when they come to
practice, they are able to part with their liberty, with their credit, with
their goods, and with their lives, that they may cleau^^o God, and keep a
clear Conscience: what is the reason of it? because they be taught of God,
they are persuaded by him, and therefore they are able to practice it; As for
the others they are taught by men, they are taught by themselves, and therefore
they are not taught it indeed^, they are not fully convinced of it, and
therefore though they know such things, though they be floating in their minds,
yet they have not the use and the practice of them. Wherein you shall observe
this difference, That a man may know a truth, and yet not be led into that
truth, John 16. 13.
as you see Ioh. 16. 13. when he shall come which is the spirit of truth, he
shall lead you into all truth. (Mark it) he shall lead you into all truth.
It is one thing to preach the truth, and another thing to be led into the
truth. The holy Ghost shall lead you into all truth, as a man is led by the
hand into a place: for we are not only blind, but lame too; we are not only
unable to see spiritual truths, but when we see them, we are not able to
follow the guidance of the holy Ghost; Therefore says he, the spirit shall not
only show you such and such things, but shall lead you into those truths, he
shall lead you into the practice of them. Many men they know what temperance,
what sobriety, and patience are, who are not able to practice them, that are
not led into the truth of these points: because that is proper to the holy
Ghost, it is he only that leads us into them; it is he only that enableth us
so to see them, as to be fully convinced, so, as to resolve upon the practice
of them; and therefore you shall find the Apostle S. Paul, Ephesians. 1. when he
reveals there those spiritual blessings, that we have in Christ, when he had
declared many of those glorious privileges, in the 18. verse he prays, Ephesians
1. 18.
that the eyes of their understandings might be opened, to see the hope of
their Calling, and the riches of this glorious inheritance prepared for the
Saints, and the exceeding greatness of his power toward them that believe.
The meaning of it is this; when Paul had discovered all this, says he, this
labor of mine will be but in vain, except the Lord open the eyes of your
understanding. So it is when we preach to you, of the All-sufficiencie of God,
when we discover to you those glorious privileges, that we have by Christ,
except the Lord open men's eyes, except he send the spirit of revelation into
men's hearts to discern those things, except he preach to the heart, as well as
we do to the ear, it is but lost labor; says the Apostle, if he would open
your eyes to see the hope of your Calling, to see those great hopes that you
have by reason of your Calling, to see the riches of that glorious inheritance
prepared for the Saints, it is not only rich, but abundant riches. Again,
(says he,) to see the exceeding greatness of his power: A man is able to see
some thing, that God is able to do this, and to do that; but to see the
exceeding greatness of his power, how far it reaches, this none is able to
do, unless he have the spirit of revelation, to open his eyes to see it;
That, even as Elisha said to Gehasi^, there are more with us them against us.
But how came Gehasie to know that? Elisba prays the Lord to open his eyes, and
when his eyes were opened, he saw it visibly: after this manner, the Lord
deals with his children; when such truths as these are propounded to them,
that God is All-sufficient, yet all this is nothing, except God will open their
eyes, except he will be with them; as he was with Job, all that his friends
said to him would not persuade him, till God himself spoke to him out of the
whirlewinde. When God himself will say to a man as he did to Abraham, I am
All-sufficient, then he persuades him, and not before. And this, Beloved, is
the office of the holy Ghost; it is he that shows the Father, and the Son,
to the sons of men, it is he that glorifies the Father, and the Son. And in
this sense he is said to fill them with Joy upon all occasions: for the cause
why a man rejoices is, because he is informed of some good news, something he
is persuaded of, and when he hears of it, there follows sudden Joy; So when
the Apostles were in distres^e, in prison, when they were in danger, the holy
Ghost brought good news to them, he revealed to them such and such things;
upon this revelation, upon this good news that was brought to them, it is often
said they were filled with Joy; which is therefore called the Joy of the holy
Ghost, which the holy Ghost works in men by persuasion, by revealing to them
the hope of their Calling, and the riches of their glorious inheritance, and
the exceeding greatness of his power, working in those that believe. And
therefore this you must consider, that though we preach to you, and you hear
all these truths of Gods All-sufficiencie, yet you are able to practice
nothing, till Christ reveal it to you. If he come to a man when he is in a
strait, and say to him, as he did to Paul upon several occasions, fear not
Paul, I will be with thee. I say, if he himself would come thus and speak to
the heart of a man, that is, if he would reveal it by his spirit, we should
be able to practice it, we should be able to stay our selves upon him, we
should be able to trust him in his All-sufficiencie, and would venture upon any
thing, we should be able to do our duty, we should be able to suffer
persecution, as the Apo^^le speaks, because we trust in the living God. It is
a certain and true rule, no man is able to guide his life aright, his riches,
his credit, his liberty aright, except he be able to neglect them; and no man
is able to neglect them, except he have some thing that is better in stead of
them; except he see these two things.

An emptiness in them.

And a fullness some where else.

But now who is able to persuade men of this? Surely he that persuaded Solomon
that all was vanity; it is he that must persuade us; without him it cannot be
done. What was the reason else that Peter, Andrew, John, and the rest of the
Apostles, were able to forsake all things, when others were not? Doubtlesle,
because they were per^waded they should find it again in Christ, when others
were not so persuaded; flesh and blood did not teach them, but the holy Ghost
revealed it to them, that though they had lost all, yet they should find all,
yea, they should find an hundred fold more. What was the Reason that Demas,
and others, when they met with persecution, and temporal preferments in the
world, were not able to keep on their course, but turned aside, when Paul who
had the same temtations did not? The reason was, because it was not revealed to
Demas, but it was to Paul; A window was opened to him in heaven, as it were, to
look into Gods All-sufficiencie, to see the treasures there, to see Gods
power, and eternity, and blessedness; and when he walked in a continual sight
of this All-sufficiencie, Paul cared not whither he went, nor what became of
him; it was nothing then for him ot pass from prison to prison, from
affliction to affliction. So, as long as a man walks in a continual sight of
Gods All-sufficiencie, as long as he sees him that is invisible, so long he is
full of comfort, so long he is able to do any thing; but when once his sight
is taken from him, when once he is left in darkness, that Torches and Candles
begin to appear great lights unto him, (as you know it is in the dark night,)
that is a sign that a man is in darkness, when the fear of men, and the
favor of men, seem great unto him: So it will be when God does but leave us a
little, when he does but cloud us, when he withdrawes from us that light of his
All-sufficiencie, then we are ready to sink, and to fail in our duty, and
to turn aside, to balke the ways of righteousness. And therefore if you
would have the use of this All-sufficiencie, if you would be persuaded that all
things are in Gods hands, beseech him to teach you to depend upon him.

Beloved, it is certain, that the holiest man that is, has as much love of
himself as others, they desire their safety, as well as others, they desire
to have liberty, and life, as well as others: but here is all the difference,
they are persuaded that God is All-sufficient, to restore all these to them,
when they loose them for his sake, when other men are not so persuaded: they
have a new judgment of things, they have another judgment of heavenly things,
and of earthly, they see another vanity in the Creatures, and another
All-sufficiencie in God, then other men see, or then they themselves ever saw
before; And this is the reason they are able to do that which other men are
not able to do; and therefore, the way to have the use of all this knowledge,
is to seek to God, to beseech him to enlighten you, that he would declare this
to you, that he would lead you into this truth; and when he has taught you,
you shall be able to know all this, and to know it to purpose. So much for this
first point.

As we told you, there are here these two Conclusions:

First; That the just, and the wise, and their works are in the hands of God.

And secondly; That all things come alike to all: we will take the first as it
lies, and deliver to you the same point, which is this;

That all things, all men, all their ways, all the Creatures, with the
several works of them, are in the hands of God: for it is thus methodically
set down; The wise are in the hands of God, and their works, and so are the
wicked, and their works, and so are all the Creatures in his hands, with all
the effects that proceed from them.

This then is the point; Doct. 3.
That all things are in Gods hands. All things are in Gods hands.


Now how all things are in Gods hands in general, we have declared to you
before: but we will now deliver it a little more distinctly, that I may add
some thing to that, which I have formerly taught. They are all in the hands of
God, that is, originally in the hands of the Father, and in the hands of all
the persons of the Trinity, as they join in the deity, as they are God: but
yet, if you compare this place with some other, you shall see more distinctly
in what manner they are in the hands of God: They are, I say, originally in the
hands of the Father; but yet they are more immediately put into the hands of the
Son, as he is Mediator. Therefore compare this place with Math. 11. 27. Math.
11. 27.
All things (says he) are given me of my Father, and none knows the Son,
but the Father: and so likewise with Ioh. 3. 35. Ioh. 3. 35.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hands: 1 Cor.
15. 24.
and with that 1 Cor. 15. 24. you shall see there this expression; says the
Apostle, there shall be an end, when Christ shall give up the King dome into
the hands of the Father. The meaning of it is this, that though all things be
in the hands of God, yet they are all put into the hands of Christ, as he is
Mediator; Psalm. 2. 8.
and therefore Psalm. 2. it is said, Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy
possession: That is, he will give them into his hands to do with them what he
pleases; So that (to add this to that which we have before delivered) it will
be a profitable point for us to consider, that though God be All-sufficient,
and has all things in his hands, yet he has put all this into the hands of
his Son.

You willsay, Quest.
what comfort is there in that? or to what end is it useful for us to know,
that they are in the hands of the son, more then that they are in the hands
of the Father?

It is to this purpose; Ans.
That you may be more confident in coming to God, to ask any thing at his
hands: for therefore has the Lord done it, that you may come with the more
boldness: for Christ has taken our nature, our flesh; he is nearer to us,
then God the Father, who dwells in light inaccessible, he is one whom we have
known, he dwelt among us, he is of the same kindred, as it were, we are flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bone. Now when we shall hear, that all things
are put into his hands, as he is Mediator, as he is the Angel of the Covenant,
we may go with the more boldness, we may have the more confidence, that, as we
have need and use of any thing, it shall not be denied us: for we know all is
in the hands of him, whom we love, whom we fear.

When one hears that his Prince has put all that he has into the hands of
a friend, with whom he is well acquainted, it must needs glad his heart, and
fill him with hope of obtaining any thing that is fitting for him; As it was
with Jacob, when Joseph said to him, all this I have in mine hands, etc. It
was a great comfort to Jacob, that one whom he knew so well, that was flesh of
his flesh, had all things in his hands: Now this is the comfort we have by it,
That the Father has put all things into the hands of the Son, into the hands
of Christ, as he is Mediator: and this he has done for these reasons.

First; Reas. 1.
That men might glorify the Son, that men might honor the Son, as they
honor the Father, for therefore was it that he would not keep all in his own
hands, but gave them up into the hands of the Son.

Secondly; Reas. 2.
He has done it, that he might dispense that All-sufficiencie, that is in
himself in a way beseeming himself, with that indulgence, and that mercy,
that is suitable to himself, and suitable likewise to our frailty. Exodus 33. 3.
And therefore Exodus 33. 3. The Lord said, I will not go up with thee, for
thou art a stiff-necked people, therefore I will not go up with thee, least I
consume thee; but I will send before thee, the Angel of my presence, and he
shall go up with thee: As if he should say, I have pure eyes, I am not able to
see that which I shall see in thee, but I shall be ready to consume thee; but
he is more indulgent, he is more merciful, he is more able to bear, because he
is made the Mediator, therefore (says he) he shall go along with thee, even
the Angel of my presence: Whereby you may see, that the Lord has put all
power into the hands of the Mediator, that he might dispense it the better to
the sons of men.

Thirdly; Reas. 3.
He has done it, that it might be sure to us: for if the Lord had made an
immediate Covenant with the sons of men, there had be^ne little hope for us:
We should have broken it, as Adam did, when the Covenant was made with him;
but he has put it into the hands of a Mediator, whom he has made the Angel,
or the Messenger of his Covenant, that it might be sure to us, that is, that
the Lord might perform all his promises to us, and that we might keep
likewise the Condition on our part: for therefore Christ is said to be the
Messenger of the Covenant, to dispense to us that which God has put into his
hands, partly, because he is able to reconcile the Father to us, (and therefore
he is the Priest, that is entered into the holy of holies, that is, into the
very heavens, to make intercession for us,) partly also, because he is able to
bring us in, as a Prophet to enlighten us in the knowledge of him, and as a
King, to subd^e the stubbornness of our hearts, and enable us to obey him; So
that the Covenant is immediately made with him, and not with us; therefore, all
things being put into his hands, he being the Messenger of the Covenant, it is
made sure to us, that otherwise had not been.

Last of all; The Father has done it, Reas. 4.
that no flesh might rejoice in it self; so says the Apostle, he has made
the Son to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, that
he that rejoices might rejoice in the Son. And therefore we see Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
how careful he was to teach the Israelites this, showing them, that they were
not brought into that good land for their own righteousness, but for his
Covenants sake, that is, for the Covenant he made both with them and us in
Christ, when was manifested to Abraham and Jacob, but was in the Son.

The use that we are briefly to make of it is this, Use.
that we should take heed of coming to God for any part of his
All-sufficiencie, except it be in the name of his Son. When you hear that
God is All-sufficient, you must not think now to go to God immediately, to
say Lord be^^ow on me such and such things, as I want: for in doing so, what
do we else but draw near to God, as the stubble, or the wax should draw
near to the fire? who is able to dwell with ever lasting burnings? He is a
consuming fire to the sons of men, if they come to him immediately. But if
you come to him in the name of the Son, into whose hands he has put all
things, he is ready to accept you, and to grant you whatsoever you ask in his
name, Lev. 17. 5. Levit. 17. 5.
it was death for a man, though his sacrifice was never so good, to offer it
without a Priest; and it is no less then death to any man to come to God
without Christ, that is, the Lord does not give life to that man, he does not
raise him from nature, which is death enough. When we come to God with out the
Son, what do we else in so doing, but dishonor the Son? We give him not
that honor which his Father would have him to have. What do we else but rob
him of that which he has purchased at a dear rate for even for this very
cause did he suffer* Therefore (says he,) he has given him a name above all
names. What do we else but rejoice in our selves, and forget to give all the
glory to Christ? Therefore whenever you come to God, still take heed, that
you forget not Christ, but that you come in his name.

Secondly; Use 2.
As we must not come without him, so we must come with confidence, and much
boldness, if we come in his name; and that especial use is to be made of it
in the second place, to come with boldness to partake of his All-sufficiencie,
for it is in the hands of the Son, it is in the hands of a Mediator.

The reason why great things are not done for us, notwithstanding God is
All-sufficient, is, because we come not with great faith; If we were able to
believe much, it would be to us according to our faith. And what is the reason
that we come not with great faith, but because we come not in the name of
Christ? We are discouraged in the sight of our own weakness, or
imperfections and frailties; but if we did look on Christ, and behold him, and
come in his name, we would come with a strong faith, and if we did so, it would
be according to our faith. When we come timorously and fearfully to God, when
we come doubting whether we shall receive it or no, it is a sign we come in
our own name; When we come boldly and confidently, and make no question, but
the thing we ask shall be granted, it is a sign that we come in the name of
Christ; and if we do so, do you think he will deny us? My Beloved, to what
end has the Father given him all things into his hands? Why is he made rich
with all treasures? Is it that he might keep it, and hoard it up? No, but it
is to bestow on those that his Father has given him amongst men; when a man
has riches it is a vanity under the Sun, says Solomon, to keep them, and
hoard them up; he were as good not to have them, as not to use them; and do
you think that Christ will have all things given into his hands for nothing?
Is it not to bestow on us? Do you think, that he will purchase a thing at so
dear a rate, and when he has done, make no use of it? It is said Phil. 2. 8.
9. Phil. 2. 8. 9.
That, because he took upon him the form of a servant, and was obedient to
the death of the Cross, therefore his Father gave him a name above all names,
and therefore he did thus and thus unto him, has he purchased this for
himself, for his own sake? Certainly, it was not for himself, for he had no
need of it, but he bought it for us; and will he not make use of it, when he
has done? therefore doubt not when you come in his name, you shall receive,
and that abundantly too; when we come in the name of his Son, he is able to
deny us nothing, only remember this, that thou come with boldness. It is
said, Ephesians. 3. 12.
Ephesians. 3. 12. that we have this benefit by Christ, we come with boldness and
confidence through faith in him.

If a man through the apprehension and sight of his own righteousness, of his
own sanctificati on, that measure of it, that he has obtained, think thus
with himself, I have thus walked with God, I have been thus perfect, I have
thus far kept the way, I have thus far denied my self, and therefore I
shall be heard. If he go this way to work, he shall find many objections,
much falsenesse in his heart, much vnevennesse in his ways, that will
discourage him; therefore so, a man cannot come with boldness. But, says he,
you shall come boldly; through whom? through ^aith in Christ, that is, if you
come in Christ, consider that you are in Covenant with him, that you come in
his name, that it is he you present to the Father, when you ask any thing at
his hands, and thus you may come with boldness, what objection soever there
can be made, they will be all easily answered in Christ.

Then last of all, Thankfulness.
if it be in Christ, if it be put into his hands immediately, then whenever
you receive any thing, let him have the sacrifice of praise, let it add some
new love, and some new engagement, and thankfulness to the Son. The Father
has done it for that purpose, that the Son might be honored, that the Son
might be magnified, that we might learn to love the Son, to serve the
Son, as we do the Father; and therefore whenever we obtain any thing at
his hands, let us be thankful to the Son; Labor to see his grace abounding
toward us, and our hearts abounding to him in thankfulness, and in all the
fruits of obedience. So much likewise shall serve for this point.

Now we come to the next Conclusion, All things come alike to all; The same
condition is to the just, as to the wicked, and to the good and pure, and to
the polluted, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; such as
the good is, so is the sinner, he that swears, as he that fears an oath.
Hence I gather thus much (before I come to speak of the application of these
events to the sons of men,)

That All men are divided into these two ranks, Doct. 3.
either they are good or bad, All men divided into two Ranks.
either they are polluted or clean, either they are such as sacrifice, or such
as sacrifice not: There is no middle sort of men in the world; all are either
sheep, or goats, all are either within the Covenant, or without the Covenant,
all are either elect, or reprobates; God has divided all the world into these
two, either they are the Lords portion, or the Devils portion.

There are some Reasons of it.

One is; Reas. 1.
That God has made all men to be vessels of honor, or of dishonor, there is
no vessel of an indi^^erent or middle use.

Again; Reas. 2.
Who are they that divide the world? God and Satan: Either you belong to God,
and are his portion (as Deuteronomy. 32. 9. Deuteronomy. 32. 9.
His people are his portion,) or you are the Devils portion.

And so likewise may we reason from the two principles, Reas. 3.
either a man is borne of the flesh, or of the spirit; if he be borne of the
spirit, he is spiritual, and if he be borne of the flesh, he is fleshly. And
therefore in one of these two conditions he must needs be; which I observe
for this purpose.

First, Use 1.
you see hence then, that there are but two places hereafter for men, as there
are but two ranks of men; there is no middle place, as the Papists affirm,
there is no Purgatory, or Limbus, either for the Fathers before Christ, or for
Children now; As they are all in one of these two ranks, in one of these two
conditions, so there are but two places into which all men are divided, some to
the one, and some to the other.

But secondly; Use 2.
The chiefest use that we are to make of it is this; If it be so, if a man's
condition must be one of these two, that either he is within the door in the
Kingdom of God, or without, that though some are come near the Kingdom of
God, some are farther off among those that are without. And again, among those
that are within the door, some are farther in, some are not so far, some
have proceeded farther into the Temple, some a less way, yet there are none in
a middle way, but all are either within, or without, let us then learn to
consider, what our condition is, let not our persuasion and opinion of our
selves, hang between both, but let us come to this conclusion, to this
disjunctive proposition, Either I am in the number of those that are good, or
that are bad; either I am within the Covenant or without; and so consider in
which of these two conditions we are: Men are exceeding apt in this case to
deceive themselves; and therefore when the Apostle has occasion to speak of
this, he premiseth that still, Be not deceived, such and such shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God: Ephesians. 5. 6.
and so in Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for, for such
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience: That is, men
are exceeding apt to deceive themselves; to be pure in their own eyes, when
they are not yet cleansed from their filthiness, to think their estate good,
when it is not; and therefore, beware, take heed that it be not so with you.
What a miserable condition is it, that when a man has been at the pains to
set up a large building, he should then loose all his labor for want of a good
foundation? that a man should do as the foolish Virgins, get oil in their
Lamps, and make a great blaze for a time, and when they come to the very point,
to the door, to the gate, then to be excluded: Nay, what a folly is it for a
man to deceive himself in this. It may be, a man out of the corruption of his
nature, may be willing to deceive another; but for a man to deceive himself,
it is exceeding great folly. And truly, as it is said of flattery, none can be
flattered by another, till first he flatter himself; So no man can be deceived
by another, till first he be willing to deceive himself. Therefore take heed
of deceiving your selves.

Beloved, there is a great backwardness in us to come to the trial; as a
crazie body will not endure the trial of the weather; as a weak eye will not
endure the light, for it is offensive to it; So when the heart is not sound,
this trial, this searching, this examining of the heart, it is tedious,
grievous, and burdensome; but yet, Beloved, it is profitable, it is that which
makes us sound in the faith, we must come to it sooner or latter, and it is
best for us to come to it, while we have time to help it, if we find things
amiss. To have a great freight, and to make shipwreck in the Haven, were a
greatfolly; and therefore we should look to the Bark, and see whether it be
sound or no. To see in what estate we are, in which of these conditions we are.

You will say to me, Quest.
how shall we know?

I will name you but these four ways of trial, Answ.
that are named here: the Wiseman makes this difference of men, Fouretryals.
some are good, and some are evil, some are clean, and some are polluted,
some sacrifice, others sacrifice not, some are careless of an oath, others
fear an oath. Would thou know then in which of these two ^ankes of men thou
art? Consider then whether thou be a good man or an evil man, that is one
distinction. Goodness consists in these four things.

Goodness which consists in four things.
The tree must be good, as you have it in Math. 7. 16. 17. that is, a man then
is said to be a good man, when there is a good sap in him, when there is some
thing in him that is good, when there are some supernatural graces wrought in
him, Mat. 7. 16. 17.
he that is not empty of these, he is a good Barnabas, he was a good man; and
how was that proved? he was full of faith, and the holy Ghost. See then whether
thou have an empty heart or no. You say a thing is good for nothing, when it
is empty of that excellency, that should be in it; when Wine has not that in
it, that belongs to wine, you say it is naught; and so we say of all things
else; When a man therefore has not that in him that belongs to a man, that is,
to a man, as he was created in innocence, he is wicked and naught, a son of
Beliall: but when he has a blessing in him, as grapes have wine in them, when
he has supernatural grace wrought in his heart, when he has the new Adam
putting into his heart, the sap of grace and life, then he is good. Therefore
see whether there be somewhat put into thee, more then is in thee by nature,
see whether thou find the new Adam effectually to communicate new sap to thee,
new grace, and new light to thee, as the old Adam has communicated corruption;
See whether thou be made a good tree or no: for it is the tree, that makes the
fruit good, and not the fruit, that makes the tree good; So it is the man, that
justifies his work, and not the work, that justifies the man: and therefore
thou must first see, whether thou be in the Covenant, whether thou have this
seal, that thou see some thing put into thee, which thou have not by nature.
Every man by nature is empty: when grace is put into him, then he is said to
be good. As it is good wine, when it is full of spirit, when it has that in
it, that belongs to wine; So he is a good man, that has that in him, which
belongs to him in his regenerate estate.

Secondly; Consider whether thou bring forth that is, not only whether thou
do good actions, but whether they flow from thee, whether they grow in thine
heart as naturally, as fruit grows on the tree, that flows from the sap
within. When a man not only does good works, but when he is zealous of them,
it is his meat and drink to do them, when they flow from him, as water from
the fountain, then he is a good man: for if the tree be good, that is, if the
heart be good, a man will be as ready, and will as naturally bring forth good
fruit, as the tree, the Vine, or the Figtree bring forth their fruit.

The third thing you shall see in the 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tim. 2. 21.
vessels are said to be good, to be vessels of honor; when they are prepared
to every good work; So when a man is good, and brings forth good fruit, and
not only brings it forth, but if there be any occasions to put forth the
goodness, that is in him, he is parepared for it, as a vessel is prepared for
such a turn, for such a service. The word in the original signifies, when a
man is fashioned, as a vessel is fashioned: and the meaning of the holy Ghost
is therefore to show, that then a man is good, when his heart is fitted to good
works, when he knows how to go about them, whereas another bungles at them,
and knows not how to do them, he is prepared for them; and therefore there
needs no more, but to put him and the good work together, and he is ready to
perform it.

Act. 10. 38.
When there is not only a readiness, but practice upon all occasions, when a
man does good, as it is said, that Jesus Christ went about doing good. And
therefore he is a good man that is a useful man, such a man that every one
fares the better for, such a man as is serviceable to God and profitable to
men. Before regeneration when a man is a stranger to this goodness, he only
serves himself, he is full of self-love, all his ends are to look to
himself, that he may be kept safe; he cares not what becomes of any thing else,
so it be well with him; but when once goodness comes into his heart, it has
this fruit, he goes about doing good; because grace brings that principle into
the heart, that never grew there before, that it the love of God and man;
whereas before there was nothing but self-love in him, which plant grows
naturally in the garden of nature, when grace comes, it brings love with it,
and that love makes us useful, and serviceable both to God and man, So that
whatsoever a man has, what gifts, what knowledge, what authority he has, he
is ready to use it for the good of others. As the Apostle says of One simus
in the Epistle to Philemon; Now he is profitable to thee and me, whereas
before he was unprofitable: So it may be said of all Saints; when once this
goodness is put into them, now they are profitable to God and man; they do
serve God and man with their fatness, and with their sweetness, before they
were unprofitable to others, but now they are profitable both to themselves and
others.

This is the first note, by which you may know your selves: Art thou a good and
useful man, do thou go about doing good, do those fare the better for
thee, with whom thou have to do, do thou spend the fatness, and the
sweetness, that God has given thee, to serve God and man with it, then
conclude thou art in the rank of those that are the Lords portion, otherwise
thou art yet without the Covenant, thou art yet in the gall of bitterness. The
other three I must defer till the afternoon.

So much for this time.

THE SECOND SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES 9. 1. 2. 3. I have sarely given my heart to all this, etc.
WE will now proceed to the second difference which remains; and that is
this;

Consider whether thou be clean and pure in heart, or polluted; There is the
same condition to the pure, and to the polluted.

Difference. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
or to be washed, you shall see 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you: That
is, you were polluted with those sins, there named, but now (says he) you are
washed. And wherein stands this washing? He tells us it stands in these two
things: Now you are justified; now you are sanctified. You are justified
through the name of Christ; and sanctified through the spirit of our God. So
then, he is a pure man, or a clean man, that is first washed from the guilt of
his sins, that is, that has no sin lying upon his Conscience, that has
not a polluted Conscience, which is a phrase used Titus 1. Titus 1.
whose minds and consciences are defiled. Now defilement, or pollution is in
the Conscience, as Divines say, as a thing that is known is in the faculty,
or understanding that knows it; and therefore the man that has committed any
sin, which yet continues upon his own score, which his Conscience is yet
guilty of, and for which he has not yet gotten an acquittance from Almighty
God, he is an impure man, he is yet unclean; for he is not yet washed from his
filthiness.

A man again that has gotten any assurance of forgiveness, so that all his
sins are put upon the reckoning of Jesus Christ, and there are none that lie
upon his own score, a man who has made all his reckonings even with God, and
has some assurance thereof such a man is washed from his filthiness. Such a
phrase you have likewise in Ezech. 36. 25. Ezekiel. 36. 25.
I will cleanse you (or wash you) from all your Idols: That is, from all your
Idolatry, from all the sins that you have committed, I will wash you, that
is, with imputation, or sprinkling of the blood of Christ.

The second cleanness, is, when a man is not Christ, and the assurance of
pardon, but also when he is washed from the stain of sin, when he is
sanctified through the spirit, when sin is mortified in him, when it is as
well healed, as forgiven. And therefore if thou would know whether thou art
a clean man or polluted, consider also this, whether thou have a clean heart
or no, that is, whether thou have such an habitual disposition of purity and
cleanness, that thou can not endure to look upon any sin, no more then a
man, that is of a neat and clean disposition, can endure to see filthiness,
whether thou have such a disposition, as that although thou be sprinkled with
sin from day to day, though thou be fowled and spotted with it, yet thou
suffer it not to abide in thy heart; thy heart works it out, as we said to
you before.

So that this you are to observe, to find out the cleanness of a man's
disposition, whether he can look upon sin, as an unclean thing, as a thing
from which his soul has an aversion, as a thing that he abhorres, that is,
although there be some thing in him, that loves it, that delights in it, that
likes it, yet the prevailing part of the soul abhorres it. Both the clean and
polluted may forsake sin, and may turn away from sin, and therefore in that
the difference is not seen, but the difference is in this, that thou art able
to hate and abhor sin, to look on it as a thing that is filthy and
unclean. Simile.
A Merchant, you know, will cast out his goods, when he is in danger of his
life, but he hates not his goods; So a man may cast away sin, when it puts
him in danger of ^inking into hell, or of the judgments of men. It is one
thing to part with sin, and another thing to hate sin.

A man may withdraw himself from sin, It is not leaving but hating of sin
that shows purity.
he may give it over, he may seem to be divorced from it, and yet he may have
a months mind after it, he may do with it still, as the husband of Michall,
when she was taken from him, yet, says the Text, he came weeping after her a
far off, he longed after her still, and loved her still; So a man may part with
his sin after such a manner, that still he goes weeping after it, he would
have it again, he would feign enjoy it, if it were not for some greater
danger, or some greater trouble that he exposes himself unto; as you see in
Phaltiel, it was not for want of love to his wife, that he parted with her, but
it was out of a desire he had to save himself, to escape the danger of the
Kings wrath, imprisonment, and death, that would have followed upon it.
Therefore consider what hatred you have of sin, and by that you must judge
whether you have a clean disposition or no. You must not think any man is
perfectly clean, and pure, but he is a clean man, that suffers not any
impuritie to take quiet possession of his heart, although he have unclean
thoughts and unclean affections (as all sinful thoughts and affections are)
though sin may pass through his heart, as they passed through the Temple,
yet he suffers it not to set up Tables in the Temple, to set up an Idol in
his heart, he suffers it not to make any breach of Covenant with God, to be
adulterous against him; though there may be many glances, some adulterous and
unclean actions, that is not the thing that breaks the Covenant, when the
heart is still wedded to God, and chooses God, and no other. And therefore, I
say, in that it is not seen, but consider what thy disposition is, whether
thou hate that sin all the while. A man that is of an impure spirit, of an
impure heart, when he is with impure company, when he delights himself with
impure thoughts, then he is where he would be, he is then in his own element,
and when he is otherwise, he is where he would not be* On the other side, he
that has an habitual disposition of pureness and cleanness, though he may
be transported to those acts of sin and pollution, yet his heart hates it, he
is not where he would be all the while, he is not upon his own center, his
heart still fights against it, and resists it; therefore consider with thy
self, what thy heart is in this case, whether thou have a heart that hates
uncleanness, or whether thou have yet a swinish disposition, that thou lie
in the mud, and delightest to lie in it.

A man may fall into the mud, but he delights not to be there; no more will a
clean disposition delight in sin. And you may know it by this effect, where
the disposition is unclean, there sin abides, till it stain the heart, till
it make a man spotted of the world, that is, it causes him to keep a tract in
sin, that a man may say, this is the path he walks in, it causes him to
wear the livery of sin, that he may be known by it from day to day, it
causes the spot so to sink into the soul, that a man may see he is such a
man. This is to have an unclean disposition, when uncleanness so cleaues to
his soul, that they agree together: whereas in a man that has a pure
disposition, it is not so; as, 1 Ioh (...).
1 Ioh. 3. 3. he that has this hope purifieth himself: The meaning is this,
there is a double hope; there is the hope of the hypocrite, that is a dead
hope, that does not set a man on work to cleanse himself from fil^hinesse.
There is again, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
a lively hope, spoken of in 1 Pet. 1. 3. that sets a man on work to cleanse
himself; that is, when a man has a true hope, a real hope to have that
undefiled inheritance, he considers this with himself, that an impure heart,
and an undefiled inheritance will not stand together, and because he hopes for
it in good earnest, (it is not a false hope, it is not a dead hope) therefore
he sets himself on work indeed to purify himself; he that has that hope
purifieth himself, he cleanses himself. Who ever therefore does not purify
himself, it is an argument that his hope is dead which he has of being saved,
it is but the hope of an hypocrite; a hope that will stand him in no steed;
for it brings forth no endeavor: that is the second thing. I must be brief in
this, because this is not the point I intend, but that which follows.

The third expression here used, Difference.
is, he that sacrifices, This is but a Synecdoche, where one particular is put
for all other kinds of holy duties; But the meaning is this; you shall know a
man by this, in which of the two conditions he is, he whose heart is upright
with God, he dares not omit any holy ordinance, he dares not omit any
sacrifice, he dares not perform form them in a slight and negligent manner.
He again whose heart is false, sacrifices not, that is, either he omits the
duty, or else he omits the substance and life of the duty. You know in Iam.
2. 10. Iam. 2. 10.
he says there, he that abides in all, that keeps all the Commandments, and
yet fayles in one, he is guilty of all* and so you may say of the ordinances,
he that keeps them, he that observes them, but yet fayles in one, it is
argument enough, that he makes not Conscience of any. You shall find this
true, that whosoever he is, that sacrifices not, that is, he that prays not
constantly, he that hears not, he that reads not the Scriptures, he that
sanctifies not Gods Sabbaths, he that partaketh not of the Sacraments, etc. he
that uses not holy Conference, and fasting, and prayer in its season, such a
man is in an evil condition; It is given here as a note of an evil man, he
sacrifices not.

But you will say to me* Ob.
may not a man, whose heart is unsound, keep a constant course in sacrificing
to the Lord, that is, in praying to the Lord? May he not keep those ordinances
constantly?

Beloved, Answ.
I answer; He may keep them constantly, that is, he may do the outside of the
duty, he may perform the duty in a formal manner; and many times men are
deceived with this, it is an usual case, (nothing more usual in the Church of
God,) for a man to content himself with a perfunctory, ordinary performance, a
customary performance of good duties* But herein Satan deceiues men, as we
deceive children, when we take from them gold and silver, that is truly
precious, and give them Counters, things that have no worth in them; only they
have a good gloss upon them, which quiets them, because they be children,
because they cannot put a difference between things of show, and things of
true worth; for even thus Satan usually quiets the Consciences of men, with
these bare forms of piety, because they are not able to discern, not able to
distinguish between the precious duties, and the right performance of them,
and between the formal and empty performance, which has an outward
splendor and glittering show of performance; but in truth he cozens and
deceiues men with it; therefore, I say, a man may do these duties, he may be
constant in prayer from day to day, he may be constant in hearing, and
performing all the ordinances of God, in sacrificing (as the Wiseman speaks
here,) yet for all this, not be one of these good men, according to this note,
because he does not perform them in a holy and spiritual manner.

You will say to me, Quest.
how shall I know that?

You shall know it thus; Ans.
when the ordinances of God are spiritually performed, when holy duties are
performed in a holy manner, How to know when we perform Gods Ordinances aright.
you shall find these effects in them:

First; Ier* 23. 29.
They are a fire to heat the heart; as in Iere. 23. my word is as fire.

Again, They quicken the heart, when it is

Iud^ 20.
Jude. 20. verse, Edify your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the
holy Ghost; As if he should say, that will edify you: and you know what Christ
says, Mar. 4. 24.
take heed how you hear, for to him that has, more shall be given; that is,
he that hears as he ought to hear, every time that he hears he grows
something more rich, he gains some more saving knowledge, some greater degree
of saving grace.

God heal the soul; They heal the distempers of it, they compose it and put
it into a good frame of grace: Job. 15. 3. 4.
as in Job 15. 3. 4. says Eliphas there to Job, do thou dispute with words
not comely, etc. with talk that is not profitable, surely, says he, thou
restrainest prayer from the Almighty; As if he should say, Job, if thou
did pray, thou would not fall into these distempered speeches, as thou
do; thy heart would not be so disordered, thou would not be so passionate
and froward, as thou art; therefore surely thou restrainest prayer. Whence I
gather, that duties performed as they should be, compose the heart, and heal
those d^stempers.



between good and evil, to divide the flesh and the spirit; still a man sees
somewhat more then he did in his own heart, he sees the good, that is in it,
and the corruption, that is in it.

Lastly; They cleanse the heart, yea the heart of Psalm. 119. 9.
David Psalm. 119. 9. says, that the Word cleanses the heart, etc. Wherewith
shall a young man cleanse his heart, etc.

Now then examine thy self, whether thou so performest these ordinances, and
holy duties, that God commands thee, that thou find these effects of them; If
thou do, then thou art one that sacrifices, if otherwise, then thou art one
that sacrifices not; and therefore consider whether thy heart be warmed by
them; If they be to thee as painted fire, such as has no heat, thou do not
sacrifice, it is but an outward form; consider if they quicken thy heart, or
if it be as dead, and as backward, and as indisposed to good duties, and as
prone to things that are evil, after thou have performed them as before, if
so, though thou seem to sacrifice, yet thou art of the number of those that
sacrifice not: do thou find it does not divide the flesh, and the spirit,
that it is as a ^word without an edge, that it is as salt, that biteth not,
which does not cleanse the heart? it is an argument thou do not perform them,
as thou should; for there is a sharpness in holy ordinances, that makes us
sound in the faith, because it discovers to us the secret corruptions of the
heart. Do thou find thy lusts as strong, as they were? are they not cleansed
out? it is a sign thou do not use the scowring as thou should; and so we
may say of all the rest. Do thou find the word to fall upon thy heart, as
the rain falls upon the earth, or as upon a stone, that sinkes not into it,
that makes it not more fruitful? Do thou find that thou do hear from day
to day, and yet art not richer in grace, and in knowledge; That it cannot be
said to thee, that thou have so much more, as thou have heard more? Do thou
find that prayer builds thee not up, that thou gettest not some strength, some
strong resolution, that thou confirmest not thy Covenant with God, thy purpose
of abstaining from sin, and the like, that there is not somewhat added to
that spiritual building? thou art in the number of those that sacrifice not,
though thou keep a constant course in performing religious duties. So much
likewise shall serve for this.

He that swears, and he that fears an oath. That which is said of this
sin, Difference.
may be applied likewise to all others, and so here is a fourth difference
betwixt the good and bad. A man who is within the Covenant, has this
property, that he fears sin, and dares not meddle with it, that is, he will
not neglect looking to his heart, he will not be negligent in keeping a Watch
over his heart, and over his ways, but has a continual eye upon sin, as we
say Timor ^igens oculos, etc. what a man fears, he will be sure to have a
continual eye unto it.

If a man be about a business, and there be any thing that he fears, he will
neglect his work to have an eye upon that, whatsoever it be. If a man fear
sin, he will be very diligent in watching himself, in taking heed that
sin come not upon him by the by, with some by-blow, that he looked not for;
such a man has a continual eye upon sin, he is exceeding diligent in
looking to his heart and ways; when another man neglects it, and therefore
easily slips into sin, now into an oath, now into Sabbath-breaking, sometimes
to the omission of prayer, sometimes to the lust of vncleann^sse, sometimes to
lying and dissembling, sometimes to one sin, sometimes to another; and the
reason is, because he is negligent. The foolish goes on and is careless, that
is, he fears not sin, and therefore he neglects, having an eye to sin.

Now that you may find out more distinctly, what this fear is, consider this,
he that fears, he does not only fear the sin it self, but he fears any
thing that he has a suspicion of, he fears any thing that is doubtful; if it
be such a thing, as may be evil to him, he fears it; So, a man that fears
sin, though it be not clear to him, though he be not fully convinced that
such or such a thing is a sin, yet if he be one that fears sin, he will
not meddle with it. Simile.
Put the case he doubt whether the Sabbath should be so strictly kept,
notwithstanding* because he is doubtful of it, he will not meddle with it. Put
the case, he doubt whether gaming is to be used, if he fears, he dares not
meddle with it. As if there should be intimation given to a man, that such a
cup or such a dish were poisoned, he would not meddle with it, because he
fears it, he fears death, he fears sickness, so a man that fears
sin, if there be but a su^pition of it, though others swallow it without
making any bones of it, yet he dares not; and therefore consider what thou
do in that case.

Besides, when a man fears, he not only fears the thing, but that which may
make way to it: for fear, you know, sets the heart to prevent evil to come;
the object of it, 18, Malum ^uturum, whereas the object of grief, is present
evil; so it is also with those that fear sin. Put the case, sin be far
off from a man, yet if he fear it, he will not come near the occasions, that
might lead him to it, Exodus 23. 10.
but keeps himself far from it (as in Exodus we are commanded, keep thy
self far from an evil matter,) he dares not suffer his thoughts to wander,
he dares no gaze upon unlawful objects, he dares not come into company with
them, that will infect him, he dares not come near the train, though he be
far off the blow. Thus a man is affected that fears. And hence it is that
when a man is possessed with a disposition of fear, he does not only fear
for a fit, but if it be a thing that he naturally fears, it is a constant
fear, he fears it at all times.

You shall find evil men may fear by fits. Ahab feared, when Eliah brought a
terrible message to him, he feared and humbled himself: So Phar^oh feared,
when Moses brought upon him those heavy judgments, and plagues; but these
fears of theirs were as mists, which cleared up again, that continued not;
and therefore you have that expression in the Proverbes, Blessed is the man
that fears always; as if he should say, Prove. 2^. 14.
by this we show the sincerity of our fear, that we do not fear by fits,
but fear always.

The ground of it is this; such a man fears only the wrath of God, he feare^
only the evil, and therefore when that is taken away, he fears no more; but
with the godly man it is quite contrary, he fears the Lord and his goodness,
H^sea 3. 5.
Hosea 3. 5. and therefore when there is an end of evil and afflictions, when
the fear of that is blown over* when goodness comes in the room of it, when
God begins to show mercy to him, to give him health, and peace, and
quietness, when he is rid of his sickness, of his troubles, crosses, and
calamities, his fear does not cease, (as the fear of Ahab did,) but he fears
God still, yea he fears him now more then ever. The more Gods goodness is
increased toward him, the more he fears; because the more his love is
increased, the more his tenderness of Conscience is increased, the more
sweetness he finds in God, and therefore the more he is afraid to loose it,
the more he is afraid of any breaches between God and him. This you shall
find in those that fear.

Again; You shall find a difference in the object, the thing that they fear.
When the fear of God, and the fear of men, shall come in competition, there
is the trial; When a man shall be threatened by man with death, when he shall
be threatened with the loss of his goods, the loss of liberty, the loss of
any thing that is precious unto to him, and on the other side* God shall
threaten eternal death. The question now i^, whether of the^e he will fear
most? mortal man, whose breath is in his nostrils, or the eternal God,
whether shall sway him most; The fear of man* which is a s^are on the one
side, or the fear of God, and disobedience to him on the other side. When thou
art put upon such a strait, (...) a trial, that thou must offend one of them;
consider what thou do in this case. You know what Christ says, fear not
men, the (...) that they can do, is but to take away life, but fear God, for
he can cast thee into hell.

Now therefore, examine thy self, whether thou fe^re men in such a case, when
a good conscience is to be kept* and thereby some evil is to be undergone from
men, whether thou will rather adventure that, or the wrath and vengeance of
Almighty God, etc. And (which is of the same nature) whether a man (...) the
doing of evil* or the suffering of evil most, whether a ^a^feare sin or
crosses more, when they come in competition, you shall find this, he that is
most fearful of (...), he is m^st bold in all things else. And on the
contrary; he that fears other things most, he fears sin least; and the
reason of this is, because a godly man looks upon sin, as the maine; he
knows that touches him in the maine, it touches him in his freehold, and
therefore, if he be to undergo poverty, disgrace, imprisonment, if it be
death, any of these things, he fears them not* (for, says he, these are less
evils, these touch me not in the maine,) but if it be sin, he looks on that,
as the greatest evil, and therefore fears it above all things.

So now by this, thou shall know what thy fear is, whether thou fear the
doing of evil, or the suffering of evil.

Last of all, consider whether thou fear the word of God, when there is
nothing but the mere word, when there is nothing but mere threatenings; Isa.
66. 2.
as in Isa. 66. 2. I will look to them that tremble at my Word. If thou fear
only the actual affliction, the judgment, the cross, when it pincheth thee,
and is upon thee, any natural man is able to do that; but the wise man sees
it before, he believes the threatening, he sees it in the cloud, before it be
shed down in the storm, he fears the word of God, and trembles at it,
because he believes it, when others believe it not. Therefore consider by
this, whether thou be such a one as fears sin, whether thou have all these
properties of true fear, or whether on the other side, thou art careless of
sin, whether thou be one that swears, or one that fears an oath. So much
shall serve for this point; All things come alike to all; and the same
condition to the just as to the wicked, etc.

The next point, that we have to observe out of these words, is this; Doct. 4.
For the time of this life, there are the like events to good men, as to the
wicked: Things fall out alike to good and bad in this life.
That is, though God be All-sufficient, though he make good his
All-sufficiencie to the Saints, so that he is a Sun and a Shield unto them,
and no good thing is wanting to them, nor any evil thing can come near them,
yet for all this, for the time of this life, in this world, there are the like
events to both, he deals with the one, as with the other. This is his common
course, as the Wiseman expresses it both here, and in other places. In the 11.
verse of this Chapter, I observe, says he, and I see, that the Race is not
always to the swi^t, nor the battle to the strong, nor Riches to a man of
understanding, nor fav^ur to men of knowledge, etc. but he that is weak gets
the battle, and he that is more unwise gets favor, etc. So, he that deserves
the best, misseth it, and he that deserves the worst, obtaines it. So, likewise
in the 8. Chapter, you shall see this fully, if you compare that and the latter
end of this ninth Chapter together; Chap. 8. 9. 10.
There is, says he, a man that rules to his own hurt, and to the hurt of
others; yet, says he, this man continues in it, yea, he continues in it in
peace, even to his grave, and not so only, but when he is gone, and is come
from the holy place, that is, the place of Magistracy, (that is there called
the holy place,) it is all forgotten; though he had done evil, yet he
continued in peace, and died in peace, and after also there was no blemish cast
upon him, but it is forgotten; this I have seen, says Solomon.

Again, you shall find it as true on the contrary side; I have seen, says
he, a poor man that was wise, that has delivered a City, when a great King
had made forts against it: That is, though he were a poor man, yet through his
wisdom, he delivered it from a great King; but, says he, this also was
forgotten; The poor man was forgotten, and so the good ruler was forgotten,
and the evil ruler was forgotten. And as it is said of the ruler, so it is
said of the error which comes from the face of the ruler; I have seen, says
Solomon, a vanity under the Sun, that arises from the face of the ruler,
that is, from the error of the Ruler. What is that? Folly is set in great
excellency, and the rich set in low place. I have seen servants on horse
back, and Princes walking as servants on the ground, Chap. 10. 6. 7. That is,
Chap. 10. 6. 7.
those that were holy and good, they were rich, how poor soever they seemed to
be, they were wise, howsoever the world accounted of them, they were Princes,
though the world reckoned them as servants: And on the other side, those that
were evil, they were poor, though they appeared to be never so rich, they
were base, though they seemed to be never so noble, they were foolish, though
they seemed to have the repute of wisdom. Now, says he, I have seen these
servants on horseback, sitting in great excellency, when others, though they
were Princes, have been set in low places, and have walked like servants on
foot. Thus you see, that all things come alike to all, so the Lord disposes
it; If you look to the condition of things, you shall see, that all bastards
escape not afflictions, and again, that many sons have but little affliction.

You shall see again, that not all evil men have prosperity, nor all good
men are followed with adversity; but God disposes these things promiscuously.

You shall see Josiah, a good King, Instances.
slain with an Arrow, when he changed his cloths, and covered himself, and
dissembled his person, even as well as Ahab was.

You shall see no difference in the case, as it is decribed 2 Chronicles. 35. the
same condition fell to 2 Chro. 35. 23
them both, they both disguised themselves, the Archers both shot at random,
God directed the Arrows to both of them, both were sick and wounded in their
Chariots, both were carried out of the battle, yet the one a very good King,
and the other a wicked King.

You see again Joseph was put in Prison for his innocence, as well as
Pharaohs Butler and Baker were for their offenses.

You see Moses and Aaron were excluded out of the land of promise, as well as
murmuring rebellious Israel: the same condition was to the one as to the other.

If again you look upon the good success of men, you shall find it the
same. You shall find Nebuchadnezzar prevailing, and reigning forty years in
pro^peritie, as well as you see King David reigning forty years, and Gods hand
was with him to bless him in all this. All this you see under the Sun. Only
this you are to observe, that it is but for a time, that the Lord does this; he
does it not always; this is not the constant condition, either of the one or
of the other; and therefore you must know, (that this truth may be clear to
you) that God uses a liberty in these two things. God uses a liberty in two
things.


In Election
he uses a liberty in Election; he chooses one and refuses another; and
that for no other reason, but because it pleased him.

Secondly; in his punishing and rewarding the In punishment, and rewards, in
two things.
elect, and reprobate, he uses a liberty in these two things.

First; In the time of their afflictions and rewards.

And secondly; in the manner and quality of

In the substance it self he uses no liberty at all; but this is an
infallible rule, that will be always true, That he rewards every man according
to his work, he rewards the good, according to his work, and he rewards the
evil, according to his work: but yet, I say, with this difference, in the
time he uses a liberty, it may be, he deferreth the rewarding of such a man a
long time, he deferres likewise the punishment of such a one a long time; with
others he deals quite contrary, he sends punishments upon them presently after
the sin is committed, he gives a reward presently after the good deed is
done.

And so likewise in the manner of the punishment: there are punishments of
diverse sorts, some are more secret punishments, some are more scandalous, some
are taken out for examples, that others may fear; others he lets alone, and
makes them not examples. This liberty he uses in the dispending of his
punishments; and the like he does in his rewards. Some he rewards openly for
their well-doing, that others might be encouraged; Some men he suffers to wait
a long time, and there comes no present reward; he shall have it, he shall have
a reward according to his works; but yet this liberty God uses in the
dispensation of it.

The use we should make of it is this; Use.
If this be so, then let us not be offended, let us not think, that God is not
therefore All-suff^cient, because he deals sometimes with the righteous
according to the works of the wicked, sometimes with the wicked according to
the works of the righteous; for you see, he will be All-sufficient, he will
keep the substance of this rule, he will reward every man according to his
work, he will make good his All-sufficiencie in performing his promises to
them, that belong to him; and again, he will make good all his threatenings to
those that are enemies to him.

But now for the time of his dispensation, and administration of things, it is
true, he takes a liberty to himself. And to make this the clearer to you, I
will do these two things.

First, I will show you the reasons, why God does thus for a time, why thus he
disposes all things for a certain season.

And secondly, I will show you this, that though he do thus for a season, yet
certainly, he is All-sufficient; To the good it shall go well, and it shall
go ill with the sinners.

First, Reas. 1.
I say, God does thus for a time: And why? One reason is; To try men.
That God may try the faith and sincerity of men; for if when men have sinned,
God should smite presently, if when they do well, God should reward them
presently, they would be drawn to well-doing, and from evill-doing, not by
sincerity and by faith, but by sense. Now the Lord therefore deferres it, he
puts it off, that those that are proved, may be known, that what men do out
of sincerity may appear to be so, that men may live by faith, and not by
sense, that men might be drawn to live by right respects, and not by sensual
and carnal respects; as they would do, if either his punishments were
presently, or his rewards.

Secondly; Reas. 2.
The Lord does it to spare mankind; for if the LORD should punish presently,
Tospare men.
men should perish from the earth. And therefore he does in this case, as
Generals are wont to do with their Soldiers, when there is a general fault
committed, they cast lots and pick out two, or three, and put them to death,
that the whole Army may be saved; So the Lord does, he takes here and there
one, whom it may be, he follows with open and great judgments for open
sins; But for others again, the generality, he suffers and lets them alone,
because he would spare mankind. This reason I find used, Genesis 6. 3.
Genesis 6. 3. the Lord said there, when he was about to destroy man from the
earth, My spirit shall no longer strive with man, for he is but flesh: That is,
if I should continually deal with men, as I do now, if I should take them,
and sweep them away with the Besome of destruction, as I do these, there
would remain no flesh upon the earth; and therefore, says he, I will not
strive with them, but bear with them patiently, though their sins are great
and many. Again; Reas. 3.
the Lord does it, that he might keep from us the events of things; To hide
events from men.
It is his good pleasure to reserve them to himself, and therefore he goes not
in a constant course. When men sin, he does not presently punish, neither
when a man does well, does he presently reward him, that is, he goes not in one
tract, as it were, but sometimes he does the one, and sometimes the other,
promiscuously; and for this end, says the Wiseman, he has made this contrary
to that, that no man might find any thing after him: That is, that he might
leave no footsteps behind him; (as we have that phrase used, Romans 11. 33.
Romans 11. 33. How unsearchable are thy ways, and thy Judgments past finding
out.) The word in the original signifies, that when God goes, he leaves no
vestigia, no print behind him, so that a man cannot say, he will go this way,
he goes it not so often, as to make a path of it; I speak of these particular
things, he does not so dispense good, and evil, punishment, or rewards, that a
man can say, the Lord will do this. And the reason of this is, because future
things, the event of things, it is his good pleasure to keep to himself; as
he says Act. 1. 7. It is not for you to know the event of things, which the
Father has kept to himself, Act. 1. 7.
and therefore he uses this promiscuous dispensation of punishment, and
reward, that he might hide these things from the sons of men.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
he does it likewise, that he may bring forth the treasures, To bring forth his
treasures.
both of his wrath, and of his mercy.

You will say, Quest.
how shall that be done? Says God, if I should presently cut off a sinner,
Answ.
and should not forbear him, his wickedness should not be full; I will let
the Amorites alone, Genesis 15. 16. That the measure of their sin might be
fulfilled: That is, Genesis 15. 16.
God purposely forbeares them, with great patience, Romans 9. 22.
Romans 9. 22. He leaves them, and heaps mercies and kindnesses upon them, that
they might continue in their sins, and abuse his patience, recompensing him
evil for good, and then he draws out the treasures of his wrath. If he should
take them suddenly and cut them off, there might be but some of his wrath
manifested upon the sons of men; but when they run a long course in
sinning, when they make a heap of sin, then God draws out the treasures of
his wrath and power; that is the very reason used, Romans 11. 22.
Romans 11. 22. and likewise Romans 2. 4. Romans 2. 4.
The Lord has certain treasures of wrath, as we see Deuteronomy. 32. 33. 34. 35.
Where speaking of the Deuteronomy. 32. 33. 34. 35.
children of Israel, he says, that he suffered them to grow, (that is the
meaning of that place) as a man suffers a Vine to grow, I suffered you to bring
forth grapes, I did not trouble you, nor interrupt you; but when you should
have had good wine in your grapes to refresh God and man, says he, your wine
was as the poison of Dragons, and as the gall of Aspes; in steed of doing
good, and being serviceable to men, when I gave you so much rest and peace. The
wine you brought forth was hurtful to man, as poison, and as the gall and
bitterness of Aspes, which is the most hurtful thing in the world.

Now, says the Lord, all this, I have done, that I might lay it up; I have
sealed it up among my treasures; for vengeance and recompense is mine: That is,
therefore I have suffered all this, that I might draw forth all my treasures of
wrath, which otherwise would be hidden, and never opened and manifested to the
world.

The like he does to the godly; he suffers them to go on, he suffers them to
do well, and yet for all this he gives them no present reward, but leaves
them to the malice of men, to the hand of the enemy, and suffers them to
prevail against them, he suffers them to be in poverty, in persecution, in
prison, to be taken away by death, etc. And why does he suffer such variety of
temptations to come to them? Iam. 1.
Iam. 1. because their grace, and their patience, and their faith might be more
tried, that they might have a larger Reckoning. Math. 5. 10. Math. 5. 10.
Blessed are those that suffer for righteousness sake; and by this means he
draws forth the treasures of his mercy. If the reward should be presently, it
should not be so great a reward; but when he suffers any man to do well, and
then lets him wait, by that means he takes occasion to be the more
bountiful; as he says to them, Heb. 10. 36.
Heb. 10. 36. When you have done his will, you have need of patience: That is,
the Lord still deferres, that you might show your patience, that you might have
the honor to suffer, as well as to do, and so he might show forth on you the
riches, and the Treasures of his mercy.

Lastly; Reas. 5.
another reason why God does it, is, because the time of this life is the time
of striving, This life is a time of striving.
of running, of acting, it is not the time of being rewarded; as Iam. 1. 12.
Blessed is he that indureth the time of trial. God puts a man for the time of
this life to many trials, he puts a good man to suffer many crosses and
afflictions, to see whether he will bear them or no, he gives not him present
liberty, present prosperity, nor present rewards, etc. Says he, When he is
tried, then he shall receive the Crown of glory, which he has promised to
them that love him: then, and not before; so, I say, the time of this life is
the time of striving.

You know men do not give the reward till the wrestling be done, they are not
knighted, till the battle be ended, they give not the garland, till there be
an end of the combat, Romans 2. 5.
Therefore Romans 2. 5. The last day is called the manifestation, or declaration
of his just Judgment; So that till then there is no declaration of the just
judgment of God, one way or other; There is not a declaration of wrath till
then, nor a declaration of mercy till then, for a time therefore, the Lord
suffers them to go on, he dispenceth the event of good and evil, of
punishments, and rewards promiscously, that the sons of men might be tried;
but when the race is done, then he will make good his promise to the one, and
his threatenings unto the other.

But now, though the Lord does this for a time, as you see he does for a
season, yet ( Beloved) remember this again for your comfort, that it is but
for a season, it shall not always be so; as the Wiseman resolves in the
Chapter before my Text; Says he, howsoever it fall out, I know it shall be
well with the righteous, and it shall be evil with the wicked; It is certain
that every man shall be rewarded according to his works. Godliness has the
promise of this life, and of the life to come. And again, ungodliness has the
curses of this life, and of that which is to come; and certainly, they shall
be both fulfilled. And that it may be made clear to you, consider this ground
for it, that though the wicked prosper a while, It shall not always go well
with the wicked.
and good men suffer affliction a while, yet it must needs be that this must
be the issue of it.

Because God is a just judge.
because the Judge of all the world must needs be righteous, as says Abraham;
As if he should say, the first standard of Justice, the first rule, the first
measure, either that must be right, or else there can be no rectitude in the
world. Now that cannot be; you see there is a rectitude amongst men, there is a
justice amongst men, there is a kind of even carriage among the creatures, and
therefore the judge of all the world that gives all these rules, that sets all
these measures, all things in this evennesse, and that keeps up that which
otherwise would fall in sunder, surely he must needs be righteous, and
therefore he must needs do well to the righteous, and reward evil to the
wicked.

God has done in former times, He is immutable.
he must needs do the same; Go through all the Scriptures, and you shall
find that still the evil in the end were punished, and the good in the end
were rewarded; he is the same God still, he is still as holy as he was, still
his eyes cannot abide iniquity, still he is as powerful as he was, there is
no change in him, nor shadow of changing. And therefore think with thy self,
he that was so severe against Saul for breaking the Commandment, he that was
so severe against Balaam for loving the wages of unrighteousness, he that was
so severe against Vzziah for touching the Arc, for meddling with holy things,
for drawing near in an unholy manner to him, he that consumed Nadab and Abihu
with fire from heaven, because they came with strange fire, (so do we when we
come with carnal affections to perform holy duties) he is the same, and
though he do it not to thee on the sudden, as he did to them, (for he did it
to them for example, that they might be rules for future times, that he might
not only deliver precepts, but might second them with examples,) yet being the
same God, he will do it to thee at length, if thou fall into the same sin;
he that struck Ananias and Saphira with death for speaking against the truth,
and against their Consciences, he will do the same to thee, though he do it
not in the same manner, (because it was extraordinary, he drew them out for
examples,) and so I may say of rewards, it is certain he will do the same.

Moreover, it must needs be so, because Gods blessedness stands in the
execution of his own Gods blessedness requires it
in proceeding according to it.

Take all the Creatures under the Sun, and their happiness stands in keeping
close to that rule, that God has given them: The fire is well, as long as it
follows that rule, the water, and so every Creature; Man to whom the Law was
given, his happiness is to keep the Law, in doing it thou shall live: The great
God has made a Law to himself, that is, he has expressed himself, his
blessedness consists in keeping it, and therefore be assured, that whatsoever
his Law is, it shall certainly be performed. The Law, you know, is this;
Either thou shall keep these things, or thou shall die for it. Now a
disjunctiue proposition is true, we say, if either part be true, that is, if a
man do not keep the Law, of necessity he must be punished, or else Gods Law
should be broken; but if either be fulfilled, the Law is kept; So I say, it
must needs be, that the Lord must do that, wherein his blessedness consists.
Though a sinner prolong his days, and though his punishment be long deferred,
and sentence be not speedily executed, yet certainly it must needs be
executed, for the Lord must needs act according to that rule he has set to
himself.

Last of all, if the Lord should not do it, he should loose his glory; If
wicked men should always prosper, if good men should always fare ill, men
would say, there were no God in heaven, to rule things, to administer things by
his providence; therefore, says he, I will bring it to pass, that you may
know that I am the Lord. So then, see thou a wicked man doing wickedly, and
yet not punished? He cannot continue long; the Lord should loose his glory if
he should. See thou a good man that continues in his righteousness, and yet
he suffers adversity and affliction, he is set in a low place, he walks on
foot, etc. he cannot continue so long; for the Lord should loose his glory,
and the Lord will not loose his glory, he is exceeding tender of his glory.
And therefore this Conclusion must be set down, that though for a time all
things fall alike to good and bad, though God dispense them promiscuously for a
season, yet certainly the issue shall be, it shall be well with the righteous,
and it shall be ill with the wicked.

Therefore (to proceed a little further) let not holy men be discouraged, Use.
because they see things go ill with the Churches; be not discouraged at it;
for it shall be well with them in due season. You shall see Psalm. 129. 3. Psalm.
129. 3.
that the Lord suffers evil men to plough the Church, and to make long
furrows on the back of it; but yet, says he, in the fourth verse; The Lord
will cut the cords of the wicked; He will cut their traces, they plow long, and
make deep furrows; but yet the Lord at length cuts the cords of the wicked.
The horses that draw the plough, as long as the traces hold, they draw; but
when they are cut, they can draw no longer; So the Lord will do, he suffers
the Church to be plowed, when they do not Judge themselves, wh^^ they do not
plowe themselves, when they do not humble themselves, then he sets the enemies
of the Church to plowe them, and to humble their souls, and this he does for a
certain season; but when he has done, he cuts their traces, he cuts their
cords, and that in due season.

As for example; Instances of the wicked.
He suffered Pharach a long time to plowe the Church; you know how long he
afflicted it, you know what long furrows he made upon it; but yet when the
period was come, the period that God had set, the fit time, then God cut his
traces, that is, he suffered him to plowe no longer, but destroyed him.

And so H^man in the story of Hester, he plowed the Church a while, till it
came to the very point, to the exigent, that he should have swallowed it up,
and then he was taken off from plowing any longer, then the Lord cut his cords,
and set his Church at liberty.

And so he did with the Midianites; They plowed the Church for a time, (as
through the whole story of the Judges we see) they plowed them for a certain
season, till they were plowed enough; and when they were humbled, repented, and
cried to the Lord, (as you shall see every where) then, says the Text, the
Lord heard them, and cut the cords of the wicked, he suffered them to plow no
longer.

But these places will be the clearer, if you compare them with Isa. 28. 24.
says the Lord there, Isa. 28. 24.
Does the plowman plowe all the day? Rather, says he, when he has plowed
enough, (mark it) when he has broken the clods, then he casts in the seed,
etc. And who has caused the plowman to do this. Is it not I the Lord? If the
Lord has put this wisdom into the plowman, that he plowes not all day, but
when he has plowed the ground enough, he stays the plowe, and sowes the
seed, will not the Lord do so with his Church? therefore, Beloved, be not
discouraged, let not your hearts fail, though you see him plowing of the
Church, though he suffer the enemy to prevail against it; for in due time the
Lord will cut their cords. You have a clear place for it Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Deuteronomy.
32. 35.
where speaking of the enemies of the Church, says he, his foot shall slide
in due time, (that is the expression there) that is, perhaps you may complain,
and think it too long, but it is not too long; If it were any sooner, it would
be too soon: in due time, says the Lord, it shall be, in due time his foot
shall slide. Heb. 10. 37.
Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; it
is but a little, a little time indeed. You know that is too long, that tarries
beyond the appointed time, beyond that measure, that should be set to it; when
the Lord does it in due time, it is not too long. He that shall come, that is,
he that shall surely come, will come, and will not tarry, that is, he will not
tarry a jot beyond the due time, and season, that season, that is fittest for
the Church, and for the enemies of the Church.

And as I say for the enemies of the Church, Instances of the godly.
so I may likewise say for the righteous man; The latter end of the righteous
shall be peace: he may have trouble for a time, but his end shall be peace. Be
not therefore discouraged; howsoever God may deal with thee by the way, yet
you know what end he made with Job; That expression you have in Iam. 5. 11.
Iam. 5. 11.
You know the case of Job, and you know what end the Lord made with him: So I
may say of every righteous man.

You know Jacob had many troubles, troubles when he was with Laban, troubles
with the Shechemites, troubles with his own sons; yet his latter end was
peace.

David had many troubles, when he was young, when he was under Saul's government,
he was hunted as a flea, or Partridge; after he came to the kingdom himself,
you know he was a man troubled a great while, there was Civil Wars, after
them he was troubled with his children, after that with the rebellions of his
people, and yet, says the Text, he died full of riches, full of honor, and
full of days. The Lord made a good end with him; The latter end of the
righteous is peace, that is, a man that trusts in the God of peace, he shall
be sure to have peace in the end, a man, that is a subject to the Kingdom of
peace, that is subject to the government of Christ, the Prince of peace, it
must needs be, that he must have peace in the end; for the Kingdom of God is
in righte^usnesse and peace, and the government of Christ, is the government of
peace, and therefore it shall be peace in the end to him, whatsoever is in the
way. Therefore, let no man be discouraged, but let this comfort him.

On the other side, another man may have peace by the way, he may have
prosperity for a time, he may flourish like a green Bay tree; but his latter
end shall be miserable. As it is Psalm. 37. 37. Psalm. 37. 37.
Mark the end of the righteous man, it shall be peace: but the transgr^ssors
shall be destroyed together; the end of the wicked shall be cut off. And
therefore you see what he says of them in the verse before, I sought him,
says he, and he was not to be found, verse. 36. Verse 36.
As if he should say, I sought him on earth, and there he was not, I sought him
in heaven, and there he was not to be found; but in hell he was, there he was
to be found; otherwise there is no remembrance of them. So I say, evil men,
though they have peace for a time, though they have prosperity for a time,
though they spread themselves as a green bay tree, yet their latter end shall
not be peace, but misery. Therefore, let us not be discouraged; Nor on the
other side, let not evil men be secure, let not them be encouraged to evil
doing; for though the Lord spare them for a time, yet certainly they shall be
punished. As Luke 13. 4. Luke 13. 4.
(it is an excellent place for that purpose) our Savior says there, Think
not that those eighteen, upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were greater
sinners, then others, that it did not fall upon: but except you repent, you
shall all likewise perish. The meaning of it is this, when you see strange
judgments come upon the workers of iniquity, though you that are standers by
have had peace and prosperity all your time and have never been acquainted
with any of these strange judgments of God, have never tasted of them, say not
that your condition is better then theirs; for, says our Savior, you are no
less sinners then they, perhaps you are greater, (though the Tower fell on
them, and not on you,) therefore, says he, you shall perish But because it is
not presently done, therefore, says the Wiseman, The hearts of men are set in
them to do evil, that is, because there is not present execution, therefore,
either man think there is no God, or else they do think God is like
themselves: I held my peace, and thou thoughtest I was ike thy self. Psalm. 50.
21. Psalm. 50. 21.
Either they think that there is no God, or else that he is not so just a God,
as we declare him to be. So, either they think sins not to be sins, or
else they think them not so heinous, that they do not draw so fearful
judgments after them. Thus men, because the same Events are to all alike, have
therefore their ^earts set in them to do evil.

Now for Answer to that, The execution, not the sentence is deferred.
says the Wiseman, though execution be deferred, the sentence is not
deferred, The sentence is past against an evil work, though it be not
speedily executed: As if he should say, it is little comfort for thee when
thou have provoked God to anger, that thou art not presently punished; for the
sentence is gone out against thee, thou art an accursed man, thou art condemned
and shut up in Prison, it is only the execution that is deferred; and
therefore is it that he says, because the sentence against evil doers is not
speedily executed, therefore think with thy self, whosoever thou art that
emboldenest thy self in thy present safety, it is but a deferring of the
execution; thou art not in a better condition then others; only the judgment
is executed on the one sooner, on the other later.

See it in the sin of Ioab; you know he committed the sin of murder, when
he killed Ab^er; it lay a-sleepe you know many years. The sentence went out
from Gods Law, God and his own Conscience was against him, but yet it was not
executed, till he was full of gray hairs; his gray hairs went down to the
grave, not in peace, but in blood.

So likewise in the sin of Saul; when he brake the oath with the Gibeonites,
the sin continued forty years unpunished; the Lord suffered it; the
sentence went out against him, as soon as it was committed, but yet it lay
a-sleepe; The Lord did not execute the sentence till forty years after, as we
see by computation: for it was all the Reign of David to the latter end, and
most part of Saul's Reign.

And so the sin of Shemei, the sin was committed long before, (yet all the
time of David's Reign after his restoring, though the sentence went out against
him; for he was an accursed man, the Lord brought that curse upon him which he
had pronounced against David,) yet it was notexecuted till a fit ^eason* So, I
say, it is with sin, the execution is deferred, though the sentence be not
deferred. Therefore, says Solomon, certainly the wicked shall not prolong his
days.

Beloved, it is a place worth considering, Eccles. 8. 13. Ecles. 8. 13
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and prolong his days, yet I know
it shall go well with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before him;
but it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days,
he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not before God. This Conclusion he
comes to; Although, says he, the Lord defer execution, yet it shall not be
well with the wicked, he shall not prolong his days.

But it will be objected, Ob.
That many evil men do prolong their days, they live long, they live till
they be old, and they live in peace.

To this I answer; That though they do live long, Answ.
yet indeed properly they are not said to prolong their days, because that
all that while they are unripe, they are not fit for death; So that they are
taken before they are fitted to go hence, so they are cut off for substance
indeed in the midst of their days. Wicked men die suddenly, though they live
long.
As an Apple though it hang on the tree long, yet if it be taken before it be
full ripe, it may be said not to hang long on the tree, that is, it hangs not
so long, as to ripen it, it is taken away in an untimely manner, it is taken
away before the season of it; So it is here, though a wicked man do prolong
his days, yet still he is taken away before he be ripe, before the time of
gathering.

As it is true on the other side, that holy men, though they be taken away
betimes, yet they are taken away, when they have finished their days; he does
prolong his days, though he die when he is young, because he is ripe before he
is taken from the tree; he is now in a fit season. And this is the meaning of
that, when he says, certainly it shall be ill with him, that fears not God,
though he do prolong his days, though execution should be deferred. I should
add more, as this for another; but I will but name it.

Does one condition fall to all, Adversity and
both good and bad? Then you may gather hence, Prosperity, not truly good nor
evil.
that all the good things, and all the evil things, that befall us in this
life, they are neither truly good nor truly evil, they are but shadows of
both; for if the Lord send adversity upon good men, if he send prosperity to
evil men; If there were true evil in adversity, God would never do it, if
there were any true goodness in prosperity, he would never do it, but when
he dispenceth these things so promiscuously, it is an argument they are not
such as men account them, they are but shadows of good things, and of evil,
Larvae et spectra, etc. that is, they are not the substance of good things,
neither of good nor evil. Let not righteous men therefore say they are
miserable, when they fall into any kind of outward misery, whatsoever the
condition be, it is not evil, if it were, it should never befall thee. Ag^ine,
let not a wicked man say, he is happy, because of his outward condition, for
if it were truly good, thou should never enjoy it. When God dispenceth
those things so promiscuously, it is an argument, that they are neither good
nor evil, that is, that there is no substance of true good or evil in them.

And so again, if they fall out so promiscuously, then you can judge neither
of love, nor of hatred by them; that is, a man is not to think, that because
the Lord afflicts him, therefore he withdrawes himself from him, or because he
gives outward prosperity to another, that therefore his hand, and his favor
is with him; for you see he dispenceth these things diversely, he dispenceth
them to all in such a promiscuous manner, that you cannot say, this is proper
to the one, or to the other.

An Host may entertain a stranger with better food, then he gives his
children, with the daintiest of that he has, yet he keeps the best portion
for his children: and God may do much for those that are strangers to him, but
he gives better prosperity to his children; though they fare hard here, though
they taste no good thing a long time, yet the portion he reserveth for them,
which portion, and blessed inheritance, he of his great mercy reserve for every
one of us, and confer upon us, for the mediation of his dear SON, JESUS
CHRIST the righteous.

So much for this time.

FINIS.
THE THIRD SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES 9. 11. 12. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but
time and chance happens to them all.

For man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil
net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.


THE last time we spoke to you, we handled the first and second verses of this
Chapter, whence there may be this Objection made against Gods All-sufficiencie;
All things come alike to all, to the just, and to the wicked, etc. And indeed
when ^en see this Conclusion, that it is to the wicked, according to the work
of the just, and to the just, according to the work of the wicked, it must
needs stand as a strong objection against the doctrine of Gods
All-sufficiencie. How that objection is answered, has been fully declared to
you; Now there comes another objection like the former.

Because all things come alike to all, says the Wiseman, Ob.
(but there he names only the good and the bad, the holy and the unholy) men
will be ready to say, as every man is; howsoever holiness, and unholiness,
make not this difference in the event of things, yet the natural strength of
men, their natural weakness, their natural ability, or their inability,
their wisdom, or their folly, that disposes, or indisposeth men in the event
of things. And therefore the Wiseman, when he had finished that former
conclusion, whereof we spoke, that there is one event to the good, and bad, he
falls upon the second vanity, that he saw under the Sun, that not only, as he
says, All things come alike to all, that is, to the holy and unholy, but
likewise, to those that have natural strength, and those that are subject to
natural weakness; even in this case also, says he, all things come alike to
all.

For I have seen that the race is not always to the swift, but sometimes to
him that is not swift; the battle is not always to the strong, but sometimes
to him that is weak; and bread, and favor, and riches, are not always to men
of understanding and skill, but sometimes to men that are weak, and foolish,
and want skill, etc.

I have chosen this Text, that I may add this to the other, that even in those
things also, all things come alike to all. There is then another caution to be
used, and to be taken heed of in this doctrine of Gods All-sufficiencie.
Though God dispense those comforts to them that serve him with a perfect heart,
yet there are certain times to be observed by the sons of men, and if you
miss of those times, that are allotted to every purpose and action, if these
be hid from men, if men take not their opportunity, though God be ready to
dispense his blessings to those that seek him, yet that occasion makes men
miss of them; therefore is it that he says in the twelfth verse, Man kn^wes
not his time; that is, there is a time for every pupose, and action, and if he
take that time, he shall be succesfull; but if that be hidden from him, and he
take it not, evil times fall upon him, as the snare upon the birds, and as the
net upon the fishes.

Now for the particular opening of these words.

First, we are to consider the phrase here used in the beginning, I returned,
and saw, says he, under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, etc. That
is, as if he should say; when I looked about me, and turned my self every way,
and looked upon the whole frame of the Creatures, I saw a vanity in every
corner, in every place, I saw a va^itie even in things, that seem least to be
subject to vanity: Whence we will gather this point, Doct.
that

All things under the Sun; All things under the Sun are subject to vanity.
even the ^est are subject to vanity.

Let a man turn himself which way he will, he shall find vanity and
vexation of spirit in every Creature, and in every condition and state, in all
the purposes, in all the actions and affairs of men: I returned, says he, and
which way soever I looked, which way soever I turned me, I still saw vanity.
So it was with Solomon, and so it must needs be with us all, if our judgments
be guided as his was by the spirit of God.

Natural things.
you shall see vanity in them, says the Wiseman: The rivers come and go, and
the winds pass and come about by their circuits, and one generation goes,
That is, They are restless.
in all these works of God, in these works of nature, which seem not to be
subject to vanity, yet if you look upon them, you shall find vanity in
them, they have no rest nor quiet, they are all subject to corruption, One
generation goes, and another comes.

There is nothing new.
there is no new thing in them; that if a man study to find out something to
satisfy his mind, he shall soon come to a bottom, and nothing will give him
satisfaction, and therefore there is a vanity; for that which is restless,
can never give us rest, that which is subject to corruption, can never give us
that happiness that is immortal and eternal; in these things, there is no
newnes; The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing.

Mortal things
and look upon other things that seem to be least subject to vanity, as
wisdom and knowledge; Wisdom.
It is true, these seem to be least subject to vanity, and the Wiseman
acknowledges it, There is weariness in getting it.
for, says he, wisdom is better yet there is vanity in that: for, first
there is a weariness in getting it. Again, there is a grief in having, in
using, Grief in using it.
and enjoying it: for a wise man sees much that which is crooked he cannot make
straight. To see evil under the Sun, and not to be able to amend it, it does
but increase a man's sorrow; and that is the wise man's misery.

Again, It freeth not from misery.
says he, The same condition is to the as the one is subject to sickness, so
is the other, as the one is subject to crosses, afflictions, and changes, so is
the other; and therefore there is a vanity in that.

But now for the perfection of works, for the doing of those things that are
indeed commendable, good, and prayse-worthy, is this also subject to vanity?
Yes, Commendable actions. Eccle. 4. 4.
says Solomon, Eccles. 4. 4. I looked, and beheld the travailes of men in the
perfection of works, and I find this also to be the envy of a man against
his neighbor: That is, this vanity it has in it, Are enuyed.
that a man shall not have praise and love answerable to the perfection of his
work, but he shall find the contrary, he shall have much envy for it; it
shall cause the envy of a man against his neighbor.

But take places of great authority, wherein a man has much opportunity to
do good, Great places.
as, This also is a vanity. I have seen men ruling one over another, says
the Wiseman, to their hurt, to the hurt of the ruler, and to the hurt of them
that are ruled. So that all things under the Sun, look which way you will,
they are subject to vanity, as these which here he names, for a man to make
himself strong, for a man to get wisdom, and skill, and to be diligent in
his business, etc. For let a man use the likeliest means to bring his
enterprises to pass, yet, says Solomon, I have seen, that the battle is
not to the strong, nor favor to men of knowledge, nor bread to the wise, nor
riches to men of understanding. So that which way soever he turned himself,
still there was a vanity. We will make some brief use of it, and so come to
the next point.

If there be so much vanity under the Sun, Use.
(those that seem to be most free from it,) To see the change sin has made
in the world.
are subject to vanity; then

First, let us consider hence, what a change sin has made in the world. The
time was, my Beloved, when the Lord looked upon all things, and he saw, that
they were all exceeding good; but now when the Lord looks, and the Wiseman
looks upon them with the same eye, they are all subject to vanity. And
whence has this proceeded, but because sin has blown upon the Creatures,
as it were, it has blasted them, it has taken away their vigor, the virtue,
the beauty, the excellency of them? And if sin has made this change, then
consider, that the more sin there is, the more these things are subject to
vanity.

In every man's particular use, you shall find this true: as in riches, a man
that is sinful, shall not have comfort from them, but vexation of spirit; he
shall find a vanity and an emptiness in them. And so wisdom, learning,
knowledge, and skill, the more sin, the more vanity is in them: Every man
shall find this in all the creatures under the Sun.

As on the other side, the more grace, the more substance you shall find in
them, and the less vanity; For that which immediately brings the vanity is the
curse, and sin is the immediate cause of every curse. I say, the immediate
cause of vanity is the curse; of God. When God bids such a thing wither, when
he bids it not prosper with such a man, when he bids it do him no good, (as
he bad the figg tree wither,) that makes every thing vain to a man, even the
curse that lies upon the creature, and sin is the cause of the curse.

Again that which gives a substance, that which gives a filling to the
creature, that which causes it to give down that milk of comfort, that is in
it, is the blessing of God upon it, when God shall say to such a creature, go
and do such a man good; it is the blessing which does it immediately, but grace
is the cause of the blessing. Therefore, let us look on sin, as the cause of
all this vanity, and on grace, as the cause of the contrary, let us labor to
excel in the one, and to resist the other. So much for this first use.

Secondly, Use 2.
if there be such a vanity in all things under the Sun, To see the vanity of
man
then surely he that has brought this vanity upon them must needs be much
more vainie. For what causes this vanity, that lies upon the whole face of
the creature? is it not man? it came not upon the creature, as you know, for
its own sake, but by man; why then surely man, that has bin the cause of all
this vanity, must needs be himself much more vain. Therefore, if a man
look upon himself, let him consider this, that he shall never find any
happiness within his own compass, or circle; If he will needs build himself
upon his own bottom, he is subject to vanity, and more then any other
creature besides, therefore let us learn to go out of our selves, and seek
it elsewhere.

Again, if you seek for any comfort from man, from friends, from great men,
remember they are vain, Psalm. 62. 9.
and more vain then any other creature, as in Psalm. 62. 9. All men are vain,
and great men are lvers, if they be laid in the balance, they be lighter then
vanity, that is, in all the sons of men there is a vanity, and the greater
they are, the more vanity is in them; not that they are in themselves more
vain, but because we expect more from great men, therefore to us, they are
lighter then vanity, they are more vain then all other men. Therefore let us
neither seek that in our selves, nor in other men: for they that cause the
vanity upon the creatures, themselves must needs be much more subject to
vanity.

Thirdly, 3. Use.
if the creature be subject to vanity, then consider what an evil choice we
make to loose heaven, It is an ill choice to loose heaven, to gain the
creature.
to loose grace, to loose the opportunity of growing rich in good works, for
any thing under the Sun, either for riches, or vain glory and praise of men,
for pleasures, or whatsoever men reckon precious, and pleasant to them under
the Sun. For if they be all vanity, what a change do we make? do we not
give gold away for dross? as our Savior expresses it, Luke 16. 26. Put the
case a man had all the world, and loose his soul, that is, Luke 16. 26.
if he neglect the things that belong to his salvation, and for the neglect of
them shall have in recompense whatsoever the world can afford him, so that he
wants nothing that the world has, yet says he, what shall it profit him?
that is, there is a vanity in it, it will be altogether unprofitable to him.
For to be vain, and to be unprofitable, is all one. Consider then what a
foolish change men make, when they draw sin on with cart-roapes, that is, when
they use their utmost strength to get these vain things to them, with the
loss of better things; what a change do they make, although they should get
the whole world, seeing all would be unprofitable, that is, they should find
nothing but vanity Use.
and vexation of spirit in it.

Again if all things be subject to vanity, Not to desire them over much.
learn we then, first, not to covet after earthly things, not to set our
hearts upon it, nor to desire it over much when we want it. And secondly, when
we Not to trust them over much.
nor to trust to much to it, not to rejoice in it to inordinately. For it is
but vanity; there is an emptines in it; it will deceive Not to grieve over
much at the loss them.
Thirdly, if God do take from us any of those earthly things, as riches,
credit, health, or friends, let us be content to part with them. For even the
best of them are vanity, subject to emptines, such as will not perform that,
which they promise, such as will deceive us, when we come to use them,*

Last of all (because this is not the point I intend to stand upon,) Use 5.
if all things under the Sun be subject to vanity, Labor to be weaned from
them, and to fear God and keep his commandments.
even those that seem to be least subject unto it, then let us labor to have
our hearts weaned from the world, and whatsoever is in the world, to make it
our whole business to fear God and keep his Commandments. You know that is
the maine use that the wise man makes of this whole book; it is all but an
explication of the particular vanuties which he found under the Sun, and the
use that the makes of it, is this, therefore, says he, the whole duty of man
is to fear God and keep his Commandments. My beloved, I beseech you mark
that expression: for therein we are exceeding apt to deceive our selves; A man
is content to do some thing, that tends to Gods worship, and to the Salvation
of his Soul, but to make it his whole work, to have all the water to run in
that channel, to have his mind altogether intent upon it, he is not willing to
do so; but he joins other things with it, because there is a secret leaning
of the heart, and an vnweaned lingering after some other vanity. It is
certain, that when the heart is weaned from all things vndor the Sun, a man
will make it then his whole business to fear God and keep his Commandments,
but because the heart is false in this, it has some thing else that it is set
upon. Some men think that wisdom and knowledge, increase of Skill in such a
particular Science Trade and profession, that that is not subject to vanity,
and so it may be his heart is set upon that; and this is enough to keep a man
from making it his whole duty, to ^eare God and keep his commandments.

Another man perhaps neglects this, but to gather in an estate, to strengthen
himself that way, to bottom himself well upon a good estate, this he thinks
is not subject to vanity, as other things, and this therefore his heart is set
upon; though he see vanity in some other things, yet this his heart is set
on; and this is enough to keep him from making it his whole duty to fear
God, and keep his commandments. And thus we might go through many instances.
Let every man therefore search his own heart; (for when a man makes not this
his whole duty, some thing or other deceiues him, a vanity that he yet sees
not.) I say, the best things be subject to vanity, if which way so ever the
wise man turned himself, they were subject to vanity, it is fit we should
learn then to make it our whole duty to set all our thoughts and affections
upon this, how we may grow in grace, how we may fear God and keep his
Commandments.

Lastly a man may by this try himself whether trial
he has done it of no. For, as Solomon when he grew wise, after his
repentance, he saw a vanity in all things under the Sun: So a man when his
heart is once changed, he will see a vanity in all things.

If there be any thing wherein thou see not a vanity, it is an argument thou
art not yet a new creature. Paul says, now know we no man after the flesh; for
whosoever is in Christ, is a new creature; as if he should say, when any man is
a new creature; he looks upon all things under the Sun with an other eye,
he judges of them with another judgment; and therefore if thou find it
otherwise, if thou look upon the world, or upon any thing, that is in the
world, as upon things that are precious, that is a sign that Satan has
bewitched thee. You know it was one (of the witcheries that he attempted upon
our Savior, he showed him the world, the kingdoms and glory of it, and so he
does to every man more or less, he shows him some thing or other, and if a
man do not see the emptines and vanity of them, but sees a glory in them, he
has yielded to Satan who has bewitched him, and prevailed over him: and
therefore when you look on every thing under the Sun, riches, credit,
wisdom, skill, knowledge, if you look on all as on flowers, if you see a
vanity, and an emptines in them, that is a sign you are now changed, that you
are now turned to God by unfeigned repentance, that you see a vanity in all
things under the Sun: So much for this first point.

I returned and saw under the Sun says he, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor riches to
men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of knowledge, but time and chance
comes to all.

The next point that we are to observe in these words, is this, that

Men of the greatest abilities, men of the greatest sufficiencies, are often
disappointed of their hopes and ends. Doct. 2.
This is a vanity under the Sun; Men of greatest abilities disappointed of
their ends.
and not so only, but men that are more weak, and insufficient, do obtain
their ends and hopes. For you must understand it reciprocally, the battle is
not always to the strong, therefore it is some times to the weak; riches are
not always to men of understanding, therefore they are often to men, that have
not understanding.

The opening of this point will be best done in showing the reasons, and
grounds of it, why it comes to pass, that men of the greatest abilities, have
not always success answerable to that sufficiency, that is in them.

And first, Reas. 1.
one cause of it is, because there is no creature, that is, No man strong in
his own strength.
or ever shall be strong in his own strength. In his own strength shall no
man be strong 1. Sam. 2. 9. 1 Samuel 2. 9.
A creature in it self has not so much ability althought it be never so well
furnished, as to bring any enterprise to pass. There is more required then the
simple strength of the creature, be it never so strong, because in every
enterprise there are many wheels; many things that must concure to bring it to
pass. Now a creature is not able to see all the wheels, that are in every
business; or if he do see them, he is not able to turn every wheel, but this
belongs to God. And therefore without his concurring with the creature, be the
creature never so strong, he shall not be able to get the battle, be he never
so swift, he shall not be able to win the race, be he never so great in
skill and understanding, he shall not get favor, nor riches. This you may see
1. Sam. 2. 3. 1 Samuel 2. 3.
Where Hanna gives this counsel in her song, speak no more presumptuously,
neither let arroagancy come out of your mouth; for the Lord is a God of
knowledge, by him enterprises are established: As if she had said, for any man
to say he is able to bring an enterprise to pass, he speaks presumptuously,
he takes more to himself, then he is able to perform; The Lord is only a
God of knowledge, that is the reason of it, and therefore by him only, and not
by any man's strength enterprises are established; The Lord is a God of
knowledge, as if she had said, men have not so much knowledge and wisdom as
to look through a business, to see all the circumstances of it, to behold all
the ingredients into it, all the wheels that must co^curre to bring it to
pass; The Lord only is a God of knowledge, and therefore by him enterprises
are established: And this was that I said, that the creatures insufficiency,
was partly, because they are not able to see The Creature is ignorant.
because though they do see all the wheels that go to make up an enterprise,
yet they are not able to turn them. Psalm. 33. 16. The King is not saved by the
multitude of an host, It is weak.
neither is a mighty man delivered by his great strength; Psalm. 33. 16.
A Horse is a vain thing to save a man, he shall not deliver any by his great
strength. Though a man do see, and though he can say, such a wheel is
necessary, yet it is not in his own power to use it.

An host is a great means to get a battle, yet says he, be an host never
so strong, that is not enough. But what if he have valiant men and Soldiers?
Yet that will not do it, a mighty man is not delivered by his great strength.
I, but what if he have horses and chariots? etc. Let the instrument be what it
will be, a horse is a vain help, that is, except the Lord concur with that
host, and turn that great wheel, except he be with those valiant men,
except he concur with the strength of the horse and of the chariot, all this
is not able to do it. And therefore I say, this is one reason why the battle
is not to the strong, nor riches to men of understanding, because the creature
of himself is not able to do it, in its own strength, excluding Gods help,
he is not able to bring an enterprise to pass.

This likewise may be added to that, that God can take away the use of the
strength they have.
though a man should have all things ready, that he should be furnished with
preparations of all sorts, so that nothing should be wanting, to bring an
enterprise to pass, yet at the very time, at the very instant, when the thing
is to be done, it is not in his power to make use of them, because at that very
time God often takes wisdom from the wise, and courage from them that are
otherwise valiant, he takes from them their abilities, even at that time he
takes off the chariot wheels, even when they are driving of them; which
plainly proves, that the Creature of himself is not able to do it: As we
see, Amos 2. 14. 15. 16.
Amos 2. 14. 15. 16. says he, The flight shall perish from the swift, and the
strong shall not strengthen his forces. neither shall the mighty save his
life, he that handles the B^w shall not stand, and he that is swift of foot,
shall not deliver himself, neither shall he that rides the horse deliver
himself, and he of mighty courage among the strong men shall fly away naked
in that day: That is, Be they never so strong, be they never so swift, never so
full of courage, at the very time when they have occasion to use it, the Lord
will take away that swiftnes, he will take away that courage, he will take away
that wisdom, and suggest it, it may be, to the adversary, and how then shall
they prevail? So that though a man were never so well prepared to bring an
enterprise to pass, as when a man purposes in his heart, and has laid all
things ready, this will I speak, yet the answer of the mouth comes from God,
whatsoever his preparations and purposes be. So in the actions and affairs of
men, though he make his preparations never so strong, yet at the very instant,
God often takes courage from those that are most valiant, and suggesteth it to
those that are most cowardly, he takes away wisdom when they have most
occasion to use it, and gives it to the adversaries, that otherwise are more
foolish then they. This is the first Cause of it.

A second Cause is this; 2. Cause.
because there is a certain time and opportunity, Men miss their times.
that a man must take to bring an enterprise to pass, and though a man be
never so strong, and never so wise, yet he may miss of those opportunities,
and so he loses the battle, he loses the bringing to pass of his
enterprise. And this we see is the Reason that is rendered Eccles. 8. 5. 6. The
heart of the wise is to know the time and Judgment, because to every purpose
there is a time and a Judgment; therefore the misery of man is great upon
him: Eccles. 8. 5. 6.
That is, to every action and to every purpose, there is a certain
opportunity, and be a man never so well fitted, yet if he miss of that
opportunity, he shall not bring his enterprise to pass, therefore, says he,
the misery of man is great upon him, for he neither knows himself, what that
opportunity is, neither can any man tell him, as it is in the seventh verse.
And because it is not within the power of man, it is not within his compass to
find out these seasons and opportunities for every purpose and action, hence
it is, that though they be never so well prepared, though they have never so
much sufficiency, and ability to bring such an enterprise to pass, yet they
miss of it, because they discern not of the times.

Thirdly; 3. Cause.
this comes to pass, From the changes appointed by God.
because God has appointed a certain variety and change of condition to the
sons of men; and there is no man's wisdom, riches, or strength, that is able
to defend him from Gods appointment. I say, God has appointed a certain
change of condition to all the sons of men, he has appointed such crosses
and afflictions, he has appointed such times, (as the holy Ghost speaks) to
pass over their heads, and all the wisdom, and strength, that a man has, is
not able to turn God from his purpose, it is not able to evacuate and to
frustrate his decrees, but they shall come to pass. And that is the meaning of
this in the text. (for I take this reason out of the text,) The translation is,
but time and chance comes to all, it were, I suppose, better translated (and
agrees with the original) for time and chance comes to all. Now by time in the
text is meant, that variety of condition, that God has appointed to every man
under the Sun, as David uses the word, Psalm. 31. 15.
Psalm. 31. 15. My times are in thy hands; My times, that is, the variety of
conditions, the changes of my life, the good and evil, the prosperity and
adversity that befalls me, says he, they are not in the hands of my enemies,
nor in mine own hands, but they are in thy hands I say, there the word is so
used, and so we are to understand it in this place, for time comes to all,
says he, that is, when God has appointed such changes to the states of men,
if riches, if strength, if wisdom, diligence, or skill, were able to turn
the counsels of God another way, if it were able to anticipate them, or to
divert them, then the battle might be to the strong, etc. but, says he, it
is not so; What God has appointed, they cannot alter. You shall see it in many
examples.

Saul was well established; Instances.
but when God had appointed a change of his Kingdom, that it should go from
him to David, you see he brought it to pass. Though he were as strong as a
Lion, as David testifies of him, though he had many children to inherit the
Crown, though the people claue fast to him (you do not find that ever they
rose up in rebellion against him) yet when God had appointed such a time to
pass over him and his house, all that strength, all that fitnes and
preparation that was in him, and his family to continue the Kingdom to his
posterity, it could not turn aside Gods Counsel, but it came to pass.

Ely had a great family, there were many Priests of his line; yet when God had
said he would cut off from Ely his whole family, and would turn the
Priesthood to another, you see how he found out means to bring it to pass;
how many Priests were killed in one day by Dveg in the time of Saul? and
afterward, when Abiathar, one of that posterity, was took in, by David, yet
he was cast out by Solomon, through an accident that fell out in his adherence
to Adoniah.

Ahab, the Lord had said he would cut him off and his posterity, though he had
seaventie sons; you might wonder how it should come to pass, that none of
these sons should inherit the Crown, and yet all were cut off, and not a
man left by the hand of Iehu. When God, I say, has appointed variety of
changes, times, and conditions to the sons of men, man's strength is not able
to divert his Counsel; and therefore the battle is not to the strong, etc.

The last reason is likewise here used, 4. Cause.
and chance comes to them all: That is, though a man be never so able, never
so sufficient, never so well prepared to bring an enterprise to pass, yet some
accident may turn it some other way, an accident that he can neither foresee,
nor prevent; Therefore says the holy Ghost, though he be never so wise, chance
may happen to him, he can neither foresee all the accidents, that come to
pass, or, if he should, he knows not how to prevent them.

Ahab, for ought we see, went well enough to the battle, Iehoshaphat and he,
yet, says the text, a man drew a bow at adventure, etc. (which accident he
could not foresee,) the man aimed no more at Ahab, nor understood it no more
then the arrow that he shot, but it was a mere accident directed by God, that
he could not foresee.

Haman thought he had made his preparations strong enough to bring his
enterprise to pass, to overthrow the Jews; there came an accident between,
the King could not sleep, he calls for the book of the Chronicles, and turns
to that place where Mordecaies discovery of a treason was recorded, and so
Mordecai was advanced, etc. This was a chance that befell him; although he were
never so well fitted to bring his enterprise to pass, yet this he could
neither foresee, nor prevent. Many such instances we might give.

So you see now the reason of this, that men of the greatest sufficiency and
ability, men that have made their preparations most perfect, yet, they do not
always attain to their hopes and ends; And contrariwise, men that are more
weak and unable, which have not made such preparations, they obtain often
their hopes and ends.

The use we are to make of it, is

First, Use.
let men learn from hence. Not to boast of any outward strength, of any
wisdom, Not to boast of outward things.
in that their foundation is made strong under them, that they are well
bottomed, that they are thus compassed about with friends, and estate etc. For
you see though a man intends to get by all things, yet the event and success
comes not to pass accordingly, but often they fail and disappoint him.
Therefore let not men boast of them; be a man never so strong, never so wise,
yet he may as soon fail as he that is weak, and most foolish.

See an example of it in Asa. 2. Cron. 14. 6. 7. 8. 2 Chronicles. 14. 6. 7. 8.
You may see there how he built the Cities, he had made him strong Bulwarks.
There was not a King of Judah, that we read of, that had strengthened himself
more then he; he had five hundred and forescore thousand valiant men, all well
armed and appointed to bear the shield and Spear; (The text sets it down
very particularly, that we might see Asa's safety, his strength and his
security, if you look upon the creature) yet says the text the Ethiopians
came against him, with a thousand thousand men; whence I gather this. That
there is no man so safe and so strong, but he is still subject to danger, and
that partly by reason of the vanity of the creature. For all the strength that
a man has, it is but the strength of the creature, and the creature is made of
such brittle ingredients, that of it self it is ready to moulder away and
fail. There is not in the creature it self any stabilitie, they are but
houses of clay, the best of the creatures, that is, they are made of mouldring
metal, they are ready to vanish of themselves, and if they were not, yet
there is some thing stronger. Let a man be never so strong, (who is the best
of all the creatures) yet, man is but as the grass, and as the flower of the
grass. The grass of it self oft-times fades, though no Sith come near it,
but if it do not fade of it self, yet it is cut down: so there is none so
strong, but there may be stronger. Asa was strong, but he met with one that
was stronger then he, the Lubims and Ethiopians; and yet as strong as they
were, they met with one that was stronger then they, because God did help him,
and assist him, so then let no man boast of himself.

If wisdom would keep a man safe, Solomon had never fallen as he did. If
possessions would keep a man safe, Jeroboam and Ahab had never bin ruined, as
they were. If the favor of Princes could keep a man safe, Haman had not had
that miserable end, that he had. If courage, fortitude, and valor could keep
a man safe, Ioab and Abner had continued safe: but you know how they both fell.
So that you see nothing vnd^^ the Sun is able to keep a man safe. Therefore
let not a man boast in any thing, that he has; be (...) never so well
appointed, let him have all the creatures agree together, to make a hedge about
him, yet afflictions, crosses, and troubles will find some gap or other into
that hedge, to break in upon him. All things that he has are subject to
mutability; Riches take themselves wings, and fly away, that is, though a man
think they are sure, he cannot see how he could easily be dispossessed of
them, yet says he, they are as a flock of Birds, Simile.
that sit in a man's ground, he cannot promise himself any certainty of them,
because they have wings, and will fly away; such are riches.

And so credit; be a man never so innocent, let him give no occasion at all,
let him keep himself never so blameless, and unspotted of the world, yet his
credit is not in his own keeping, honor est in potestate honorantis etc.
Honor is not in a man's own power. You know though Joseph was very innocent,
yet he was blamed; and so David and Christ. And as it is said of honor, so it
may be of all the rest, wealth, and friends, and whatsoever a man has; let no
man boast himself, because he is a strong man, because he is of understanding,
because he is rich, because he is of ability in his business, because he is a
man of skill, for by these things he shall not obtain his ends and hopes.

Nay, my beloved, let me be bold to add this. If a man begin to think
himself safe for these, and to grow confident upon them, and say thus with
himself and his own heart, well, now I am thus and thus rooted, I am now
compassed about with these and these helps, I see not now how I should be
removed; let him know this, that God will so much the rather blow upon him, that
he will so much the rather dissettle him, and take him off, that he will so
much the rather turn away his face, God delights to cross men in carnal
confidence.
and he shall be troubled.

I say God will do it so much the rather, partly, To maintain his own right*
and when a man will begin to challenge it to himself, God will begin then to
look to his own right, and challenge his own privilege. You shall find in
1. Sam. 17. 47. 1 Samuel 17. 47.
David gives this reason, why he should prevail against Goliath, it is not I,
but the battle, says he, is the Lords, as if he should say, if the battle
were mine, or thine, it may be, Goliath, thou might prevail against me, it
may be thou might overcome me, but the battle is the Lords: So we may say
in this case. The event and success of things, the good and evil that comes
to a man, upon that preparation and endeavor that he makes, it is the Lords,
and not any man's, nor any creatures. Therefore when a man challenges it to
himself and boasts of it, and thinks I will do this, the Lord will not do
it, the battle is his, and as it is said of the battle, so all things else
are his, and therefore he will not dispose them according to man's preparations,
but disposes of them according to his own purpose.

To show his power.
God will do it the rather, that he might show forth his own power, and
discover the Creatures weakness, especially when a Creature shall pride it
self in any of these outward things, as Asahel did in his swiftness, it was
the cause of his overthrow, and indeed God usually takes men in such things,
when they begin to boast, I shall now have the battle, because I am strong.
These things, I say, are commonly their ruin. The policy of Achitophell, the
hair of Absalom; and so many a man's wealth, many a man's wit, that thing
wherein their strength lies, wherein they boast themselves, God causes to be
the means of their ruin: he takes them in these things, that he might
discover his own power, and the vanity and weakness of the Creature.

Again; To show his providence.
The Lord does it so much the rather, Beloved, when men go well prepared to
the battle, and do overcome, there is a providence of God in that, as well
as when they get the battle by some chance, or accident; but by reason of the
infirmity of man, by reason of the iniudiciousnes that he is subject unto,
they do not so much acknowledge this providence in an ordinary course, as they
do in accidental things, that are done by occasion, by sudden intercurrent
causes, that we are not able to foresee. Therefore, I say, God delights to
do it so much the rather, when men are prepared, and say with themselves, what
should hinder me? What should keep me from bringing such an enterprise to
pass? God therefore puts in some accident, and turns it another way, that his
providence might be seen and acknowledged. The Conclusion is, let none boast
themselves, that this and this I will do, because I am strong, for God will
turn all a contrary way. So much for the first use.

Secondly; 2. Use.
As men are not to boast themselves when they are strong; Not to be discouraged
in want of preparation.
So likewise if the battle be not always to the strong, but that sometimes
also to the weak, let no man be discouraged because he is weak, because he is
unprepared, because he is not so well furnished to bring such an enterprise to
pass. For as there are certain times that God will have to pass over men for
their evil (that be a man never so strong, as he has appointed his change and
condition, so it shall come to Because weakness cannot frustrate Gods purpose.
So also there is a certain time that God has appointed for other men's good
and advancement; when a man is weak and low, his weakness, and folly, and
inabilitie, shall no more frustr^te, turn aside and prevent his advancement,
when God will bring it upon him, then the strength or wisdom of the other
shall turn away Gods decree, and prevent the counsel of God against him.

Gods hand is then most seen.
when a man is weak, God puts in an accident, that he may have the praise of
his providence, that men may say he has done it, whereas if things went in
ordinary course, they might ascribe it to the second Causes.

God has more glory in that case.
The Lord rather delights to do it, even when men are weak, because therein
his glory is most seen, he delights to manifest his power in our weakness.
And therefore Paul, when he saw this, he says, he will rejoice in his
infirmities: That is, he thought his infirmities would be a very great
advantage to him, partly, because they would keep him humble; that is one
reason; And partly, because he thought that God would the rather put forth his
power, because he was weak, that he should the rather have Gods power to
uphold him. Therefore, I say, let not men be discouraged for their weakness;
be the adversaries never so strong, and their resolutions never so fixed, yet
they shall not prevail, if God have purposed otherwise.

You see how peremptory Iezabels speech was, God do so and so, etc. if I make
no Eliah as one of the Prophets of Baal by to morrow this time; yet you see he
was safe notwithstanding this.

Thus was it also when the Jews had vowed with themselves the death of ^aul;
he was in great danger, there was forty to one, and their resolution was so
strong, as it could not be altered; yet God kept him safe, he prevailed, and
they were disappointed.

So Elisha, when the King thought to have taken off his head, though he had the
power of a King, and his purpose was firm, that it should come to pass, to a
full height, there was no doubt made of it, yet God kept him safe.

Therefore, let us be encouraged on the other side that are weak, God is able
to hide us, he is able to strengthen us, to give us advantage and success,
when we are unable to help our selves: for as it is true, that the battle is
not always to the strong, nor favor to the wise, etc. So it is ture on the
other side, that many times when men are not strong, when men are not wise,
when they manage not their business with that prudence, wariness, and
circumspection that they should do, yet oftentimes they have success, when
the other want it.

So much shall serve for this time.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES 9. 11. 1^. And I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, etc.
YOu know where we left, we proceed to that which remains.

In the third place, Use 3.
If men of the greatest sufficiency and ability may often be disappointed,
that the battle is not always to the strong, Not to be over-ioyfull or
sorrowful for good or ill success.
nor the race to the swift, This should teach us then not to be lifted up, but
to be thankefulls in our best success, and on the contrary, not to be
overmuch dejected, but to bear it patiently, when things speed ill. If any
man have good success in any business and enterprise, he is not to attribute it
to his own strength, to his own wisdom; since that, as you see, so often
fails. The Creature has not power enough in it self to bring any enterprise
to pass, it can neither see all the wheels, that tend to make up an
enterprise, or though it see them, it is not able to turn them all. And
therefore if it be done, it is the Lord that does it, and the praise is only
to be given to him.

Beloved, this is a necessary point. It is usual with us to be very earnest
with God, when a business is to be done; but we forget to praise him afterward.
And whence proceeds this, but from a secret attribution of what is done to our
own wit, to our own strength, to our own policy, to other occasions?
Whereas if he were acknowledged, we should be ready to give him the praise of
all that we do.

David was a wise man, yet you shall find, 1 Samuel 18. 1 Samuel 18.
he did not therefore carry himself wisely in all his affairs, because he
had an habitual gift of wisdom, but, says the text, because the Lord was
with him. The Lord was with him to guide him in every action, to direct him
what to do upon every particular occasion, and thence it was, that he carried
himself wisely in all his affairs.

Cyrus was a valiant man, and a potent; yet the Scripture attributes it not to
his strength that he prevailed as he did, but says, that he was GODS
Shepherd, he was his instrument, it was God that used him, it was God that
wrought his work for him.

Nebuchadnezzar was a mighty potent Prince, and prevailed which way soev^r he
turned himself; yet God tells him, it was he that gave him dominion and
victory wheresoever he went

And as it is true on this hand, so it is likewise on the other; when a man
has ill success in any business, let him not say, it was because he did not
manage it wisely, because he had such an enemy to oppose him, or because such
an accident fell out to cross him; no, that is not the cause; The Reason is
here rendered: for time and hance happens to every man: That is, if there he any
such accident, if there be any cross event falls out to hinder him in his
enterprise at that time, it is in Gods disposing, it is God that has done it.
And therefore you see, in the evil events, that have upon any occasion
befallen the Church, if you observe the phrase of Scripture, it is not
attributed to them, but to God. When the spirit of Pull, and Tiglapellezer, were
stirred up against the people of Israel, says the Text, 1 Chronicles. 5. 1 Chro 5.
26.
the Lord stirred them up against the people; it was not they that did it, but
it was the Lord, that stirred them up.

So likewise he poured forth his wrath by the hands of Shishak; and, as David
expresses it in his own case, God has bidden Shemei curse David. So it is in
many other places. Therefore let not men sit down discouraged, vexing
themselves, and eating up their hearts with grief. Let not men say, If such an
accident had not been, I had prevailed; for, it is this time and chance, that
turns the event of businesses, which is from the Lord, and not from man.
Therefore labor to be thankful to him in the best success, and not to
sacrifice to your own wits, or to give him thanks in a formal manner, but
heartily to acknowledge him; And likewise to be patient in all the cros^es and
troubles that befall us. So much for this third use.

Fourthly, Use 4.
and lastly; If men of the greatest abilities be so often disappointed, Not to
make flesh our arm.
that the battle is not to the strong, nor the race to the swi^t, etc. Then
learn we hence, not to make flesh our arm, not to trust in any strength of
our own, in any wisdom of our own, or other men's; for if this would do it,
if the strength of any man, if the policy of any man were able to bring any
enterprise to pafse, it would always do it; If it were the swiftness of him
that runs, that could get the race, If it were the strength of him that
fights, that could obtain the battle. I say, it would always do it: And
therefore seeing it falls not out so, but theevents are turned a contrary way,
that is a sign it is not in them, but in something else. Therefore, I say,
take we heed of making flesh our arm, of saying thus with our selves, because
we have these preparations, because we have these means, therefore our work
shall succeed: for that is not so; for we see often in experience, when a man
comes to a business with much confidence, out of a reflection upon his own
ability to do it, for the most part it succeeds ill: As on the other side,
when a man comes with fear and diffidence in himself, for the most part he
prospers best. And you have a rule for it, Ier. 17.
Iere. 17. Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm; Cursed is he, that is God
has engaged himself, when a man will make flesh his arm, to blow upon his
enterprises, and to cause them to wither.

Again, blessed is he, that trusts in the Lord, that is, God is tied by his
promise to give success in such a case. Therefore that use we should make of
it, not to trust to our own strength, to our own wisdom, nor to other men's.
For, Beloved, what is it, when we have other men that are strong, and wise, and
potent to rest upon? Are they able to bring it to pass? You shall find that
expression Psalm. 31. Psalm. 31.
a place that I touched in the morning upon another occasion; David tells us
there, that great men sat and spoke against him, and consulted together to take
away ^is life; but, says he, my times are in thy hands: As if he should say,
my times, and the disposing of all my affairs, good and evil success to me,
they are not in their hands, be they never so potent, they are not in the hands
of Saul, they are not in the hands of Doeg, they are not in the hands of all
mine enemies, but Lord, my times are in thy hands. So then, if we could learn
this lesson aright, we should not be discouraged, when the most potent men are
set against us, not be much encouraged when they are for us. That in Isa. 51.
12. Isa. 51. 12.
is excellent for this purpose, Who art thou, says he, that fe^rest mortal
man, whose breath is in his nostrils, and who shall be made as the grass? That
is, if such a man be never so potent, yet, says he, consider his br^ath is in
his nostrils, and he shall be made as the grass: that is, Why we fear men.
in truth he is of no power. But the reason now why men do fear, why men are
discouraged in such cases, you shall find in the verse following, who art
thou, says he, that do this, and forgettest the Lord thy maker, who made
heaven and earth, who stretches forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of
the earth? You never find a man that fears a great man, a potent man, but the
true ground of it is, because he forgets the Lord his maker; if he did remember
the mighty God, he that stretches forth the heavens, and that lays the
foundations of the earth; Man would appear a mortal man. You may take it for
a certain general rule, a man's heart is never possessed with fear, upon such
an occasion, but when he forgets God, the great God; he would never else fear
a great man. On the other side, he would never be confident in such occasions,
but when he remembers not the Lord. Therefore learn we neither to fear them,
when they are against us, or to trust them when they are for us.

We usually pity the case of Merchants, for say we, their goods hangs on
ropes, they depend upon uncertain winds; but certainly, he that trusts in
man, is in a worse condition; for he rests upon the affections of a man, that
are more uncertain then the wind. What so brittle, and so unconstant? We see
that for the most part they are carried to do us good or evil with
by-respects, with something touching themselves, they are turned to and fro, as
the Weather-cocks and Mils are, that when the wind cease, and when the
waters fail, stand still, they are driven to do for us so long as such
respects lead them, no longer. And therefore, to trust in men, it is not the
safest, it is not the wisest way. See this in some few examples. David how
inconstant did he find the people, Instances of inconstancy.
and apt to rebel against him? and so Moses, yea, David himself, though he
was a holy men, yet how inconstant was he, inconstant to Mephibosheth, one that
was innocent, one that had never done him any wrong, one that had never given
him occasion? How inconstant was he to Ioab, when he had prevailed in that
battle against Absalom? How quickly was he out of grace and place, when he
had saved David's life and recovered the Kingdom, and Amaziah that was but a
reconciled enemy put into his room? These and many such like examples you
shall find. Abner how inconstant was he to Ishbosheth? even for a word spoken
against him, and a word that he gave him occasion enough to speak, a word that
he need not have been so much offended at, he falls off from him for it; and
this it is to trust in man; I say, either in a man's own wisdom, or strength,
or in any other man's. This place shows what a great folly it is. The battle
is not to the strong: That is, let a man be never so well compassed about with
strength, and wisdom of men, let him put himself, and his friends into the
number, yet he is not safe; but let him trust in God, and he is safe in midst
of dangers. Sampson and Ishbosheth, when they were in the midst of their
friends, when they were asleep, they were circumvented. David on the other
side, when he was asleep in the midst of his enemies, when there was an host
pitched against him, yet, says he, I laid me down and slept: Why? because the
Lord sustained me. So that both for our safety when we are in danger, and
likewise to have our works wrought for us, to trust in God, and not to trust
either in our own wisdom, or in the wisdom, or strength of man, that we
shall find constantly to be the best way.

When David abstained from going up to battle against Naball, when he took
the counsel of his wife, and when he abstained from putting violent hands upon
Saul, you see how God wrought it for him: he gave him Nabals wife, he gave him
Saules wives, and his houses, and his Kingdom into his hands; this he got by
trusting him. But when men will make their own ways, when they will go about
enterprises with their own wisdom, In his own wisdom and strength shall
no man be strong: God has said it, and he will make it good upon all
occasions. The conclusion therefore is, if the battle be not to the strong,
nor the race to the swift, etc. If men of the greatest ability are often
disappointed of their hopes and ends, then we should not make flesh our Arm,
but trust in God, both for safety in danger, and to bring our enterpises to
pass. And so much for this point. We now proceed.

Neither does man know his time. This is added, partly as a second vanity,
which Solomon saw under the Sun, and partly as a reason of the former. For,
says he, though men be strong, and wise, yet there is a certain season to do
things in, that they may mistake, which causes them to fail; for man knows
not his time: and from hence he draws this Consequence, because men know not
their times, therefore they are snared in an evil time, because they know not
the good time, when good actions should be done, therefore evil times come
upon them suddenly, that is, they take them unawares; and this he illustrates
by two Similitudes, They come upon them, says he, as an evil net comes upon
fishes, and as the snare upon the fowls. So that in these three propositions,
you shall have the full meaning of these words; and these therefore we will
handle distinctly.

First, that there is a time allotted for every purpose, and to every business.

Secondly, that it is very hard to find out that time.

And thirdly, because men cannot find this time, but mistake it, therefore
evil times come upon them suddenly, that is, crosses, afflictions, and
destruction comes upon them suddenly, even as the snrre upon the foul, and as
a ^et upon the fishes. And that this is the meaning of this place, and that
these three points are included in it, you may see best by comparing it with
another of the like sense, Eccles. 8. 4. 5. 6. 7.
Eccles. 8. 4. 5. 6. 7. Where the word of the King is, there is power, and who
shall say to him, what do thou? That is, it is a dangerous thing to admonish
Princes; who shall say to a Prince, what do thou, says the Wiseman? There
is a time wherein we may admonish Princes safely, although they be exceeding
powerful, although they have it in their own power to take away the spirit,
etc. as he says afterward, yet there is a time.

But how shall a man know that time? Quest.


Says he, Answ.
he that keeps the Commandment, shall know no evil thing, and the heart of
the wise shall know the time and the Judgment: That is, he shall know when to
give a seasonable admonition to a Prince, or to a great man; for, says he, to
every purpose there is a time and a Judgment, that is, there is a time and a
discretion, (that is the meaning of the word in the original,) when any actio^
is to be done, there is a certain exact time; If you go before it, or if you
come after it, there is much danger in it, if you hit upon the just time, you
are like to be succesfull in it; for to every purpose, there is a time, and a
Judgment, because the misery of man is great upon him: That is, it is the
Lords pleasure to appoint such a certain time to every purpose, and to every
action, that he might discover to men that vanity to which they are subject,
and likewise that he might inflict his Judgments upon them; The misery of man
is great upon him, because every purpose has a time.

But how shall this be proved? Quest.


He proves it by this; Ans.
for, says he, he knows not what shall be; for who can tell him what shall
be? That is, as if he should say, If a man did know this time, he were safe
enough, he were free enough from misery, but since he neither knows it
himself, nor is there any that can tell him, therefore the misery of man is
great upon him. Thus you see that in both these places these three points are
included, and these I will run over, and so make use of them.

First, There is a time allotted to every a^tion.
there is a certain time, that God has allotted to every purpose, and to
every business; If you take that time, you may succeed in it, if you miss
it, it is exceeding dangerous. As you shall see Eccles. 3. Eccles. 3.
To all things there is an appointed time, to every purpose under heaven; There
is a time to be borne, and a time to die, a time to plant, and a time to pull
up; a time to slay, and a time to heal, etc. A time to weep, and a time to
laugh. All these particulars mentioned by Solomon, may be divided into these
three ranks; for all natural actions, as well as those that are voluntary,
and done by consultation, there is a time that God has set.

Again, for all lighter actions, as well as for actions of moment, there is a
time.

Again, for all private actions, as well as for those that are public, there
is a time, that is, not a time which man in prudence will choose out but a time
which God has appointed, a time which God has set down; if a man hit upon
that time which God has allotted, he shall succeed in it, ots^erwise he
fails. So you see Act. 17. 26. Act. 17. 26.
he has made of one blood all mankind to dwell upon the face of the earth,
and has assigned the times that were ordained before, and the bounds of their
ha^itations; That is to say, the times of every man, the times for every man's
state and condition, the times for the several changes to which every man,
every Commonwealth, and every City is subject, these times God has
assigned, he has ordained them before, and they are as bounds that cannot be
passed. The like you see Job 14. 5. 6. Job. 5. 6.
Are not his days determined, and the number of his months with thee, thou
have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. (Mark it) As if he should say;
There is not a man comes into the world, but God has appointed him certain
bounds, he cannot pass the number of his months; That even as a man deals
with an hireling, (for that Similitude he uses presently after in the next
verse,) he agrees with him for such a time; So long you shall work and no
longer; So says he, God has appointed every man so many months, so many
years, he must do him service, some ten years, some twenty years, some
forty years: As you see it is said of David, Act. 13. 35. Act. 13. 35.
When he had served his time by the Council of God. As if he should say; There
is an appointed time that David had to do him service in, he did him service as
a King. And so in the same Chapter, it is said, John Baptist, when he had
finished his course, etc. That is; There was a certain race that he was to
run; he could not come short of it, nor he could not go beyond it. So that
both to the actions of men, to every purpose, to every action, and business that
is done in the life of a man, there is a certain time appointed, there is a
certain time that God has allotted, and as a man observes this time, So is it
better or worse with him.

But before I come to the second, let me show you the Reasons in a word, why
God has appointed these times, God has set these times: That is, God has
appointed such times for busin^sses, for every purpose; Reas. 1.
partly, because they cannot be done in another time: and therefore it is said
to be an allotted time; If you take another time, you may labor, and labor in
vain: As you see Eccles. 3. 9. Eccles. 3. 9.
after he had said, there is a time for every purpose, he adds this, and what
profit has he that works of the thing wherein he travels; As if he should
say, If a man miss of these times, what profit is there of his work, though
he travail never so diligently in it, if he miss his time, if he pitch not
right upon his time, God works not with him, there is no concourse with him,
so he labors in vain.

Secondly; Reas. 2.
There is an allotted time, because God in his providence, in all his works,
he does, what he does, in measure, in number, he waighes every thing, and makes
it beautiful; now every thing is beautiful in its season; out of its season,
it is not beautiful. And that is another reason, that he likewise here
renders, verse. 11. he has made every thing beautiful in his time, therefore
there is a time allotted to every action, and to every purpose: because if it
miss of this time, it is not beautiful, there is a desormitie, there is an
obliquitie in it, the beauty, the preciousnes, and the comeliness of it, is
lost.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
God has appointed a certain time, he has allotted a time to every action,
out of his own royal prerogative, he will not have men to know the times; but
the times must be of his allotting, he has appointed a time to every thing,
wherein his great sovereignty over the creatures, and over all things appears;
and therefore you shall see, Act. 1. 7.
Act. 1. 7. It is not for you, says he, to know the times, and seasons,
neither to know them, nor appoint them; for, says he, those the Lord keeps in
his own power; and therefore it it he that has allotted a time to every
thing. It is he also that concealeth and hides them from the sons of men.
And this is the first point; That to every action there is a time appointed.

Secondly; It is hard to find out the time.
to find out this time, is exceeding hard, because it is not in the power of
any man to know it, except God guide him to see it, there are not principles in
man, there is not the sufficiency of wisdom, to find out the fitnes of
time, except God guide him to pitch upon that time.

Now if the Lord were pleased to reveal to men these several times, allotted
to actions, it were an easy thing to find it out: but he has kept them to
himself, and that for these two Causes.

One is; Reas. 1.
That men might watch, for if men knew the time, To teach us watchfulnes.
they would be loose, and neglect, till the time came; Therefore, says he,
seeing thou know not the time when he will come, whether at night, or at
what time of the night, whether at the dawning, or at the Cocke-crowing;
whether at the first watch, or at the second, therefore watch; As if he should
say, If men knew the time certainly, they would sleep till that time, and
then they would be awake; but God will have men watch.

Secondly; Reas. 2.
God has appointed these times, and reserved them to himsel^e, That men may
lea^ne to fear the Lord, and depend upon him.
that men might learn to fear him, that they might learn to keep a
continual dependence upon him, for if the times were in our own hands, we
might manage our business with our own strength, but when they are in Gods
hands, we know not what to morrow will bring forth; Iam 4.
Therefore James says, say not, I will do such a thing, I will go to such a
place, and stay there a year, and buy and sell; for, says he, it is not in
your hands, your life is not in your own hands to effect this business. If you
do live, it is not in your hands; and therefore you ought to say, if the Lord
will. And therefore to keep men in this dependancie upon him, God has reserved
these times unto himself.

The third, 3. Proposit.
and last proposition is, That because men miss of these times, therefore
their misery is great upon them, Because men mis^e the time they ^all into
misery.
partly, because they do not effect the thing they go about, when they miss
of their time; for the Lord works not with them, when they hit upon a wrong
time; partly also because they failing in their duty, not taking the good time
that God has appointed, he in his most just judgment sends upon them evil
times, that suddenly come upon them, even as a snare upon the birds. As you see
when birds are feeding quietly and fearing nothing, then an evil snare comes
and takes them; So it is with men, when they have missed their times, when they
think they are safest, when they speak peace to themselves; when they think
that danger is farthest off, then evil times come suddenly upon them. This you
shall see best in examples.

Gehezi, Instances.
when he took a gift of Naaman; The Prophet his Master reproues him in these
words; Gehezi, says he, is this a time to receive gifts? As if he should say;
To take a gift in it self is not amiss; but this is not a time for it: for
Naaman was but a stranger.

Again, he was but a beginner in believing, in the true God, and therefore to
take a gift of him, that was not a time.

It was the manner (you know) to bring gifts to the old Prophets, not for
reward of their Prophesies, but for the maintenance of their estate; So Saul
brought to Samuel a gift, and therefore in some cases it might have been
seasonable, but says he, is this a time to take a gift of such a man, upon
such an occasion, at such a season? And what misery came upon Gehezi for
missing his time? says his Master; The leprosy of Naaman the Assyrian shall
cleave to thee, that misery came upon him.

So you shall see Haggai 1. Haggai 1.
The people did a lawful action, but they missed of the time; Thus says the
Lord of hosts; This people say the time is not yet, when the Lords house should
be built: Then came the Word of the Lord, by the ministry of the Prophet
Haggai, saying, Is it a time for your selves to dwell in seeled hou^^s, and
this house lie wast? Therefore now says the Lord of hosts, you have sown
much, but you have brought in little, you eat, but you have not enough, you
drink, but you are not filled, you cloth you, but you are not warmed, and he
that earneth wages, he puts it into a broken bag. It was a lawful thing for
them to build houses to dwell in, and to enjoy, but, says he, is this a time
to dwell in your seeled houses? As if he should say, You have mis^ed of the
time. And what then? You see therefore their misery was great on them; you have
sown much, but you bring in little, etc.

Jacob, It was lawful for him to have sought the blessing, but, because he
missed of the time, you see his misery was great upon him, how many sore years
of travail had he under his uncle Laban? And this was because he missed of his
time.

On the other side, David that did hit upon his time, God promised him a
Kingdom, and he stayed his time, you see he had it with good success, he had
it in such a manner, as was fit for him; for he stayed his time.

Rehoboam is another example, when he consulted with the old men; They told
him, that if he would serve the people at that time, they should be his
servants for ever; but he followed the counsel of the young men, and you see
what fell out upon this, the missing of his time; for that was the counsel
that the old men gave him, if thou will serve them at this time, etc. As if
they had s^yd, Rehoboam, thou think it will be disadvantage to thee, if thou
let the raines loose upon them; and not restrain, and curb them in the
beginning, but thou missest of thy time: There is a time for meeknes, and a
time for roughnes; There is a time for clemency, there is a time again for
severitie, but this is not a time for Rehoboam to use severitie, in the
beginning of his Reign, therefore you see his misery was great upon him, he
lost ten tribes by this means.

So likewise, The people of Israel, when they sought a King for themselves, it
was lawful for them to seek a King; for God had appointed from all eternity
David to be their King, and if Saul had not been their King, David had been
King at the same season that he was; but their error was in the time, they
would have a King, when Samuel raign^d over them; when God was pleased to Judge
them by the hand of the Prophets, more immediately then by the hand of the
King, and therefore he says, that himself ruled over them; and therefore God
tells them, because they would needs have a King now, because they would
anticipate him, (they would have a King before God had appointed them a King,)
therefore this curse should go with their King, he shall do thus and thus to
you; he shall take your sons, and put them into his Chariots, he shall take
your da^ghters, and make them Apothecaries, he shall take your Vineyards, and
your Olive trees. Thus your King shall do to you, because you have missed your
time, your misery shall be great upon you.

The like you shall see in the Children of Israel* Number. 14. Number. 14.
The people might lawfully fight against the Cananites, you know, they were
brought forth for that purpose; yet because they missed of their time, they
would do it at that time when they were not appointed, Moses tells them if they
would needs go up, they should fall before their enemies, and accordingly it
fell out so; for they missed of their time. I need not run through more
examples, Josiah, and David, if you lay these two examples together; you shall
find, David went not out to war when he should; and the other went when he
should not, and so missed of their times; and you see what misery it brought
upon them, upon David it brought the greatest misery of all other, which was
the giving of him up to such sins, as that of murder, and adultery, that
brought all the evil that he suffered afterward. And Josiah, it cost him his
life: for he went out vnseasonablie, and did mistake the time which God had
allotted for such an enterprise. So you see now these three; there is a time
allotted to every purpose, to every busi^es. And it is hard to know it; for God
keeps it to himself, he reve^les it when it pleases him, he pitcheth one man
by his providence, by the secret guidance of his spirit, upon a right time,
when another misseth it, I mean not that it is always done in mercy, but in
the ordinary disposition of time, to them that know him not; for when a man
pitcheth upon the time, it is he that guides him.

Thirdly, because men miss of their time, the misery is great upon them, it
comes upon them; that is, some evil times come upon them suddenly, it comes
upon them like a snare.

Now briefly, Use.
the use we should make of it, is this, Not only to look to our actions, but
the time of them.
That we be careful, not only to do the actions that belong to our Callings,
either our general Calling, as we are Christians, or our particular Calling,
in our ordinary business, it is not enough to do them, but to look narrowly
to the time. It is a Rule among Divines, that an action is not good, except it
have all the Circumstances good. An action may be evil upon missing any one,
therefore the time is an ingredient into the goodness of the action, were the
action never so good, if the time be missed, it makes the action evil when we
do it out of its season; when we do it not in its time. As it is said of
words, when they are in season; they are beautiful: So it is true of every
action, when it is done in its own season it is beautiful, if it be not,
there is some deformity in it, some obliquitie, and by consequent, some
sinfulness, if it be a moral action, or somewhat that brings evil after it,
if it be an action of another nature. Now, the actions wherein we are to look
so narrowly to our times, are of three sorts.

Some are the actions that God has commanded us to do. Watch our times in the
things God commands.
Wherein, it is not enough for us to do the works, but we must observe the
times. To admonish is a good action, and it is commanded us, but to do it in
an vnseasona^le time, either unseasonably to him that admonishes, or to him
that is admonished, it spoils the action. To be thankful for mercies, and to
pay our vows, it is a good action; but yet if the time be missed, and we give
not thanks in due season, if you pay not your vows but defer them, he that
deferres his vow, though the action be good in it self, yet if the time be
missed, he provokes God to anger, and sins against him. It is a lawful thing
for us, to do the works of our Calling, and to do them diligently, yet if we
do them vnseasonablie, and incroach upon the time allotted to prayer, wherein,
we ought to renew our repentance, and to set our hearts straight, and right
before God, now it is not done in season, it displeases God, it is an action
done out of its time. To mourn, and rejoice, are both good actions, but if
they be done out of their season, they are both exceeding evil, and sinful:
We see how carefully Nehemiah tells them, they should not have mourned; for
(says he,) this is a time of rejoicing, for this time to rejoice, (it is your
strength) for the joy of the Lord is your strength; therefore now weep not,
mourn not, butreioyce. Again, at another time, to rejoice, is as great a
sin, as then to mourn, as we see Isa. 22. 12. 13. Isa. 22. 12. 13.
When the Lord calls to mourning, if now you give your selves to killing of
sheep, and slaying of Oxen, etc. Your sin shall not be purged from you till
you die. I need not give you instances in this case. These are one sort of
actions. All the duties of our Calling must be done in season.

The second sort of actions, Watch opportunities in actions that concern
others.
that we are to observe this time in, they are such as belong to others, that
tend to the good of others, the good of the Church, the good of the
Commonwealth, the good of particular men; There is a time when (it may be) a
man's voice, or suffrage would have turned the scale of a business, that
co^cerned much the Commonwealth, or the society where he lives: but when that
opportunity is past, it can be recalled no more. There is a time when a man's
speaking may do much good, and his silence is sinful* and does much hurt, by
the loss it brings. Such times and seasons are to be observed, such
opportunities there be. There is an opportunity of preventing a mischief to a
Commonwealth, or to a Kingdom, when we neglect that opportunity, it causes
the misery of man to be great upon him, as we heard before. So for particular
Cases; There is a time, and a season, and an opportunity of comforting the
bowels of the Saints, of relieuing and entertaining strangers, of doing good to
parents, of educating, and bringing to God children and servants, such as are
committed to our charge; This is but a short time, and opportunity, which when
it is past, can be recalled no more. The missing of these times and
opportunities, is that which causes the misery of man to be great upon him.
You know, at the day of Judgment, because men did not such, and such actions,
because they lost their opportunity, they did not visit the prisoners, they
did not cloth the naked, nor feed the hungry, therefore, this eternal
misery falls upon them; Much more temporal miseries, upon a man, a Kingdom,
or a King.

The last sort of actions wherein we are to observe Watch in actions
concerning our own safety.
they are such as belong to our own safety; There is a time that if a man
speak, he makes himself a prey to the wrath of men. And therefore the
prudent, at such a time shall keep silence, says Isa^. And there is a time
wherein if a man do not speak, he makes himself a prey to the wrath of God.
And not to hit upon a right season in such an action of speaking and showing
himself, or not doing it, it brings misery either from God, or man.

There is a time for a man to give, and to spend; and a time again, for him to
spare and gather, if he miss of this time, if he will not give when he ought,
if he spare when he ought to give, it brings a misery upon him, he shall be a
looser by it.

In all particular actions, oftentimes God opens a door to us of advantage to
our selves, to our children, to those that depend upon us, if it be taken. You
have the opportunity, if you stay till it be shut up again, there is a
misery that follows it, it is a thing that concerns your own safety, but
these are but lesser matters. Beloved, there are times of greater Consequence
then these.

There is a time when God offers grace to a man. Now to refuse it, to miss of
that time, it causes the misery to be great, yea to be eternal upon him,
Luke 19. 42. Luke 19. 42.
Oh Jerusalem, if thou had known the things belonging to thy peace in this
thy day, but now they are hid from thine eyes; As if he should say, This is the
time Jerusalem, when if thou will take the offer, thou may, if thou did
know thy time, if God would reveal it to thee, thou should be safe enough,
thou might escape this misery, but God has hid it, that thou see not
this time, therefore thou and thy children shall perish.

The time of a man's health, and of his peace, of his life, quiet, and rest, is
the time of making sure his Election, a time of growing in grace and knowledge,
and of growing rich in good works. He whose eyes God opens to see this time,
he makes use of it, he lays out those talents he has to such a purpose, but
when God hides it from a man, it is his undoing, an evil time, the time of
death comes suddenly upon him, as a snare on the foul.

The time of youth, the time of education, is the seede-time of our life after;
he whom God has enlightened to see this time, and to consider it, he is not
negligent i^ it, he lays up the ground and foundation of his future li^e in
it. Such like times there be.

You shall see an example of them in Saul, and in the people of Israel; Saul
had a time to make sure the Kingdom to himself, and the Kingdom of heaven to
himself; but because he lost his time, God would give him no more, he had
opportunity no longer; but it was cut off from him. You know he lost the
Kingdom, by not staying the time that Samuel appointed him, he stayed to the
very point of the time; but he stayed it not out. The seventh day Samuel came
according to his promise; but he thought he would not have come, because he
stayed so late, but this was the loss of the Kingdom to him. God intimates
thus much to him there, that if he had discerned his time, he might have saved
his Kingdom, but because he did not see it, that misery came upon him, he
lost the Kingdom from himself, and from his posterity for ever.

The Jews likewise; there was a time when God would have received them, and
averted that fearful Judgment that came upon the whole Nation, when they
were carried away captive; but when they had passed that time, we see God is
resolved to destroy them; there is no more hope for them, Iere. 11. 14. Ier.
11. 14.
Thou shall not pray for this people, I will not hear their cry in the day of
their trouble: Thou shall not pray for them; thou shall not lift up a cry, a
prayer for them. It is twice repeated, because the Lord was resolved, the time
was past, and they saw it not, therefore their misery was great.

But you will say to me, Quest.
(to conclude with that) How shall a man do to know that time, to know the
time, and the season, that God has allotted to every action, since it is of so
much moment; and the missing of it brings so much misery upon men?

Beloved, Answ.
I will run through some directions very briefly: Consider, what the cause is,
that men miss of their time, and you shall find by that the means how to
find it out. The cause why men miss, it is

First, The causes of missing the time.
Inability to discern, man himself knows it not, and no man else can tell it
him. So then it is in Gods own power to reveal it. Therefore to find out this
time, let a man do these two things, to have ability to discern the times.

First, Directions to find it.
let him not lean to his own wisdom, God; that is, let him go and ask
counsel of God: Even as David did, Shall I go up to Hebron, or shall I not?
So in all such doubtful Cases go to God, shall I do such a thing, or shall I
not? Shall I do it in such a season, or shall I s^ay another? We see what
Solomon says, Prove. 3. 5. Prove. 3. 5.
Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thine own wisdom, in
all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy way. The me^ning is
this, let a man in his heart rest upon God, and trust in him, and say thus to
him, Lord, I confess, I know not the times, I know not whether this be a fit
season, or another, Lord, I lean on thee, I beseech thee discover the times to
me. When the heart indeed rests on him, there is a promise, trust in the Lord
with all thine heart,(that is) trust in him in good earnest, and he shall
direct thy way: That is, there shall be a secret guidance from his spirit, that
shall pitch thee upon a right time; There shall a secret thought come in thy
heart, (which shall be as if a man stood behind thee,) that shall whisper to
thee, and say, this is the way, this is the time, turn this way, and not that;
So God directs us, if we trust in him, and rest on him; If we go to him, and
pray him, and beseech him to guide us.

walk in his ways, not to step out of his ways, but to keep the
Commandments, when we have any business to do, go to the straight path,
step not out to any inordinate course, but keep the Commandments, and the
Commandments will keep thee: This you shall find Eccles. 8. 5. Eccles. 8. 5.
He that keeps the Commandment, shall know no evil thing, and the heart of
the wise shall know the time, and the Judgment; for to every purpose there is
a time and a Judgment. You see, though it be very hard to find, and a man
knows it not of himself, nor can any tell him, yet this promise is made, he
that keeps the Commandment, and the heart of the wise, that is, the godly
man, he shall know the time, and the Judgment.

Beloved, it is a sure rule; If we be obedient to Christ as a King, we shall
find him to be to us as a Prophet; If you will resign up your selves to keep
his Commandments, that prophetical office of his, (which is to guide us in
the way,) he will perform to us. So I take that place to be understood, Act.
2. Act. 2.
I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams, etc. It begun to be fulfilled
in that extraordinary gift of Prophecy that was powered upon the Apostles; but
yet, says he, I will power it upon all flesh; that is, it shall be such a
spirit, as shall teach you to see those mysteries that were hid from the
beginning of the world, and such a spirit, as shall guide you, and direct you,
it shall teach you what you ought to do, what way you ought to choose. This, I
say, the Lord will do, if we walk in his ways.

Beloved, if we will be stepping out of his ways, we shall get many knockes,
and many falls too, many troubles, many afflictions shall stick by us, while we
live. You know the Children of Israel went not a foot, but as they were
guided by the Cloud.

Jacob, in his Journey would neither go to La^an without warrant, nor come
from him without it. David, in all that he did, he asked counsel of the Lord;
shall I stay in such a City, or shall I not stay? Shall I go up to war to
such a place, or shall I not go? (As I said before,) shall I go up to Hebron,
or shall I not go at this time? This walking in the ways of God, is that
which the promise is made unto. You shall find Psalm. 25. 12. Psalm. 25. 12.
What man is he that fears the Lord? Him will he teach the way that he shall
choose: As the promise is made to trusting in him; for then he will direct him
in his ways; So, what man is he that fears the Lord, and keeps his
Commandments? Him will he teach the ways that he should choose. And this is
the first direction. The first cause why men miss, is, Inabilitie to discern
the time, and the season; therefore let them take this Course, and God will
reveal it to them.

A second Cause why men miss of these times, 2. Cause.
that God has allotted to every action, Of missing the time.
and purpose, is, some passion, and distemper, to which they are subject; for
passion, causes indiscretion, in the ordinary course of things; you see,
passion makes a man miss of his time, it makes a man do things vnseasonablie;
whereas were the heart quiet, the judgment would be clear too, to see what
were fit and what unfit.

As it is in the common Converse with men; So it is in these great actions, to
choose the time that God has allotted to every action, and purpos^. If there
be any carnal, worldly, sinful distemper in the heart, you are apt to miss
of the time; for every passion and distemper is like drunkenness, it casts a
man asleep. Now, he that observes the times, must watch, and watch diligently,
and a man that is distempered, is not fit to watch, and to observe. And
therefore Christ ^ayth Luke 21. 34. Luke 21. 34.
Take heed that your hearts be not over charged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this world, least that day come upon you (...)
unawares: As if he should say; The reason why you miss of the times, why that
great day comes upon you unawares, why you do not that duty as you ought
within the compass of the time that God has appointed; it comes from hence,
some excess in the use of lawful Comforts: So you have two Causes given there,

Either, when men inebriate themselves too much with the present Comforts of
this world, when they ex^eede in them, when they take more then they ought,
though the things in themselves be lawful.

Or secondly; They take so much care for worldly things, that it breeds a
distemper in them; that is, it distracts their minds; for by that a man may
know when his cares are inordinate, when they breed distractions in the mind;
as we see in Martha; Christ found not fault, because she was careful to
provide; but because her care went to far, that it troubled her, that she
could not attend upon spiritual duties, there was the fault, Marthaes thoughts
were troubled about many things, when such distempers grow on us, it causes us
to miss* the time.

My Beloved, if we would then keep our times; If we would know the times
allotted us, take h^ed of excess; Take heed we affect not too much outward
comforts, that our hearts be not too much set upon any outward blessings, be it
what it will be.

Take heed again, that we take not too much ^^re for any thing, that we mind
not too intentiuely worldly businesses, they will cause us to miss our times.
This is the second Cause.

Thirdly, to do impertinent things, is that which causes men to miss the
time that is allotted to every purpose, and to every business. When a man is
occupied about things that he ought not, he misseth doing of those businesses
that he ought to do. Therefore 1 Cor. 7. 1 Cor. 7.
The Apostle gives this Rule, says he, whatsoever you have to do, if you be
to buy, do it as if you bought not, if you be to marry, do it as if you did
not: And generally use this world as if you used it not: That is, All the
actions belonging to this world, be not too much occupied about such
impertinent things as they be. Impertinent things to the maine business for
which you came into the world, for I would have you, says he, without care;
for he that is unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, and I would have you
cleave to the Lord without separation. The meaning is this; The reason why men
miss their times that God has appointed them, is, because men are too intent
upon impertinent things, which interrupts their care to serve the LORD. And
therefore we are to pass by them, and not to put our full intention to every
worldly business, but reserve the maine intention of our thoughts for the things
of the spirit, for not to take care over^much for them is that which will make
us careful to do things in their time.

The next impediment is selfe-Confidence; 4. Cause.
when a man trusts himself, and will be his own Counselor: And therefore
the way to hit of a right time, is, to take Counsel with others; In the
multitude of Counselors there is peace.

Lastly; 5. Cause.
The cause of the missing of the time, is, negligence, when men are idle,
slack, and indiligent in doing those things that belong to them, that is the
Cause of missing their time. And therefore you have that Counsel in the words
next before the text (since the time is short, there is but a day for you to
work in, and the night comes when no man can work,) that is, in the grave,
there is neither work nor invention, and. And therefore do with all thy might
that which thou have to do. The doing what we have to do with all our might,
and with all our diligence, is that which quickens us, and keeps our hearts in
a holy preparation to take the times, and not to over-slippe and over^ pass
them. These things I should have enlarged, but I had rather shorten them thus,
then hold you longer, etc.

FINIS.

