A LITTLE Catechism, that is to say, a short instruction touching christian
religion, set forth by Theodorus Beza. Minister of the Church of God in Geneua.
The first section.
WHerefore has God placed us in this world?



Will he be known and served according to our understanding and will: or
according to that, which it has pleased himself, to declare and set out
unto us touching the same?



VVher has he declared and set out the same unto us?



Who has made this book?



What is the Law?



What is the Gospel?



Does this word contain all that which we must believe and do?



Say now the articles of your belief.



The second section.
Does this doctrine teach us that there is but one only God, or that there are
more gods then one?



Wherefore say you so?



Yet you in naming God, have seemed to rehearse three, that is to say, the
fathet, the son, and the holy Ghost?



Mean you that God is divided into three parts?



How can this be?

our understanding, and yet notwithstanding most certain and sure, for God
has so declared it, and set it forth unto us, by his holy word.

Do you then believe in one only God, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost?



The third section.
How is the son of God called?



What mean these words Jesus Christ?

Jesus is as much to say, as Savior, and Christ is as much as anointed and
consecrated to be our sovereign king, having power over all creatures, our
sovereign or high prophet, who has fullye declared unto us the will of God
his father, touching our salvation, and our sovereign or high priest, which
has fullye appeased and pacified the wrath of God against us for our sins.

What has he don and suffered to save us?



Can God suffer or dye?



Is not Jesus Christ true and very God eternal, with his father and the holy
ghost?



How then is he said to have dyed?



Do you mean that the son of God was changed into man?



If he had not bin God, could he have bine our savior.



And if he had not bin man, could he have bin our savior?



The fourth section
Shall all the world be saved?



Who then are they which shall be saved?



And what is faith?

which every true Christian man ought to have, that God the father loves him,
for Jesus Christ his sons sake.

Wherefore do you say for Jesus Christ's sake?



Comes this faith of our selves?



And they which have this faith at they saved?



The fifth section.
But whereby may a man know whether he have faith or no?



Which be good works, and which be evil?



Rehearse now the commandments of God?

Hear Israel. etc. The sum whereof is, thou shall love the Lord thy God.

To know Gods commandments is not only to know to say them, but men must
also understand that which they say: wherefore I demand of you what means
that which is said in the third commandment, to take the name of GOD?



Then it is by stronger and greater reason more forbidden to swear by God in
vain, that is to say, to take him for a witness and judge, without just and
good cause why?



What means it to sanctify the Sabbath day or day of rest?



Ought we not also to dedicate unto him all the rest of the days of our life?



Do men forbid to travail or work on the saboth day, as though to labor were
a thing evil of it self?



The sixth section.
You have said that they only are good works which God has commanded.
Wherefore tell me can we accomplish and fulfill the commandments of God?

shall be a man, excepting Jesus Christ only, which has perfectly fulfilled
the same.

Wherefore say you so?



Yet so it is that a good life is the way to salvation?



And why shall we not be saved by our works, seeing that they are good?



Wherefore then are they good?



Good works then make us not gods children?



What then makes us the children and sons of God?



The seventh section.
The holy ghost then is he which makes us the children of God: but what
instruments or means does he ordinarily and commonly use to bring us to that
honor and keep us in the same?



What call you preaching of the word?



How do you pray?

Saying. O our father which art in heaven. etc.

To whom speak you these words?



How is he your father, seeing that he has but one only Son, that is to
say, JESUS CHRIST?



Albeit then that you direct not your speech and words, either to the Son or
to the holy ghost, yet you do not exclude or shut out either the one or the
other.



And is it not lavvful for a man to frame or make his prayer to the person of
the son and of the holy Ghost?



The eight section
And what is a Sacrament?



And wherefore has God ordained these signs to his promises?



How many such signs are there in the christian Church?



What see you in Baptism?



What does this water signify unto you?



To what end?



Does this water make clean and purge sins?



Mean you that this matter or substance of the blood of Jesus Christ vvasheth
our souls?



Is there any difference betewene the water of Baptism, and common water?



The ninth section
What see you in the supper?



What does this bread and this wine signify unto you?

crucified for me, and the wine signifies unto me, the blood shed out for me.

To what end?



Are this bread and wine our spiritual nourishment?



Is there any difference between the bread and wine used in this sacrament,
and common bread and wine?

seal unto us our spiritual and everlasting nourishment.

The tenth section.
Wherefore has the Lord ordained and instituted two signs in his holy
Supper, seeing that in Baptism there is but one only.



Where is Jesus Christ now according to his human nature?



By what means can you then which are on the earth receive him?



Do they which have no faith receive Jesus Christ in the Supper?



How so?

and that which is the sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, whom
they reject and throw from the^ through their unbelief.

How must a man prepare himself to come worthily to the supper.



But has Jesus Christ left it unto our liberty and choice, whether we will
go to the supper, or not go to it?



God give us all grace to go to it, to his honor and glory, and to our
salvation. So be it.
A prayer to be said of children before they study their lesson
Wherein shall a child address his way, in guiding himself according to thy
word O Lord. Open our eyes and we shall consider the maruailous things of thy
law. Give us understanding, and we shall keep thy law, yea we will keep it
with our heart.

O Lord which art the fountain of al wisdom and knovveldge, seeing it has
pleased thee to give us the mean to be taught in our young age to know how
to guide our selves holily and honestly, in all the rest of our life here after
to come, let it please thee also to lighten our understanding (which of it
self is blind) that it may comprehend and receive that doctrine and learning,
which shall be taught us, confirm also and strengthen our memory to keep it
well: dispose our hearts to receive the same willingly, and with such desire as
is mete, least that thorovv our unthankfulness, the occasion that thou do
offer unto us, should perish or be lost. To this end power upon us we pray thee
thy holy spirit, which is the spirit of all understanding, truth,
judgment, wisdom and learning, which may make us able to profit so well
that the pain which shall be taken in teaching us be not lost. And to
whatsoever study, that we apply our selves, grant that we may refer it to the
true and right end, which is to know thee, in our Lord Jesus Christ, that
we may have full trust of our salvation and eternal life in thy grace, and may
serve thee vprightlye and purelye, according to thy good pleasure, so that all that which we shall learn, may be an instrument to help us thereto And seeing
that thou do promise to give vvysedome to the little ones, and such as are
humble, and on the otherside to confound the proud in the vanity of their wits
and understandings: and likewise to make thy self known unto them that be
of an vpryght heart, and on the otherside to make blind the wicked and ungodly,
we beseech thee to fashion and subdue us to true humility, that thereby we
may be made apt to learn and obedient also, first unto thee, secondly unto
our superiors which thou have appointed to govern and teach us. Moreover, we
heartily pray thee to dispose and frame our hearts, unfeignedly to seek thee,
for saking all fleshly and evil affections, and that we may now in such
sort prepare our selves, to serve thee hereafter in that estate and calling,
which it shall please thee to ordeyne and appoint for us, when we shall
come to age. Hear us O father of all mercy through our Lord Jesus Christ. So
be it.

PSALM. XXV. The Lord reuealeth his secrets, unto them which fear him, and
makes them to know his couenaunte.
Jmprinted at London by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Creed Lane, at the sign
of the gylden Tunn, near unto Ludgate, and are there to be sold.

Cum priuilegio.

Anno. 1579.

insignia of printer HS




