A WELSH BAYTE to spare Prouender. Or, A looking back upon the Times past.
Written Dialogue wise. This book is divided into three parts, The first, a
brief discourse of Englands Security while her late Majesty was living, with
the manner of her proceeding in Government, especially toward the Papists and
Puritanes of England, whereof a Letter written late before her death,
specifies, as follows in this first part. The second, A description of the
Distractions during her Majesty's sickness with the composing of them. The
third, Of the Aptness of the English and the Scotte to incorporate and become
one entire Monarchy: with the means of preserving their union everlastingly,
added thereunto.

Printed at London by Valentine Simmes. 1603.

A Prelude upon the name of Henry VVriothesly Earl of South-hampton.
Ever
Whosoever beholds this Leaf, therein shall reed,
A faithful subjects name, he shall indeed:
The grey-eyde morn in noontide clouds may steep,
But traitor and his name shall never meet.
Never.
To the right Honorable Henry Wriothesly Earl of South-hampton Baron of
Tichfield: and of the Noble Order of the Garter.
LEt golden artists practice quaint imposture,
And study to a semblance of perfection,
Let Leopers sweat to show the world their moisture,
We study not to Patrones for direction:
Unless the Honor that my lines shall owe
Can both protect us, and approve them too.
And such is thine, whose beams of Patronage
Do heat alike in Judgment, and in blood
Both, with pure fires derived from parentage,
Preserved in the Arc of Fortunes flood,
When Neptune, and the sea gods did abette,
With Cynthia in her fullest veins aspect.
Thou wholesome Honor, Chaste Nobility,
Be in protection mine, as Generous,
Without distent through all thy auncestrie:
It was thy wont, Thou can not err in us:
And for the Test suffices me to know:
Thy Judgment best deserves my lines to owe.
Your Lordshippes In all the nerves of my ability, Tho: Powell.

A Welsh Bayte to spare Prouender.
Englands Security.
Question. SIr, whereas at our last parting at Richmond house very early, and
in the very same morning wherein the late Majesty of England made progression
through Tudyrs royal name, before any Successor yet apparent or proclaimed,
you, excusing your self with the times distraction, the fear of eruption,
your duty and security to repair at such times to your own home, (thinking
nothing Disaster that you suffer under your own star, no stroke too violent
for your native country) promised after that confused Matachime, recovered into
his wonted harmony, such as crowns this day, with full consent, to describe
unto me the Distractions precedent to her death, which did inform each estate
so plentifully, as might supply even all the uses of observation. I desire you
to be so feeling of these times felicity, Vbi quid censeat, etc. as shall
suffice for the liberty of your speech, and the freedom of your promise.


Answ. Good Sir, I confess to have liberty of modest speaking, whereby is
offered an expedition from my promise is the chiefest felicity in my wishes,
and to proportion out the broken numbers of those latter times with our mutual
comments and collections might somewhat confirm us toward futurity: It only
detaines me before I enter into the discourse thereof to be so curious over
your expectation, for you seem prepared unto me as to challenge conditions of
your gentleness and humanity, both of hearing and censuring me, as one forced to
be divided into so many and such the forms of this subject for the lifer
description thereof, as may with a little help of wit be fashioned and fitted
with some peculiar, the like behavior, though much dissonant from my meaning,
without giving the Character, or presuming your wit. For between the height of
my souls contemplation, and the earth of my affections, there is a Commonweal
so populous, of whatsoever condition, that in describing all men, I discourse
but my self unto you.


Qu. Before you begin, I would desire you first to set forth that Tranquille
Estate of England as it lay most soft, in her most security (her Majesty yet
living, and in health.) That first, Taking your height from thence, even, from
the Ouerflow of her Fullness, you may the easier make seem how great the
distant was into the Distractions. Next, By the degrees of her sickness
measures the times farthest out of measure. And lastly, show how suddenly and
solidely it was again composed

What transposition and how many frets,
how much vicissitude, one month begets:
Be admonished by the way to use those means which may exempt your style from
seeming serious, give it a free and pleasing laxation, but not so diffuse as if
your flashes of mirth were cut out of the whole dresser cloth of rank wit?


An. To describe that Security proceeding partly of the fullness of such a
government, as was one reformed in all the defects of those best squarde, and
conformed by religions principles, and especially of the bounty of providence,
whole blessings, for a perfect government in it self to contain, it is as
impossible as for a full vessel, his own moisture under a violent shower that
falls far off: I must first show wherein her Fullness did ouerflow and
molifie: And then, into what.

It did ouerflow and suffer Excrescence. First, In Religions uses. Secondly, In
uses of temporal blessings.

Of both which the Extent was into Softness, and Singularity.

Softness and Singularity being either of Fashion or Custom.

It was Softness of Fashion in such (I leave chambering and such like to the
office of a Divine to speak of) as had the security to be fashionable in all
their actions, and to live ^x vs^ viuendi, of which sort of people are all
sectaries of (...), blind zeal, and example derived from ancestors and
grandfathers, with such like whatsoever. The goodness of the day was to these
like Lybian worms in digestion; it gave to such drowsinesse all their
faculties, that they could do nothing but what the fashion of their living
offered unto them: and it was for fashion that Sir William R^ R^^^^^^ was wont
in those days to send his man every morning to know how such a great namelesse
Ladyshippe took her rest after the last nights neates-tongue pic, etc.

It was Softness of Custom in such as held no law to ceremony, no liberty to
custom: and this was your country reueller, your only Lord of Whitson ale:
with a heigh ho come over the dale, come over the dale heigh ho.

It was into Singularity with others, of which kind there be two sorts,
Paradox, and Moral affectation.

Paradox was one that for ambition of a Singularity in Religion and arts,
would altogether oppose himself against the most received authority. Or rather
for distinctions sake betwixt such, as who though they differ from the true
positions: yet it is not e regione: let me call it Affectation: and that only
Ambition where the Singularity is fetched from extremes, the farthest of which
is Atheism.


Qu. Is it possible there should be such presumption in man, as to impugn his
own bosom faith, and all for ^bition of a Singularity, can it be that a
Singularity should be so dearly gained and farre-fetcht?


An. Yes; and boast that wit for it to, as much as Laco the lying trauailer does
his discovery of the new found land, with all the miraculous stones and plants
he left behind him there: For, for mine own part I do believe there is no
other Atheist but of conscious ambition.

I come to the Moral affectation ofthose days which was either the oppsite of
Fashion or Custom.

Your opposite of Fashion was either he that used to dedicate the affected
pretty and fantastic of every new (...) to the judgment of some new Mistress.
Or your Affectation of a neglected fashion and hauiour, and this was your only
shallow malecontent of the age.

Now your Anticustome was one that would never go directly and by president,
where his own wit or countenance could come by ambages: and therefore me
thinks this should be he that was the first inuenter of Monopoly, because the
first that ever went out of custom. Me thinks this should be he that devised
your first Impropriation of Ecclesiastical livings:


Quest. Why should he not be the first Proteus of offices and occupations?


Answ. No doubt Sir but he was: For I can tell you I knew him live in the
Court, do her Majesty the service of a whole man there, and yet he was a
parson in half a dozen places more at least, he was a baylife in one shape,
and a steward in an other, now, an Honorable, and by and by a housesweeper, I
mean him that had no substitute therein for saving of the fee, and to the rest
I reserve Euge and Belle.

But Proteus was no body to an other Anticustome in my remembrance: What think
you of the old Ubiquitarie Lycus? But I perceive you are rather chewing upon
the times fullness that it should come to this, and notwithstanding to have
wholesome government.


Qu. Sir, I ratify your reasons before cited, for a kind of necessity to be
acknowledged in them.

I only expect to be hastened, now you are at the height of Englands
Security, to hear the manner of dieting it from the first Ouerflowe of her
Perfections fulness, while it is gathering new blood for new infection, desiring
you to resume at her clear Governments proceeding between Softnes and
Singularity.


Ans. With Softnes in Religion, because there was no such intention in it as
might attaint it finaly, the mildest means of recovery were thought most
competible, and so applied in discretion to reduce it by gentle means, rather
then give the wholesome blood issue at incisions.

But into Singularity more observation enquired, prosecuting it in wisdom from
the first schism to the extremest heresy.


Qu. Of hit particular proceeding toward these by example of the Papists and
Puritanes, I pray enlarge your proposements, the rather to give satisfaction to
the question had of the sincerity and constancy of the Inquisition into them.


Ans. Because I hope I can not go beyond my duty and authority with their
satisfaction, I will intertaine their doubts with the sufficient answer of a
letter written to that effect late before her Majesty's death: As follows.

A letter to a French Gentleman touching the proceedings in England in
Ecclesasticall causes translated out of French by T. T.
SIr, whereas you desire to be aduertized touching the proceedings here in
Ecclesiastical causes, because you note in them some inconstancy and
variation, as if we inclined sometimes to one side, and sometimes to an other,
and as if that clemency and lenity were not used of late that was used in the
beginning, all which you imputed to your own superficial understanding of the
affairs of this state, having notwithstanding her Majesty's doings in singular
reverence, as the real pledges which she has given unto the world of her
sincerity in religion, and of her wisdom in government well meriteth, I am
glad of the occasion to imparte the little I know in that matter unto you,
both for your own satisfaction, and to the end you may make use thereof toward
any that shall not be so modestly, nor so reasonably minded, as you are.

I find therefore her Majesty's proceedings to have bin grounded upon two
principles. The one: That consciences are not to be forced, but to be won and
reduced by the force of Truth with the aid of time, and the use of all good
means of instruction and persuasion: The other, That causes of conscience,
when they exceed their bounds, and grow to be matter of faction, loose their
nature, and that sovereign Princes ought distinctly to punish the practice in
contempt, though colored with the pretense of conscience and religion.
According to these principles her Majesty, at her coming to the Crown
utterly disliking of the tyranny of Rome, which had used by terror and rigor
to seek commandment of men's faiths and consciences, though as a prince of
great wisdom and magnanimity she suffered but the exercise of one religion,
yet her proceedings toward the Papists was with great lenity, expecting the
good effects which time might work in them.

And therefore her Majesty revived not the laws made in the 28. and 35. of her
fathers reign, whereby the oath of Supremacy might have bin offered at the
Kings pleasure to any subject though he kept his conscience never so modestly
to himself, and the Refusal to take the same oath without farther
circumstances, was made treason: But contrariwise, her Majesty not liking to
make windows into men's hearts and secret thoughts, except the abundance of
them did ouerflowe into ouerte and express acts or affirmations, tempered her
law so as it restrains only manifest disobedience in impugning and
impeaching advisedly and maliciously her Majesty's supreme power and
maintaining and extolling a foreign jurisdiction: And as for the oath, It was
altered by her Majesty into a more grateful form* the harshnes of the name,
and appellation of Supreme head was removed, and the penalty of the refusal
thereof turned only into a disablement to take any promotion, or to exercise
any charge; and yet that with liberty of being reuested therein, if any man
shall accept thereof during his life.

But after, when Pius Quintus had excommunicated her Majesty, and the Bull of
excommunication was published in London, whereby her Majesty was in sort
proscribed and that theruppon, as upon a principal motive or preparatiue
followed the rebellion in the North: yet because the ill humors of the realm
were by that rebellion partly purged, and that she feared at that time no
foreign invasion, and much less the attempt of any within the realm not
backed by some potent succoure from without, she contented hirselfe to make a
law against that special case of bringing in, or publishing of Bulls, or the
like instruments: whereunto was added, a prohibition, upon pain, not of
treason, but of an inferior degree of punishment against the bringing in of the
Agnus Dei, hallowed bread, and such other merchandise of Rome, as are well
known not to be any essential parts of the Roman religion* but only to be
used in practi^e as loue-tokens to inchaunt and bewitch the peoples affections
from their allegiance to their natural sovereign. In all other points her
Majesty continued her former lenity.

But when about the twentieth year of her reign she had discovered in the
King of Spain an intention to invade her dominions, and that a principal
point of the plotte was to prepare a party with in the realm that might
adhere to the forreiner, and that the Seminaries began to blossom and to send
forth daily priests and professed men, who should, by vow taken at shrift,
reconcile her subjects from their obedience, yea and bind many of them to
attempt against her Majesty's sacred person, and that by the poison which they
spread, the humors of most Papists were altered, and that they were no more
Papists in conscience and of Softenes, but Papists in faction; then were there
new laws made for the punishment of such as should submit them selves to
such reconcilements or renuntiations of obedience* And because it was a treason
carried in the clouds and in wonderful secrecy, and came seldom to light,
and that there was no presumption thereof so great as the recusancie to come to
divine service: Because it was set down by their decrees. That, To come to
Church before reconcilement, (...) (...) schism: But; To come to Church after
(...), was absolutely heretical and damnable.

Therefore there were added Laws containing punishment pecuniarie against such
Recusants, not to enforce consciences, but to infeeble and impouerish the
means of those of whom it rested indifferent and ambiguous, whether they were
reconciled, or no.

And when not withstanding all this provision, this poison was dispersed so
secretly, as that there was no means to stay it but by restraining the
Merchants that brought it in.

Then lastly, was there added a Law whereby such seditious priests of the new
erection were exiled; and those that were at that (...) within the land shipped
over, and so commanded to keep hence upon pain of treason.

This has been the proceeding, though intermingled, not only with sundry
examples of her Majesty's grace toward such as in her wisdom she knew to be
Papists in Conscience, and not in Faction and Sigularitie; but also with an
ordinary mitigation toward the offenders in the highest degree convicted by
law: If they would but protest* that if in case this realm should be invaded
with a foreign army by the Popes authority, for the Catholic cause, (as
they term it) they would take part with her Majesty, and not adhere to her
enemies.

For the other part which have bin offensive to the State, though in other
degree, which name themselves Reformers, and we commonly call Puritanes; this
has bin the proceeding toward them.

A great while when they inueighed against such abuses in the Church, as,
Pluralities, Nonresidence, and the like; their zeal was not condemned, only
their violence was sometimes censured. When they refused the use of some
ceremonies and rites, as superstitious, they were tolerated with much
con^iuence, and gentleness: Yea, when they called in question the Superiority
of Bishops, and pretended to bring a Democracie into the church; Yet, their
Propositions were heard, considered, and by contrary writing, debated, and
discussed. Yet all this while, it was perceived that their course was
dangerous, and very popular: as, because Papistrie was odious, therefore it was
ever in their mouths, that they sought to purge the Church from the relics
of Papistrie, a thing acceptable to the people, who love ever to run from one
extreme, to an other.

Because multitude of Rogues* and Poverty were an eyesoare, and dislike to
every man, therefore they put it into the peoples head: That, if Discipline
were planted, there should be no vagabonds, nor beggars (a thing very
plausible.) and in like manner, they promised the people many other impossible
wonders of their Discipline.

Besides, they opened the people a way to government by their Consistory, and
Praesbyterie (a thing though in consequence no less praeiudiciall to the
liberties of private men, then to the sovereignty of Princes, yet in first show
very popular. Nevertheless all this (except it were in some few that entered
into extreme contempts) was borne, because they pretended but in dutiful
manner to make propositions and to leave it to the providence of God, and the
authority of the Magistrate.

But now of late years, when there issued from them as it were a Colonie of
those that affirmed the consent of the Magistrate was not to be attended, when
under pretense of a confession, to avoid slanders and imputations, they
combined themselves by classes and subscriptions, when they descended into that
vile and base means of defacing the government of the Church by rediculous
Pasqu^ls. When they began to make many subjects in doubt to take an oath,
which is one of the fundamental parts of Justice in this Land and in all
places. When they began both to vaunt of the strength and number of their
partisans, and followers, and to use communications that their cause would
prevail, though with vproare and violence. Then it appeared to be no more
zeal, no more conscience, but mere faction and division: And therefore though
the State was compelled to hold somewhat a harder hand to restrain them then
before; yet it was with as great moderation as the peace of the Church and
State could permit.

And therefore Sir (to conclude) consider uprightly of these matters, and you
shall see her Majesty is no temporizer in religion; she buildes not religion
upon policy, but policy upon religion; It is not the success abroad, nor
the change of servants here at home can alter her, only as the things
themselves alter, so she applies her religious wisdom to correspond unto
them, still retaining the two rules before mentioned, in dealing tenderly with
consciences, and yet in discovering Faction from Conscience, and Softnes from
Singularity. Farewell.

Your loving friend T. P.


THe other kind of Softness in mortal behavior, because it had no such
eagerness in it, as might it time vnquallifie the general temperament, was
measured advisedly by his own length and breadth: It had ceremony of an
implicit law and custom of a modest liberty.

Singularity in Arts, because it needed no other penance but the world to have
knowledge of it, to be the sign of a too soon mellowed wit, to be as soon
rotten, was therefore limed with no other circumuention.

Ambition in Arts, such as tended to induce the heresy of religion, suffered
under the same letter of the law with it: it was only the modesty of the
lawgiver not to prohibit that which her charity denied her to suspect, as an
ambition so infinite and beyond extremes, as is Atheism, which in the most
presumption broake but out in positions of Philosophy, and that for
disputations cause, or so.

Your Singularity of Fashion, was such an uncertain fellow, that no law, nor
good opinion could ever take hold of him.

Next, your Malecontent expressed, had leave to walk the great conduite court of
the world, till he wanted breath to give curses their significant found,
unless it chanced the wantons to wash out the face-making fly stingde
giddiness before his cew.

Lastly, as I cannot excuse Singularity of custom better then by ascribing it
to the iniquity of the times past so. I will not wish it worse then to be so
reformed in times to come, that Proteus may have but one certain shape, and
plumpe Lya^^ one Ivy bush.

Even here at the habit of Anticustome, thus far crept in upon seeming good
and lawful inducements, was the most extensure of Security, her Majesty even
now in health, and even now she sickened when her fullness had all these
fortunate moles upon it, when,

Softness had safety to live out of use. when,
Religion had time to be factious. when,
Arts had strains of affectation. and when,
Wit was ambitious of Singularity.
All which are the manifest signs of a full and fortunate Weal.


Quest. I believe you have omitted one and the chief kind of a habit of
Security: Inoculate Security: that which never looks behind him: never
studies to futuritie, unless you implide it in Softness of Custom?


Ans. I did so, as it was improuidence of requisite, and no otherwise: But it
seems you mean Security Inoculate to the succession, which is as far from
being Softness in duty, that it is rather the quality of (...) in the heart
of obedience, whereby a man is so securely and wholly dedicated to the present
scepter, that he lend no part of this duty to the next succession.

For the greatest duty which we owe to succession, next prayer, is, to
instruct, ourselves modestly in his title, for our confirmation and assurance,
that our lives, laid down in his cause, and, when his time shall require, are
a sacrifice: and the blood otherwise, spent otherwise: The next is, if God have
endued him with singular gifts, to set them before us for our comfort. And
whatsoever is more then this is superarrogation of works, which oftentimes
want their faith. I speak not this, to accuse any such, but to excuse the most.

Or rather, it seems you cast out this bait, to catch an unadvised answer, a
contrary, as if you would tendetly lead me to say, that among a people of
fufill and insinuating behauior there all ways has been, and ever will be,
transposition of duty, while there is possibility of change.

I think I may speak it generally, reserving safely my faith of the present
excepted state.

All imminence of change, or age suspected,
Yields cold affectious, awefulnesse neglected,
And every scepters years wears out his gold:
But this of James wrought out of purest mold.
To whose clear radiance being so divine,
All subjects eyes look forward, (...) behind,
And wish we may enjoy those beams of his,
While Time has when to be, or Being is.
Your last question has discontinued me longer from Englands most soft of
Security, th^n I purposed. But I hope all is well till we come ever here
where her Majesty sickened.


The Distractions during her Majesty's sickness.
THe first news the (...) had of her sickness came from (...) by one Oliver
Sharke a sculler and was delivered with other certain pr^ua^t accordingly*
Before this news was stale came a tail of fresh sammon to countermand it with
other certain news of a something nothing, and a priest that was neither dead
nor alive, but suspended betwixt both. But the meat that this news carried in
the mouth of it, having taken wind in the seasoning was sold two days after
at the Bridge-house in Southwarke for little or nothing.

The appetite of the vulgar was not so queasie but it would rather call again
for the first dish, than turn gordge to the tainte of the latter; and now
again her Majesty's sickness was altogether in their private cups: for as
yet it was but private, and that only in the Ci^tie^ till anon after, Tweedle
the Tab^rer chanced to carry it piping hot into the Country, and what
mavelous Distractions it wrought in both, I shall briefly discourse unto you.

Yet the news past but betwixt neighbors and familiars, only for
intertainement of time and exercise of secrecy, or so. The first news only
prepared them to believe the second affirmations, whereof the next tidings
presently possessed them: for indeed, the vulgar faith is all possession; and
now there wanted nothing to transport and distract them, but the many differing
circumstances of the often repeated news.

Quest. And could that be wanting in a world so ambitious of innovation? Were
there none that would lend a hand to vnhinge the stalenesse of it with the
important circumstances that should attend this sickness?


Ans. (...) were either such as to whom their present coffeehouse, either
the hope of Revenge or Advancement made it seem stale.

These only labored to draw the vulgar into distraction knowing them to be of
such facility therein, that they would dissolve again in the fear of
eruption. And now, when this third days asseueration to the former with all
the circumstances that midnights advise could add unto i^ had full effect in
them, they were distracted.

The poorer sort, lest their security and fashion of living should be
disturbed by the eruption. The richer sort, lest the eruption should bring a
general embargo of trafique abroad^* and domestical credits or debts depending
in other men's hands at (...).


Quest. Then, if their distractions could reserve to fear and that fear
recover some part of it self into the study of prevention. Let me know how
far it could reach his means at such a time, or whether by striving to be
freed it was not more engaged?


Ans. Of these two the first only was lost in the act of study. The other
being loath to out-steppe the sure and slow modesty of his discretion embraced
only the next means which offered themselves to his advise: That was to
proceed lawfully while time yet served in quest of debts at home, and to
dispatch an expeditious summons to factors abroad.

This intendment of lawefull quest put hope of revenge upon creditors, for at
such a time a man shall find none so great an enemy as his debtor, to a
farther task, for his own security, which would not be better preserved than
by abating the edge of justice with a constant report of her Majesty's death.
This was presently snacht of maney. The more believed, by how much the more was
the nicenes had of it: And the rather, because the voice of her sickness had
now depended among them three or four days at least.

For it is not the intention or remission of a thing already granted, but the
degrees of time, wherein it depends persuades the vulgar belief in extremes.
This opinion of the commons, especially those of the City, was as, the next
days business gave occasion, in Guildhall, in sollide sentence re-enforced and
had, no doubt, given way to the (...) in a reverence of the speaker but for
suggestion of Desire of innovation, who still took up their parts of facility
as they lay for his use and employments, of which none was so fit in this
place as his suspicion over greatness and nobility upon some superficial
surmizes, which turned his speech into a greater argument of their former
presumption, so that here I may well say with the poet.

-- Agitatas vrere (...)
and vidi nullo con^^^^^te mari.
The which our English Ovid has thus translated,

The more I wave this brand of fire about,
The more it burns, fire let alone goes out.
And though it were in their presumption already, to believe the report of her
death, yet fear, and the habit of obedience under a long established and
civil government commanded their humility, not to publish it; till when, the
inferior officer of justice, though he made some scruple (as was craftily put
unto him) to do the most that the virtue of his office would bear, yet he
would still be foyling at transgression, as occasion served, and till then the
creditor durst be so valiant as to acknowledge, yea and to challenge his debtor.

My self knew a Mercer of the spirit in those days to send his wife with the
book to a right Honorable, whose chance it being to overtake me upon my way,
bespake me for one of his followers, that had served him seven years to know
his (...) (...) the order, to dispose her, where she might accost his (...)
(...) most conveniently, excepting only his bedch^^^er, for to have audience
there, her author says is a note of (...) great popularitie; to avoid which,
it is his custom to be attended in the drawing chamber, which me thinks
should be a note more then woman-modesty would bear: and of this, too much for
the valor of the creditor, while she was dead in their whisperings.

Hitherto the vulgar descerning no alteration in the method of the world, such
as uses to follow the death of princes, and no breath used to maintain the
fire of belief by the suspected endeavor of suppressing it, grew to be so
remiss in the delay, that his whilome impatience became a thing like a
reasonable creature, so like, that shortly the commandment of certain the
(...) physicians to be sent to Court, made them once more affable, so affable,
that he could have endured the discourse of the measure of her diet, the manner
of her rest, or the nature of her sickness with some few breathings betwixt:
whereby it appears hitherto, yea unto the end: The habit of a civil
government had his challenge in them entire, and that hitherto the disease of
stalenesse lay soft in his own bosom.


Qu. Me thinks a Habit at such a time as this was, could not so wholly retain
them, without the better and much more then ordinary inuigilance of office?


Ans. Sir, I make Habit of obedience, the nature of his tenure, and the
present circumstances of the time, his conditions with the government; So that,
these times being so incertaine and quick in their circumstances, that they
could not be measured with conditions, I think I may without detraction from
office attribute the continence of them to Habit, of obedience chiefly. Once
more laying aparte all surmises, it was in clear eloquence (provided it were
from the mouth of their own Orator) and in gentle means, though not to give
their affections peace, yet to compresse them from breaking out into looser
speaking, which is always the certain Message of mutiny.


Quest. As if the private example of punishment had, were not rather to be used
at such times, then gentle means to the vulgar, in whom admiration and fear
of Justice have such simpathie and relative suffering.


An. It were in composed times; but not here: for know.

This vulgar's like a skaine of many threads
Running into a rownd and looser list,
It rauels, and it opens ere ye wiste.
Pluck at the single threads with violence,
It puckers to a knotty consequence:
When with a gentle shaking of the (...)
The hardest knots vnt wine themselves again.
Yea the very rage of humility, though it be most violent, and dangerous: Yet
it is sooner alliciated by ceremony than compelled by virtue of office.

The Extremest vassallage enlarged acquires
The most insatiate and licentious head
Whose giddiness like to a drunken man
Is sooner pacified than chastized.
It would be pacified in the present fury, and afterward in his time
chastizement would be taken of the first and chief commencers thereof: But in
this place they could not be so loose of obedience for the reasons before going.

Anon: For all this, I know not upon what admonition of circumstances, there
chancing certain munition to be carried through the City to the Court, and
other carriages retriued from thence to the Tower; the vulgar began to find
fault with his own flexibilitie of belief, vowing no longer to suffer his
ears to be taken up with any other persuasion but that of her death, nor to
defer any farther his instance taking from the Court, but to be presently
appointed upon his double guardes. And here Distraction had his ancient
cognizance of Bilbo: passant, and Lantern and candlelight pendant. And even
here it rusht into the suspicion of apparent succession approaching.


Quest. Then, the out-breaking was not till now? because nothing could divide
them so much as the question thereof?


Answ. Nor yet: for it was a question, not in faith; but in works; or rather
ceremony of knowledge thereof had, to which it had been so long enawde, that
it was in their disposition, and nature to fear to speak it before the very
Ajax in the painted cloth. It was no violent sweat in their affections to
attend the providence of God, the goodness of the hour, and the due consent
of the Nobility.

These former signs of Eruption to be suspected, at least did here dead, the
quicknes of all sale and commerce. So that the trades man and the man of
science mercenable gave that time to hearing and retailing of news which
belongd heretofore to the care of his charge. Why? there was such pursuit
after news, that whole houses stood as naked as Newington buttes, and no body
to give a man a reasonable answer at door but my True and Natural Bilbo:
which I could have best allowed, if it had been at a Constables door, for it
must needs be there most safe: because the stocks never stand far off: And
both together are like a cup of good wine at the Counter gate in the Powltry
where a good fellow dares not come to commend it, or rather like a provost
Marshall at a Misers feast, where beggars dare not attend it.

Over the common application of these said signs, came his degrees of time,
which by this, brought Suspicion into Expectation of change; after which
Coffeehouse thirsted, Prisons yawnde, the skirts of the Suburbs longde, and
Hope of Revenge did invoke, yet all was spe macra (as Persuis speaks) for
still Justice was foyling as occasion serude.

Occasion serude this day the next before her death, to put into safe custody
your only honest Dicke termde Captain, for making fencers breakefasts as he
was passing upon his way to take instruction from some Coopers boy where the
Cities provision was stored, or such like business of importe, I guess for
caution to such as it concerns to be more careful, whom they employ in the
lodging thereof.

Notwithstanding, my Captains late mischance this very same day, such as had
smoakte out the memory of them in Bankeside tappehouses and Bartholmew boothes,
were seen abroad at high noone; all, in expectation of executions or
employments at least.


Quest. You shall do well to make the description of the day somewhat more
cinct then the subject ministers unto you, and to close it up with the setting
of the fairest star in the farthest West: Even with the Eues evening to her
death* In which, if there be familiarity betwixt Heavens and Mortality, I
should especially look for manifestation thereof by such signs whose reasons
stand without the mystery of your Philosophy?


Answ. Besides, that I am so far from being scrupulous therein, that only
excepting against some absurdities founded upon it, I repute it a necessary
instrument of providence I assure you that such signs of promotion to come
from the North, asked the astonishment of this frailty, and these Organs affixt
unto them.

This night, I know not by what unknown familiarity; amazement usurped upon all
senses, and more then wonted weight sat upon all eyes. This night, the
trauailer as advised upon some gaine-giuing, reposde himself before his hour,
and the watchman, whom the business of the night had took up, seemed to walk
his round in some unfrequented place, so full of sollitude was that night,
laboring of that consummation, whereof this next morning was delivered: when
every star hastened to be quenched in his own dew.

Her lives familiar star did shoot and fall,
The fairest one the heavens were graced withal.

Quest. What could now obsist (her death being granted) why, between it and
the Succession proclaimed, Humility should not put off his habit of
awefulnesse, and like a full eyde faulcon take impatience of handing? Why
should not this intermission complain her old agreemences? Or rather, why
should it not actuate whatsoever the former times had took to heart?


Answ. Because the news thereof had the same wing with the best expedition of
publishing the Succession. Or say, the present ruins of Majesty, detaining
yet the Pieres conscript in the spectacle, had given the speaking message of
her death the first statte, and preoccupation of ears, yet it being long since
registered in the vulgar faith, could not now with all his comment of
circumstances take off the foreskinne which had even ouergrowne the memory of
her: for his faith was long since made so yielding unto it, that no new force,
or concussion of loud report, but only lenitiue means could give quickenes
to the grief of it, being so much stupefied and blunted with depending, as the
sense of his expectation of change with use, now nothing but evident romage,
and the inuersion of the general method could be violent in their affections;
so much their fear was ouerlaide with delay. For take notice, that this vulgar
is not to be preparde to any thing by any, but by Kingly power: It is an
extemporall creature, and certain in nothing but his habit.

While Englands Majesty was very early this morning about to be transposed,
did coffeehouse fretting upon protraction resolve at length, because the
Sere of the Commons according to the airs subtlety would not take to be
deliberately kindled into rage to lift up his burden upon his own shoulders,
and to set the first hand that should even dislocate this stale world locallie;
so eagerly it distasted him, promising to him self an assurance of buyng back
their duties by the offered prey into which his facinorous example should not
fail to engage them;

When to secure themselves for that offense,
No treason is too dark to be commenc't.
And now as the hand of Coffeehouse was vp-lifted, when Revenge looked big
upon his creditor, and the rich man feared to carry his throat about him. The
blessedness of the hour, admonisht by signs from heaven, and consciences on
earth to proclaim King James of England the first, composde as suddenly, as
sollidly even all the Distractions of our scaene: At which did Coffeehouse
give this desperate farewell to all his hopes.

The News is good thus, and good otherwise:
What needs he fear to fall never hopes to rise?

Quest. Sir now you have digested the fractions of those days remotion so
compendiously as these few, the appertment words and the patience of your
hearer could bear, I desire you before you speak of the Scottish Englishing
which I take to be the maine drift of your exercise, to offer by the way at her
exequies, who was sometimes the Fire, the Numbers, the Genius, the any thing,
Eliza of poesy, the same, sometimes. Musa potens musis, dijs dea dia deabus,
Angelica Angelicis, Nimphaque chora Choris.



Answ. Because I would have you think you cannot do me more acceptable
imposition, you shall receive it at once in these few lines following.

The Offering.
LIttle wonder thou should die,
Though thy means were great in flying:
Greatness shall I tell thee why,
Longest lifed is longest dying,
And if both at once began,
Who would wonder at thee than?
Nothing strange to be sufficed,
After Kingdoms left behind thee,
And so much by thee demized
With this little to confine thee,
For thy story never makes mention,
Appetence had more Intention,
Tell thou to others that their ends must have,
For all their Kingdoms but one little grave.
Uixit atque moritura
Eliza.

Quest. IS this all she shall have? Why I expected a vollume of your Melpomene
bound up in the very vampe of her buskine with pretty passionate speeches in a
new streine, and an invocation that should have drawn dry the very hoofes of
your flying horse in Friday-streete; as thus. Admetus dairie maid come feed
thy Neame,
Come bring Apollo curds and clowted cream.


But indeed, indeed, this is all in all, for true grief would not be
commended for action, it is so much in suffering: It would be ceremonious, not
affected?


Answ. At least Sir I am sure, there is no more sincerity in these few lines,
then I am able to quote upon a mass of her flatterers: For who would believe
it? That he which was wont to set a worlds distinction betwixt her and
mortahtie, should now come after, and say she went the way of all flesh?

Or, is it possible? That the same Anti-Corbulo that has so often prayed, he
might never live to see that day should be so good to his Physician now? I see
the reason of it, the quenched fire made the old wife give over her tale; and
there she lost it.


The Scottish Englishing.
Question. NOw you have brought me to the restitution of the times harmony, I
think it not amiss to close up your discourse with the Scottish Englishing, or
the uniting of both Nations, that first, implying his Majesty's prerogative
therein, in his title derived from Henry the third: you come briefly to the
discussing of the inherence upon these two questions. The first, whether there
be an aptness in these two to be reconciled and made one? The second, whether
being now made one, there may be means used to preserve that consent and
unity everlastingly? The first question is only of their mutual
accommodation thereunto? The second question is only of secondary means,
whether there be such as might uphold in all and like contentment, the
Liberties, Reputations, and Benefit of both? Besides that I confess, we ought
in duty to observe his Majesty's decrees whatsoever, provided in that behalf
without farther study to our satisfaction.

Of these two in the second place, and at the first sight somewhat be spoken
wi^h a breath soaring in a middle region, neither deprest to the earth of your
self extraduced, neither ascending to paint the face of the times best
favorites auro ouato with flattery?


Answ. In the first place that I may only differ in mine authority from the
rest of my country men, give me leave to derive his Majesty by the history
of the Royal house of England, written in Italian by Petruccius Vbaldine
Cyttadine of Florence for the indifferency of his Nation, and the reverence of
his testimony, who lived lately among us, translated by his own Manuscript,
and briefly abridged, as concerning our purpose only, as follows. The
division of the Koyall house of England had his original from the sons of
Henry the third, Edward and Edmund: It has been supposed by some that Edmund
was the elder, and being crooked, Edward was preferred the easier before him,
which suggestion Henry the fourth used to color his usurpation of the Crown
upon Richard the second.

This faction after it burst out, caused bloody wars in England, either house
prosecuting the other to the destruction of them both; the possession of the
Crown remaining to either according to their force, the fortune and favor of
the time.

This controversy after God had made use therein to manifest his just
punishment of Edward the fourth in his children, for his cruelty toward Henry
the sixth, and Edward his son, together with some periuries that the histories
impose upon him and his unnatural dealing toward his brother Clarence, was by
the plotte of Morton Bishop of Elie taken away in the performance of that oath
which he took of Henry of Richmond of the house of Lancaster, to marry with
Elizabeth the sole heir of the contrary house, after the tyrant Richard slain
in battle.

Of this Henry the seventh came Henry the eight with his sisters, the eldest
of which being named Margaret, King Henry the seventh in his spirit of
prophecy, wherein he had a peculiar potencie (as the history of his dying
makes mention) and in his providence of reducing the two Kingdoms of England
and Scotland into one entire Monarchy, as his own hand writing left behind
him can sufficiently testify, did match with the Scepter of Scotland, from
whence both by father and mother after the issue of Henry the eight, now
extinct is derived King James of both Kingdoms the immediate successor: who
for the constancy of his favors, his inappetence of new purchase, and his
care of husbanding the means of all his Dominions for their own good and
preservation, is lively modeled by his grandfather Henry the seventh, whose
example Vbaldine commends to his successors for the best form of
administering the Commonwealth abroad, and the household at home: In his days
the Nobility wonted not to procure access through inferior aduocation, nor
the Fabij to have their cause solicited by Vinius bondsman, or Nimphidius
verlottes, the Commons were yet invited to contributions, but came freely, nor
the Exchequer was ever better stored with the proper reuenew, and the
exhibition of those offices which belonging thereunto, were conferred upon the
ministers which should execuse them with his own immediate hand, the neglect
whereof has been the cause of all the abuses of office in this land, when his
patent must come through so many aduocating hands.


Quest. Now you have sufficiently implide in the title his prerogative of
uniting these two Kingdoms, warranted and instanced both out of holy writ, and
traditionall report of Scepters long since translated with their whole tribes
and families, I desire you to come to the question of their aptness thereunto
in the second place?


Answ. To prove an Aptness in the Scot to incorporate with the English, let
me tell you what kind of Aptness is required in this place. For Aptness of
agreeing is either in Substance or Beauty.

And because there is a general Aptness, or an Aptness in Substance, even in
the Scithian to incorporate with any the most civil nation, that is, having in
his reasonable soul matter malleable thereunto, without farther immoration upon
it, I lay the present proof in Aptness of the Beauty of their Manners, Laws,
and Language.

Of which the Beauty is to be tried and examined by these his two Trialls,
Delight and Similitude.

That his manners have complacence and similitude of Beauty with ours of the
English in religious manners it appears. It being only conformable with the
English. Both which the other world removed aparte makes seem one City upon
a hill.

In conversation he delights us the more by how much the liuelier he only
expresses our endeavors, and our principles whereby there is discerned a
mutual Aptness, and inclination in both, owing our duties to the same Scepter
to become one entire, and vndistinct Monarchy.

Of Laws, (Law ye fir) Iustine says there is no difference so long as they
agree in the fundamental parts, being executed Per eos Legis peritos qui sunt
honesti, studiosi iustitia, non anari, etc. It is some thing in latin, which I
can not translate into English I assure you sir.

Of Language because the difference is but this, that the English is like a
Denshire carsie after fulling set out with all the art of draperie to give it
grace and gloss. And the Scottish vnstarcht with inkehorne, stage suiting
conscisenesse It can not choose but delight the English Orator for firmness
and soliditie, having much cleanenesse and purity in the written letter, The
Poet for descant upon the first eliments of his natural phrasing; and both
for very Aptnes and consimilitie of sentence.

Now for the preserving of this union the secondarie means which occur are
either, Free means, or Obligatory and less free.

The free means are these, Election and Confidence.

First by Election we shine in humanity to select his strangeness into
fellowship of exercising and businessing: wherein; by desiring him well we
shall duly erogate the like from him.

The next is to be confident in onr election when we exercise or business
with him, in freeness of spirit apertly; not curiously with observing into
him: whereby we shall challenge to discover in his generous expansure (I speak
of their gentry chiefly) much cause of delight in our choice, by the plentiful
accommodation of his parts in converse.

I call these Free means because they proceed only of libeberall education and
nobility in nature, which are by these two signs to be distinguished from
such souls as are conditions, slaves.

The Obligatorie or lesser liberal means, next under the Laws, are in
Conditions of Commercement, Seals of marriage, and Bonds of duty.

First, in Commercement, when our thrift is implied and promised to
ourbusinesse with him (as no dubt but it carries such profit with it as shall
uphold the benefit of either in all and like contentment.

Secondly in Marriage, which being now sealed betwixt the sons and daughters,
of either is obligatory in nature after consummation, and before in Covenant
for the most part. If otherwise, it is a free means: Howsoever, it makes no
less alike the liberties and reputations of either than Election and
Confidence in the ^^^^st converse that may be.

Wherefore I commend it to both having such pregnant aptnes upon their
complexions and in then dispositions thereunto for the best means of
incorporating and preserving this union everlastingly.

Lastly, in Duty, and to this we are whipped and led by the Animal motion of
like for like, in Liberties in Reputations, and in Benefit: where there is no
difference (if so please his Majesty) of Franchisement; none of Heraldry, nor
yet of Mart; both being within the same Ocean both one Monarchy, and one
City upon a hill, without confusion of Manners, Laws or Language.

Of this union, and consent: to conclude with this small taste of the Times
felicity, I think it no giddie Rapture in me to divine.

May both swell in one maine, and neither fall:
That Sea will stretch to Romes high Capital.

FINIS.
To the unparalleled blesst disposition The Lady Elizabeth Bridges.
THat thou art fair, because thou would not know it,
My Verse shall be no flattering glass to show it.
The art free from conflicts with the blood of sense:
Experience too, bids that doubt space expense.
Then, where is it I am detained?
Chaste (...), self owning beauteous,
Be benign^ as we are dueteous;
Reed our Line, and Love unfeigned.
T. P.

To the noble Gentleman, Sir Thomas Kneuet.
THis would thy Mistress once bespeake thy merit,
Not with any breath of liver:
Had I a child that challenged to inherit
More then Scepter holds together.
Even such blesst issue might as well be*seeme
Brought up by Kneuet, as borne of a Queen.
And thus, unto thy Censure now speak I,
(Humbler affectation suiting.)
The fairest issue of our nurserie,
Ift deserve that names reputing,
Thinks greater fame than this cannot succeed it,
The wisest Kneuet does vouchsafe to reed it.
T. P.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Edward Dyer.
THis which I bring thee is no Ilias
Writ in Veratrum drunken giddiness:
Yet in the stufffings of our legends mass,
It is not to conceit in most recesse,
Nor honors it with the most humble knee,
Though it is vnsinewed to fall under thee.
T. P.


