A SERMON PREACHED IN SAINT MARY'S IN OXFORD, BY THOMAS POWELL. 1613.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, 1613.

ORNATISSIMO VIRO D. D. SINGLETONO S. THEOLOGIAE DOCTORI, COLLEGII AENEI-NASI
PRINCIpali, and Academiae Oxoniensis Vice-cancellario dignissimo.
ORnatissime vir, nimis forsan superfluus indicabor, qui hanc mea^ conciunculam
in lucem edo, Plautus.
scriptorum enim plus est hodie quam olim muscarum cum caletur maxim.

Sed lingua nulla est mihi, quae negem quicquid tu roges; non sum nescius quin
futuri sunt quamplurimi (...) otiosi nimis homines, qui suis vestimentis and
cibis alienas res curant, quibus ad reprehendenda mea dicta, Salust ad Caes.
vix satis apertum os, vix satis lingua prompta videbitur.

Atque hic in primis Tragoediam mihi for san excitabunt opiniastri nonnulli si
quid adferetur quod discrepet a saliua quam imbiberint Sed si me immeritum
imperitus vllus Carpat, quid tum?

Istis maxima displicere laus est Beza in epigr. P. Valerius cos: vir populares
Publicola Arctus: Plut: in Pub: and ^. Livi^^l. 2. R^hist*


Publicolae c^rent scilicet qui solummodo viris (ad istoru^ normam) bonis
placere student. Ego non magnopere indignabor si quisquam sit qui de meis male
loquatur; satis est enim si hoc habemus ne quis nobis male facere possit Recte
pius Antistes. Augustus ad Tiberium* Suet. in Augusto. Augustinus co^tra Pet. 3.
Quis quis volens detrahit famae mea nolens addit mercedi meae: ego sane equos
and magnas bestias imitari cupio, qui oblatrantes caniculos cum contemptu
praetereunt. Ea lege and condition and meipsum and has primitias laboris mei
tuo Patrocinio commendo qua olim Augustus filios suos populo commendare
solebat; si merebuntur.

Collegij per prudentiam tuam optime gubernati olim alumnus* THOMAS POWELVS
Cambrobritannus.

EXODUS 28. 34. A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate
in the skirts of the robe round about.
HE that loves the law of God, Qui^dei^ legem diligit, etiam eaquae non
intelligit honorat. August. in Psalm. 119. Con. 31.
honors the things that he understands not, as that heavenly Doctor writes
upon the 119. Psalm. For here is no superfluous iod, every circumstance has
some pith, and the supposed barren places of the scripture co^taine in them
great fertility of wisdom.

And this would better appear if some skillful Zenas Tit 3. 13.
among you had the expounding of this present chapter, that describes the
ministerial garments of the priests: for my part, I presume not above the
skirts of the robe, If I touch but the hemme of the garment soundly, it shall be
unto me sufficient contentment.

When great Alexander marched with his army against Jerusalem, he was so
amazed at the sight of the high sacrificer in his pontifical robes (as the
Jewish antiquary records) that he revoked his purpose, Joseph lib. 11. Antiq.
cap. 8.
he turned his hostility into veneration, he spared the city, and he
granted unto the Jews all their requests* And yet Alexander saw but the out
side of these holy vestiments, the mysteries that are folded up in them never
entered into the thoughts of a mere Aristotelean Prince.

The ceremonial law ( which was a shadow of future good things) Heb. 10. 1.
is a book written within and on the backside (as Hugo Card. Hugo Card.
says in his preface to the book of Numbers) intus mysterium, foris historia,
within is the mystery, on the outside is the history.

You heard the sound of the words, I make have to the sense of the matter,
after some short analytical resolution of the text.

In this chapter the first canonical scribe of the holy Ghost describes the
ministerial garments of the priests, and they are of three sorts.

1 Some are proper to the high priest alone. 2 Some are proper to the inferior
Priests alone. 3 Some are common to both. The Priest must bear in his breast
the care of right judgment.

The proper ornaments of the high priests are four.

1 The robe of the Ephod. 2 The Ephod. 3 The breastplate of judgment. 4 The
miter with the golden plate. (...)

The robe of the Ephod is described a causis. ab adiunctis. ornamentis.
By the causes By the adjuncts.


The causes are of two sorts external internal.


The external causes are efficient final.


The internal matter. form.
The matter of this robe was (...) tekeleth which (as Munster observes by the
universal consent of the Jews was some kind of silk. Munster


Arias Montanus, Iunius and Tremel: and our English bibles mention here the
color without the stuff.

Concerning the form of this robe the greek word which the 70 Jewish Rabbis
use here, gives some light. 70 Interpret.


Their word is (...), which signifies a garment to the foot.

In few words then this robe was a blew habit of tekeleth which came down to
the foot of the high Priest.

The proper ornaments of this robe, were of 2 sorts, golden bells and
pomegranats.

And concerning these two with the assistance of God, and by your Christiam
patience, I intend this subsequent discourse: and first concerning the bells.

When Moses spoke unto the people he covered his face with a veil, Exodus 34,
35.
signifying by that type, the obscurity of the law, Compared with 2. Cor. 3.
according to the anagogicall interpretation of the Apostle in the second to
the Corinthians and the third Chapter.

Here is solid meat that requires much chewing of the cud, Scriptura in locis
obscurioribus quasi cibus qui manduc^ndo glutitur, in locis apertioribus quasi
potus qui itasorbetur, sicut invenitur. Greg. Mag. lib 1. Moral, c. 21. Idem in
epist. ad leand. Mare est script. divina habens in sesensus profundus.
Ambrosius in ep. 44* ad Constable. Gregor. Mag. part. 2. curae pastoral. c. 4.
Cyrillus de sacerdotio.
by spiritual meditation before we can digest it. Here is that ocean in which
the Elephant may swim, diue you into it who can, wading peradventure is a
fitter term for my shallow passage. Yet now with Peter I cast my self into
the sea. The law threatens death to the Priest, if he make not a sound with
his bells. And this (by the general consent of interpretors upon this place)
imports danger to the dumb Minister, if we compare the type with the
antitype, and the ceremony with the signification. And here among the rest
Gregorius Magnus takes away the veil from the face of Moses in the second
part of his pastorals at the fourth Chapter, in these words. Iram contra se
occulti iudicis exigit, qui sine sonitu praedicationis incedit. He provokes
the anger of the secret judge against himself, that insisteth not in the sound
of preaching. And with him forteth well the Archbishop of Alexandria in his
book de Sacerdotio where he speaks thus. Impendebat mortis metus ijs qui
sacerdotis munere in tabernaculo fungebantur nisi tintinabula maxim
circumstreperent: est ergo silentium doctoribus in primis periculosum idque
perspicue illud est quod Paulus ait vae mihi si no^ Evangelizavero: they that
executed the office of the Priests in the tabernacle were in danger of death
if the bells made not a noise. Therefore (says he) silence is dangerous in a
doctor and this is that which Saint Paul affirms in plain terms Woe unto me
if I preach not the gospel. Vetus testame^tum in novo revelatum and in veteri
novum uelatum, Aug. in Psalm. 105.
And thus as the new testament is veiled in the old, so the old testament is
revealed in the new. Consonant unto the former is the exposition of Calvin upon
this place, although he be commonly a close adherent unto the letter of the
text.

Morte dignus est sacerdos a quo vox praedicationis no^ auditur. Calvin Exodus
28*
That priest is worthy to die from whom the voice of preaching is not heard.
This is a hard saying, if peradventure he mean not by preaching any
publishing of the truth and so is the word taken in the 8. of Luke at the 39.
verse, Luke 8. 39.
the man out of whom the devils were departed went into his own house, (...).
and he went away preaching through the whole city, how great things Jesus did
for him: howsoever his meaning is, in this I am confident with Bernard, Bernard.
Nobis tacere non licet quibus ex officio incumbit peccantes arguere. Silence
is intolerable in us, who by our office are bound to reprove offenders. If you
affected multiplicity of language it were easy to parallel this text with many
plain places of scripture but I refer you to the 56. of Esaias at the 10.
verse, Esaias 56. 10.
and to the second of the Acts where the holy Ghost comes down upon the
Apostles in the likeness of fiery tongues, Act 2. Sic fere Greg
quia omnes quos miserit and ardentes pariter and loquentes facit: because all
that are sent of God upon this message have their mouths opened and their
tongues fired from heaven. And here by your patience we may tax negligence in
some, who although they have the tong^es of the learned yet they minister no
word of comfort to the afflicted. 1. Cor. 9. 13.
They eat of the sacrifices but they minister not at the altar.

Is not the pastor resembled in scripture to the Ox, 1 Cor 9. 9. Rev. 4.
which is a symboll of painfulness. For Theseus marked his coin with the
stamp of an Ox, and in so doing (as Plutarch records in the life of
Theseus) he provoked his citizens to industrious diligence in their callings.
Plut. in These. Origeni Adamantini cognomen inditum pr^pter indefatigatam studii
tolerantiam, Eras. Chil.


Are not the disciples compared to salt which melts away by seasoning other
things. And was not John Baptist a burning candle because he consumed himself
by giving light to others.

Secondly this makes way unto a just complaint against the ignorance of
others, the first sort want that fidelity, the second sort want that wisdom
that is required in a good steward, who is a faithful and a wise steward: si
non fuerit fidelis fraudabit, si non fuerit prudens fraudabitur.

The first sort rese^ble the Estridges that have wings but they fly not.
Sernard: ad hoc de^ium dantur pennae vt currentem adiuve^t caetero non sunt
volucres nec a terra tolluntur Plin. not hist. lib. 10. cap. 1. Plutarch.


The second sort resemble the lapwings that run away with some part of the
shell upon their heads.

The virgin vestals vowed chastity for the space of 30. years, in the first
10. they learned their duties, in the second 10. they did that which they
learned, in the last 10. they taught young novices.

Our course is preposterous, we begin at the last: and here I accuse my self
in the first place with Ambrose, Ambros. offic. ^ib. 1. cap. 1.
factum est ut prius docere inciperem quam discere: I began to teach others
before I was taught my self. And this I may second with the words of the
Spowse in the Canticles, at the 5. verse, the sons of my mother made me the
keeper of the vines, but I kept not mine own vine, or with the words of the
mellifluous doctor upon that place, ego huius loci occasion meipsum
reprehendere soleo, Bernard. sermon. 30. in Cant.
quod animarum susceperim curam, qui non meam sufficerem custodire. I took
upon me the cure of souls, before I was sufficient to watch over mine own.

The breast, and the shoulder were appointed unto the Priests under the law,
Pectus et armi sacerdoiibus da^tur, qui and consilio populum regere, and inge^s
onus gubernationis Ecclesiae sustinere debent Sic Origin. hom 5. in Levit. 7.
Moses, enim (...) Theod. quaest. 27 in Levit. The Romans sent 3 Ambassadors to
the Realm of Bithinia, the one had the gout, the other had his head full of
gashes, the 3 was a fool. Of these 3 Cato said merrily mittit Populus R.
legationem quae nec caput nec cor, nec pedes habet. Plutarc in Cat.
not without some mystery, because they must have a breast for counsel, and a
shoulder to bear the burden of care for the flock, and therefore no man
discharges the part of a good Pastor, unless he have a breast for counsel,
and a shoulder to bear that heavy burden. By the law of Moses they were
incapable of the Priesthood that had any outward blemishes in their bodies
Levit. 21. 17, 18, 19 20. (...) these are our types, these outward deformitis
in the body, resembled inward imperfectio^s in the soul that make men
incapable of ministerial function in the Church under the new Testament. At
vtinam viveres Cato, If Cato mayor were now living, here is matter of laughing
for him: for now the people of Rome sent forth Ambassadors (like unto the^
that went into the Realm of Bithinia) that have neither head nor heart, nor
feet. Nemo egregium and munus maximum per indignam mittit personam, no man
sends the greatest present of all by the hand of an unworthy person, says
Ambrose upon the third to the Ephesians: and therefore if any send such, they
have the greater sin, and yet on the other side, if any refuse the sacraments
at their hands that have the outward calling of the Church, this is zeal out
of his wits. Notably does the hammer of haereticks beat down thesurging pride
of the Donatists. August. Malleus heretrcorum
in this point in his third book contra Cresconium grammaticum: per ministros
dispares Dei munus aequale. By Minist^rs of unequal gifts the gift of God is
of equal worth. The best gifts are to be desired (if they may be had) yet the
want of them nullifieth neither the calling, nor the ministerial actions of
the minister. St Paul to Timothy requires many things to the commendable being
of a Pastor, Mr Cl^in his manu^l.
yet they are not all necessary to his essential being: Plato draws forth a
Common wealth, and Cicero describes an orator, at such a pitch of perfection,
that no man ever yet saw the like, and yet if any infer this conclusion upon
the premises: therefore there was never any true orator etc. Every yesterdaies
sophister denies readily the sequel: And so from the bells I come to the
golden bells.

In a golden bell I note two things matter sound.
1 Precio valet. 2 Dulce sonat.
3 It is precious in estimation. 2 The sound is pleasant to the ear.
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci.

He beereth away the golden bell that delivers a profitable story in a
pleasant style. Good matter slubbered up in rude terms becomes loathsome to
the hearers: and elegancy of words without soundnes of matter, is but a nice
vanity. To both these the Psalmist has respect, Psalm. 45. at the first verse
(...) (...) my heart bubbleth up a good matter, or a good word for dabor tob
signifies both: his meaning then as I conceive him is this: Praedicatores
Ecclesiae been labia sponsae di ^^ntnr quia per eos populis loquitur: Greg.
Mag. in Cant. deliciosa ad saporem, solida ad nutrimentum.
my heart inditeth a good matter in good words. The lips of the spouse (they
are the preacher: of the Church) drop down honycombes. Koheleth (as all the
other Prophets) has words of delight and Scripture of right words of truth,
he matcheth (...) dibre Kephets words of delight, and (...) dibre Aemeth,
words of truth together. A preacher must have words of truth, he must not make
the pulpit a chair of falsehood, Eloquentia expe^s sapientiae calore and succo,
sapientia eloquentiae expers color and cultucarere videtur ex Bensii erat. 169
and he must have words of delight for divine truth is a grave matron that
abhorres wanton daliances, but she loves comeliness. They that pranke her up in
vain fashions, offer unto her great indignity, and so do they that cloth
her in rags. In the 11 of Math. Christ compares himself to a Master of
music We have piped unto you because his preaching was music to the ear,
D. H. Verbu Dei mel in ore Melos in aure, iubilus in cord.
grace was powered into his lips all men wondered at the gracious word that
proceeded out of his mouth: and by the confession of his very enemies, never
man spoke as this man: mulcendi sunt auditores sermonis dulcedine, Gulielm.
quem Martinus D. ^. Riocitat in (...) 4. Psalm. 147. 1.
ne vt ilia invtiliter audiant: such is our nature we are soon weary of good
things unless we take pleasure in them and therefore the Psalmist exhorts
the church to the praising of God. First because it is a good thing to sing
unto our God, and secondly because it is a pleasant thing. 1 Su^^ quaedam (...)
patientia, disciplina.


1. Some things are good but they are not pleasant as Correction, Heb. 12, 11.
no chastising for the present seems to be joyous.

2 Some things are pleasant but they are not good: (...): 2. Sunt quaedam
iucunda and non bona, voluptas.
durty speeches, foolish talking and scurrilous jesting condemned in the 5. to
the Ephesians: at the fourth.

3 Some things bring neither profit nor pleasure as envy, 3. Sunt quaedam nec
bona nec iucundat invidia, tristitia.
and worldly sorrow and swearing: Basilicon doron.

4 Some things are both good and pleasant and they affect us most. 4. Sunt
quaedam bona and iucunda: honestas: charitas, puritas. Bernard.


In a golden bell, there is good matter artificially handled, and both these
are commended by S. Paul to Timothy in the second epistle 2. chapter. and at
the 15. verse, study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that
needs not to be ashamed (...) rightly dividing the word of truth: the word
of truth rightly divided, is a good matter artificially handled.

And here there are three sorts of workmen, that offend against this rule.

1 Some deceitful workmen contrary to the Canon in the 19. Doctrina falsa
verae non admiscenda, Pelargus.
of Leviticus at the 19. verse, sow the field with mingled seed by sowing tares
among the wheat I mean heretical opinions among some catholic points of
doctrine, these men among many good herbs cast some deadly colloquintida into
the pot and of this sort were the Pharisees that taught many sound fundamental
points, but they had their leaven.

2 The second sort are unprofitable workmen that beat the air to no purpose,
and they make anagrams upon the text and fond defcants upon every letter as if
the scripture were but a rattle for children to make sport withal, these so
press the breasts of the scriptures the old and the new testament, that
insteede of milk they draw forth nothing but blood: they mount aloft now and
then in great words, but their words are like unto the cypress trees, Malac.
2. 7.
which are high, and lofty, but they bear no fruit. The Priests lips says the
prophet Malachy preserve knowledge and the people shall seek the law at his
mouth not toys or fables. Well said sweet S. Bernard, In ore secularis nugae,
nugae sunt, in ore sacerdotis blasphemiae, toys are toys out of the mouth of
a secular man, but out of mouth of the priest they are blasphemies.

3 The third sort are unskillful workmen, who because they want their knife, I
mean their art, and method, divide not aright the word of truth. Plin. not.
hist. l* 10 c 65. Apud Persas pregnantes and in vtero parentis reperiuntur
mures.
And yet these sermocinators imitate the Persian Mice which as Plinius secundus
records, multiply in so great number that the tale hazards the credit of the
reporter, for as he says the young ones are found with young while they are yet
in the belly of the damme, so they multiply sermon upon sermon, and the
conception of the one preventeth the birth of the other. As these men please
themselves with so little learning as may be, so (having to near affinity
with those spirits whom St Jude taxes) they speak evil of the things which
they understand not. Iud. 10.
They condemn the use of arts, and sciences in the pulpit, together with the
ringing sentences of the fathers (as they speak) not perceaving how through
the sides of our learned divines the Apostle is goared, Act. 17 28. 1. Cor. 25
33. Tit 1. 12. Quaecu^que been and rationabiliter dicta invenimus apud immicos
n^stros opor^et nos mundare and resecare omne quod em^^tuu^ and inane est. hoc
enim sunt omnes capilli capiti^, and vngulae mulieris ex inimic^rum spoliis
assump^ae Origin. hom. 7. in Levit. 10. Philosophi si qua vera and fi^l^i
nostrae accommoda dixerunt non solum form^danda non sun^sed ab iis etiam
^^nquam ab (...)oribus in vsu^ nostrum vendicanda. Aug. de doct Chr. lib 3
who cites three several sentences out of profane Poets; The truth is, the
profitable inventions of the heathen may be sparingly used by Christians. And
this was the judgment of Origin in his 7. Hom. upon the 10. of Levit. When any
of Israel took a maid in battle, he first pared her nails, and he shaved
her head before he married her: so we must pare away in humane learning all
things noxious before we captive it to the use of the Christian religion, and
with him agrees Augustine in his second book de doctrina Christiana, at the
40. Chapter: We rob the Egyptians of their jewels, when we co^vert arts and
sciences and humane learning to the use of Theology. Nec aranea um sanc textus
id ^ m^lior quia ex se sila gignunt, nec noster vilior quia ex alienis libamus
vt apes (...) in not ad Pelit. lib. 1.
The spider is never the more commendable because he weaueth his web out of
his own bowels. neither is the be despised because she gathers her honey
out of diverse flowers.

Whatsoever some pretend yet many (I say not al) condemn the use of learning
in the pulpit, that men may not take notice of their ignorance. And here the
Apology of the crafty fox (that by some mischance lost his tail) may take
place, he coming into the assembly of beasts of that kind, exhorted them all
to cut of their tails, alleging the unprofitableness, and the cumbersomnes
of it. And this he did for the covering of his own deformity; the application
is easy. I go forward to the next point.

The golden bells were about the skirts of the robe.

Concerning this circumstance Ierom to Fabiola has a witty observation:
Hieron. ad Fab. circa finem.
the golden bells hanged about the skirts of the robe, quia ipse vestitus
sacerdotis debet esse v^cilis, because the garments of the Priests must be a
loud preacher to the people. As John Baptist preached the doctrine of
repentance to the ear by voice, so his garment of Camels hair preached
sobriety to the eye in hieroglyphick manner by a sensible sign. Adam had
coats of skins, Moneantur ^io divites, ne in nimium vesti^ e^^iornatum
plurimum insumant Pelarg. in Genesis 3 Venturae mortis signa: Lyse^us in Genes. 3.
and they preached frugalitie: they were the skins of slain beasts, and so
they preached mortality to the beholders. The second Adam had a coat without
seame, and that preached unity. So our apparel must preach modesty and
sobriety: for a Bishop must be sober in speech, in behavior, in diet, in
apparel.

And here I cannot pass further without shouldring of some that stand in my
way on both sides, and they are of two sorts: First they of the new faction;
secondly they of the new fashion.

The ordinary garments of the factions which they use publicly in the
celebration of divine service, and in the administration of the sacraments, are
indeed loud preachers unto the people; but what do they preach? (...)
disobedience to superiors, singularity in opinion, and desire of contention.
But from the Salamanders that delight in the fire of contention, I turn: my
self on the other hand to the Chameleons, M^tat namque, Chamaeleon colorem
suum and oculis and caud^ and toto carp^re Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. c, 33.
that transform themselves into all fashions. Their swaggering in the fashion,
and their swearing in the fashion proclaim unto all men the impiety, and
vanity of their minds: for true is that observation of Bernard, forma haec
vestium deformitatis mentium indicium est: this form of apparel argues a
worse deformity in the heart. Eccles. 19. 28.
A man's attire, excessive laughter, and going, show what he is: these three
make a commentary upon the heart. And so from the golden bells in the skirts of
the robe, I come to the Pomegranates, that were matched with them.

The pomegranate, which is an excellent fruit, was a symbol of good works, as
Gregorius affirms, nee desunt malogranata, sicum linguae sonitu bona opera
coniu^gas, he wants not pomegranates to his bells, that ioineth teaching, and
doing together. Both these are joined together in the 5 of Matthew at the 19.
verse. Whosoever shall do and teach them, he shall be great in the kingdom
of heaven. Act. 1. 1.
S. Luke reduces the history of Christ into two heads: teaching, and doing.
Moses wishes unto Levi Vrim and Thummim, Vult lex Pontificem in operibus
ornatum, nec sufficit sola scientia. Origin: de indumentis pontificis hom. 6.
in Levit.
the light of knowledge, and the integrity of conversation, and our Savior
commends to his Disciples, the wisdom of the serpent, and the innocence of
the dove.

A Church minister must be in verbis Ulysses, infactis Achilles, or rather
because we are accused for bringing the vnciscumcised Greeks into the Temple,
Acts 21. 28. he must be in verbis Chrysostomus, in factis Polycarpus. The
Scribes and Pharisees are sharply reproved Mat. 23. for putting asunder the
things, which God ioineth together, I mean, saying, and doing, they say but
they do not.

And this light shined in darkness for the Romans accused Publicola for
praising Brutus in word, when he followed Tarquinius in deed. Plut. in Public.
B^rnard.
Multi sunt Catholic (...). dicando, qui tamen sunt haeretici operando: many
are Catholics in their doctrines, which are heretics in their lives, Multi
habent Christum in codicibus sed non in cordibus Aug lib. de spiritu and animi.
c. 62.
says Bernard. They confute their sermons, with their evil lives. They
rese^ble the file, that smootheth other things, but it self remains rough.
These are mercuriales statuae, that point at the way to others, but they stand
still.

But how can they so boldly reprove others, that are so badly reformed in
themselves? Who laughes not at the Cynicke Philosopher trampling upon the pride
of Plato with a greater pride. Bernard.
Monstruosares est seeds prima, and vita im^, gradus summus, and animus
infimus, lingud magniloqua, and manus otiosa, sermo multus, and fructus nullus.
These are monstrous things (says the devout Abbot, de consid. ad Eugen.) the
highest seat and the basest life, a busy tongue and an idle hand, much
talking, and little good walking: here are bells without pomegranats, Mat. 5.
Ergo vitae suae diligentem rationem habeant pastores, vtpote in quos omnes
spectant in quibus exiguus lapsus foedi criminis instar crit. Ferus in Mat.
Minoris aestimatur offensa, quae ab vno aliquo populari, qua^ quae a sacerdot^
acciderit, Iunius in ^xp. Analyt. in Levit. 4, Rev. 1* 6.
which is a plain transgression of the law.

Brethren we play our part upon the open stage of the whole world, and
therefore we must use the greater circumspection. The law in the 4. of
Leviticus appoints a he-goat for the sinne-offring of the Priest and a lesser
sacrifice for the offering of a private man; because God is more highly
displeased with the sin of the Priest (and so he is with the sin of all
governors) then with the sin of a private man, Levit. 10. 3.

Lastly, this text contains instruction for all Christians, for we are all
Priests to God the father.

God therefore by ioining together bells, and pomegranats in the skirts of the
robe, requires 2. things at the hand of every Christian.

1 Profession. 2 Practice.
First he requires profession; as we believe with the heart unto
righteousness, so we must confess with the mouth unto salvation, Romans 10. 10.

And secondly he requires practice, not every one that says unto me Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
father, which is in heaven. Mat. 7* 21.

Concerning the first our Savior speaks in the 10. of Matthew at the 32.
verse, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before
my father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will
I also deny before my father which is in heaven.

Here is a cou^terpoyso^ against the deadly doctrine of the Nicodemites, who
deny the faith in time of persecution, under pretense of keeping their hearts
unto God. As the law threatens death to the priest, if he make not a sound
with his bells, so Christ here requires public profession of the faith under
pain of eternal death. And yet profession in word is not sufficient, without
good works.

The Church is compared to a woman in the Canticles, propter foecunditatem
bonorum operum, for her fruit fullness in good works, as Beda notes. And the
Christian is compared to the vine, which is most fruitful of all plants.
Augustine writing upon the 103. Psalm, Psalm 103.
speaks occasionally of the 8. of John, where our Savior writes with his
finger upon the ground, In lapide legem scripserat significans duritiam
Iudaeoru^; hie in terra scribit significans fructum Christianorum, He wrote the
law to the Jews in stone, signifying the hardness of their hearts; here he
writes upon the ground signifying that fruitfulness that is to be expected at
the hands of Christians. And here I might take occasion to fight a combat with
verbal professors, that profess in word the knowledge of God, but in deed
they deny him, Titus 1. 16. Non recte sane, Bernard.
sed impie, linguam Christo, and animam dedisti diabolo: wisely done indeed!
for so thou give thy tongue to God, and thy soul to the devil. (...).
These men have the smooth voice of Jacob and the rough hands of Esau. They are
good linguists, but they are bad reallistes. Vt poma in Iudaea non poma
nascuntur, quae contacta in fumum abeunt, talis verbosa illa pietas, sine
vitaeli hoc operum succo; Lips. in po^ Sobrie quantum ad nos, just quantum ad
proximos, pie quantum ad deum: Bernard.
They resemble the fair apples that grow by the lake Asphaltites, which (as
Josephus says) vanish away into smoke when they come to handling. These men
abuse the doctrine of free justification by faith, by turning the grace of God
into wantonness, and so with good food they poison themselves.

But the grace of God teaches us to deny ungodliness, and wordly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, soberly in
respect of our s^lues, righteously in respect of our neighbors, and godly in
respect of God.

FINIS.

