Devout prayers in english of thactes of our redemption.

Christ with halo, crown of thorns, and stigmata standing beside the cross,
with instruments of the passion, empty tomb, a cock, etc.

Christ on the cross surrounded by St. John, Mary, and another woman (with
haloes?) (left) and a group of Roman soldiers (right)

Here begins five devout prayers / mouynge man unto the meditacyon of
Christ's passion.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god / for thine unspeakable pytye /
and the most excellent life of thy most holy mother Mary / and for the
merytes of saint Francyse and of al thy saints: grant (we beseech the) unto
us most wretched sinners unworthy any of thy benefytes / that we might love
the alone / and ever be burning or fervent in thy love / and yt we might
continually magnify the work of redemption / that we might ever desire thy
honor / and daily bear and remember in our heart ye benefyt of thy passion. That
we might know and considre our misery / and continually desire to be despiced
and rebuked for thy love. So that nothing should comfort us or abide in our
heart / but thy death and passion / and nothing displease or trouble us but our
own sin and wretchedness. Amen.

Here follows a prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ which freely and with thyn own will came unto thy passion:
come also to me a wretch / by thy grace into my heart or soul. And thou that
then did repare me by thy death on the cross / repare me again that am fallen
to sin / repare me I say by the merytes of that same most blessed passion.
Grant to me lord that in all things I might keep myldenes and mekenes / and
subdue my flesh and my spiryt holly unto the. And that I may be made as a
be unto the / that thou sitting upon me and rulyng me as thy be: may
led me now unto the taste of inward peace and desire of heavenly peace And at
last may bring me into the vision and sight of the same eternal peace. Amen.

A prayer.
O Lord thou made a general sign or token of thy terryble judgment when
thou cast out of the temple al buyers and sellers with a whyp made of.iii.
cords / showing in thy face or cyne the flame of thy divinity: I pray and
beseech the lord to grant me to remember and so to consider thy terryble
presence. That I might fear the with an holy fear / for thy iugeme^tes be
great and not to be searched / which when I consider al my bones quake for
fear. For there is no man living upon the earth that is sure of thy glory / but
al things be reserved as uncertain unto the time herafter to come. That we
should ever serve the devoutly and ver uously in fear: and also joy in the
with dread. Amen.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ / which in the cuyntyde made thy last supper with thy
discyples in a great and large chamber / strawed and made ready for the / and
there fed the^ with thy most sacrate body and blood: make my heart a great and
large chamber prepared for the / enlarge in it true faith / hope and charity.
Magnify or make it great with lo^gammite / pacyence and mekenes. And straw it
with all manner of virtues. Grant me lord that my heart contrite and thus
prepared: may take and receive the after my pore manner / whom heaven and earth
are not able to take and conteyne: and by thy grace inhabytant in me I may
think and perform in deed all things pleasynge to the / and declyne or
avoid all vice and sin by perfect hate of them. And so co^tinuyng unto the
end / I may worthily receive thy precious body and blood in the sacrament of ye
altar. Ame^.

A prayer.
O Mylde Jesus and the examplar of very mekenes / which washed the fete of thy
disciples. I ask and also beseech the lord / purge and cleanse thou my
affections / that I so purifyed in both fete / and kyndeled with a double
charity / that is with the love of god and of my neighbor: I might suerly come
to the my purifyer and cle^ser: keep me good lord unto the end of my days /
and cleanse me from all spots of sins / that all my negligences and sins
forgyuen: mine enemies confounded and rebuked might go fro me at the hour of my
death Which specially will lie in a wait of me at that hour. Direct and order
my fete lord in to the way of peace / that I delivered from the hands and
power of all mine enemies: might bless and praise the with all thy elect
servants world without end. Amen.

Here ends the.v. prayers / concerning.v. particles of Christ's passion.
Here begins.lxv. prayers of our lords passion with a.ix. other prayers of
the Resurrection / Ascencyon. etc^.
The first prayer of the fear and heaviness of Christ. Math. xxvi. D.

O Lord Jesus Christ son of the living god which at midnyght thy passion
drawyng nygh would take upon the fere and heaviness for me most wretched sinner:
grant me continually and faithfully to refer all my tribulations / heaviness
and pains unto the: the god of my heart / that thou would vouchsafe to bear them
with me in ye union of thy passion and heaviness. That so by the merits of thy
most holy passion / they might be made to me fruitful and profitable. Amen.

The second prayer of the blody sweat of Christ. Luce. xxii. E.

O Lord Jesus Christ son of the living god / which in thy long prayer
would be comforted of thangell / and in thy agony swette merueylously drops
of blood: grant to me by the virtue of thy prayer / that thy holy angel
might ever assyst me in my prayer and comfort me / that I restyng in the sweet
remembrance of thy most bitter passion: might devoutly sweat the drops of
tears for thy blood in thy sight and knowledge. Amen.

Math. xxvi. B.
The third prayer of the vendicion or sellyng of our lord.
O Jesus which would be set at naught and sold of one of thy disciples for a vile
price. Grant to me that I never change the my god and creator for any
transytory thing. And also that I may pacyently bear all rebukes and
despisynges for the glory of thy holy name. Amen.

Math. xxvi. E.
The.iiii. prayer of the betrayeng of our lord.
O Jesus that suffered thy self to be betrayed by a kiss of Judas: grant to me
that I never betray the in my self nor in my neighbor. And also yt I never
deny to mine adversaries thoffyce of love / that is charity to love the^ / and
to correct them with charytie. Amen.

The.v. Math. xxvi. E.
prayer of the taking of Christ.
O Jesus Christ the son of ye living god / which would be wylfully taken and
holden of the Jews: grant to me that I may continually subdue all my sensys
and understanding unto thy service / that by thy infinite goodness I may be
delivered from eternal death and captivity. Amen.

The.vi. Johan. xviii. C.
prayer of the byndyng of our lord.
O Jesus which would be bound with the hands of wicked men: I beseech the loose
the bonds of my sins / and so bynd me to the with the bonds of thy
precepts / that never the members of my body / nor the powers of my soul be
loosed and at lyberty to do any thing contrary to thy will. Amen.

The.vii. Math. xxvi. F.
prayer of the fleyng or departing away of the disciples of Christ.
O Jesus yt did suffer al thy elect and chosen disciples to fle from the /
receive thou me thy fugityue servant for thy great virtue and omnipote^t power:
and suffer me not to wa^dre from the / through the lyberty of my froward will.
Amen.

Marci. xiiii. E.
The.viii. prayer of the leadynge of Christ.
O Jesus which bound as a thief and an evil doer / would be led by the armed
hands of wicked me^ from place to place with rebuke and great shame: grant to
me that grace / that I never be led unto any sin / though the persuacyon of
the devil or counsel of any wicked person / but that I may be led by thy
holy spirit unto all things that shall be / pleasant unto the. Amen.

Johan. xviii. C.
The.ix. prayer / how Christ was presented unto Annas.
O Jesus which would be first led and presented unto the bishop Annas: grant
to me that I never fear to be led or presented for thy name and faith /
before any tyrraunt or secular judge of this world. And also that thy grace
and right reason have ever the domynyon in me / that I may learn to present all
mine acts / wylles and desires unto the examinacyon of right reason before
that I do them in deed: thy grace at all times being assistant unto me, Amen.

Math. xxvi. G.
The.x. prayer of the denyenge of Petre.
O Jesus which suffered thy self to be denied thryce of the prince of thy
Apostles / whom also thou mercyfully beholdynge / made him to weape bytterly
for his sin. I beseech the behold me with the eye of thy mercy / that I may
worthily weep in thy sight for my sins / and that I never deny the my lord
god / another in words nor in deeds. Amen.

The.xi. Math. xxvi. G. Johan. xviii. D.
prayer / how our lord was smytten upon the cheke.
O Jesus which would be smytten for me most unworthy / of ye vile ministre and
servant of Annas: grant to me I beseech the thy grace / that I may stop my
mouth from al evil and vain speech / and that I never cease from thy laud
and praysynges. Amen.

The.xii. prayer / how Jesus was presented to Cayphas. Math. xxvi. F. Johan.
xviii. E.

O Jesus which for me most unkind wretch / would be sent from Annas unto
Cayphas: and also would be examyned before him: grant to me I beseech the for
the love of thy name / yt I fear not the judgment of evil persons. And also
that I may appear in thy syghte with a good and pure conscience. Amen.

Math. xxvi. F.
The.xiii. prayer of the bringing forth of false testimony against Christ.
O Jesus which would for me be blamed of ye Jews / and by their false
testimony accused: grant to me yt I never blame or rebuke man for the / nor
falsely yt I accuse any person. And also that I patiently suffer al false
accusacyons for thy honor and glory. Amen.

Math. xxvi. G.
The.xiiii. prayer of the blasphemy imputed to Christ.
O Jesus which did suffer the abominable sin of blasphemy to be put upon
the: keep me that thy name be never blasphemed by me in word nor in deed. And
that never any blasphemy or any other evil word be spoken or uttered with my
mouth. Amen.

Marci. xiiii. G.
The.xv. prayer of the condempnacyon of Christ.
O Jesus which feared not the wicked voice of the most cruel Jews when they
said of the / Reus est mortes he is worthy death / and pacie^tly did suffer /
the same for me most wretch: keep and preserve me / that I never be found
worthy eternal death in thy sight. Amen.

Math. xxvi. G.
The.xvi. prayer of the buffetynge or smytyng in the neck of Christ.
O Jesus which would be smytten by the cruel Jews in the neck for my love:
grant to me that I may so confess the my lord god with my mouth that I never
do contrary thy precepts in my deeds. Amen.

The.xvii. Math. xxvi. G.
prayer of the spittyng in Christ's face.
O Jesus which would suffer thy most fair and amiable face to be defiled for my
love with the felthy spittynges of the Jews: grant to me yt I never defile ye
face of thy image in my soul / by my si^ful acts or filthy cogitatio^s. Ame^.

The.xviii. Math. xxvi. G.
prayer of the smiting of Christ in the face.
O Jesus which would suffer for my love / thy most lovely face to be smyten
with ye hands of the most wicked Jews: grant to me that I may ever keep ye
face of thy image pure and undefiled in my soul / that it never be spotted or
hurt by ye sinful hands and works of my iniquities or sins. Amen.

The.xix. Marci. xiiii. G.
prayer of the coueryng or blyndfyldynge of Christ's face.
O Jesus which did suffer for my love thy most gracious face (the which
Au^gelles desire to behold) to be covered of the wicked Jews to thy great
rebuke: I beseech the make thy face shynt upon me thy most wretched servant /
that thy godly image i^ me be never derked or covered. And that mercyfully thou
would take away the cloak of sin / and the derkenes of ignorance from my heart
/ with ye light of thy heavenly grace. Ame^.

Math. (...). ^.
The.xx. prayer of the mocking of Christ wha^ they bad him prophecy.
O Jesus which with scorneful mockes of the Jews was smytten upon the heed /
and bydden to a read or prophecy who smote the. I beseech the good Jesus
prophecy and show to me / that I might know what a wretch and sinner I am /
which so often (alas for sorrow) have smytten the with the hand of mine evil
and sinful deeds. Amen.

Math. xxvii. A.
The.xxi. prayer / how Christ was presented before Pylate.
O Lord Jesus Christ son of the living god / which in the first hour of the
day for our health / would be presented by the Jews unto Pilate a pagan judge:
grant to me for the love of thy name / yt I dispice no manner of power. but yt
I may give due and worthy honor to my superiors and to al judges. Amen.

The.xxii. Math. xxvii. B
prayer how the Jews falsely accused Christ before Pylate.
O Jesus which would for me be falsely accused in many false things before the
judge pilate: teache me to avoid the disceytes of wicked men / and truly to
profess thy faith with good works Ame^.

The.xxiii. Lace. xxiii. B.
prayer how Christ was sent to Herod.
O Jesus which for my love did not fear to be sent from Pylate unto Herod
grant to me I beseech the that I with a glad mind for thy love may obey to
the commandments of my superiors / though they be wicked. And to do my
obedience promptly and redyly without any grudgynge. Amen.

The.xxiiii. Luce. xxiii. B.
prayer how Herod derided and mocked Christ.
O Jesus which for me would suffer Herod scornefully to demand many
questions of the / to ye which thou would not answer one word: grant to me
for thy love / that I may pacyently here and bear scornful questions and
mocking words. And yt I may decline and avoid my vain praise by my scilence.
Amen.

The.xxv. Luce. xxiii. B.
prayer how Christ was accused before Herod.
O Jesus which presented before Herod would for my love suffer the false
accusatio^s of the jews / and thou would not excuse thy self nor deny i^ any
word their must sayenges: grant to me that I be not overcome by the injuries
of wicked men / nor yt I show thy holy mysteries to the unworthy persons. Ame^.

Luce. xxiii. B.
The.xxvi. prayer / how Christ was despised of Herod.
O Jesus which was content to be despised for me / of Herod and his company or
servants: grant me to despise al worldly pomp for the. And not to regard
the dispysynges of wicked men for thy love and for justice. Amen.

Ibidem
The.xxvii. praer / how Christ was clothed with a white garment to his
dispysynge.
O Jesus which would be for me clothed in a white garment and mocked as a fool
of Herod and his servants: grant me warely to declyne or avoid the wisdom
of this world which in thy sight is but a folysshnes. And with a pure heart to
come to the / which art the very true wisdom. Amen.

Vbi supra.
The.xxviii. prayer / how Christ was sent again to Pylate.
O Jesus which for me would be sent again from Herod unto Pilate and thereby
would make them friends: grant me that I fear not the frendeshyp of wicked
men against me / but rather that I may so profyt by their exercise / that I may
deserve to be conformed and made like unto the. Amen.

The.xxix. Math. xxvii. C
prayer / how Christ was forsaken of the Jews. And Barrabas by them was
delivered.
O Jesus Christ the son of the living god / which for man's saluacy on
disdayned not in the.iii. hour of the day to be reproved and forsaken of the
Jews that did ask ye sedicious thief Barabas to be delivered from death unto
his liberty: and would have ye the auctor and gyuer of life to be crucified:
grant to me that I may ever chose the my creator and maker before all other /
and never to reprove or forsake ye for any creature.

The.xxx. Math. xxvii. D
prayer / of the pulling of the garments of Christ.
O Jesus which for me would have thy clothes pulled vyolentely of thy back and
would be stripte naked to be scurged: grant to me yt I may cast of from me mine
old synful cote or life with all his operations / by true / pure and plain
confession of al my sins. And yt I never appear i^ thy sight naked from
virtue.

Johan. xix. A.
The.xxxi. prayer how Christ was scourged.
O Jesus which would be bound for me to a pyller and grievously scourged:
grant to me that I may patiently and gladly bear the scourges of thy fatherly
correction / and never to scourge the again with my sins. Amen.

Marci. xv. B.
The.xxxii. prayer / how they put an old purpull cote upon Christ.
O Jesus which for me would be cladde in an old purpul rob to thy dispysing:
grant me continually to have i^ my mind / or to be clad with ye remembrance
of thy passion / and to hyde and cover my sins with the purpul of charity.
Amen.

Math. ^7. D.
The.xxxiii. prayer / how Christ was crowned with thorns.
O Jesus which for me would be crowned with thorns: make me so worthily to be
co^punct by the thorns of penance / yt I may deserve to be crowned of the in
the heavenly kingdom. Ame^.

Math. 27. D.
The.xxxiiii. prayer / how the Saugiours put a read in Christ's right hand.
O Jesus which would have a read to be put in thy right hand scornfully for a
royal ceptre: I beseech the so to strength my imbecilitie and frayltie with
the right hand of thy power / that thy kingdom may be continually confyrmed
and stablysshed in me. Amen.

The.xxxv. Johan. xix. A.
prayer / how the Saugiours scornefully saluted Christ.
O Jesus which for me would be scornfully worshypped and saluted of the Saugiours
knelynge and saying. Hayle king of the Jews: grant to me that I may worship
the my very lord and god in spirit and truth. And reuere^tly to salute the /
ye only king of all kings.

The.xxxvi. Johan. xix. A.
prayer / how the Saugiours smote Christ with their hands.
O Jesus which would be smiten of the Saugiours for me: make me ever to laud
and praise the both in word and deed. And also that the deeds of other men
though they be evil / may ever turn to my good and profit. Amen.

The.xxxvii. Math. 27. D.
prayer / how the Saugiours did spyt in the face of Christ.
O Jesus which for me did suffer the vile saugiours to spyt in thy most
beauteous face: grant to me yt I never pollute or defile thy face in the
sacrament of the alter by my unworthy receiuyng thereof. And that I never defyle
my conscience with unclean thoughts. Amen.

Math. 27. D.
The.xxxviii. prayer / how the Saugiours smote Christ upon the heed with a read.
O Jesus which would have thy noble and precious heed smytten with a read for
me: grant to me that I never offend the our heed with my vain and idle
life. But that I may ever please the with my good and quyete manners and
living. Amen.

Johan. xix. A.
The.xxxix. prayer / how Pylate did show Christ scourged unto the Jews.
O Jesus which for me would be showed and presented unto the Jews in so
scornful and dispytefull array: grant me to avoid all ostentation of vain
glory / and appear before the at thy judgment in such array as shall stand
with thy favor. Amen.

Johan. xix. A.
The.xl. prayer / how the Jews did cry. Crucyfye him / crucifye him.
O Jesus which for me was not afraid to here the terrible and fearful voices
of the Jews cryeng. Crucifige crucifige / that is crucifye him / crucifye him:
grant to me that I be not afraid of the cursed and malicious words of mine
enemies. And that I never hurt my neighbor with my speech. Amen.

The.xli. Johan. xix. C.
prayer / how Christ was brought unto his judgment.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god / which in the.vi. hour of
the day would for me most wretched sinner be presented before the judge syttyng
in judgment: grant to me so to judge my self in my self of all my sins /
by the testimony or witness of mine own conscience. And also so patiently to
suffer thy judgment in all adversities: that I may in suertie appear in thy
last and terrible judgment. Amen.

The.xlii. Marci. xv. B.
prayer / how Christ was condemned.
O Jesus which for me would pacie^tly and innoce^tly suffer the unjust sentence
of death / and that of the most shameful death of the cross: grant to me that
I never deserve the just sentence of death in soul or in body. And yt for thy
love I fear not the wicked judgments of men. And also that I never judge any
person wrongefully. Amen.

Johan. xix. D.
The.xliii. prayer / how Christ bare his cross.
O Jesus which for me a wretch would bear thy heavy cross upon thine own
shoulders / make me wylfully and gladly to take the cross of penance and
strayter life. And to bear it daily after the and for thy love. Amen.

Ibide^. and Math. 27. D.
The.xliiii. prayer how Christ was led unto Golgoltha / that is the mount of
Caluary.
O Jesus which for me would be led unto Golgotha to be there crucified: lead
me in the pathe of thy commandments / that I may follow the steps of thy
passion with ye holy women / and weep upon my self the misery of my frail
condicyon. Amen.

Ancelmus in dialogo passo^is.
The.xlv. prayer / how Christ was spoiled of his clothes before the cross.
O Jesus which for me would be spoiled of thy clothes and sit naked be / fore
the cross: make me to be spoiled or naked from al worldly things yt be
hynderau^ce to my salvation / that I naked might follow thy naked cross. Amen.

The.xlvi. Ancelmus vbi supra.
prayer / how Christ was laid or spread upon the cross.
O Jesus which for me would be extended upon the cross / and that so cruelly yt
all thy bones might be nombred: make me to extend al my members and powers
both of soul and body unto thy laud and praysynge. Amen.

The.xlvii. Johan. xix. D.
prayer / how Christ was crucified.
O Jesus which for me would be nailed with most hard nails unto the cross /
and thereby would fasten the obligacion and writing of our sins and death unto
thy cross. Nail fast I beseech the my flesh with thy fear / that I surely
cleuynge fast to thy commandments / may evermore be fastyned to the and to
thy holy cross. Amen.

The.xlviii. prayer / how Christ's hands and fete were nailed / and specially
of the first or left hand. Psalm. 21

O Jesus which for me most wretched would have thy left hand dug or bored
with a nail and fastened to the cross: grant me that I may ever put and hyde
all mine adversities and temptations in the most sweet wound of that left
hand / and that I may find in it a sure and wholesome remedy against all manner
of tribulations. Amen.

The.xlix. prayer of borynge or naylynge of the second or right hand of
Christ.
O Jesus which for me a wretch would have thy right hand persed through with a
nail / and so fastened to the cross: grant to me that I may hyde in thy most
sweet wound of thy right hand with thanks: al my good works that it shall
please thy goodness to work in me. And that all my negligences and
imperfections may thereby be performed and supplied. Amen.

The.l. prayer / of the naylynge of the first foot or lift foot of Christ.
O Jesus which for me would have thy most holy fete perced with a great cross
and hard nail / and so to be fastined unto the cross: grant to me that when
so ever I am impugned or troubled with evil cogitations / sinistrall
affections and desires: I may come to the wound of thy lift foot / and
there to find and receive holsom medicynes for my salvation. Amen.

The.li. prayer of the naylyng of the second or right foot of Christ.
O Jesus which did make a fou^tayne of thy grace / spring to us from the
wholesome and most sweet wound of thy right foot: grant to me that I may
fasten and join all my good desires to that same thy wound with a lovely
kiss. And to make them conformable and agreyng to thy holy desires. Ame^.

The.lii. Ancelmus in dialogo passo^is.
prayer / how the cross with Christ upon it was raised up.
O Jesus which for me would be lyfted upon the cross / and so would be exalted
from the earth: make me I beseech the to be eleuate from all erthely affections.
And to be conuersaunte in mind in heavenly things. Amen.

The.liii. prayer / how.ii. Johan. xix. D.
thieves were crucified with Christ.
O Jesus which for me a wretch would be crucified betwixt.ii. thieves and would be
reputed as one of them: grant that my spirit may be crucified betwixt the
flesh and the world / that I may rest quietely in the in the mydle the
extremes that is the flesh and the world crucified to me. Amen.

Math. 27. D.
The.liiii. prayer / how the Saugiours divided Christ's garments.
O Jesus which for me would have thy garments divided among thy crucifyers /
and would have them cast lottes for thy vnsewed cote yt was wouen or knyt and
without seames: grant to me to take part with thy saints and to follow their
examples in the keeping of thy commandments. And that I may ever keep thy
charity in me. Ame^.

Johan. xix. D.
The.lv. prayer of the writing of the title above Christ's heed.
O Jesus which for me would be dyffamed scornefully with the subscription of
thy victorious title: grant to me yt I may strongly live and feyght under that
banner and victorious title / Jesus Nazarenus rex iudeorum. That my gostly
enemies afraid by the sight or hearing thereof / should not darre to come nyghe
unto me. Amen.

Math. 27. E.
The.lvi. prayer of the illusyon and mocking of Christ crucified.
O Jesus which for me crucified would be mocked and dispysed with many rebukefull
words / and yet would so charitably pray for thy crucifiers make me that I
never descend from my religion or any good work for no suggestion of the
devil or dispisynges of man. But that I may continually perceuer in thy love /
and that I may for thy love forgive al them that do or say any evil to me or
against me. And that I may evermore pray hertely for them. Amen.

The.lvii. Luce. xxiii. F.
prayer / how the thief of the left hand rebuked Christ.
O Jesus which for me would be scornfully rebuked of one thief / and of the
other would be honorably confessed to be god: make me for thy glory of thy name
to suffer patiently the rebukes of evil persons when need requires / and never
to suffer thy injuries. And also to possess the joys of paradyse with this
holy thief. Amen.

The.lviii. Johan. xix. E.
prayer of the compassion that Christ had upon his mothers sorrow and heaviness.
O Jesus which for me would be crucified and having compassion of thy mothers
sorrow and co^passio^ / would diligently commend here to thy dear beloved
discyple John^ / and also commended him to her: I commend me unto the / and
also all mine in that faith and love that thou co^mendest them together /
mekely besechynge the / that for the tenderness of so great love thou would
make me to come truly and perfytely to thy love / and through their prayer
and co^mendacyon I may be preserved and kept from all adversity and peril in
the perils and dangers of this world and life. Amen.

Math. 27. F.
The.lix. prayer / how the manhood of Christ complained him self to be forsaken
of god.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god / which at the.ix. hour of the
day for me most wretched hanging upon the cross cried to thy father with a
great voice saying: Hely / hely lama hazastani / that is. My god my god / why
haste thou forsaken me: grant to me yt in all my trouble and anguysshe I may
cry to the my lord god with the great voice of my heart. That so thou never
suffer me to be reproved as left and forsaken of thy mercy. Amen.

The.lx. Math. 27. F.
prayer how they gave him to drink vyneagre or asell.
O Jesus which thirstyng our health would have vineagre and wine mixte with myrre
and gall offered and given to the to drink: make me worthily to offer to the
the wine of devotion mixed with the mirre of mortificacion of my se^sualitie /
and with the gall of contricyon for my sins / and that I never drink of the
vineagre of infidelitye or of sclaundre / though I taste of any sclaundre / that
is / suffer wrongfully any sclau^dre. Amen.

The.lxi. Johan. xix. F.
prayer of the consu^macion and end of the passion of Christ.
O Jesus which offering the co^summacion of thy hoole passion as it were i^ a
su^me to god thy father for me / did say. Consu^matum est / it is ended /
grant to me yt I may duly finissh and end all the good works and pains /
that it shall please thy grace to work in me and by me: and so ended / to
offer the^ with due thanks unto god the father by the.

The.lxii. Luce. xxiii. F.
prayer of the yeldynge up of his soul or of the death of Christ.
O Blessed Jesus which for me dyeng upon the cross did commend thy soul to
thy father: grant to me that I may spiritually so dye to the and with the in
this life / that it would please the at the hour of my death to have my
wretched soul reco^mended to the / which lives and reigns with god the father
and the holy ghost world without end. Amen.

Johan. xix. F.
The.lxiii. prayer / of the openyng of Christ's side and heart with a spear.
O Jesus which for me would have the side of thy deed body opened / from whens
came plenty of blood and water for our health and comfort: wound I beseech the
my heart with the spear of thy charity / that I may worthily receive thy
sacraments / which flowed out of that thy most holy side. Amen.

Math. 27. G.
The.lxiiii. prayer / how the body of Christ was taken down of the cross.
O Jesus which for me a wretched sinner after thy death would have thy body taken
down from ye cross by Iosephe and Nychodemus / and so anointed and dressed
with sweet oynteme^tes and spices / would be wrapped in fair lynen clothes:
grant me worthily to receive thy blessed living body in the sacrament of the
altar / as if I should take him of the cross / and so to anoint him with the
oyntementes of virtues / that I may continually keep him in a pure heart and
chaste body. Amen.

The.lxv. Math. xxvii. G
prayer of the buryeng of Christ's body.
O Jesus which for me at the hour of complen would be buried in a Sepulcre
lamented and kept: grant to me that thou my lord god may be buried in the
sepulcre of my heart and there lamented and kept / that I buried with the / may
deserve to come to the glory of thy resurrection. AMEN.

Here ends.lxv. prayers / and here after follows.ix. prayers of the
Resurrection / Ascencyon. etc.
The first prayer / how Christ descended unto hell.
O Good Jesus thy unspeakable petie and charity was not yet saciat and content
with the death / but that thou would vysite the clausures of hell / and redeem
thy people there being in captivity. Therefore thy most blessed and glorious
soul knyt to thy godhede / descendynge unto the helles / delyueryng thy elect
people from yt derkenes and shadow of death. I beseech the O merciful Jesus
that thy grace and mercy might descend upon the souls of our parents /
brethren / systerne and all our kynsefolkes. Also upon the souls of our
familier acquaintau^ce benefactours / and all other that we be bound to pray
for / and of all christen souls: That thou would deliver them from the pains
that they have deserved for their sins. And that thou would bring them to
eternal glory. Amen.

The.ii. prayer / of the Resurrection of our lord.
O Lord Jesus Christ our eterne and only swetenes / which brekyng the bonds of
death / has glorified thy body and has ryson from death in glory unspeakable: I
pray the and I beseech for thy glorious and floresshyng Resurrection / to
grant to me that I rysyng from vices and the death of soul may ever floryssh
in virtues / and so to walk in the newnes of good life / that I may sauer and
follow those things that be above and heavenly / and not tho things that be
erthly and tra^sitorie. Also good lord by the virtue of thy clerenes / purge
my soul from the darkness of sin. That by ye same virtue at the day of
general Resurrection my body may arise unto glory / that I may joy both in
soul and body / eternally with the in thy glory. Amen.

The.iii. prayer how Christ appeared to his mother Mary.
O Mary ye mother of god most gracious virgyn and comforter of all desolate
persons calling and cryenge unto the: I beseech the for that great joy whereby
thou were comforted when thou knew yt thy son Jesus Christ was risen the
third day from death unto life immortale and impassible. That thou would be a
co^forter of my soul / yt what time I shall arise both in body and soul at
the last day of judgment / and there appear before yt same son of thyn Jesus
Christ / and there to render mine account of all my thoughts / words and
deeds: it would please thy motherly pite to help me that by the (O blessed
mother and virgyn) I might escape the sentence of eternal da^pnation / and
graciously to come to everlasting joy and glory with all the elect and chosen
people of god. Amen.

The.iiii. prayer / how Jesus appeared to Mary Magdalayne.
O Most sweet master / O most sweet Jesus / how good art thou to them that be
clean in heart. How sweet art thou to them yt love the. O how happy are they
that sech the and find the. How blessed are they that trust in the. It is truth
that thou love all the^ that love the. Thou never forsake them yt trust in
the. Lo lord this Mary thy true lover of a good simple mind sought the and
truly she found the. She was not forsaken of the. But she had more of the
than she looked for. I beseech the lord grant me to love the / to seche the
and to trust in the / that I may deserve to find the and to be loved of the /
and never to be forsaken of the. amen.

The.v. prayer how Jesus appeared to his disciples / Thomas being also present.
O Lord Jesus Christ which showed unto Thomas that douted of thy Resurrection /
the places of thy nails and the spear / and has revoked him from error by
the puttyng of his finger in to the holes of thy hands / and of his hand into
thy side: grant to me yt I having ever the remembrance of thy wounds and
passion / may expend and put in my finger and hand / yt is what so ever good
work or discrecio^ be in me I may put it in and expend it all hoole in thy
service to thy honor. And that I may confess with Thomas that thou art my
lord which has bought me with thy precious blood: and my god which has
create and made me. And that which thou said before of our faith / that
blessed be they which have not seen and believe: I may have experience thereof
in my self / and that by thy grace I may be found blessed in thy sight. Amen.

The.vi. prayer of the Ascencyon of our lord.
O Jesus our crown and glory which rysyng from death did ascend unto the right
hand of thy father / draw my soul unto the / that I might fervently seche and
desire the only / grant to me I beseech the that I may with all my desire and
study come to that place: to the which as I steadfastly believe thou have
ascended. And yt I being here in body / may be with the in love and desire /
that my heart may be there: where as thou art my love and treasore most to be
loved and desired / draw me after the / that by thy grace I ascendyng from
virtue to virtue may deserve to se the my lord god in the heavenly syon. Amen.

The.vii. prayer of the sendynge of the holy ghost.
O Jesus the gyuer of al gifts which sent thy holy ghost unto thy discyples in
the lickenes of fire. I pray and beseech the O most merciful lord / that I
(though most unworthy) might receive to my perpetual health by thy grace those
gifts which thy disciples received of thy only bou^tious goodness. And send
upon us (good lord thy servants the spirit of thy charity / love and peace /
which might visit and comfort our hertes / purge them from vices / lighten
them with virtues / bynd us in the bonds of peace and love illumynate us with
the light of thy knowledge / and inflame us with the fire of thy charity /
forgive us our sins and bring us to life everlasting. Amen.

The.viii. prayer of the Assumption of our glorious Lady.
O Lord the gyuer of joy the grau^ter of solace / the dilligent releuer of the
desolate person / the chaser away of all heaviness and sorrow / which have
gladded and make joyful the most blessed virgyn Mary thy mother the glass of
thy majesty / the solace of aungelles / the image of thy goodness / the
begynner of our health (thou have gladded her I say) with manifold joys both in
heaven and in earth: I beseech the grant to me thy supplyant / that I which
presume to come trustely and faithfully to her / as to ye well and fou^tayne of
joy in all my sorrows and troubles: may by her merits and prayers feel and
receive the effect of her prayers and comforts in this present life. And
finally to come to that ineffable joy / to the which she assumpte ioyeth with
the eternally in heuyns. Amen.

The.ix. prayer of the last judgment and of the coming of the judge to the
same.
O Lord Jesus Christ judge of both quick and deed vouche safe to order and set
me in the last judgment on thy right hand. And that I may than here thy most
sweet voice to my comfort / which thou shall tha^ speak to thy chosen people
that is. Com ye blessed childern of my father / and take possessyon of the
kingdom of glory that was prepared for you before the beginning of the
world. And also keep me that I fere not the hearing of that most terryble
sentence / which than thou shalt speak unto the reproved sinners / saying.
Go ye cursed people in to everlasting fire prepared for the deuylle and his
company. O thou only begoten son of god have mercy on us / that we never
feale that incurable and intolerable pain / that is to be excluded from the
glory and sight of god. And to burn perpetually in everlasting fire. O my god
my mercy and socour / be merciful to us. Amen.

Imprynted by me Roberte Redman Cum priuilegio.

Christ on the cross surrounded by St. John, Mary, and another woman (with
haloes?) (left) and a group of Roman soldiers (right)


