A notable Sermon concerning the right use of the lords supper and other
things very profitable for all men to know preached before the Kings most
excellent Mayestye and his most honorable counsel in his court at Westmynster
the 14. day of March, by Master John ponet Doctor of dyuinity. 1550.

Matthew. 11. Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will refreshe
you. They be to be sold in Paul's churche-yard, next the great Schole, at the
sign of the sprede Egle.

A notable Sermon, concerning the right use of the Lords supper, and other
things very profitable for all men to know: Preached before the kings most
excellent May-stye, and his most honorable counsel in his court at Westmynster
the.xiiij. day of March, by Master John Ponet, Doctor of Diuynytye. 1550.
Math. xiii. Alia quidem cecideruntiuxta uiam. Some fell by the ways side.
IN my last sermon (most noble audience) enteringe this piece of the parable
whereas our Savior Christ says ye sum of the sede fell by the ways side:
Matthe xiij. a. Marce. iij. a. Luke. viij. a.
I promised ye declaracio^ of four things.

First what was meant by this word way. Secondarely what it was that has so
hardened, that thing which is fygured by this word way. Thirdly what seed it
is that has been lost in this way.

And fourthly what birds they be and what men they be that has deuowerid, and
trode^ the same seed. Of the two first points I said somewhat my mind the
last time when I was in this place. And I am come at this present to perform
my promise touching the two latter points. Whereof the first is, touching what
seed it is that has been lost in this way. For declaracio^ whereof ye shall
understand that it is the doctrine of the heavenly banquet where with our heavenly
father fedeth all his elect and chosen people with the very body and blood of
his son our Savior Jesus Christ, which doctrine is so necessary, that
without the comfort thereof it is impossyble, yt any man should be sauid.

It is not enough for a man to have a knowledge of this doctrine: but also so
many as shall be sauyd, must have a practyse and a lively feeling of it in his
heart, and a pleasant taste of the swetnes of this heavenly comfort. The
scripture says not that he which knows the doctrine of eating of Christ's
flesh and drynkyng of his blood shall be sauyd, but it says. Nisi ederitis et
biberitis. Ioh. vi.
(that is) onles ye have ye act of eating of Christ's flesh and of drynkinge
his blood.

Non habetis uitam in uobis.

Ye have no life in you, So yt here is not only a knowledge and an
understanding, but also an act and a work required at every man's hand.
Forasmuch therefore as it stands upon every man's salvation and dampnacio^
everlastingly to have or lack ye inward felyng of this comfort, it is very
expedient and necessary that all such as be called to this office of
preaching gods most holy word should instruct and lead every man into the
true knowledge thereof especially for yt it is a doctrine which has not ben
received, but ben a lost and cast away sede upon ye most sorts of people thus
many years.

Therefore for declaracion of this doctrine of the heavenly banquet, ye shall
understand that it is our heavenly father which make the this heavenly banquet
as it appears by the parable in the 22. of Mat. and the 14. of Luc. Matthe
xxij. a. Luke. xiiij. b. Apoca. xix. b.
And so so desirouse he is to have all men come and feed upon this banquet, that
after his preparacion of all things in a readiness, he sends fourth his
servants to bydde not some me^ only, but al me^ to come to his feast. And
eue^ as there is no liberal hearted gentelman yt makes a feast but he is
desirous ye his gestes should have a lusting gredy and hungry stomach Even so
our heavenly father is desierouse, that al men which are bydden to this feast
should have hungringe and thurstinge stomakes. Nota.
But here ye must note yt as this ba^ket whereunto our heavenly father byddeth
us, is a banquet for our soul and not for our body, even so must this hungrynge
and thursting, be hunger and thirst of the soul and not of the body:
Wherefore it is conuenyente that first and foremost I declare unto you, how the
soul of man is made hungry and thursty, and also when it is hungry and
thurstye. Which lesson shall give a great light to all the rest of our purpose.

For declaration whereof ye shall understand that the soul of man is made
hungry and thurstye by the means and workyng of the law, and that after this
sort as I shall declare unto you.

The law works four To. iij. b vij.
things for and in the soul of man, First and foremost the Gal. iij. Heb. vij.
law makes the soul of man know and see her offenses and sins committyd
and done against the mayestye of almighty god. And it shows them as lively
to the eye i. Co. xiij. Iac. i. c.
of the soul, as a glass shows the spotes and marks of man's face unto his
bodylye eye. And if the law did not show to our souls, our sins after
this sort, we should not know that we be sinners (as Saint Paul witnesses to
the Romans.

Peccatum non cognouissem nisi per lege^, I had not known sin but To vij. b
by the law. Therefore is this one office and work of the law to make man's
soul know here offenses.

The second thing that the law works for the soul of man is, that it
shows unto man gods displeasure and gods punishment for sin, and
everlasting death and hell fire for her offenses. Stipendium peccati mors ye
reward of syn is death. To. v. b. vi. c.


The third office and work of the law is to make man despair quiet of him
self. For when the law of God has given thus much knouledge to the soul of
man, then does ma^s soul begin, to despair and to think verily that there is
no way with her but one which is everlasting damnacion.

Now when man's soul sees her self in such great danger, then is man in a
wonderful agony and sorrow, and quiet out of all comfort, and is driven to
seek some other means for help then at the hands of the law which shows
no mercy Deuteronomy. xxvij. c. xxviij. b. Ie. xi. a.
but extreme punishment. And for this forssyng that the law straineth man with all, the law is called pedagogus ad christu^ a sholemaster which teaches man
to goo to christ for help and Gal. iij.
this is the fourth office of the law but all men cannot by and by se christ
in this agony, ma^s nature is so naturally by reason blinded ye first man
seeks all other means for help and comfort before it seek for the true and
right help. For declaracion whereof ye shall understand that when man's
soul sees her self in such danger, first and foremost peradventure man will
fall to abstinence from this or that kind of meat, and once or twice a week,
or else at some such time in the year when as ye pleasantenes of the blood
increases see whether he can pacify God the father, by that means for that
thing wherewith the law does charge his conscience or not. But the law replieth
unto him and tells him that that abstine^ce which he now uses will not
satisfy and make ame^des for his former offendyng almighty God. And ye law
tells him that in absteining now he does no more but his duty. For if
absteining from this or that kind of meat were acceptable in the sight of God
for it self, then should man be always bound to asteine from this or that
kind of meat, because, yt man is always bound to do that thing which is
acceptable in the sight of God. And so man doing that thing which seems to
him acceptable in the sight of almighty God, does nothing else but his duty.
So that this abstinence now can not be a recompense for his former offenses.
Then the soul of man being thus thwartid and charged by the law does remain
and stand still in her former fear, thinking verily that she shallbe dampened
not withstandinge al here abstinence. Well when it will not be this way the^
peradventure this soul of man moves him to wear a shirte of hair or to
wear no lynnen next his body or to lie wtoute a bed upon the ground either in
straw only or upon ye hard stones or else to forsake the company of men and
to go into wyldernes, or else to wyppe and beat with rods and scourges that
body which has offended and has brought him in to such distres and misery:

All this notwythstandinge the law lays dampnacion to men's charge, To. vij.
and tells man that he is a sinner though he have committed but one sin,
And that he is not only bound to have so much care for him self only and
for his own salvation, but he must have the like care for the salvation of the
soul of his brother, Mat. v.
yea even of his very enemy, by means whereof man stands still in his
comfortles estate considering his negligence either in that or else in sum
other point.

When all this will not serve then falls man to ask counsel, and here
almightye God knows that it is most men's chances to light i. Reg. xxviij.
upon naughty counsellares, for when man comes to his ghostly father as they
call him have his conscience loused from those bounds wherein the law has
bound it, The bishop, person, vycar, paryshe priest, or other usual
mynisters thereunto appointed, commonly has not the keye of knowledge,
wherewith to open and lose theresaied consciences, and deliver them from the
charge of the law, And therefore of custom such blind counsellars, which men
call confessors, send man being in this agony, to fasting, praiyng, and giving
of alms, and to other works of man's own hands. But allwaye the law is at
hand and tells man that this can be no satisfaction for ye former offenses,
For in so doing he does nothing else, but his duty if it stand with Gods
glory. When all this will not serve man is so afraid of almightye God, that he
dares not goo immediately unto him for help, but thinks that he shall find
more mercy at S. Peter his hand or S. Paul's hand, or S. James hand, or S.
John's hand, or at the blessed virgin Mary's hand, then at the hand of
allmightye God, by means whereof man falls on calling upon some or many of
them trusting to have some help that way. But when man perceaueth not that way
to be allowed in scripture, but in consyderyng fyndeth that this coming first
to saints before he comes to god, seems rather to include a distrust in
almighty god, then to be a frut of a suer belefe in him, still she remaynet
in his former agony and unquietness, and harkeneth to the saying of Saint. Johan.

Si dixerimus quia peccatiu^ non habemus mendaces sumus and ueritas in nobis
non est. i. Ioh. i.
If we say that we have no sin we belyars and there is no truth in us. Thus
man's soul travellith from one devise to another devise, and so to the third,
and so to the fourth and so forth serchinge if she can help herself or not.
And in conclusion she perceaueth well yt she can not help her self with all ye
wits that she has. Even as a man who by chance is fallen into a deep dry
pyt far from succor ca^ not by any means possible help him self out onles,
some man come with some ladder or other instrument to help him out: desiereth
to be deliuereid out of the pit, but by his own wit he can not tell how: even
so ye soul of man desiereth to be deliuerid of this sorrowful agony, but she
ca^ not tell how. This earnest desire yt the soul of man has to be made
rightuouse again when she is fallen from god by sin is the.iiij. office and
working of the law. And it is called in scripture ye Psalm. xiij.
hungring and thurstinge of the soul. And yt thing which does satisfye that
desire, and does comfort the soul in this agony is called in the scripture
meat and drink, Ioh. vii
because of the symylytude and lyklyhod that it has with meat and drink. For
eue^ as that thing which comfort the desyrefull body in extreme hunger and
thurst is callid meat and drink. Even so ye same thing which comfort the
desierfull soul in this extreme agony and misery is called meat and drink.

So does our savior Christ him self in the fifth of Matthew and in the sixth of
Luke. Mat. v.
Luke vi.
Term and name the desyer of the soul, calling this desyer hungryng and
thursting in these words.

Beati qui esuriunt and sitiunt iustitiam, quoniam ipsi saturabuntur. Mat. v.


Happy be they that hunger and thurst for righteousness, for they shall be filled:
By the which words it is euydent, yt Christ calls the desyering of the
soul for righteousness a hungring and a thurstynge. So is this desire called
hungringe and thurstinge in sundry other places of the scripture. As the desire
to hear Gods words, is called hunger in the.viij. of Amos.

Mirtam famem in terram, non famem panis, neque Amos. viij.
sitim aquae, sed audiendi uerbum Domini. I will send a hunger into the earth,
not a hunger for bread, but a hunger for hearing of the word of the lord. Here
ye see that the desire to hear Gods word is called hunger. And in the, 55.
cha. of Esai.

Omnes sitientes, uenite ad aquas, Venite emite absque Esai. lv.
argento. Al ye yt be thyrsty come to the waters, Eccls. lv
come and bey it without money. Thyrsting in this place is a desire of comfort
and salvation. And also in the first of Luke. in the hymn of the blessed
virgin Mary. Luke i. v
(...)


Esurientes impleuit bonis, and diuites dimisitinanes.

He filled them that were hungry with good things, That is to say, he
satisfied the desire of them, which instructed them selfs and there own
worckes, and did put there hole trust in him only. But contrarywyse, such as
did put some trust in themselves, and were not so desierouse of Christ, as the
other were, not so hungry as the other were, them he sent away empty, leuynge
them to themselves. And in the seventh of Saint John. Ioh. vij.
This desire is likened to a thurstynge.

Si quis sitiat, ueniat ad me and bibat. If any man be a thirst, that is to
say, if his soul be desierouse to have remission of sin, let him come to me
and drink. And also in the.21. chapter of the Apocalypse.

Ego sitienti dabo de font aque uite. Apo. xxi
A will give to him that is thyrsty the water of life. By all these places it
is plain, that ye desire which the soul of man has to have forgeuenes of her
sin, is called in scripture hungring and thurstynge.

Now then again, the scripture calls that thing which does comfort and
satisfye this desire of the soul, meat and drink. And when the soul of man
has that same thing given unto her that she desiered and longed for so sore,
the^ is she fed. For a proof where of Matthew and the rest of the Evangelists
does use these terms, faturabuntur, and aqua and cibus. And in the.4. of S.
John's Gospel. Ioh. iiii.
Christ was desierouse to satisfy the will of his father, and he called the
satisfyenge of that desire his mete.

Meus cibus est, ut faciam uoluntatem patris mei. My metes (says he) is to
do the will of my father. His hunger and his thurst that he had, was the
desire that he had to do the will of his father: And the doing of it, was his
meat and drink, as it appears before in this text, when as answering to his
disciples he said,

Ego habeo alium cibum comedendum, quem nos nescitis.

I have other meat to eat, which ye know not.

Thus far I have declared unto you, most noble audyens, how the soul of man
is made hungry and thurstye by the workynge of the law, And also how that
thing which does satisfy this desire of the soul, is named in the scripture
mete.

Let us now then proceed to the declaracion of the heavenly banquet, whereby our
heavenly father does feed and comfort the soul of man which is made hungry
and comfortles by the law.

When our heavenly and most merciful father perceaueth yt his law has
wroughte her feat in the soul of man, and has brought man even to very
desperacyon.

Ad inferos ducit and reducit.

Then he feeds and comfort man's soul and sows the seed of salvation
upon him in this wise. Here I must desire you to license me most noble
audience to change my parson, and to speak in ye name of god the father, who
calls al men to feed and comfort there hungre and thursty souls with such
meat and drink as he has prepared in his most heavenly banquet for them. Thus
says our heavenly father to yt man and all men which be comfortles and
afraid of eternal dampnation for there offenses. Man despair not for thy
sins that thou haste committed. God the father speaks to the solue of man.
Follow my counsel and although thy sins be never so great and manyfolde, yet
shall they not dampne the. Be sorry for thine offenses, even from the botom of
thine heart and purpose earnestly to amend thy former life, and believe that my
son Christ Jesus has taken the pains upon him, that thou have deseruid for
thy sins, and thou shall not be dampened, but thou shall have life
everlasting. Let his death ease thy stomach, comfort thy fearful and
sorowefull hungringe soul with the punyshing of his body, and the sheding of
his preciouse blood. And even as meat does comfort thy body, when it is
hungry, and drink when it is thursty, even so let his punishment, comfort thy
soul, For I assuer the that his pains, his punishment and death is able to
save both the and all the whole world from eternal dampnation.

I will no more be angrye with the, for the sins that thou haste done, If my
son Christ will take upon him to answer for the, as no dout he if thou will
come to him, and put thy hole trust in him. Feed thy hungrye stomach with this
meat, that I have prepared for the, and thou shall have remission of all thy
sins.

Fear not any of those dangers that sin, that flesh, the world, or the
deuel has brought the into, for my son has for thy sake overcome all his
and thine enemies, whom otherwise thou waste not able to overcome with all the
wits thou had.

First and formoste he has overcome sin for thy sake, in that he has paid
his death to me, not for his own sins, but for thy sins, and for the sins
of all the world, so that allthough thou have commit-may so be that he will
tempte the, as in deed he does daily tempt all such as I have chosen to
possess my kingedome, but of this thing thou may be well assuerid, that he
can not hurt the, because my son has made him, both his and thy bond
servant with his death.

The deuell in tempting the shall be my servant, for I will use him as an
instrumente to try thy faieth, and to exercise thy belefe from time to time.
So that for this purpose I suffer him to tempt the from time to time, that by
that means thou shouldeste wax stronger in thy fayeth and stronger.

Now see thou that where as before time thou waste afraid of the deuell
fearinge that he had rule and power over the: Now my son Christ and I do
use him for our slave and bond servant, to exercise the fayeth of the good by
daily temptacions, and to punish the wicked with continual affliccion and
miserye.

My son also has for thy sake overcome death, and yet not after such a sort
as though it were utterly taken away, but he has so taken it away, that it
can not hurt the.

For whereas before such as has deyed without belefe in my son, went out of
this life into eternal death: Now shall death be a door for the and them to
everlasting life, in so much that thou shall confess in thine heart, that
which is written in the first to the Philippians, saying: Phil. i


Mihi uita Christus est, and mori lucrum. Christ is my life, and it is
advantage for me to dye.

Death shall no more be unto the, neither unto any of my chosen bitter, but
sweet: not so rowfull but joyful: not loss but gain, not to be feared, but
to be desiered, death shall not be worthy to have the name of death, but
rather of the way and entry unto eternal life. Death shall have no power to
hurt the for his stinge is cut of according to my promise.

O mors, Oze. xill.
Ero mors tua. O death, i. Cor. xv
I will by thy death.

Thus has my son for thy sake overcome sin, he has overcome death, he
has overcome the deuell, and all thine enemies and mine: and when he made an
end, he said, Consummatum est, now all finyshed: Ioh. xix.
He has done all those things that I required at thy hands to have done.
Despair not therefore comfort thy self with this death of my son. Trust
that this death and bloudsheding is a sufficient ransom and recompense for thy
sins. Comfort thy hungry stomach with this restoretish dishe, (which may so
be well called, for that it has restored the, and all such as believe in him,
again into my favor.)

Whosoever comfort his hungry soul with this dishe, shall have remission of
all his sins. Whosoever feeds with a sure faith and eat thereof hartyly,
not doutinge but that Christ is sufficient to save his soul, that Christ is
sufficient to slaake his hunger, and to quench his thurst, he shall not need
of any other dyshes divised by men to feed upon: but he shall be suer, that the
death and bloudshedinge of mine only begotten son, is sufficient to comfort
his penitent hungry soul so, that it shall not be famishid, it shall not
sterue, nor peryshe, but have life everlasting.

This is the joyful tidings the comfortable doctrine, the sede of gods most
holy word, (most noble audience) which has been so long trodden and cast
away under neth the foot of the people.

This is the lost seed which when it was sown, would not, this many years,
enter into the hearts, and understandings of men.

But here I most humbly desire you, Nota.
to note, that it is not meant by these words, (eatinge of Christ's flesh, and
drinking of his blood, and feding upon Christ,) that ye should so feed of
Christ, as ye would feed of a piece of motton, a piece of beef, or a piece of
venson: For that kind of cating, profetteth nothing at al.

Caro non prodest quicquam. Ioh. vi
The flesh profeteth nothing at all.

This gross kind of feedinge upon Christ, profeteth nothing at all: But it
is meant, that even as ye comfort your earthly and corruptible body, with bread,
and meat when it is hungry, and with ale, bear, or wine when it is thurstye:

Even so does the soul of man, (when the law shows to her, her faults and
eternal damnation, and the dreadful judgments of God for her offenses,)
comfort her self in her great hunger and thirst: beleuynge that almightye
God, has forgeuen her sins, for Christ's sake. So that where as before she
was hungry, and comfortles, and afraied of eternal dampnation: Now is she fed,
and comforted, with thassuerance, that her sins be forgeuen her of god, for
Christ's sake her savior.

It is an vnreuerente, and an ungodly opinion, and void of all Godly religion,
to say or think, that we must eat and chame with our corporal teeth, or
that we must swallow with our corporal throat, Christ's blessed flesh and
bones, after so gross a sort, as we eat other kinds of meat.

Yea, and it is a thing abhorred of nature, that man's should feed of man's
flesh, hyde the same flesh of man in pastes or culles or by any means
otherwise never so conningly. Man detesteth and abhors to be (...), that is
to say a man eater.

The Centuryon of a relygyouse mind, and of a godly fear, thought him self
unworthy, that our savior Christ should enter into his house, mat. viij
saiynge:

Non sum idoneus, ut tectum meum subeas. And S. Peter in the Luke v
.v. of Luke, had a certain relygyouse, and a godly fear to come nighe to
Christ, and said unto him.

Discede a me Domine, quia homo peccator sum; Depart from me O lord, for I am
a synnar.

Even so all such as have any Jot of Godly religyon in there hearts, should
be ashamed once to desyer, to bruise with there teeth, to eat raw, and to
swallowe the flesh, blood, and bones of our sauyoure Christ, even as it was
borne of the blessed vyrgyne Mary. S. Austen witnesses that the Capernaites
took our Savior Christ after that sort, when he said,

Nisi quis manducauerit meam carnem, and biberit meum sanguinem, Ioh. vi
non habebit uitam eternam. Onles a man eat my flesh, and drink my blood, he
shall not have everlasting life.

They took him (says he) grossly, as it appears by there question that they
demanded immediately, saiynge:

How can this fellow give us his flesh to eat? Is not he the son of Joseph?
This gross opinion of there is, Saint Austen calls heresye, as it is a plain
heresye in deed to say, that we must eat of necessity. Christ after such a
gross sort.

They thought that Christ had offered his body to be eaten, as flesh that
hangs in the bucherye, so that the flesh of his arms, and sides that stood
there before them, should be chewed and swallowed of them.

But (says Saint Austen, that was not his meaning: For that kind of eatinge
of Christ's flesh, profeteth nothing at all.)

Caro non prodest quicquam:

But that they which were made sorrowful and hungrye by the terror of the law,
should be fed, and comfortedwith the death of his flesh, and with his blessed
bloudshedynge.

And he that feeds not his soul after this sort with Christ's flesh, and
blood, is not alive in Christ, but he is in desperation,

Manet in morte. He dwells in death. Ioh. iii. v. xi.
yea being alive in this world, he has a taste of hell, because his
conscience is comfortles, and the worm byteth him continually, so that he has
deuell in his conscience. And he is altogether comfortles, because there is
none other meet and comfort, that can comfort our souls, but only the
comfort that we have by Christ. And whosoever eats this flesh, and drinks
this blood with ye mouth of belefe, that this very flesh of Christ was put to
death for him, and this very blood was once shed for him: He shall have
everlasting life, and the lord will raise him again at the latter day. And he
had a taste of the kingdom of God, Ioh. vi
even being alive. He has peace and quyetnes in his conscience. Which is
Gaudium and pax in spiritum sanctum.

And this kind of eatinge, To. xiij.
is called of learned men, an of Christ, Spiritualiter (that is to say) a
comfortinge with our souls with Christ spiritually. And as often as we comfort
our souls of this sort, we have a sure knowledge, and a felinge that the
wrath of god the father against us is pacyfyed, and so be we of our for more
hunger eased.

There is another kind of eatinge of Christ's body, and drinkinge of his
blood, and that is called eatinge and drinking Sacramentaliter. Sacramentally.
And we eat Christ on this fashion, as often as we Join the outward signs of
bread and wine, (that is to say) the sacrament of the holy communion, with
our faith and inward belefe, receiving a visible testimony of our inward
belefe in the face of the congregation.

And if it chance any man, to receive this outward pledge and testimony of the
lords death, and have not this inward belefe: the same man, in taking of that
visible Sacrament in the face of the congregation, makes a lie to the holy
ghost, because he shows him self outwardly as though he comforforted his soul
inwardelye with Christ, and yet in deed he does not and therefore when he takes
this heavenly Sacrament, his conscience co^dempneth hum, and tells him that he
is not inwardly so affected, and disposed as his outward receauinge of the
Sacrament does pretend. Wherefore saint Paul gives sentence of every such
man, and says. i. Cor. xi.


Iudicium sibi manducat et bibit. He eats and drynketh his own condempnacion
and judgment which is an unworthy kind of eatinge.

Quia non diiudicat corpus domini. Because he has no consideracion why he
eatith of that bred and drynketh of that cup, whereof he eatith and drynketh
for an outward Sacrament and testimony before the hole congregation, that he
is inwardly fed and confortith by Christus death, but inwardly indeed he feleth
no such confort.

Wherefore thus I may conclude, he that believes, eats: And he that believes
not, eats not, although he eat the Sacrament every day in the week.

And S. Austen being of the same mind, says:

Quid paras dentem and uentrem, creed and manducasti.

Why do thou prepare thy teeth, and thy belly, believe and thou have eaten.

Therefore should man prove himself (as S. Paul says) and examen diligently
his own conscience, within his breast, and way with him self well, before he
come to this holy communion, whether he be endued with the spirit of god, and
lively faith in Christ or not. And if he perceive him self to be a fleshly
and a sensual man, without faith, and without the spirit of almighty god he
ought not to receive this holy sacrament: but to withdraw him self until such
time, as almighty God shall more plentyfullye indue him with his most heavenly
grace. But if he perceive by his faith that he is knyt holly to Christ, and
that he is a liuelye member of him, let him then go forward and eat of this
bread and drink of this cup to his most heavenly comfort. And let him say
to him self on this wise, when he goes to receive the communion. I go now to
make a solemn professyon before God and his congregation of my fayeth, and to
receive that comfortable Sacrament and mystical pledge that Christ has
appointed.

And besides the quyeting of mine own conscience, to declare to other of the
flock of Christ, that I believe assueredlye, that our Sauyoure Christ shed
his precyouse blood, and dyed for the remissyon of my sins, And that he, and
none but he, has given me a wisdom, whereby I am returned again into the
favor of God. The law told me, that I was not able of my self (searchinge all
the wits that I had) to return again to God, but Christ.

Factus est mihi sapientia a Deo.

Has given me a wisdom and a knowledge how to come with his help again to
God. I was altogether wicked and vnholly and he has made me holy in that he
has made me partaker of his holiness. I was altogether vnrightuouse, and he
has made me rightuouse, in that it pleases him to make me partaker of his
righteousness. By means whereof my former offenses shall not be imputed unto me.
I thought that I could by no means have pacified the wrath of God the father,
and have made amends for mine offenses, but now I am sure, that Christ is
become my redemer, and has made a quietness and an atonement between almighty
god and me. So that I feel and perceive this, to be true that Christ is god and
man.

Factus est mihi sapiencia a Deo. Iusticiaque sanctificatio and redemtio.

Christ is become my wisdom from God my righteousness my holiness and my
redemption: In witness whereof I will eat of this bred and drink of this cup,
that our savior Christ has appointed me to eat and drynk of to my most
heavenly comfort and consolacion.

After this examinacion, our conscience will tell us whether we be apt or not
to receive this holyco^munion, according to Christ's right institucion.

Which is appointed for us to perpetual memory of his death, until his
coming again in glory.

For this end was the holy sacrament first instituted, and not to be holden up
in the hands of the priest over his head: not to be hanged up in ye church to
be worshipped with a goodly honor of ye people, not that the minister thereof,
should by the ministracio^ thereof, purchase remission of sins for ye quick
and the dead, not that he should get reyne thereby or fayer wheter, not yt he
should cleanse the air thereby from evil infections, no more yt the receyuer
thereof should be the better for the receuing thereof, (that is to say for the
doiynge of that work) but rather the worse, if he were not a goodly beleuinge
man before.

The right use of this holy sa Sacrament is as often as it is taken for a
heavenly means to putt us in rememberanrce of the death and bludshedinge of our
Savior Christ.

Which right use being once trewely and plainly perceived of the people, all
vain uses will fall away of them selfs, even as falsed fails when truth
comes, and as darcknes gives place when light comes.

And at the last the mainteyners of these fond diuises will be ashamed of their
ignorance when all the world shall see the truth to there open confusion, and
perceive sensibily how blind bussardes they be, and what shift they make, both
to live themselfes, and also to bring up and confyrme other in blyndnes.

Yt is a sport to here these ignorant blyndlynges what shifts they make, when
they be driven to their answer, either concerning the Sacrament it self, or
else concerning the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. Some say
that Christ is in this Sacrament realiter et substancialiter but not
naturaliter: (that is to say) really and substancially: but not naturally: And
of this opinion be the most part of the schole Doctors.

Some other hold that, that opynion is false, and will in any wise have this
word naturally, saiynge that Christ his body is there naturally which term
I marvel much where they find. seeing that it is not used either of Saint
Austen saint Ambrose saint Hierom or of any other of the old aunceant doctors
and writers, either in greek or latin, old or new.

And yet is there one who has of late written a book called the detection of
the deuels Sophistry, which used this term naturally twyse or thrice in his
book, belyke he learned this term in that schole whereas he learned the deuels
Sophistry (that is to say) in the schole of lies, of whom the deuel is the
chief scholemaster. Some say that he is there.

Iisdem dimencionibus quibus pendebat in cruce.

Even of the same lenght breadeth and thyknes as he did hang upon the cross.

Some say that the bread is transubstanciated, (that is to say) that the
substance of the bread is gone and the qualities only of the bread does
remain which opinion is an heresy in logike, to say that accidens may be sine
subiecto.

Some say the bread is the body, and some say, the body is under the bread.
And if a man allege unto them the article of our Creed and say, that that body
which was borne of the blessed virgin Mary, and lived here in earth.xxxiii.
year and suffryd under pontius pylat, and that honge upon the cross, and that
was dead and buried.

That theselfe same body arose again the third day from death, no fantastical
body but even the same flesh and bone and the self same body that was felt of
Thomas, and that it remains here.xli. days with his disciples after his
resurrection from death, and that the self same body is ascendit into heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God the father (that is to say) in the glory
of the father, and that he shall not come again until the latter day, when he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and to restore all things which
were spoken of by the prophets accordingly Act. iij.
as we reed in the third of the acts: they will say constantly that all this
gere is plain false.

For (say they) a priest may fetch Christ his manhood down from heaven when
he will before the latter day come, with saiynge.

Hoc est corpus meum. Be he never so viciose a gentelman that says the
words, he has Christ's body at his beck and commandment to bring him down
when him lusts.

And for the mayntenance of this there erroneus and Anthechristian opinyon they
will not styke to say, that Christ's body may be in sundry places at one time
granting, that it may be at Rome, at Paris, in London, in Canterbery, and in a
thousand other diverse places at once.

Whereas if ye read the scriptures through ye shall never find, that Christ's
body was in two places at one time, or that after his resurreccion it appeared
in two sundry places at one time.

This deuilishe opinion of there is opens a door to Martion and the Manicheis,
who defied Christ's body after such a sort, that they denied it to be of
like substance as other men's bodies be:

Against which doctrine S. Austen gives this rule.

Cauendum est, Epla. ad Dardanum. lvij
ne it a diuinitatem astruamus hominis, ut ueritatem corporis auferamus. We
must take heed (says S. Austen) that we do not so affirm the divinity of
his manhood, that we take away thereby of the truth of his body.

And Saint Austen does plainelye affirm that this body must be in one place
of heaven, whereas it pleases his dyuine majesty to be.

And he says in the.30. treatise upon John.xvi.

Corpus enim in quo resurrexit in uno loco esse oportet. The body wherein he
did rise must be in one place. I am not ignorant that the prynted copy of
saint Austen has in that place, Vno loco esse potest. (that is) may be in one
place. But I pray you what is he that douteth of that thing, that Christ's
body may be in one place.

Surely Saint Austen would never have used so vain a sentence in so weightye
a matter, and it is plain in the decrees.

De consecratione, distinctionei. ca. Prima quidem heresis.

And in the master of the sentence in the fourth book distinctione decima,
that S. Austen is faslye prynted in that point. For in both these places ye
shall have these plain words.

Corpus enim in quo resurrexit in uno loco esse oporter.

The body of Christ, in which he arose, must be in one place.

These two of there own schole be sufficient witnesses to me, and to all men,
that S. Austen was plainly of this opinion, that Christ's body must be at
one time in one place, and can not be at one time in sundry places.

In uno loco esse oportet.

It must be in one place.

The best way to confute this sort of men, is to set the one of them against
another, him that says that Christ's body is there naturaliter, naturally
against the^ that say, it is the natural body of Christ, but not naturallyter.
And them which says that there is a transubstanciation in the Sacrament
against them that say, that there is the body and the bread together.

And them that say, the mouse may eat the Sacrament, against them that say,
the mouse ca^ not eat it. And them that say it may moule against them that say
it ca^ not moule.

And so shall we ease our selfs of a great deal of pains, in sufferinge the
one of them to confute the other, who as they have many hedes so have they many
wits, and their is eue^ as great a confusion amongst them, as their was
amongst the tongues in babylon, wherefore when they strive to hit the matter,
they lightly always miss eue^ as men that threshe heynes blyndfyld.

But ye will say to me.

Sir ye have told us what some say, but what say you? Forsooth, Sir I say as I
have says, that Christ's blessed body is not eaten with our teeth so grossly
and so carnally as they take it to be.

But I believe that that very body which was borne of the virgin Mary, and was
crucified, ded, and buried, and that very body which arose again the third
day, and that was felt of Thomas after Christ's resurrection, that it had
flesh and bones otherwise then spirits has, and that which did eat and drynk
with the duciples after his resurrection, Io. xxi.
And that which was seen of the Act. x.
disciples when it ascendid into heaven, and that which sits at the right
hand of God the father according to the article of our Creed: I believe (I say)
that that body is in heaven only, and is not in the earth accordyngly as Saint
Augusten August. tract. L. in Io.
says in the 50 treatise upon John.

Conuersatus est secundutu corporis presentiam quadragintaa diebus cum
discipulis suis, and eis deducentibus uidendo ac sequendo ascendit in celum:
and non est hic, ibi enim sedet ad dextram patris. That is to say. He was here
conversant with the presence of his body forty days with his disciples, and
they going with him, and following him, he ascendid into heaven in their sight:
and he is not here, for he sits there on the right hand of his father.

By his divinity, his godhed, his divine mayestye, his power, and his
providence, he is here and every where.

But his manhod is a creature and is in heaven only, and there shall he remain
until the latter day. And yet is it true that Christ's very body is present at
the mynistracion of the lords supper. Yea even flesh blud and bone as he was
borne of the virgyn Mary.

Why but what mean I to say so? This geer seems to be quiet contrary, to all that ever I have says before, his body is in heaven, and his body is present at
the mynistracion of the Sacrament of his Supper, These sayenges seem to be
directly repugnant the one of them to the other.

To put you out of dout in this point, ye shall understand, that even as the
son which is far of dystand, is absent from mine eye and yet is present to my
sight even so is Christ's body absent from my mouth, and yet present to my
belefe.

For my belefe ascendith in to heaven, even to that body of Christ, which
sytteth there at the right hand of God the father, which is his very true and
no fantastical body flesh blud and bone as it was borne of the virgyn Mary.

And when I receive the holy communion,

Mea conuersatio est in celis.

My conversation is in heaven. Where Christ's body is even so present to my faith
as the sone is present to my sight and as the bred and wine bepresent to my
mouth.

So that if I have no faith Christ is not present to me when I receive the
Sacrament of the body and blud of Christ:

If I have faith Christ's body being in heaven in one only place is present to
my faith: and when I receue the holy communion I inbrase him by faith, even
flesh blud and bone as he was borne of the virgyn Mary. And so does al me^
through out the hole world hang upon him and comfort them selves with that
only body, being in one place of heaven, though they be dispersed into never
so many sundry places through out the world.

Thus far I have declared unto you (most noble audience) The heavenly banquet
that all mighty god has prepared for the ro^fort of the soul of man, which
notwithstanding that it is so comfortable a doctrine, yet this many years it
could not be received of ye people, and therefore may it well be likened to that
seed, which has been lost in the way, and couldnot enter to take rote, grow
and bring forth fruit, according to the expectacion of the seed sower.

Now because I have determined to speak somewhat of the fourth paynt for the
satisfyenge of my promise, I will leave and make an end of my for more matter.
and proceed to the latter piece of my purpose this day. Which is concerning what
burdes they be, and what men they be, that has trodden and deuowered this seed.
As touching the burdes our Savior Christ makes it plain sayng, that they
figure the deuell, who inueigleth and inchanteth so the ears and hearts of
many people with heretical doctrines and false opinions, that the good seed of
Gods most holy word can find no place there, to take rote grow, and bring
forth fruit. But as soon as it is sown, it is by and by forgotten, and (as it
were) drowned and swalowed up amongst wicked opinions of the martians, the
manycheis the arrians, the Pellagyans the Libertines, the Annabaptistes, and so
fort.

These and such like has been the deuelles instrument, the deuels throat,
whereby he has deuoureth the seed of Gods most holy word.

And as touching the treading of the same word underneath the feet of ye
people.

The chief and arche capitayn tread word is the Antichristian Biishope of Rome
who (as they report) never says mass but he treadith the holy bible under
neth his feet in toke^ that he and his ministers have an aucthoritye greater
the^ is thaucthoritye of the scripture: or rather that he and his mynisters
will be always ready to tread down the word of god underneath their feet, and
with their wicked doctrines, stop up the hearts of the people that they shall be
made unapt to receive it.

There be a great number (god knows) that stamp and tread down gods word
underneath their feet.

And very hard they be to be known. Yet shall ye know them by two tokens
commonly whether they be stampers and treaders of Gods word under neth their
feet or not.

The one is by their talks, and the other is by their life.

As thouchynge their talks, they be of many sorts, yet all tend to this one
end, that is to say to the pulling down of Christ, and to the setting up of
Anthechrist.

And Amongst sundry other of there talks this is one.

Christ say they is not sufficient but we must have some other bye merits, and
bye satisfactions not meaning civil satisfactions between man and man, but
satisfaction to god the father for there offenses.

And they contend plainly that god can not save man except man help him.

And for this they bring out a place of Saint Austen.

Which in deed is in his.xv. de uerbis apostoli sermon xv.
sermon de verbis Apostly and these be his words.

Qui fecit te sine te, non saluabit te fine te. (That is to say) he that made
the without the, shall not save the without the.

But the living almighty god he knows that holy S. Austen myndyd no thing
less, then by this or any other sentence in his works, to rob be god of his
omnipotentie, as though he were not able as well to save man, without ma^s
help as he was hable to make man without ma^s help.

But for the defense of this holy doctor Saint Austen,

There is one who has written a tragedy. De libero arbitrio.

In the Italian tongue, and is not translated into any other thonge to my
knowledge: he is an ytalian and seems to be singularly well learned.

He says that at Rome in that worthy library (most unworthy to be in so wicked
a place) named, Biblioteca Vaticana.

Their remains an old written copy of Saint Augusten, where in the same
sentence, is word by word, as I have rehearsed it unto you: but in the end of
the sentence (he says) that there is an interogatif point, that so it is not a
determinynge sentence, but a question. Thus.

Qui fecitte sine te, non saluabit te sine te?

He that made the without the, shall he not save the without the? Oh lord what
a change here is now in this sentence.

How small advantage now can our merit prechers, and our satisfactioners take of
this doctrine? Trewly none advantage at all, for the words sound now to
thesittingforth of gods omnipote^cy, and they declare that God is even as hable
to save man without man's help, as he was to make man without man's help
Saint Augusten confuteth this opinyon of thy merits no man more, and namely in
his works against the pellagians. Ambro. 1. Cor. x.
And Saint Ambrose upon the first Epistle to the Corynthes utterly condemns
that opinion of other satisfactions besides Christ, saying.

Hoc est constitutum a Deo, ut qui credit inchristum saluus sit sine opere,
sola fide, gratis accipiens remissionem peccatorum. This is thapointeme^t of
god, that he yt believes in Christ, shall be saved without work, by faith only,
freely receiving remission of his sins. So that although our works declare
our at tonement with almighty god, yet do they not make satisfaction and
atonement between god and us. Such as use this talk of satisfactions besides
Christ for there sins be sta^pers and treders of Christ and his word under
there feet with there talk. Another talk there is, whereby ye shall know them to
be treaders down of gods word, which is the same in effect as ye other was but
in words diverse: They say yt we shall be saved and justified in the sight of
god by our works, and not by faith only. and here they condemn al prechars,
which teach the doctrine of ye kings May. homelies of salvation, and of good
works, saing wrongly of them, yt they condemn al good works, which thing
is very untrue. For the true prechers of gods most holy word, (who^ they take
for this point as heretics) do not condemn good works, but they set faith
in her place, and good works in there place, teaching a diverse office of ye
one, from ye other (ye is to say) that faith makes a man just in ye sight of
god, and good works does declare a man just in the sight of god yt faith
makes a man a good tree, and works declare a man to be a good tree. And
therefore ye prophet david lykeneth the good man to the Psalm. 1. a
tree that is planted by the waters side, Iere. xvii.
which brings forth his fruit in season convenient.

That man says, he has faith, and lives ungodly, he says, vntreuly for
faith can not be frutles, no more then fire with out heat.

And therefore is faith in the scripture always lykned not to barren and frutles
trees, but to herynge, and frutfull trees, as to the fygge tree the olyue, Ioh.
xv.
and the vine, which exede in plentifulnes of fruit above other trees.

In the.xxi. Mat. xxi.
of saint Math. gospel our savior Christ cursed the fig tree when he
found no fruit upon in why? Not because the fygge tree had offendid, but to
give us example that all such as be frutles trees be accursed of God. Wherefore
ye see that all good men wyldoe good works even as a good tree will bring
forth good fruts, they will cloth the naked, feed ye hu^gry, house the
harbolles, help to deliver the prisoner, visit the seek. yea and there heart is
at newgat, and at ludgat, and so forth geuynge alms though they have never a
penny in their purse, so that when they be of ability, they will bring forth
fruit and give alms and do all other good works accordyngly.

This is the doctrine of the true preachers whom these that tread down gods
word, and hinder the going forward of it with there talk, impeache as teachers
of false, and arroneus doctrine, to the intend to make the people unapt to
receive the sead that is sowe^.

I beseech god stop them of there talk when it shall be his pleasure.

Another talk there is whereby ye shall know such as tread the sead of Gods
most holy word, under their feet. I can say (say they) my pater noster, mine
Aue mary, and my creed, and the ten commandeme^tes, and that is enoghe for me.

Let them preche and teach, as much as they will I care for none of them all.
But S. Paul says yt ye must feel a certain quiknes in your hearts of your
belefe, which quiknes shall make you confess Christ with your mouth when so
ever time and occasion shall serve, So that it is not enoge to say these lessons
of our faith with out the book, but these lessons must proceed out of a quike
faith, without which, it is impossyble to please almighty God.

Another talk there is whereby they tread the seed of gods most holy word under
their feet, which is this. Believe say they as your fore fathers has done
before you.

And in this mind they counsel al men to stand and remain still styfly without
searchinge any further.

To these I say that if it were a sufficient excuse for men to say: We believe
as our fathers has belefet, then had the Jews, the Turks, and all infydelles
a sufficient excuse, saying that they believe as there forefathers belefet before
the^. And by this reason, if our fore fathers denied Christ, we must also deny
Christ: if our forefathers acknoweledged the bishop of Rome, to be the supreme
head of the church, we must do the like, and so forth of the popish mass,
and all such like trumpery, which is to great an inconvenience to grant.

Therefore for Christ's sake good people from henceforth, give no ear to such
talkers, as say they will do as there fathers has done before them. Some other
say, look how most men do, and so will I. For he that does as most men does
shall be blameles.

This saying also being blown abroad into the ears of the people. Does stey
them from the hearing and receauynge of Gods most holy word. For a
confutation of this found talk, ye shall understand, that the great multitude
and number of men be ignorant, then if we should follow most men we should
follow the ignorant sort. Again if the good men should follow the most part, then
should the good men become naught, for the most part of all the world is
naught.

And again if such me^ as have there faith grounded upon the multitude had been
in the thapostles time, they would not have receauyd Christ, for the multitude
of the people would not receive him.

But cried Crucifige, crucifige eum. Crucyfy him, Crucify him.

Moreover if such men as use this sentence in their mouth, dwelled in Turkey,
thynkye not but that they would do as most men does? What is that? For soth
worshipe mahometh, for so does the most men there.

Yea and if the matter went by the greatness of the number and follows the
multitude: Then should the Turks, the Jews the hethen and al infideles be
sauid, for they be most in number.

But our Savior Christ says:

Multi sunt uocati pauci uero electi. Mat. xx.
Many be called but few be chosen.

And in the.xiii. of Saint Luke Pauci sunt qui saluabuntur.

They be but few in number that shall be saved. Luc. xiii.


Yesee, that this sentence is an un meet saying to be in a Christian man's mouth.

Wherefore for Christ's sake let us both shune it our selves, and advertise and
counsel all other to take head, that they use it not. Another sayng and talk
they have whereby they occupy the ears, and deceive the hearts of the people,
and make them unapt to receive ye seed of gods word, by means whereof the
good seed is lost, trodden, and cast away: and that is this.

I believe say they as the Church believes, then ask them, how the church
believes? and they say as I believe, and so they teach all men to make answer,
as it were in a circule. Truly this answer might peradventure be borne and
allowed, if they meant by this word church, none but the chosen flock of Christ.

Which church in deed can not err. But they mean the church of Rome, by this
word church, though they pretend otherwise.

Notwythstandynge for the confutacion of there tread word talk, I will use
there general division of the church which is this. They divide the church
into the Greek, and into the Latin church.

Now if I can prove, that both these members of the church have erred, then
have I proved, that such as say they will believe as the church believes
(meaning either the greek, or the latinchurch) may be deceived.

First then touching the Greek church, it is manifest, that it did err in
saiynge, that the holy ghost proceaded from the father only, and not from the
father, and the son, Libro. l. did. xi.
as it apperyth by the master of the sentence, and bysundry places, in Basil,
and Nazianzen, and especially by the creed which was made in the Nicen
counsel, whereas these words be.

(...) And I believe in the holy ghost, the lord and geuer of life, which
proceeds from the father.

This opinion is utterly condemned, and Nicen Creed is amended with an
addicion, that the holy ghost proceeds from the father, and the son. So that
it can not be denied, but that the Greek church was in a manyfeste error in
this point.

Now as touching the latin church, whosoever says that it can not err, let
him consider well the scriptures, which give justly and truly unto the kings
Majesty his title of the supreme head of the church: and he shall perceive, that
he is both an heretyque, and a traitor.

And that may be proved by two reasons, which be of such strenght, that they
can not be avoided, And this kind of reasoninge the Logicians call
Syllogismus, it was my chance to use them ones in a like argument at Paul's
cross. The first of them is this.

Who soever concluded that the kings mayestye is not supreme head of the
church he is a traitor: but whosoever says the latin church can not err
concludes that the kings mageste is not supreme head of the church. Ergo.

Whosoever says that the latin churcche can not err he is a traitor.

And again: Whosoever concludes the bushop of Rome to be supreme head of the
church he is an heritique, but whosoever says that the latin church can not
err concludes that the bushop of Rome is supreme head of the church, Ergo.
Whosoever sait that the latin church can not err is an heretic.

The parts of this Sylogisme be so true, and the consequentes does follow,
insuche a dialecticall form that all the Sophistry in christendom cannot
reprove them.

Then good Christian audience, let not this carnal saiynge, and Anthechristian
talk diuisyd by romyshe mynisters any more blind you.

No it is not enoge for you to say that ye believe as the church of the electes
and chosen of god does believe, oneles ye know and feel in your hertes what
thing it is that the church believes.

Your faith must not be grounded upon any other man's fait, but upon Christ
only. Yet is necessary for every man to have eyes of his own, whereby he may
discern the true church from the false, and the good doctrine from the bad,
the spyrytuall preacher from the carnal, Christian learning from Papystry,
and Christ from Antychrist.

Wherefore search the scriptures your selves, that ye be not deceived, and try
whether your faith be a true fayeth or not. Use your own eyes, in readyng,
use your own knowledge in iudginge, lean not upon any other man's fayeth, and
so shall ye not be deceived.

Do ye as the people of Berrheadyd as it appears in the acts.

Erant quotidie scrutantes scripturas in Act. xvij
templo number haec ita se haberent. They did daily search the scriptures in the
temple to try Paul's doctrine, whether it were true or not.

Believe not the doctrine because I or any other preacher does preach it unto
you: but believe it to be true: because your own faith does assuer you it to be
true, as the people of Samaria said to the woman:

Iam non propter tuam orationem credimus, Ioh. iiij
ipsi enim audiuimus, and scimus quod hic uere est saluator mundi. Now said
they, we believe that Christ is the savior of the world, not because thou have
said so, but because we know it our selves to be true.

These and such like talk cause the people to contempne, and to tread the
seed of gods most holy word, underneath there feet, wherefore they must be
shunnyd of all them that mind to be true folowers of Christ, and to receive
the sede of Gods most holy word, according to the intent of our Savior
Christ.

And here is a question, By what means chiefelye has these talks been sown
abroad, and bruted amongst the people? Forsothe by the judges in there
circuites, and the justices of peace that be popishely affected. By bishops
and there officers in there synodes, and other metinges of ecclesyastycall
parsons, by Schole Masters in their grammar Schools, be stuwardes when they
keep their courts, by priests when they sytte to here auriculare confession
and such like as mind nothing else but the plain subversion of the kingdom of
Christ, and all Christyan doctrine and setting up again of the doctrine and
kingdom of the romish Antichrist to Gods greath dishonor.

The judge in his circute in times past when the people has been assembled,
hat persuaded the people to do as there forefathers has done before them, And
to do as the most men does, and so they shall be most in quiet.

And to be content with such godly doctrine as was contained in the six
articles, and so forth.

The bishop and his officers persuade the priests of the country that they
shall also follow aunceant customs and vsages in the church, and to believe and
do as the church believes, and has thaught them: meaning by the church, the
church of Rome though they say not so expressly.

Now here has all the justices of peace and gentell men and other which were
at the cessions: and all the priests and other that were at the sinod, learned
there lessons how they shall talk to their neyghbors when they come home.

In so much that the Scholemaster in the grammar, schole herynge of it will
power this talk into the ears of his scholars.

Oh what hurt these popish Scholemasters does.

They will sharsly suffer any good doctrine to be talked on in their Schools.

Yea if there be a child that have his father honestlye and godly affected
toward gods word, they will pyk sum such matters against him that he shall be
suer to be thryse breched against his fellows once.

They mar all most noble prince, poysining the childers ears with popry in
their youth.

For redress whereof I would whish (most noble prince) that there might be a
Cathechisme made in the Latten tongue, which should be red by commandment in all
grammar Schools through out your noble realm, and so should the brood of this
most noble realm, not be brought so popishely up as tey be. They shall live and
enjoy the same land which we now possess and inhabit, if they be brought up
in popry, they will alter and mar as much in one year as your grace shall make
and amend in forty The good educacion of them in true religion, shall be a
fortress to all your graces most godly procedynges. The euel deducacion of
that brood of England in popry and supersticion shall inconclusion be an
overthrow to all your graces most godly procedynges.

Wherefore for Gods love and the wealth of this your realm most noble prince. I
wish that they should be remembered.

The stewardes of the courts abroad in the country hang upon the sleues of
the judges and justices of the peace and other gentelmen in the country.

So that they dare do none other but as they see and here there elders and
chief capitayns in the law do before them.

And as the stewardes of courts learn there lesson at the sessions, so does the
popyshe pressed at the Synod. When he gets once a poer simple man in the
country under his benedicite.

O lord what stuf he whistelleth in to his ear there lacks no treadword talk,
I will warrant you he has all in a redines and more to.

He wanteh none of these communicacions whereby the simple peopell be seduced,
when this confessioner has him there upon his knees he handles him, as him
lystith, and makes him believe that the laynge of his hand upon his head is a
sufficient recompense for his sins.

Yea and they bear the poer man in hand that that laynge of his hand upon their
head, is there quytaunce.

Oh pestylent generation.

What shall I say by the throtes of these people? Forsote I will say as the
prophet David says, as Saint Paul recyteth. To. 3. Romans iij
Sepulchrum apertum est guttur eoru^, Psalm. v.
linguis suis ad dolu^ usi sunt uenenum aspidum sub labijs eorum. Quorum os
execracione and amaerulentia plenum est ueloces pedes eorum ad effundendum
sanguinem. Contritio and calamitas in uijs eoru^ and uiam pacis non
cognouerunt, non est timor dei ante oculos eorum.The throat of such
slanderouse talkers, of such judges, justices, byshopes and there officers, of
such Scholemaysters, stuerdes, confessioners and so forth:

There throt (I say) is an open sepulcher. They have used there tongues to
disceyt the poison of serpents is underneath there lyppes.

Their mouth is full of cursinge and bitterness there feet are swyft to shed blud.

They are very wretches in there doings, they know not the way of peace, the
fear of god is not before their eyes.

These be they that tread down the good seed of gods most holy word with
their talk through out this realm most noble prince.

Some also tread this sead down with there vnamended life. For when they be told
and cried out upon for there adultery they live in adultery still when they be
cried out upon for there popery they be popish still.

When they be cried out upon for their extorsion and oppression of the poor,
they contynewe in there extorsion and oppression still. When they be cried out
upon for there disobedience, they norishe rebelliouse hearts in there breasts
still.

When they be cried out upon for their slanderose tongues they leave not there
slander and their blasphemy.

These be they that tread the sead of Gods most holy word underneath their feet
with there vnamended life.

I beseech almyghtie God amend all our talks, and lives that the seed of his
most holy word be not cast away upon us as the seed which is cast by the
ways side is lost deuowred and cast away, trodden and destroyed with the burds
of the air, and the feet of the people.

That almighty God may be glorified with the Godlynes of our talk and with the
amendment of our lives unto whom be all honor and glory world without end.
Amen.

A prayer against the pope and Turks, which be the mortal enemies of Christ,
his word, and his church.
Heavenly father, full well have we deserved, to be corrected of the. But
correct us Lord thy self according to thy mercy, and not after thy fury.
Eccli. ij.
It is better for us to give our selves into the correction of thy hands,
Dan. xiij.
than into the hands of men which be the enemies of thy word, Susan. v
as David prayed also. ij. Regu^ xxiiij.
For great is thy mercy. We have sinned against the, and have transgressed thy
commandments.

But thou God almighty father know, that we have not sinned against the
devil, Pope, or Turks. And yt they also have no authority nor power us to
correct. How be it thou can and may use the^, as thy fearful scourge,
against us, which against the have offended and deserved all michief.

Yea dear God, heavenly father, we have done no sin against them, wherefore
they might lawfully punish us. but much rather would they, that we with them
most abhominablye should sin against the. For they regard it not, if we to
the were disobediente, blasphemed the, used all manner of Idolatry (as they do)
and went about with false doctrine, false faith, and with lies, and committed
against the aduoutry, uncleanliness, murder, theft, robbery, Sorcery, and al
manner of evil. But this is our trespass against them, that we preach, believe,
and knowledge the, God the father to be the only true God, and thy wellbeloued
son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy ghost, to be one only God, yea
this is the sin that we committ against them, but if we should deny the,
then should the devil, world, pope and Turk fulwel leave us in rest,
according to the saying of thy dear Son, if ye were of the world, the world
would love her sone. Ioh. xv.
etc.

Here show thy mercy, O merciful father over us, and earnest judge over our
enemies, for they are more thine enemies then ours. Because that when they
persecute and stryke us, then do they persecute and stryke thy for the word,
which we preach, believe and knowledge, is not ours, but thine, and the work
of thy holy ghost in us.

The devil will not suffer, such things, but in stead of the he will be our
god, Genesis iij.
instead of thy word he will stablishe lies in us. Ioh. viij.
The Turk will set his Marchometh in the rowme of thy dear son Jesus
Christ For he speaks evil of him, and says: That he is no right God, and
that his Machomet is hyer and better then he.

If it be sin, that we hold, knowledge and boast and father, and the Son,
and the holy ghost, for the true only God. Then art thou the sinner thy
self, which workest this in us, and commaundest us to do it. Therefore do they
hate, stryke, and correct thy self, when they for such matters, do hate
stryke or punyshe us.

Wherefore awake O Lord God, and sanctyfye thy name, whom they blaspheme,
strengthen thy kingdom, which they distourbe in us, and let thy will be
done, Mat. vi
which they will quench in us, Luke xi.
and suffer not thy self so to be troaden under fete for our sins sake, of
them, that do not correct ouresynnes in us, but would quench in us thy holy
word, name, and work, to thyntent, that thou shouldeste be no God, and have
no people to preach, bileue, and knowledge the. Uouchesafe O Lord gratyouslye
to hear this our peticion, Ps. iiij. v xvij
and do according to our believe and trust. By the dear Son our Lord Jesus
Christ, which lives and reigns, with the and the holy ghost world without
end.

Amen.
Imprynted at London for Gwalter Lynne, dwelling on Summers Kaye, by Byllynges
gate.

In the year of our Lord. 1550.

And they be to be sold in Paul's church yard, next the great Schole, at
the sign of the sprede Egie.

Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.


