THE PRAISE OF MUSIC: Wherein besides the antiquity, dignity, delectation,
and use thereof in civil matters, is also declared the sober and lawful use
of the same in the congregation and Church of God.

Hieron. in Psalm. 64. Matutinis Vespertinisque hymnis Ecclesiae delectatur Deus
per animam fidelem, quae relicto inanium superstitionum ritu, eum deuote
laudauerit.

God is delighted with the morning and evening hymns of the church, in a
faithful soul, which rejecting the ceremonies of vain superstition, praises
him devoutly.

Printed at Oxenford by JOSEPH BARNES Printer to the University, Anno 1586.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR WALTER RAWLEY KNIGHT.
RIght worshipful, I am glad that I have any small occasion to revive that
study which lay, as dead, for a time: and I would be as glad to have it
continue in good credit and liking after it is once revived. For which cause I
request your worship in all humility to become a patron of this small work,
worthy to be taken into your hand when your worship shall have any respit from
your weightier affairs, and pleasant to be read, because it is an Orphan of
one of Lady Musickes children. It is commended to me by men of good judgment
and learning, and it will be the better commended hereafter if it may go out
under your worships protection: which I request again most humbly, wishing your
worship as much happiness as I can conceive, and conceiving as much as your
worship can wish.

From OXENFORD. Your worships most humble at commandment, JOSEPH BARNES.

The preface to the Reader.
TRue it is, Arist. eth. 9.
which is reported of Poets and Musitions, that they are no otherwise affected
toward their own devises, than parents toward their children. And surely
(gentle reader) I willingly confess unto thee, that I am glad I have some
skill in music, which is so sweet, so good, so virtuous, so comely a matrone
among other arts. Wherefore I shall not justly blame thee, if thou think, that
love and affection has prevailed much with me in publishing of this pamphlet:
for therein thou shall give testimony unto me, that I have performed the part
of a kind and grateful son, in bestowing the best of mine ability, to the
advancing of so gracious a mother. Neither would I have thee so much to stand
upon this conceit, as if reason had no place in this action: considering that
affection without reason, is a blind and unjust judge of any matter. May it
therefore please thee, no otherwise to judge of my labor, than the reasons
therein alleged shall give thee just occasion: and if it happen thou come to
the view hereof with a prejudice, yet consider that nature has therefore given
thee two ears, that thou should as well apply the one to the defendant, as
the other to the plaintiff. For as in civil matters, so in this, Seneca.
Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit:
Who so defines a thing he does not know,
Though just his verdit be, he is not so.


If then I bring not only reason, but testimony also for mine assertion, I
shall desire the auerse Reader, not to condemn me without ground, nor with a
pha^tasticall prejudice to set light by that, which perhaps, he will not be
able to gainsay. For as the Poet said in an other matter, Terent.
Qui hunc accusant, Naeuium, Plautum, Ennium.
Accusant, quos hic noster auiores habet.


So I make answer to them that pass their sentences of condemnation upon me,
that they do in no wise disgrace me, but Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Basil*
Gregory Nazianzen, and the holy Fathers of the primitive Church, whose
authorities are here alleged men far better than themselves, and not worthy
to be condemned under a session of their pieres. I know a blemish is soonest
perceived in a comely body, and the greater the man is that does offend, the
greater seems his offense. Because one small wart is a stain to be a
beautiful face, and some little fault committed, that might otherwise seem
tolerable in a man of mean estate, is inexcuseable in a greater personage: So
fares it with music, which because it is excellent, and for that naturally
subject to the envy and malice of many, is therefore ill spoken of, because it
falls out, that she is oftentimes blemished with the faults of them, that
profess to have some knowledge in her. Hence it comes to pass, that the
faults of the persons are attributed to the art, and that whatsoever is amiss
in this or that lewd musicion, is said to proceed from her, which ought by
better reason to obscure and ouershadowe the foulest blottes which are incident
to men, than she by them should be disgraced. Because the Pierides in pride of
their skill provoked the Muses, or Marsyas and Pan in opinion of their own
excellency, Apollo: this general collection is made, that music causes
pride and ambition. If there be any such foolish musicions as Arcabius was,
having that fault whereof Horace speaks, Vt nunquam inducant animum cantare,
rogati,
Iniussi nunquam desistant:
That being praid to sing and show their skill,
Cannot induced be, say what thou list:
But unrequested keep a chaunting still,
And from their folly never will desist.
straightwaie music is wayward and troublesome, ^unning men are either
dangerous or fantastical, as if to be skillful, were a fault, or to be
cunning, wor^hy reprehension.

Great occasion and advantage of inueighing against his art, is taken of that
saying which King Philip of Macedon used to his son Alexander when he rebu^ed
him, for that he could sing so well and cunningly: as if we did allow the
importunity of Nero, which is said, all a long so^mers day, to have sitten in
the Theater, playing on his Harp: or did not rather think, that music is so
to be used of Noble and Gentlemen, as Achilles did in Homer: Iliad.
who after that bitter contention between him and Agamemnon, taking to him his
^harp, (whereon he had learned to play of Chiron ^he Centaure, who also taught
him feats of arms, with Physic and surgerie) and playing thereon, Eliot.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
sang ^he martial acts of the Princes of Greece, as Hercules, Perseus,
Peritheus, Theseus, and his cosen Jason, and was ^herewith assuaged of his fury
and reduced into his first esta^e of reason. And this in him was so
comme^^able, th^^ Alexander himself, after he had vanqui^hed Ilion, oeing
demanded of one, if he would see the ^arp of Paris, who ravished Helena: there
at gently ^miling answered, it was not the thing he much desired, but had rather
see the harp of Achilles, wherewith ^e sang not the illecebrous delectations of
Venus, but ^he valiant acts and noble affairs of excellent princes.

Some, I doubt not, will exult to draw a reproach of his art from the ancient
Greeks, with whom it was ^t the first in greatest estimation: and therefore
will triumph that Minerua should have cast away her Recorder from her in
disdain, Arist. 8. pol. cap. 6.
not as some say, because the using thereof made her cheeks swell and puffed,
bu^ as Aristotle rather thought, because the playing on (...) Recorder does
neither auail the mind, nor help knowledge any thing at al: whereas we ascribe
art and knowledge to Minerua. But I would not have any man suppose that my
purpose is in this treatise, otherwise to speak of this science, than so, as
that it may seem both worthy private delectation, for a man's proper solace: and
also publicly commodious in matters both civil and ecclesiastical as in the
process shall be declared. And therefore I refer the Reader, for the dece^t use
hereof in gentlemen, to the 8. book of Aristotle's politiques, and the 7.
chapter of Sir Thomas Eliots first book of his Governor. From whom he shall
sufficiently gather, wha^ the proper and sober use hereof is, and ought to be
Touching the other use, I mean the Ecclesiastical, because that is a matter in
controversy, I shall desire the gentle reader, so long to suspend his
judgment, till having read the treatise, he shall also consider of the
strength and firmness of the reasons. And I do no^ doubt, but as I without
bitterness speak of these things so he peradventure, that is most auerse, shall
take some profit and fruit of these my labors. If thou be skillful and
learned, I know thou will not condemn me at a blush: if unskillful and
ignorant, think that I will not so mildely answer thee as Stratonicus answered
King Ptolomy, (...). A scepter o King is one thing, and an instrumen^ another:
but rather that which is more agreeable to thy person, which the same man also
is said to have answered a smith, which maliciously reviled him: Sir, (...)
pray you deal not above your hammer.

THE ANTIQVITIE AND ORIGINAL OF MUSIC: FIRST GEnerally, then more
particularly set down. CHAPTER I.
IT were but lost labor to write any thing of Music, being an Art of more
use than credit, more known than acknowledged, were it not that more
indifferency is to be looked for of the eye, to whose view and oversight she
betaketh her self, than has heretofore been shown by the ear, whose
itching sense she hardly contented. But fullness perhaps breeds loathing: And
the eye which in a manner has been kept hungry from these things, may by
sight and reading hereof, both satisfy her self, and teach her ungrateful
neighbor the ear to think better of so comfortable a treasure. The
commendation whereof as it arises from many heads, namely her parentage,
auncientrie, dignity, her both pleasant and profitable service, with other as
many and no whit meaner arguments of her praise, all which jointly fill up a
perfect measure of more than common honor, so her birth and antiquity makes
not least to the setting forth of her beauty.

And although it is for poor men to reckon their cattle, because rich men's
store grows out of number, and for yonglings to account their years,
Justinius,
because antiquities wax out of mind (whereupon the Arcadians least they might
come in question of iuniority wc any other country would needs be elder tha^
the moon) yet the casting of her nativity ca^ in no wise prejudice so ancient
a science, whose continuance is great but not defined, her birth day ancient
but not dated. For time cannot say that he was before her, or nature that she
wrought without her. To prove this look upon the frame, and workmanship of the
whole world, whether there be not above, an harmony between the spheres,
Musica mundana. Cor. Agrippa.
beneath a simbolisme between the elements. Look upon a man, who^ the
Philosophers termed a little world, whether the parts accord not one to the
other by consent and unity. And who can blame nature in any reason for using
her own invention? Polydor. Virg. 1. lib. cap. 14.
Does the nightingale record by Art or by nature? Although the Roman taught
his crow this one lesson with much ado, All hail Caesar, and the Carthaginian
his birds hardly enough to sing this one plain song, Hannon is god, yet it is
I am sure besides the custom, and perhaps beyond the cunning of any man, to
instruct the nightingale in so pleasant and variable notes, being as cunningly
delivered as speedily learned. But to leave nature and come to Art (which then
is at her best when she is nearest this maistresse) who can be ignorant that
nature has given her the ground work, whereon she a long time has
flourished? As for her infancy, let us bury it in silence, and wrap up as it
were in her swathing cloutes. For no doubt she was not enquired, talked, or
written of till she waxed and grew in years, that is in perfection and
ripeness. At what time being Iam plenis nubilis annis, fit to wedde men's
ears and hearts unto her, she began even with greediness to be received,
commended, practiced, to exercise their wits, possess their minds, occupy
their tongues, fill their books and writings. Forthwith she was so challenged
by this nation and that country, so claimed by this man and that God, that it
was doubtful in such variety of judgment, to whom she was most beholding for
her birthright. Whereof what shall I say else, but that as the contention of
seven cities about Homer that famous and renowned Poet, and earnest plea of
each of them to be his native soil did implie his excellency: so these many
lands and Islands, men and weomen, gods and goddesses, and (if I may so speak)
heaven and earth being at ods and variance about this science, argue her to be
no base borne child, but such a one as both commends him that invented her, and
honesteth them which intertaine her.

Cornelius Agrippa.
But because she is as pregnant as Libia always breeding some new thing, for so
it pleased Anaxilas long ago to make comparison, it will be the harder in such
fruitfulnes of issu to father every child aright, and to assign to every one
his proper and peculiar invention. First the Muses lay challenge unto her for
their offspring, as may appear by christening her Music after their own
name. If we from hence derive her lineage, what one thing is amiss? Jupiter,
that is dexterity and quickness of wit her grandfather: Natal. Comes
memory that aged and reverend Mistress of all sciences her grandmother, her
mother many in steed of one (for how could ordinary parents have conceived
such extraordinary perfection?) and yet but one in many, for all is but
Harmony. Exception may be taken against these things as fables and fantasies
of the Poets: yet if we draw the veil aside, and look nearer into that,
which now we do but glimpse at, what else is meant but that Music is and
ought to be accounted donum and inuentum deorum: the gift and invention of the
gods, and therefore ordained to good use and purpose? Now if Music can find
no favor by alleging these parents, Pol. Virg. ibid.
let us search other men's registers, and see if happily she be more gracious
for the graces sake. Whose hands being fast claspt without seuering, their
faces amiable withoutfrouning, their youth fresh and green without waining,
their garments loose without-girding, and their chastity perpetual without
violating express in sense and meaning nothing else, but concord without
breach, mirth without sadness, continuance without end, liberty without
co^straint, and finally pureness without taint or corruption. And can a
graceless fruit come of so gracious a stock? For proof hereof may serve the
image of Apollo which stood at Delos, bearing in the one hand his bow and
arrows as being God of the archers, in the other the three graces with
several instruments as having soueraintie over the Musicians. Idem ibid.
I would not leave Bacchus out of this catalogue: were it not that his name
now adays is in some disgrace amongst us, and those dronken euohes and
howlinges together with confuse hammering of timbrels used in his Bacchanalles
feasts and somnities might seem to indaunger the credit of this art. Howbeit
if we take him not as he is imagined, but as he was indeed, I mean an
heroical person, his finding out of wine and Music is or ought to be as
famous, as his victories and triumphs in India were glorious.

But because as the rainebowe being not of one color is therefore more sightly
to the eye, so Music being not of one kind is therefore more welcome to the
ear, it shall not be amiss to consider the specialities, and lay by it self
each man's help and furtherance in this science. And first to begin as best
beseems, with vocal Music, Vocal Music
being sounded with a lively instrument the tongue of man who will not fly with
birds of his own feather and profess that both the nature of man is beautified
with so excellent a quality, and the quality credited with so excellent a
nature. For if we join even with heathen Philosophers and masters in this
point, and confess with Pythagoras that man is a great miracle, with Mercury a
second god, with Phauorinus a mortal god, with Abdala the Sarracene another
Proteus apt to receive any form, with others a little world, and with others
omnia, all in all: as taking part with angels, part with plants, and part with
brute beasts, it were most injurious to make better account of an instrument
framed by art, than made by nature, the one being without us, the other living
and growing within us. But what need I call the light of the Sun in question?
Let each of these sorts receive her due commendation, neither let contention
about the maystrie make to the disgracing of either of them, but rather prove
how happy and rich we are, that can find no worse quarelling matter, than
to dispute of two good things, whether is the better. The antiquity of this
kind has more need of disciding than the sovereignty, both because the
times are not easily remembered, and the opinions of men hardly reconciled.
For some ascribe singing to Jupiter, as Diodorus of Sicilie: some to Mercury,
as Heraclides of Pontus: rest in whether of these two verdicts we list, deus
est in vtroque parente, each of their authors was deified by the heaven for
principal virtues. Furthermore as all the Muses were reported at the marriage
of Cadmus and Hermione to have sung a ditie of the near alliance betwixt
friendship and honesty, so specially amongst the rest Calliope had been
miscalled but for the goodness of her voice, and Melpomene nicknamed but for
setting of songs. But in such cases we canonize for Authors, as well those
that make perfect, as those which first invent: not for devising that which was
not before, but for bettering that which was worse before. Does no man build
but he which lays the foundation? no man paint but he which shadows? no man
wade but he which first breaks the ice? If it were so, in what case had all
our Arts and sciences bin? They had been monumentes as one speaks adorandae
rubiginis, and nothing else, well we might have reuere^ced their ancient
rustines, but neither had their faces bin half so well favored, neither their
knowledge half so much practiced. Diod. Sicul.
Now then by this account Osiris must be remembered for one whom the Muses
were said to attend upon. To signify that he was his craftsmaister, having
the art at will, and thoroughly stored with all the gifts of so notable a
knowledge. Rauis.
Next Tisias otherwise Stesichorus commended even from his cradle to this
science by the ominous sitting of a nightingale upon his tender lips. Besides
these Chrysogonus which made a perfect consorte between his own voice and
Mariners oars, observing a delectable tune in the one, and proportionable a
time in the other. Volaterranus
What shall I speak of Simon and Lysias, which being offended with the old
Music as too too harsh for their smooth and delicate ears, cast it once and
again as it were in a new mould, neither suffered so much as the former name
to remain unchanged. These and many the like whose memory is fresh in
histories though passed by me in silence, either for setting us on work by
their examples, or for instructing us by their precepts, or for polishing other
men's rough hewn work by their skilfulnesse ca^ deserve no less at our hands
than to be held and reputed for authors. But why do I plead for their
privilege and authorizement, who have found no age hitherto so ungrateful as
not to offer it? He that will not give seconds and thirds a first place in
these matters thinks it easy perhaps to build Rome in one day, and possible
enough to make a science perfect even at one instant. Albeit we know that even
Mercury himself called amongst the Egyptians by a name of prerogative, Ter
maximus, as being in three special things, especial and chiefest could not
acquit himself so handsomely in this science, as not to have need of
bettering in succeeding ages. His Music of three parts, Pol. Virg. ibidem.
set and proportio^ed to the three times of the year, the base ^o winter, the
treble to summer, the mean ^o the spring, being a middle season between summer
and winter, was bare and naked til other parts came in to help and supply it.
So that as a question is made whether Theseus his ship being kept among the
Athenians for a monument, and by continual reparation even from the hatches to
the keele quite altered be now Theseus his ship or no: so it might be
disputed were it not injurious to the good deseruings of our predecessors,
whether this our Music after the new fashioning, and working of so many me^
in so many ages be the same music which was retained in former times? For
string has been added to string, part unto part, precept unto precept, one
thing to an other so long til at length no one thing so much as variety has
made music a perfect and uniform body. Now besides all this who knows not that
as generally so many men so many minds, so specially sundry musicia^s drive
sundry crotchets, and diversity of masters maks diversity of methods.
Timotheus one for all (though one swalow be no sufficient warrant of the spring)
yet standing in for (...) of many witnesses, as being borne out b^ common sense
and practice of our days required a double fee of other men's scholars: one to
make them forgette what the^ had taught the^, another to make the^ learn^ what
he himself would teach them. S^ then if both the matter taught, and the manner
of teaching have seen as many alterations, as almost ages, who can imagin^
that so great a dissent of the kinds can sta^^ without as great diversity of
the authors?

Instrumental music.
But to come nearer home, and to speak^ of the other sort of Music, which has
a while been prevented by this needelesse digression, although we be now
adays fallen into a kind of intemperancie and wantonness, especially in the
framing of instruments, in so much that the diuising of them is not so great a
trouble as their naming, yet antiquity the mother of simplicity and
singleness in the greatest part of artificial things, both contented her
self with meaner choice, and incombred her self with smaller business. In
those times three colors did serve for painting, and three instruments for
playing. Now the Painters ^^op may vie with the rainebow for colors, ^art has
almost gone beyond it self for in^^ruments. But to leave both the greater and
^^e later number of them which are made (...) the imitation of the former,
there is no ^uestion but as the dignity of these three ^boue the rest is to be
maintained, so their ^^der amongst themselves not to be ^eglected. The harp.
For by the judgment of Alcibia^es the harp is to be preferred before the
whistling pipe or pshalms, because it leaves (...) room for the voice, whereas
the other pos^essing the whole wind and breath of man ^ispossesse him of that
service.

Touching the original hereof it is repor^ed that when Nilus had ouer-washed
the country of Egypt and afterward drank in ^is waters again into his seven
mouths being so many streams or channels, Polydor. Virg.
amongst many other fishes which perished on the dry la^d being in a sort
betrayed by that element wherein their nature is preserved the Tortuise also
came short. Mercury coasting along that way took up one of them, and finding
nothing thereon but a few of parched or withered sinews tied them with his
fingers, wherewith they made some offer of a musical noise. The experiment is
well known lippis and tonsoribus, to the meanest and simpleir persons amongst
us. For every child holding a threede or hair in his mouth, and striking it
with his finger shall find the like partly by the motion of his finger
wherthrough the solid is caused, and partly by the hollownesse of the mouth
whereby it is tuned. Mercury having gotten this hold took occasion to set
abroch his cunning. For he fashioned a piece of wood proportionable to the shel
of a fish, and put thereon three strings distinct in sounds, answerable to the
three seaso^s. After this first onset which for the most part carries both the
greatest danger, and the greatest creditte, Terpander made up seven
stringes in honor of the seven Atlantides which go under the name of our seven
stars: Simonides and Timotheus brought them to nine in reverence of the nine
Muses. Ibidem.
Thus Mercuries handsell set the market in a good and happy forwardnes. This
instrument being as well for the nouelty as excellency strange was presented by
report of some to Apollo: in lue whereof he reco^pensed Mercury with his
heralds rod called Caduceus.

Hoc animas ille euocat orco
Pallentes, alias sub tristia Tartara mittit.
Herewith he calls some souls from Hell,
And sends down others there to dwell. Ovid.

By witness of others it was given to Orpheus, wherewith he brought even
senseless things to a sense and feeling of his sweetness, and lifelesse
creatures to a lively stirring and motion of their vnarticulate bodies. And
when Orpheus was torn in pieces by the drunken Bacchides, his head and harp
swam down the river Hebrus, and were taken up at Lesbos: where they buried the
one, and hung up the other in the temple to their gods. Thus the harp lived
after Orpheus was dead, and made a manifest proof how highly it disdained to
be handled by unskillful and profane fingers, revenging even unto the death a
presumptuous act committed by Naearchus. This young man being the king of
Miteleus son bargained with the priests of the temple for Orpheus his harp,
because as the practice of music was co^me^dable amongst them, so the greater
every man's skill was the better was his recompense. Now Naearchus having a mind
to the best game, and putting more affiance in the virtue of the harp than his
own cunning, got by night into the suburbs, and there iangled the stringes
so long, till at length he was rent asunder by dogs. Thus was his Music
unsavory, thus was his death untimely.

But to proceed, the first that ever sang to the harp which is either the only
or chief reason why it is preferred before wind instruments, was Linus. Whose
ungracious scholar Hercules being controlled by him for his rawnes made such
untoward Music betwixt his Masters harp and his head, that he beat out the
sides of the one, and the brains of the other. Although some displace him from
the honor of this invention, Polydor. Vir.
and ascribe it rather to Amphion.

The Pshalme.
Now among the wind instruments the Pshalme was devised either by Euterpe one
of the nine Muses, or else by Ardalus Vulcans son, made at the first of the
sha^ke bones of cranes, and therefore called Tibia by the Latins. Caelius Rhod
Although afterward it was framed of the baytree in Lybia, of box in Phrygia,
of the boans of hinds in Thebes in Scythia of raue^s and eagles, in Egypt of
barley stalks, and so accordingly at other times and in other places of other
matters. But the most voices run upon Minerua the daughter of Jupiter, and one
who for her wisdom is said to be borne of Jupiters brain. And because every
artificer loves his own work, Minerua was delighted with her pipe, and used
even in the assembly of the gods very much to wind it: till such time till
both they drove her both from her Music and their presence by laughing at her
blown cheeks. She to make trial of the matter went down to a river side,
and beholding her swelling face in Neptunes glass bid her pipe farewell in a
great choler, loathing and disgracing the same as much as it disfigured her.
This pipe left not so good a Mistress, but it lighted on as bad a Master
Marsias by name: whom it caused so to swel not in face but in heart, Ovid.
that he challenged and provoked Apollo to a musical combat: and being ouercom
lost the best and nearest coat to his back, having his skin plucked over his
ears for attempting so bold an enterprise. The use and effect of this as also
other instruments I refer to their places. In the mean while I follow my
purpose.

The whistling Pipe.
Touching the whistling pipes which were made, for the most part, of reeds,
though some assign them to Silenus the foster father of Bacchus: on whom he
always attended riding upon an Ass, yet the greater part agree in Pan the God
of sheepheardes.

The occasion was this: It chanced that he fell in love with Sirinxe a nymph
of Arcadie, Ovid.
who would neither give her head as they say for the washing, nor her
virginity for the asking. And therefore when he first came to commense his
suit she took her course from him toward the river Ladon. Where her journey
being at an end upon request made unto the nymphs, she was delivered by them
from that rusticke paramoure by transforming her into water reeds. Those he
took for love of her, and made them instruments to utter forth his
complaints. Howsoever other things in this history be feigned, sure it is
that it carries with it an other drift than to prove Pan the author of that
instrument. And if it be so, how could so grounded a worke-man, being made as
they say to the imitation of nature and expressing by his horns the sun
beams, Natal. Comes.
by his red face the color of the skies, by his rough and heary thigh the
trees and herbs upon the face of the earth, by his goats feet the soliditie
and steedfastnes of the same, be the master of a vain and frutelesse work?
What shall I speak of the Lute, Citterne, Violle, Rebeck, Gittorne, Pandore,
Dulcimer, Organes, Virginals, Flute, Fife, Recorders, of the Trumpet, Cornet,
Sackbut, and infinite other sorts so excellent and pleasant in their sundry
kinds, that if art be any way faulty for them, it is for being too too riotous
and superfluous. For having as it were wearied and ouergone her self in choice
of new sorts, she has devised a kind of newnes even out of the old, by
joining and compacting many in one, which these later times may by right
challenge for their inue^tion. But to leave al other historiographers dissenting
some of them far in opinions that history which indeed is the witness of times
and light of the truth written by the finger of God sets down Iubal son of
Lamech and Ada to be the Father of all such as handle harp and instruments.
Genes. and Joseph.


THE DIGNITY OF MUSIC PROVED BOTH by the rewards and practice of many and
most excellent men. Chap. 2.
THus having stood upon the antiquity and original of music being so nearly
linked together that they could not well be severed, it follows by order that I
speak somewhat of her honor. A needless treatise, were it not for the
affectionat judgments of some men, which making more reckening of the shadow
than the body account neither virtues nor sciences worthy the taking up for
their own fair faces, unless they come furnished with good and sufficient
doweries.

Ipse licet venias Musis comitatus Homere,
Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere for as.
Come Homer if thou list and bring the muses crew
Yet Homer if thou bring naught else but the^ adue.
Notwithstanding to satisfy those which like indifferently well of this
science not so much for her own laudable nature as her profitable accidents,
let them know that her professors and practisers were not rewarded heretofore
(as they speak in reproach) with meat, drink and money, which they call fiddlers
wages, but admitted into the presence and familiarity of kings, sought unto by
whole cities and countries, and dismissed with rich and honorable rewards. I
am sorry that I am forced to seek those kind of arguments, being fitter to
quiet the common people tha^ the learned and wise: who looking into the things
themselves, wey the^ by themselves, valuing at an higher price the goodness
wherewith they are endowed, than the goods and commodities wherewith they are
enriched. But to approve music unto both those sorts of men, to the upright
and well minded for her own sake, to the others for the things which they do
most estimate I intend both by variety and truth of history to make manifest
declaration in every respect of her dignity. Alexander ab Alexandro.
Who was more accepted of Periander King of Corinth than Arion? of Hieron King
of Sicil than Simonides? of Perdicchas than Menalippides? of Alexander the
great than Timotheus and Zenophontus who could make him both give an alarm,
and sound retrait at their pleasures? Who in better favor with Agamemnon than
Demodochus to whom he committed his wife Clitemnestra for the time of his long
and unfortunate voyage? with Themistocles than Exicles whom he made his daily
and household guest? with M. Antonius than Anaxenor to whom he gave the tribute
of four Cities? with Julius Caesar than Hermogenes? with Nero than Ferionus?
with Vespasian than Diodorus? with Galba than Canus? Who more tendered of
Aristratus king of Sycio^ than Thelestus, whom he countenanced being alive with all kind of preferment, and honored being dead with a costly monument? Music
mollifieth cruelty.
Nay the cunning of some has so far rebated the edge of most cruel and hard
hearted tirants, that they have been willing, as they say perforce to put up
injuries and wrongs at their hands. Pyttachus of Mytilen let go scotfree
Alcaeus his sworn enemy, notwithstanding he had both disgraced him and taken
arms against him. The like did Phalaris the Agrigentine by Tisias his mortal
foe, albeit he took as much pleasure in murdering as in banqueting, and had
often even with greedines dislodged the souls of many innocents from their
harmles bodies. Thus Music led him farther tha^ ever humanity could draw him.
What need I ad water to the sea, Theat. vitae.
and after al these speak of Terpander in a dangerous tumult of the
Lacedemonia^s appointed by the oracle and required by the country to appease
their vprores? A president so much the more to be heeded, by how much the
judgment of a whole country than of any private person is the rather
esteemed. And is Lacedemo^ singular in this case? have not Rome and Greece
joined hands with her, the former instituting a College of Minstrels, the later
by ordeining that the same men should be their sages, prophets and musicians?
Plenty makes me scant both by restraining me to choice, and by withdrawing me
from tediousnes: for how easy a thing were it in such abu^da^ce to tire and
weary even ye patientest ears? Notwithstanding because I am to convince these
judgments which look no farther than the outside, and harke^ rather to the
honor co^ferred otherwise, tha^ the honesty and goodness incide^t to the things
themselves, let them ad to the favor and acceptance of those royal persons
above named their practice and industry which they have exercised.

I omit the muses, graces, gods and goddeses before mentioned. Colworts twice
sodde are harmeful, and tales twice told ungrateful. This next pageant shall
be filled with Emperors, Kings and Captains, men both of courage and
experience not content to go by hearesay and testimony of others, The practice
of Music in great and Noble men.
but adioining them unto their own use and practice. Nero Emperor of Rome
wanne and ware the garland to the great admiration and shouting of the people
for victory over the harpers. Alexander the great made a great jewel of
Achilles his harp. Choraebus the Lydian prince was as soueraign in music as in
authority. Cimon of Athens and Epaminondas of Thebes no worse musicians than
Captains. Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome ended his life and music
together, and the quier at this day is a witness of his pains. Yea Socrates
himself as great a king in wisdom, as they in jurisdiction: whose stay and
moderation of life let Xantippe his wife and scourge witness, and let envy it
self judge of his other qualities, being far stricken in years, and having
in a manner one foot in the grave, yet of an old master became a young scholar
unto Conus for the attaining of this science. And being charged therewt as a
wanto^ toy unfitting to his gray hayres made this apology, Cael. Rhod.
It is more shameful in the wain and decrease of our life to be ignorant of any
good and commendable property. Thus he put on music as the list and uppermost
garment, wherewith his wisdom, gravity and age, might be adorned, and even the
whole race of his life perfited, a garment no dout that is well worn, and of
seemly personages better worth the wearing tha^ the softest raime^t in kings
house^. Music good in it self.
You may cloth an Ape in gold, and an Infant in Hercules armor: does an
infant therefore change his age, or an Ape forgo his nature? or is there less
price in the gold, or viler estimation of the armor? This is to misuse the
right use of things neither fitting the persons, and far unfitting the
garments. The deepest dye may be stained, and the best gift abused. The tuning
of the voice and strings may turn to the jar and discord of manners, as well
as Rhetoric may plead untruths, and Logic prove impossibilities. So that
I marvel the less if Diogenes the cynick Philosopher amongst other his
dogtrickes put up a formal bil of indictment against the musicians in open and
ordinary court, for showing greater skill in concordes and unisons of their
notes, tha^ unity and consent of manners: whose suit or action, being in all
cases and with all persons a resolute and peremptory man and little caring
where or how he fastened his teeth so he fastened them, may seem approueable in
respect of those unjust and ever repining plaintiffes which attemper every
thing to their distemperate humor, and in their proceedings make not reason
their advocate, but either the weakness, stra^genes, or vndiscreetnes, of their
own nature. Now if a bleareeied man should give sentence of the sun beams,
no doubt he would judge the^ to be shut up into everlasting clouds, least at
any time they might be offensive to his sore eyes. If a feuersicke palate
should be judge of tastes and relishes, what unmerciful doom would it award to
the holesomest restoratiues? Ask the Satire what shall become of the fire for
swealing his beard being ouersawcie in embracing it, I warrant you he will curse
Prometheus for ever troubling the earth with it. A melancholic man and one that
is fitter to live in Trophonius his den, than in civil society will trowne
upon music, if for no other cause, yet at the least to show him self
serviceable to his melancholy. Thus we shall have the brightest eye of the
world even the sun plucked out of heaven, the best meat out of our mouths,
and the necessariest element out of the nature of things, yea all virtues and
sciences utterly raced out, as the occasions sometimes (though never the causes)
of some inconveniences, if every brainsicke, hareblind, and froward man may
judge and determine in those cases. Cael. Rhod.
Now then as often as we shall hear Archidamus or any the like sectarie of his
make better account of a Cater tha^ a Singer ( mihi bonus cantor, bonus
cupediarius) what shall we say of him but that animus erat in patinis: His
belly was his idol, Terent.
and the belly having no ears is unfit to meddle with soundes? If Anteas the
Scythia^ at the singing of Ismenias the Theba^ for want of better gods swear by
the wind and his fauchin, he had rather hear the neieng of an horse tha^ ye
singing of Ismen. let his words as they are indeed so go but for wind, and if
his sword be the best argument that he has to avouch it let us wound him
again but with this only blow, Quis tumidum guttur miretur in alpibus, Who
can look for a white skine in Aethiopia, or an upright judgment in Scythia?
Albeit besides the vnciuilitie and brutishnes of his country, he was no doubt
fitter to handle a curriecombe than judge of singing, who in the midst of his
royalty made boastes that he used to rub horses heels. But if Antisthenes
shall go a note above Anteas and give this or the like uncharitable censure of
Ismenias, as indeed he is reported to have done, Cael. Rhod.
he is a naughty man: if he were honest he would never be a musicia^, we may
say with some indifferent reverence of his philosophers beard and gown, yt as
he was generally reputed to be Auitus magis quam eruditus his wit being too
headstro^g for his wisdom, Tullius ad Articum.
so particularly in this matter he had not sufficiently learned how to define
honesty. Music not to be blamed for the lewdness of some Musicians.
For although many good musicians be as many bad men, yet so far is it off
that music should be blamed as the cause of such an effect, that rather if
they be otherwise bad men she weanes and withdrawes them from their
corruption. For warrant hereof the necessity of the art to be set down in a
latter treatise may yield sufficient argument: mean while thus much I say,
that a precious stone may be set in led, and a good quality placed in an
evil subject. In which cases we have more cause to pity their unfortunate
houserome, than accuse their unseemly demeanor. But to lose the bitte a little
farther and to give the^ even their own asking, music, as many other good
blessings has been made the instrument of many disorders. What need I recite
them? other are eagle eied and quick sighted enough to epsy the^. I confess
this to be true, but in such sort as glory becomes the fuel and occasion unto
envy, peace to security, beauty to pride, learning to insolency, good laws
to enormitie, meats and drinks to surfeting, and finally the fairest gifts an
edge and intisement to the foulest faults. Where notwithstanding the well natured
things themselves are not chargeable with those crimes, but the evil disposed
persons. If thou can not moderate and school thy self in beholding, pluck
out thy eyes as Democritus did, if not in hearing stop thy ears with wax as
Ulysses his companio^s did, if not in eating lay thy teeth aside as those
Graeae of Scythia did, if not in speaking bite off thy tongue as Zeno Eleates
did. For by as good reason may thou do the one as the other, seeing the
disliking of these and the like good things stands in the immoderation and
intemperancie of these men which abuse them. Now if it be uncivil to live without
virtue and knowledge, if unnatural without meats and drinks, if unreasonable
without eyes, teeth and tongues, although perhaps they have many insufferable
consequentes, then blame not the hatchet for the Carpenters fault: but esteem
worthily of good things for their own natures, and favorably deal with them
for other men's offenses.

Music not to be blamed for some musicians unskillfulness.
Now besides this they that cannot epsy an hoale in the musicians coat for
their looseness and effeminatnes of manners seek to bring music in contempt
by reason of their unskillfulness. As if the husbandmans reasoning a baculo ad
angulum should conde^n Logic, or Tom fools telling his geese Arythmeticke.
There are infantes in all arts, and I grant none so very a babe in music as
was Babys. Minerua to beg his pardon for offending therein used this frindly
intercession to Apollo, Theat.
abiectior est and infaelicius canit quam vt dignus sit supplicio. Cast not
away chastisement upon so base and inexpert a person. And sure he was worth
nothing (say I) if he were not worth the punishing. Diogenes was troubled with
the like moon calfe, whom as often as he met him welcomed with this
salutation, Salve galle, God speed cock, the other demanding him why he
mistermed him, Quia cantu tuo excitas omnes, Thou diseasest quoth he every man
with thy unseasonable crowing. And Demost. was plain on the other side with an
harper of ye same sta^pe, with who^ he ever co^ditioned to tie up his pipes
before he would once set foot with in his doors. There are a great many cocks and
to use a domestical proverb, a great many asses at the harp who because they
have employed themselves at ye trade dijs tratis, Eras. Persius.
genioque sinistro against the hair as they commonly speak and eue^ in despite
of Apol. and nature, have made themselves a byword and skorne in all places.
Our alehouse, vagabo^d and beging minstrelsie I defend not, liberal sciences
are for liberal men, whose dexterity and aptnes of nature has forwarded
their art, and both these being conjoined have made the men commendable and of
good report. For the^ is the medly good when art and nature have met with each
other.

But I leave this reason to be refuted by the weakness and simplicity of it
self. I come to another vain which has need of a little opening, Dainty me^.
least the neglecting of it make it in time somewhat more troublesome. I mean
those men, who, as if they came of some finer mould, like well enough of
music in others, but cannot away with it themselves. They are delighted for
examples sake with the well proportioned pictures of Jupiter, Juno, and Venus, but
yet would not be Phidias, Policletus or Praxiteles. Examine their reasons they
areas rare as black swannes, unless perchance they answer as children and
fools are wont. They will not for their minds sake. And why not they as well
as other men? They are belike of a better brood. Be it so, let them plead
their privilege, but so far forth as they seek not to dishonor things as
honorable as themselves. In mechanical arts I bear with them. Tractent
fabrilia Fabri. Courser meats may serve siner mouths. What cards can they
show to discarde literal sciences? If every man's will were a rule in such cases
there is no doubt but that some (...) the whole corpse and body of sciences
would quite be extinguished. For even amongst the nobler sort which stand upon
their gentry, and in consideration only of their better fortune, condemn
better natures than their own, there are many aureae pecudes, golden sheep
such as Iunius Brutus was better clad than taught, which cannot conceive the
excellency of good faculties, many monstra hominum strange natured men such as
Licinius the emperor was, not so princely borne, as pestilently minded, which
call learning the poison and plague of a commonwealth. Howbeit some there are
better inclined than these which do it not so much of despite as of daintines,
for they are well enough content to take all the pleasure they can by it, and
yet take as great pleasure to discontent those that afford it.

In whose favor notwithstanding I will speak thus much, Aristotle.
and my speech is abetted by good authors that both a choice of music is to
be made, and a moderation therein retained. Minerua as before cast away her
pshawlme (...) for very shame. And amongst us every one will not blow a
bagpipe, that will finger the Lute or Virginals. And as in one banquet all
viandes, though all very good, please not alike every man's diet, so in Music
there are sundry and delectable sorts, which unless they be ordered with good
discretion will not suit al times and persons. The which two things time and
persons serve principally to make limitation of that measure which I mentioned
before. There is a time of breathing and a time of business, a time of mirth and
a time of sadness. If thou be remiss or merry use for thy recreatio^ some kind
of melody. Albeit indeed with Music no times are amiss. For we know that life
is as it were put into the deadst sorows by inflexion and modulation of voice.
And they whose hearts even yearne for very grief sometimes fall on singing
not to seek comfort therein (for the best seeming comfort in such cases is to
be comfortles) but rather to set the more on flote that pensiuenes wherewith
they are perplexed. Similitudo parit amicitiam says Boethius, and sorrow finds
somewhat in Music worthy his acquaintance, If not, how chance they have
specified three originals or causes of Music? Cael. Rhod.
the first pleasure of which there is no question, the next grief, and the last
Enthusiasmu^ some divine and heavenly inspiratio^. Surely affections dance after
pipes and being themselves but motions do by a natural kind of propension
apply themselves to Music, whose efficacy sta^ds wholly upon motions. But I
return to my purpose. The chief end of Music is to delight, howsoever sorrow
uses it sometimes for an advantage as knowing how forcible and effectual it is
to help forward al purposes. Therefore in time of vaca^cy and remission when
there is a mutiny of wars and a calm of other the like troblesom affairs, the
place being not molested, the people being not disquieted, the^ has music
evermore had the best audience. For otherwise if you light upon Pirrhus and ask
him whether is the better psalmist Pytho^ or Charisius, he will answer you
Polysperches. And why? In pro^ptu causa est, a blind man may hit his staff at
this mark, his mind forsooth ran upon captains and not musitio^s: bring an
harp or other good instrument to Lacedemo^, they will cry away with it. No^ est
Laconicu^ nugari, Trifling is not our vocation. And do we marvel at the^?
Pirrhus as if he had bin hu^gersterued and stifled in his poor kingdom of
Epirus had laid a platform in his head of usurping the whole world. The
Lacedemonia^s (to speak without exception of sex, age or condition) as hard
hearted as if they had been borne of Adama^t or nursed up with Lions milk. I
belly them not, their stoicall Apothegs and resolute exploites delivered unto us
by faithful authority are plentiful witnesses hereof. But to end this
point, the dignity of Music is great if we do not partially and unequally
burden her with those faults whereof she is guiltless, the artificer may
offend, men's affections are corrupt, times unseasonable, places inconvenient,
the art it self notwithstanding in her own proper and lawful use innocent
and harmless.

THE SVAVITIE OF MUSIC. CHAP. III.
ALthough both the Authors of this most divine science, and antiquity thereof,
and estimation which it has had in times past, may sufficiently credit the
same: yet I do not desire any man hardly affectioned in this point, to be
moved by this treatise, unless both the sweetness and necessity, and
operation of it, be declared to be such, as neither ought carelessly, or ca^
worthily be neglected. For as in those things which are both pleasant and
profitable, that which is profitable ought most earnestly to be followed: so
the pleasure which is joined with the commodity, is not to be contemned.
Wherefore, seeing that poetry, which is but a part of Music, as Plutarch
does testify, has this commendation of Horace, Aut prodesse volunt, aut
delectare Poetae,
Aut simul and iucunda, and idonea dicere vitae.
Poets of pleasure, or of profit great,
Or else of both most decently entreat.
we may safely pronounce of the whole, that it has both delectation to allure,
and profit to persuade men to those things, wherewith man's life is beautified
and adorned. I will first therefore speak of the sweetenes and delectation of
Music: and afterward of the use and necessity thereof. Concerning the
pleasure and delight, I will first show it by that affinity and congruity which
Music has with the nature of living creatures: Secondly by the effects and
operation, which it works in the hearers. Touching the first: Arist. 8. Polit.
as the testimony of Musaeus in Aristotle: Res suauisima cantus est mortalibus,
singing is a most pleasant thing to men: and daily experience does prove unto
us, that not only men but all other living creatures, are delighted with the
sweet harmony and concent of Music: so if there were no other thing else, yet
that proper fiction of the Gra^marians, Onito parchus in princ.us lib. 3. suae
musicae.
might fully satisfy any man in this point. Sonus, say they, the king of
Harmony had two sons. The one of them was called Concentus, the other
Accentus: of Grammatica he begat Accentus, but Concentus was borne unto him of
the nymphe Musica. Whom when their father perceived to be both equal in the
gifts of the mind, and that neither was inferior to other in any kind of
knowledge, and himself now well stricken in years to wax every day nearer and
nearer to his death: he fell into a serious cogitation with himself, whether
of them two, he should leave his successor in his kingdom: and therefore he
began more narrowly to mark the manners and behauiours of them both: now
Accentus was the elder of the two: and he was grave and eloquent, but austere,
and therefore less beloved of the people: But Concentus was very merry,
pleasant, amiable, lovely, courteous, acceptable unto all men, and clean
contrary to the disposition of his brother, thinking it more glorious to be
beloved than feared. Whereby he did not only get the love and liking of all
his Subjects, but also put his Father into a greater doubt which of them he
should institute inheritour of his Scepter. Therefore appointing a solemn
meeting, he asked the Counsel of the Nobles and Princes of his Land, as
Musicians, Poettes, Orators, Philosophers and Divines: and in conclusion their
consultation had this issue, that neither should be preferred before other,
but both should equally inherit their Fathers Scepter and Dominions. Whereof I
gather (omitting all other circumstaunces) that as Accentus which is Grammar
ought not to be disinherited, because of the necessity thereof in speech: so
Concentus which is Music, could not but be esteemed as worthy of
pre-eminence, for his pleasure and delectation. And for as much as that was the
judgment and determination both of Musicians, Poets, Orators, Philosophers,
both Moral and Natural, and Divines: so much the more is to be ascribed to the
sweetness of Music, as these Professors are of better judgment than other
men. But I will not ground the commendation of that on fictions and conceits:
which neither in it self needs the color and shadows of imaginations, being
above all conceiptes: nor in the pleasure thereof any external ornament: being
sweeter than can be counterfeited by fictions, or expressed by fantasies.
Wherefore leaving these, I will as nearly as I can, declare the reason of that
delight which Music yields. And this first is evident, that Music whether
it be in the voice only as Socrates thought, or both in the voice and motion of
the body as Aristoxenus supposed: or as Theophrastus was of opinion not only in
the voice and motion of the body, but also in the agitation of the mind: has
a certain divine influence into the souls of men, whereby our cogitations and
thoughts (say Epicurus what he will) are brought into a celestial
acknowledging of their natures. For as the Platonicks and Pythagoria^s think al
(...) of me^, are at the recordatio^ of that celestial Music, whereof they
were partakers in heaven, before they entered into their bodies so wo^derfuly
delighted, that no man ca^ be found so hard hearted which is not exceedingly
alured with the sweetness thereof. And therefore some of the antie^t Philosophers
attribute this to an hidden divine virtue, which they suppose naturally to be
ingenerated in our minds, and for this cause some other of the^ as Herophilus
and Aristoxenus which was also a Musician, thought that the soul was nothing
else, but a Musical motion, caused of the nature and figure of the whole body,
gathering thereof (...) necessary conclusion, that whereas things that are of
like natures, have mutual and easy action and passion between themselves, it
must needs be, Cic. Tusc. quaest.
that Musical co^cent being like that Harmonical motion which he calls the
soul, does most wonderfully allure, and as it were ravish our senses and
cogitatio^s. But this which I have said may seem peradventure to be too
profoundly handled: I will therefore confirm it by natural experience and
examples. And first generally (as I said before) there is neither man, nor any
other living creature exempt from the participation of the pleasure of Music.

As for man let us begin with him even from his cradell, and so take a view of
his whole life: Man naturally delighted with music.
and we shall see, that even every particular actio^ of his, is seasoned with
this delight: first in his infancy, whiles he is yet wholly destitute of the use
of reason, we see that the child is stilled, and allured to sleep, with the
sweet songs and lullabyes of his Nurse: although the grief of his tender
limbs be such, as is able to breed impatience in a stronger body. And for
this cause is it, that children are so delighted and allured with rattels and
bells, and such like toies as make a sound. Now as strength and judgment
increase in man, so Music pleases and delights him more and more: so that
whether he be noble or ignoble, yet the same delight of mind grows to
perfection together with the body. Arist. Polit. 8. cap. 3.
And therefore Aristotle in his Politiques, cou^selleth that children be
instructed in music, especially if they be of noble pare^tage: not so much for
the profit and commodity thereof, as because it is agreeable to nature being in
it self both liberal and honest: for in all matters to propose profit as the
only end, is neither ye part of a liberal nature nor of a ge^tlema^like
disposition. Again in base and in ignoble persons, the very senses and spirits
are wonderfully inflamed, with the rural songs of Phillis and Amaryllis: insomuch
that even the ploughma^ and cartar, are by the instinct of their harmonicall
souls compelled to frame their breath into a whistle, thereby not only
pleasing themselves, but also diminishing the tediousnes of their labors. And
therefore most natural is that which Virgil uses in describing of a good
housewife. longum cantu solata laborem
Arguto coniux percurrit pectine telas. 1. Geor.

The huswifes spinning makes her labor long
Seem light with singing of some merry song.
as also that other spoken of ye pruner of trees: Eclog. 1.
Alta subrupe canit frondator ad auras.
The lopper singing from the craggy rock
The bows and leaves beats down with many a knock.
and that of the sheepeheards: Eclog. 5.
Cur non Mopse (boni quonia^ conuenimus ambo
Tu calamos inflare leaves, ego dicere versus)
Hic corilis inter mixtas consedimus vlmos?
Mopsus my friend, seeing our skill is great
Thine for the tune, mine for the pleasant rhyme.
In th'hasell bower why take we not our seat,
In mirth and singing there to spend the time?
And hence it is, that wayfaring men, solace themselves with songs, and ease
the wearisomnes of their journey, considering that Music as a pleasant
companion, Comes facu^dus estpro vehiculo in via.
is unto the^ in steed of a wago^ on the way. And hence it is, that manual
laborers, and Mechanical artificers of all sorts, keep such a chaunting and
singing in their shoppes, the Tailor on his bulk, the Shomaker at his last, the
Mason at his wall, the shipboy at his oar, the Tinker at his pan, and the Tylor
on the house top. And therefore well says Quintilian, that every troublesome and
laborious occupation, uses Music for a solace and recreatio^: whereof that
perhaps may be the cause, which Gyraldus notes. The symphony and concent of
Music (says he) agrees with the interior parts and affections of the soul.
For as there are three parts or faculties of man's soul, the first and
worthiest the part reasonable, which is ever chief, and never in subjection to
the other, the second irascible, which, as it is ruled of the former, so rules
the latter, and the last co^cupiscible, which ever obeieth, and never rules:
so if we compare the symphony of Music, with these powers of the soul, we
shall find great conueniencie and affinity between them. For look what
proportion is between the parts reasonable, and irascible, such is there in
Music between that string which is called hypate, and that which is termed
Mese, causing the melody called diatessaron: and look what proportion is
between the parts of irascible and co^cupiscible, such is there between Mese
and Nete making that sound which is named Diapente: so that as those three
parts of the soul consenting in one, make an absolute and perfect action: so
of these three in Music, is caused a pleasant and delectable Diapason. And
therefore no marvel if according to the mixture of these sounds diverse men be
diuersely affected, with several Music: insomuch, that almost every peculiar
nation and people, be in their wars delighted with proper instruments: as in
former times, the Cretenses with the harp, the Lacones with Cornets, the
Amazones with Flutes, the Cibarites with Shalmes, the Lydians with Whistles and
Pipes, the Latins with trompettes, the Getes with the Cytheron and Flute: so
in these later days, and more nice times of the world, al nations with
compound and mixed Music, and with sundry kinds of instruments, as Cornets,
Wayts, Shagboyts, Tru^pets, Dru^b and fife.

Neither do I here so attribute this delectation unto man, 1 Beasts delighted
with Music.
as denying it to other creatures, for I am verily persuaded, that the plowma^
and cartar of who^ I spoke before do not so much please themselves with their
whistling, as they are delightsom to their oxe^ and horses. Polyd. Virgil.
Again the warhorse is so inflamed with the sound of the trumpet, that he cannot
keep his standing, but makes an open way to his rider, through the midst of
his thickest enemies. Horses delighted with Music.
And here may it please the reader for his recreatio^, to call to mind one
special history of the Sibarits: whose horses were not only delighted with
Music, but also taught to da^ce to the instrument: insomuch that one of their
musitio^s at a certain time, having some discurtesy and injury offered him took
occasion to forsake his country, Policianus Miscellanioru^ 15.
and fled to the Crotoniats, which were enemies to the Sibarits, forasmuch as
not long before that time the Sibarits had given the^ the overthrow in battle.
This tibice^, or plaier on the shalm, coming among the crotoniats, made his
speech unto the^ to this purpose and effect, that if they could afford him
credit, he would work such a device, as they should easily obtain the conquest of
the Sibarits horsemen. Credit was given unto his tale, and he ordained captain
of the war, Sybaritarum mollicies prou.
instructed all the fluters and shalmers of the Crotoniates, what note they
should play, and how they should address themselves against their enemies. Now
the Sibarites on the other side being insolent, and having taken heart a grace
and courage unto them by reason of their former victory, prepare themselves to
meet their enemies in the field. Wherefore the Shalmers of whom I spoke
before having received a watchworde of the Captain, on a sudden sounded
their Flutes and Shalmes. The horses of the Sibarites hearing their country
Music, whereunto they had been accustomed, reared themselves on their hinder
feet, cast their riders, and as they were wont to dance at home, so now they
did it in the skirmish, and by this policy, the Crotoniats wan the victory of
the Sibarits. Whereby may be gathered not only how pernicious clandestine
treason is to a commonwealth, but also what strange and incredible delight
music impresseth even in these dumb and unreasonable creatures. So mules are
wonderfully alured with the sound of bells: and sheep follow their sheepeheards
whistle. And it is recorded also, that the Heart and other wild beasts are by
sweet and pleasant notes drawn into the toiles and gins of the huntesman.
AElianus in his varia historia testifies, that Pythocaris a musition playing
upon his Cornet, mitigated the fierce and ravenous nature of wolves, and that
the mares of Libia and Oliphantes of India would follow the sound of Organes
and diverse other instruments. 2 Fishes delighted with Music. Plutarch in
conuiuio 7. Sap. Herodotus in Clio. Cic. Tusc. 1. Ovid. 2. Fast.
Now as these terrestrial beasts have their peculiar and proper delights, so
aquaticall creatures also living in another element, offer themselves
voluntarily to the sound of Music: so, as Martianus records, certain
fishes in the poole of Alexandria are with the noice of instruments enticed to
the banks side, offering themselves to men's hands, so long as the melody
endures. Wonderful are those things, which in good authors are related of
the dolphin: but for our purpose, none so fit, as that of Arion: whose
excellent skill in Music, gives testimony as well against the savage and
barbarous cruelty of those unnatural shipmen, which sought to take away his
life: as to the gentle and kind nature of the dolphin, which is both a lover
of men, and an earnest follower of music. Arion seeing no way to escape the
fury of his cruel enemies, took his Citterne in his hand, and to his
instrument sang his last song, wherewith not only the dolphines flocked in
multitudes about the ship ready to receive him on their backs, but even the
sea that rude and barbarous element, being before roughe and tempestuous,
seemed to allay his choler, waxing calm on a sudden, as if it had been to
give Arion quiet passage through the waves.

There is also a third kind of living creatures, which by the Philosophers are
called (...), because they live both on the land and in the waters. Of these,
(...)
I will only name the Swanne, which bird is therefore said to be under the
patronage of Apollo, not only for that she is allured with the sweet notes and
mellodious concent of music, following them which play upon instruments on
the water: but more especially because she seems to have some divination from
him, whereby she foreseing what good is in death, by a natural instinct,
finisheth her life with singing and with joy.

Sic vbi fata vocant vdis abiectis in herbis,
Ad vada Maeandri concinit albus olor:
When death the swanne assaies,
Laid prostrate on the ground,
Her song does make Maeanders banks
her dolors to resounde.
4 Birds delighted with music.
As for those other creatures which live in the air, I do not think that the
fouler could ever have made such spoil and hauock of them, being so far out of
his reach and jurisdiction, had not nature told him, that they above all
creatures under the heavens, are as most delited, so soonest entangled and
allured with his songs. Wherefore when thou see, each foul in his kind, the
Linet, the Nightingale and the Lark, to mount aloft, and sing their notes unto
the skies, show thy self docill in these two things, first in acknowledging
the delight which both thou take in the^, and they in music: and secondly
learn by their example, what thy duty is and ought to be in grateful singing of
psalms and songs to him that made thee.

Semidei.
Lastly, yt I may not omit those which the heathnish poets and wise me^ counted
inferior indeed to the gods: but better tha^ men (how worthily I will not here
stand to debate) even they testify also of the^, yt they take infinite
pleasure in musik. As when Silenus sang his song of the beginning of the world
unto Chronis, Mnasilus and Aegle yt fair nimphe.

Tu^ vero in numeru^ Faunos Satyrosque videres
Ludere, tu^ regidas motare cacumina quercus.
Then might thou see the Faunes
and satyrs daunces lead,
The Cypress trees to shake,
and sturdie oaks their head.
So when Pan and Apollo strove whether of them was the better Musician.

Deseruere sui nimphae vineta Timoli,
Deseruere suas nimphae pactolides vndas.
When Pan for laurel branche
in song with fair Apollo strove,
Pactolus nymphs forsook their stream
and Tmolus nymphs their grove.
Homer is not afraid to asce^d a little higher, showing that eue^ the gods and
Jupiter himself are content to give a patie^t ear to musical concent: and
thereupon in that banquet of ye gods where Vulcan played the skinker, he makes
Apollo and the Muses singing a song. Iliad. ^.


(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Thus they in banqueting consumde the day:
Nor fair nor mirth was wanting to their will
While fair Apollo on his harp did play,
The Muses answering with aequal skill.
Pithagoras and his sectatours, thought that the world did not consist without
musical proportion and concent. And therefore both he and the best philosophers
ascribe unto every Celestial sphere, one Goddess or Muse, which is the
gouernes and ruler thereof: and because there are eight of those spheres, the
seven planets, and the eight which is called the firmament, therefore they made
8. peculiar Muses, attributing to Luna the muse Clio: to Mercurius, Euterpe: to
Venus, Thalia: to Sol, Melpomene: to Mars, Terpsichore: to Jupiter, Erato: to
Saturn, Polymnia, to the firmament or coelum stellatum, Urania; and because of
eight particular soundes or voices, keeping due proportion and time, must
needs arise an harmony or concent, which is made by them all, therefore that
sound which al these make is called Calliope. And hence is that pleasant
harmony of the celestial globes caused, which Pythagoras so much speaks of.
If then both Gods and men, and unreasonable creatures of what kind soever, be
allured and mitigated with music, we may safely conclude that this proceeds
from that hidden virtue, which is between our souls and music: and be bold
with Pindarus to affirm, that (...) etc. Al those things that Jupiter does not
love, do only contemn the songs of the Muses.

THE EFFECTS AND OPERATION OF MUSIC. Chap. 4.
IN the former chapter was gathered a proof and demonstration of the
sweetness of Music, proceeding from the causes to the effects. Now I mean by
the contrary demonstration, to prove the delectation thereof from the effects
to the causes. For it cannot be but that as the conuenie^ce and agreement which
music has with our nature, is the cause of the delectation thereof: So the
pleasure and delectation is also the cause of those effects which it works
as well in the minds as bodies of them that hear it. Music being in it self
wholly most effectual, imports much of his force and efficacy, even to the
peculiar parts and portions thereof. And thereupon ancient writers make the
distinction of songs and notes in music, according to the operations which
they work in their hearers: calling some of them chaste and temperate: some
amarous and light, othersome warlike, others peaceable, some melancholicke and
doleful, other pleasant and delightful. And yet this division is not so
ancient as that other which was in use in Orpheus and Terpanders time: for
Plutarck in his treatise of music records that Modi Musici were also
distinguished by the names of nations: such were principally these four, Modus
Dorius, Modus Phrygius, Modus Lydius, and Modus Myxolydius. Hereunto were added
as collateral other three Hypodorius, Hypoludius, and Hypophrygius: making
seven in number, aunswerable to the 7. planets: whereunto Ptolomaeus adds an
8. which is called Hypermyxolydius, sharpest of them al and attributed to the
firmament. These several distinctions of notes in music do not so far
dissent in name and appellation, as they do nearly accord in effects and
operation. For Modus Dorius, being a grave and stayed part of music,
answers to that which I called chaste and temperate. Modus Lydius used in
comedies, in former times, being more lighter and wanton than Dorius, answers
to that which I termed amarous and delightsome. Modus Phrygius distracting the
mind variably, also called Bacchicus for his great force and violence
answers to that which I called warlik, And Myxolydius most used in tragedies
expressing in melody those lamentable affections which are in tragedies
represented, answers to that which before I named Melancholic and doleful.
As for those other, Hypodorius, Hypolydius, Hypophrygius, and Hypermyxolydius,
there is no doubt, but that they being collateral and assistants to these,
move such like affection as their principal.

Macrob. in Some. Scip. lib. 2.
Macrobius in effect says as much in these words: Vt visus colorum, sic
sonorum varietate delectatur auditus: Modus Dorius prudentiaelargitor est and
castitatis effector: Phrigius pugnas excitat and votum furoris infla^mat:
Aeolius animi temperiem tranquillat, somnumque iam placatis tribuit. Lydius
intellectum obtusis acuit, and terreno desiderio grauatis caelestium
appetentiam inducit, bonorum operator eximius. That is, As the eye is delited
with the variety of colors, so is the ear, with the diversity of sounds.
Modus Dorius is a giver of wisdom, and a causer of chastity. Modus Phrygius
provoke to fight, and makes courageous. Aeolius quieteth the mind, and
gives sleep to the pacified se^ses. Lydius sharpneth dull wits, and to men
oppressed with earthly cares, it brings a desire of heavenly things: being a
wonderful worker of good motions. So that the effects of music generally are
these. To make have to incite and stir up men's courages, to allay and pacify
anger, to move pity and compassion, and to make pleasant and delightsome: Nay
yet I will go farther: and doubt not but to prove by good authority, that
music has brought mad men into their perfect wits and senses, that it has
cured diseases, driven away evil spirits, yea and also abandoned the pestilence
from men and cities. Music makes chaste.
Touching the first effects of music we read that Agamemnon going to the war
of Troy left behind him Demodocus, an excellent musician, Dydimus Homeri
interpr. in 2. Odyss.
skillful in Modo Dorio, to keep chaste his wife Clitemnestra, whom he nicely
had in suspicion of wantonness and leuity with Aegistus. Whereupon it is
recorded that as long as Demodocus lived, Clytemnestra remained faithful to
her husband: but when Aegistus, for that purpose had murdered him, she gave
over her self to satisfy his adulterous appetite. So did Ulysses leave
Phenius an other musician, with Penelope, whom Ulysses returning home at
twenty years end, found to have wrought so effectually with his wife, that
both he deserved great commendation for his acts, and she is registered as a
most perfect and absolute example of chastity: neither do I attribute so much
to Homer the author hereof, as to Dydimus his interpreter, who gives this as a
reason thereof, because in those days, Musicians were the cheifest professors
of philosophy. I doubt not but that those, Objection.
which are glad to take any occasion to speak against music, will think the
contrary: and affirm that it makes men effeminate, and too much subject unto
pleasure. Answer.
But whom I pray you, does it make effeminate? Surely none but such as
without it would be wanton: it is indeed as fire to flax, and as wine to a
drunkarde, if flax be easily inflamed, is the fault in the fire? or if a
drunkard, be easily ouercom with wine, is the fault in the wine? So likewise if
the sun harden claie and mollify wax: the diversity of these effects is by
reason of the diversity of those subjects: even so the same music which
mollifieth some men, moves some other nothing at all: so that the fault is not
in music, which of it self is good: but in the corrupt nature, and evil
disposition of light persons, which of themselves are prone to wantonness.
Music makes courageous
As for the 2. effect which is caused by Modus Phrygius, as I said before, it
shall suffice to confirm it by example. The Athenians having received great hurt
and loss, by seeking to recover the Island Salamis, made a law that whosoever
should make mention of any more recovering thereof should die the death.
Plutar. in Solone.
But Solon perceiving this law to be hurtful to the common wealth, feigned
himself to be mad, and running into the cheifest places of the City, sang
a certain Elegy, which he for that purpose had made showing how easily the
Island might be redeemed, and how pernicious a law that was, which had been
made in that behalf. With whose sweet song Plutarche does record the Athenians
to have been so incensed, that immediately they armed themselves, and with
good success recovered Salamis. To this purpose serves also that which is
recorded of a certain young man of Taurominum, which Boethius reports, Boethius.
was incited with the sound of Modus Phrygius, to set a fire an house, wherein a
harlot was entertained, But a most manifest proof hereof is that, which is
said of Alexander the great, who sitting at a banquet amongst his friends, was
nevertheless by the excelent skill of Timotheus a famous musician so inflamed
with the fury of Modus Orthius, Gyrald. lib. 1. Poet.
or as some say of Dorius, that he called for his spear and target as if he
would presently have addressed himself to war. Neither is this a more apparent
proof for this part than that which followed is for the next. 3 Music allayoth
anger.
The same Timotheus seeing Alexander thus incensed, only with the changing of a
note, pacified this mood of his, and as it were with a more mild sound
mollified and assuaged his former violence. Chameleon Ponticus reports of a
certain man called Clinias Pithagoricus, that he being a man given to
severity, if at any time he perceived himself to have been melancholik, took
his Citterne in his hand and professed that he took ease thereby. And Homer
witnesses of Achilles that of all the spoils of Etion he only took for him
self a Lute, wherewith he might assuage his wrath in his extremity. 2.
Kings. 3.
So a minstrell pacified Elizeus when Iehoram came to ask counsel of him, 4
Music moves pity.
and quieted his mind when he was sore offended. As the 4. effect may by many
examples be confirmed, so the story of Lodouicus pius the Emperor does make it
most evident. For when Theodolphus the Bishop, had by his counsel and devise
caused Lotharius not only to deprive his father Lodouicus of his empire but to
cast him into prison, who can justly accuse the Emperor, if he being restored
to his imperial dignity again, did fully purpose to chastise the bishop
with death? Yet nevertheless such was the force of Music, that the Emperor
parsing by the prison wall, and hearing the Bishop sing an Hymn most
pleasantly which he had made in prison for his solace, was moved with
compassion, to be sauourable to that man, which had dealt disloially with
himself, and restored him to his former dignity and estimation. As for the
fifthe, 5 Music makes pleasant.
we daily prove it in our selves: using Music as a medicine for our sorrow,
and a remedy for our grief: for as every disease is cured by his contrary,
so music is as an Antipharmacon to sorrow: abandoning pensive and heavy
cogitations, as the sun beams do the lightsome vapors. 6 Music restores
madmen to their wits.
Greater are those other properties of this art, which I will in this place
rather touch, than dilate with examples. Music aswageth and eases the
inordinate perturbations and evil affections of the mind. For Pithagoras with
the changing of the sound of his instrument, caused a young man overcome with
the impatience of love to change his affection also, wholly taking away the
extremity of his passion. Baptist. Port. Magiae naturalis, lib. 2. cap. 25.
So Empedocles with his skilful playing on the Citterne hindered a mad man,
ready to slay himself: yea Zenocrates also and Asclepiades, 7 Music cures
diseases.
are said by this only medicine, to have restored a lunatike person, into his
perfect senses. If it be so that music can help the outrages of the mind,
it will not seem incredible that it should cure the diseases of the body. By
the help of music Ismenias a Theban musician, restored men sick of an ague,
to their former health, and Asclepiades by the sound of a trumpet caused a
deaf man to hear. Theophrastus also testifies of the Ischiasy, that their
sicknesses are cured, if a man play the Phrygian note unto them.

8 Music drives away evil spirits. 1. Sam. 16.
It is also a present remedy against evil spirits: which as it is proved by
that one example of Saul from whom the evil spirit departed when David played
on his Harp: so having so sufficient authority, 9 Music medicinable against
the plague.
for the confirmation thereof, I shall not need to stand upon it any longer.
Lastly we read also of music that it has delivered both men and Cities,
from the noisome infection of the pestilence. As Gyraldus in the place above
incited, records. Terpander and Arion, says he, with their music
delivered the Lesbians and Jove's, from most contagious infections. And Thales a
musician of Creet, with the sweetness of his harmony, banished the plague from
his city. I durst in no wise affirm the last effect and operation of this
worthy art, 10 Music preserves or overthrows co^monweals.
were it not that Plato with his credit and authority did embolden me: Mutati
musicae moduli (says he) status publici mutationem afferu^t: The changing
of Musical notes, has caused an alteration of the common state. The reason
hereof can be no other than this, Because by the force of Music as well those
of less heart and courage are stirred up, as those of greater stomach weakened
and unabled to any excelent enterprise. Whereupon he also infers, that such
are the manners of young men, as are the notes and tunes they are accustomed to,
in their tender years.

Now if these my proofs and authorities shall to some (...) and immovable
person either seem too weak, or the things attributed to music too
hyperbolical: he shall bewray either his ignorance in not having read ancient
writers, in whom, as of al other sciences, so of this especially, as most
admirable, condign praises are comprehended: or else his malice, in derogating
from this art, those properties which he can neither deny other men have
given, nor convince, ought not by good reason to be attributed thereunto. For
as I do not stand on the sufficiency of these allegations, meaning in this
part only to show what has been ascribed unto music in former times: so is
it not enough for any malicious Musomastix, to take his pen and write I ly,
unless he can by sufficient reason declare, that these authors by me cited
have erred heretofore: which if he shall not be able to perform, then let him
give some reason why music in these days, is not the same, it has been
heretofore: or why Music has rather lost any of her former excellency, than
increased in perfection from time to time, considering that time is the
perfecter and increaser of all arts? But I will not willingly entangle my
self, with the vain and fantastical devises of this sort of men. Only I
conclude this point, with that common saying of the learned: Scientia neminem
habet inimicum nisi ignorante^. None are so great enemies to knowledge as they
that know nothing at all.

Likewise in Apulia when any man is bitten of the Tarrantula, Balthas.
Castalion. Auli^ lib. 1.
which is a certain kind of fly, very venomous and full of danger, they
find out the nature and sympathy of the sickness or humor, with playing on
instruments, and with diversity of Music, neither do they cease from
playing, until the often motion and agitation, have driven the disease away.

THE NECESSITY OF MUSIC. CHAP. V.
But what of all these things before rehearsed, if Music have neither profit
or necessity? or to what end should a man bestow his travel and industry in that
whereof there is no use? Can an Art be unnecessary, or can any thing be good for
so many purposes as have bin declared, and not be needful? yea can any thing
be so profitable and have no use? Easier is it for water not to moiste^, and
for fire not to give heat, tha^ for an art liberal to be unnecessary, or for so
precious a science to have no use. And therefore most memorable judgment of
Galene, which will not suffer that to be called an Art, that brings no
profitte to our life. Wherefore before I enter into that which is the mark
whereat I aim, I mean, the use of Music in the church, I must add to these
former commendations, something, as of the necessity of it in fewer words, so
of civil use thereof more at large. And first concerning the necessity: I
confess, that Music is not so necessary for man, as meats are for the
preservation of life, and clothing for the defense of the body: (for so he were
not a man, that were not a musicion:) but as in meats some are course, and
others delicate, which both nevertheless are necessary, the one to those of
meaner, the other to the^ of higher degree: and as laboring men use mean
apparel only to defend their bodies from the violence of the weather, and
gentlemen finer, not only so, but for an ornament also, which both are
necessary, to distinguish callinges: so Music is as the more delicate meats,
and as the finer apparel: not in deed necessary simply, but profitablie
necessary for the comeliness of life. And therefore Socrates and Plato, and all
the Pythagoreans instructed their young men and maids in the knowledge of
Music, not to the provocation of wantonness, but to the restraining and
bridling their affections, under the rule and moderation of reason. For they,
because youth naturally is moveable, and desirous of delight, and yet unfit to
receive any severe discipline, thought it convenient and necessary, to
acquaint their children with an honest oblectation of Music in their youth,
that being brought up in that liberal delectation, they might learn to
refrain from other illiberall and inordinate pleasures. And Aristotle in the
eight book of his Politiques, which is wholly of that argument, gives counsel
that noble men and gentlemen be instructed with Music, Arist. Polit. 8. cap.
3.
first to avoid idleness, because the idle time which is in a man's life, does
require to be busied in the knowledge and learning of some profitable thing:
secondly because Music after a sort belongs unto virtue. Cap. 4.
For as that exercise which is called Gymnastica does strengthen and confirm
the body: so Music refreshes the wearied mind with honest delectation.
Thirdly for that it has great force in the well ordring and good institution of
life. And therefore Pythagoras his Scholars, as Tullie records, Tusc. 4.
were wont, both to give certain hidden and secret precepts in verses, and
to with-drawe their minds from intentive and deep cogitations, with singing
and with instruments: yea and many of the ancient Grecians among whom this
Art was in high estimation, instructed their children in Music, as
profitable to the correction of life and manners, that thereby they might be
incited to temperance and honesty: for it is the property of liberal
Sciences, to ingenerate a gentle, and liberal action in their hearers. Whereupon
Aristotle, in the same place does infer, that albeit arts are to be learned not
for any vain pleasure or ostentation, but for some good and profitable use, yet
if music were neither necessary nor profitable at all, it ought to be
accounted of and embraced, for that it is liberal. And yet Aristotle does not
so far commend Music to noble men, that he would rather wish them the
practice, than the speculation and knowledge thereof: But as he would have none
but those that profess it to be the practisers of it: so he counsels noble
men rather to use it for their private solace, than public ostentation, and
rather to be able to judge of other men's cunning, than willing to show their
own. For the Lacedaemonians, says he, a warlike and noble people, have this
as a singular commendation, that although they seemed not to have any skill in
Music, yet they could easily discern, which sound agreed or disagreed most.
And he makes it a general observation, that in all poets of any credit and
name, Jupiter is never made to sing, or to play upon any instrument, although
they deny him not most exact knowledge and judgment. Suetonius.
And indeed who does not confess an abuse of this art in Nero, which would sit
whole days together plaing in the Theater? or in Archabius that foolish
musition, of whom it is written, that his auditors were wont to give him more
money to end his song, than to begin. Pope John the 22. of that name which was
himself a good musicion, and wrote a book thereof: in the second chapter of
his book attributes thus much thereunto. Great is the necessity of Music,
and the use thereof not to be contemned: for it makes him that is skilful
therein, able to judge of that which he hears, to amend that which is amiss,
and to make a new. And thus much he ascribes to the necessity of the art.
Nevertheless the necessity which we mean, is, that it does bridle and
nurture our inordinate affections, as not only Aristotle taught us before, but
Strabo also, calling musicions the masters and correctors of manners. Homer in
the same sense terms them Sophronistas, that is to say, Moderators or
teachers of Temperance. And for the like cause as I suppose, was Music first
brought into the church, and used in divine service: for Isidore testifies,
that Propter Carnales in Ecclesia, Isidor. Eccle. off. lib. 1. cap. 5.
non propter spirituales, consuetudo est instituta canendi, vt qui a verbis non
compunguntur, suauitate modulaminis moueantur. The custom of singing in the
church, was instituted for the carnal, not for the spiritual, that they whom
the words do not pierce might be moved with the sweetness of the note. S.
Augustine also is of opinion, Confess. lib. 10. cap. 33.
that Music is necessary in the church of god, vt per oblectame^ta aurium,
infirmior animus in affectum pietatis surgat: that by the delight of the ears,
the weak soul may be stirred up into a feeling of godliness: and his reason
is: Omnes affectus spiritus nostri pro suaui diuersitate sentio habere proprios
modos in voce atque cantu, quorum nescio qua occulta familiaritate excitentur.
I perceive, that all the affections of our spirits, have certain proper
motions in the voice and song, according to the sweet diversity thereof,
which (with I know not what hidden familiarity) are excited and stirred up.
Arist. Polit. 8. cap. 5.
In a word Aristotle's resolution touching the civil necessity is, that music
has relation to these three things, to delectatio^, to discipline, and to an
happy life. To delectation, because Music with the sweetness thereof, does
refresh the mind and make it better able to greater labors. To discipline,
because it is a cause of breeding in us chastity, temperance, and other moral
virtues. To an happy life, because that cannot consist without judgment and
liberal delectations, whereof Music is the chiefest.

THE USE OF MUSIC GENERALLY IN THE course of our life. CHAP. VI.
PHilosophy and experience have taught us that omne bonum quo communius eo
melius, the goodness of every good thing sta^ds chiefly upon the use. If the
mysteries and secrets of nature touching plants, springes, metals, stones,
and the like had lain always smothered and suppressed within her bosom,
doubtless we had wanted much of her blessings, and she as much of our
commendation. Plutarch.
How vile a thing were gold amongst us, if for lack of better use we used it
as we read of the Scythians to manacle and shackle our prisoners? skarlet is no
color to him that sees it not, an Emeraul not precious to him that knows it
not. But Music God be thanked is no nightbird, she has flown through the
whole world in the open face and sight of al me^. And ye sun has not had a
larger theater wherein to display his beams the^ music to lay open her
sweetness. Look into al ages, she has grown up with the^. Look into al places,
she has infranchiced her self within them: look into al estates, she has no
sooner come, but welcome unto them. Antiquity which now adays every green
head will needs set to school, and make subject to the ouerlashing pregnancy
of his young wit, deriues her even from Saturnes time, when the world was skant
sheld: Iuuenal.
Tum cum virguncula Juno
Et private us adhuc Idaeis Jupiter antris.
When Juno was a girl as yet,
And Jupiter not weand from teat.
Then did the priests of Cybele sing an happy lullabie for him, Pol. Virgil.
whose crying if they had not drowned of purpose with their singing and
tabering, his merciless father Saturn had devoured him. But what need these
broken staves? Nature which in deed was when nothing else was can bear the
best record in these cases: and what evidence gives she? When I made the
firmament I established it by concent. When I made the elements I qualified
them with proportions. When I made man I gave him a soul either harmony it
self, or at least harmonicall. Nay besides this, Non est harmonice compositus
qui Musica non delectatur. If I made any one which cannot brook or fancy
Music, surely I erred and made a monster. For how is it credible, if beasts
have bin snared, birds allured, fishes baited, serpents charmed, yea and rent
in sunder with Music, that her strength should become weakness in the
wisest and most reasonable creature, without an infallible prejudice of a most
untoward nature? If there be any such flintlike and senseless man, let us
leave him as a desperate patient unrecoverable, to the course of his own
hateful constellation: which if it had not vowed to try an experiment, and
make one in all degrees worse than Timon of Athens, a man even wholly resolved
and done into spitefulness, how could it possibly have harbored within his
breast such an unnatural loathing toward so excellent a science? I speak this
but in jealousy: for I never heard of any though seated and planted in the
very heart of Barbary, which ever did abhor it, or was not sometimes greedy
to embrace it. Music a Delphian sword.
The rather because it is gladius Delphicus, having an edge on all sides, for
it is made meat and drink to melancholy, a great horse to choler, a full tide
to grief, a fire to pleasure, a right hand to prodigality, a main sea to
drunkenness, and finally a forced friend to all manner of affections and vices. So
then if good dispositions love her for her own sake, the bad for their passions
sake, as whereby they back and strengthen themselves in their ungraciousness, I
hope I may safely conclude an universality touching her use and service. In
this discourse plenty would have overwhelmed me, had not a former tract of her
suauitie and effects forstalled this place. For to omit the court with her
consortes, corporations with their waits, and other places both of greater
countenance and frequency, wherein Music may seem by more authority to claim
acquaintance, and to look but with half an eye into the country, wherein
toiling and as they call it good husbandry should exclude all pleasurable
recreation, how heartily does the poorest swain both please himself, and
flatter his beast with whistling and singings? Alas what pleasure could they
take at the whippe and ploughtaile in so often and vncessa^t labors, such
bitter weather beatings sometimes benu^med with cold, otherwhiles melted with
heat, evermore pa^ting and scarcely drawing breath under their burthenous
travels, unless they quieted and eue^ brought a sleep their painfulnes, with
this their homely, yet comfortable and self pleasing exercise? That as the
woman in Plutarch sang, Mole pistrinum, mole, nam and Pittachus molit Rex
magnae Mytilenae: grind mil, grind: for eue^ Pittachus grindes the great king
of Mytilen (otherwise were it not for his grinders his belly would take but
poor tole) so those with a light heart make their plough go lighter, and while
they use the solace of their natural instruments both quicken themselves and
encourage forward their ouerlaboured horses. What shall I speak of that petie
and cou^terfait Music which cartars make with their whips, hempknockers with their
beetels, spinners with their wheels, barbers with their sizzers, smithes with
their ha^mers? where me thinks the mastersmith with his treble hammer sings
deska^t whilst the greater buz upon the plainsong: who does not straitwaies
imagine upon music when he hears his maids either at ye woolhurdle, or the
milking pail? good God what distinct inte^tio^ and remission is there of their
strokes? what orderly dividing of their strains? what artificial pitching of
their stops? If the^ the bare imitatio^ of Music in comparison of the other
being dombe and liuelesse, he notwithstanding so available as to cherish
ouerdulled spirits, and even by stelth to carry away the laboursomest
drudgeries, what malicious and sworn frowardness is it against nature, sense,
and reason by a commission only of Sic volumus, Sic iubemus, to discommon that
which is the principal, and by all reason of the greater force? Where-in
because experience does prevent examples (for what need I allege Parrhasius
and Nicias two notable painters by their own confession strengthened hereby
and even steeled in their infinite labors?) I will reduce all to one monument
of antiquity, not private to any one either person, household, colonie, or
town, but generally put in ure by a whole nation. The auncientes of Creete (a
realm renowned sometimes for no fewer than an hundred beautiful cities) as
they were religious in their laws, AElianus.
being the very sinews and joints of every wel-gouerned commonwealth, so they
were as careful to plant them in their childrens heads. But these laws being
matters of state and government, and therefore too hard meat for such young
stomachs to digest, and deeper lessons than to match their shalow capacities,
they used Music therein as a Schoolemaister, by fair means and gentle
allurements to mitigate the difficulty of their taskes. Which if it be so
unprofitable as it is made now adays, why was it accepted in so famous and
populous a country? why borne out and maintained by so grave authority? why
admitted to things of so great importance? wherein stands the life and soul
of all Kingdoms? why instilled to youth for pliablenesse of nature easily
corrupted, and for their hope the best seed of the next harvest? But
henceforward because these sullein stoickes do measure not their good liking of
good Arts by such hard and niggardly skantlings I will learn to be more
liberal to my self, and presume upon that foregranted, which as I know not so
I care not whether ever they will grant or no. Music is not at their
stinting: her charter (how large let all the world judge) was granted by
nature, confirmed by prescription of time out of mind, and established by the
use of all places, persons and conditions. For better assurance whereof I will
descend more particularly to her use, and speak of it partly as it is civil
in time of peace and quietness, partly as warlike in times of commotion.

THE PARTICVLER USE OF MUSIC IN Civil matters, especially in sacrifices,
feasts, marriages and Burials. CHAP. VII.
NOw the civil use, to let pass all generalities which I touched before with a
wet finger, may best be collected out of these solemn either actions or
assemblies, which are frequented in all politic states, and may be listed for
breuities sake within the compass of these four things, to wit, sacrifices,
feasts, marriages and burials. For I dare not speak of dancing or theatrall
spectacles, least I pull whole swarms of enemies upon me. Albeit Lesbonax of
Mytilen, honestus plane vir and bonus, Cael. Rhod.
a man I am sure, as well titled, as the curiously minded called dauncers (...),
men teaching wisdom even with their hands, and often went to theaters, giving
this testimony of them, that he ever returned home the better by the^. I
confess I am accessory to their injury against Music in bereauing it of
these two so ample and notable provinces, because I do not by open resistance
hinder their riot. For howsoever obcenity may bring the stage in suspicion of
unchasteness and incontinency, make dancing disfauorable and odious, I am sure
that neither of them keeping them selves under sail, that is not ouerreaching
their honest and lawful circumstances, can want either good grounds to
authorize them, 1 In sacrifices.
or sufficient patronage to maintain the^. As for these sacred or rather
profane churchrites used amongst the heathen and paga^s in reverence of their
supposed gods, let that sorting of Music into Sophronistice applied to
Sobriety and Temperance, Cael. Rhod.
Encomiastice to praises, Orchematice to dancings, Threnetice to calamities,
and Paeanice to sacrifices be sufficient to discharge me of farther pains.
Ibidem.
Notwithstanding because examples stick deeper than precepts, and both these
will ska^t serve to win some men's credence, let the^ call to mind what the
priests of Rhea in Creete called Curetes or these Corybantes in Phrygia did.
What kind of service Apollo found in Delos, or the Sun amongst the Indians,
in what manner those gadding huswiues of Thrace worshipped Bacchus. And if one
Proctor Antoninus the Emperor may not serve to answer thoroughly enough in
behalf of Rome, who in sacrificing to Heliogabalus appointed Carthaginian
Dames to dance, and make melody about the altars, let the whole clergy of
Mars called Salij (perhaps as some have gessed of dancing and leaping) instruct
them what the usage, and fashion was amongst the Romans.

Touching banquets, 2 In banquets.
let no man I would advise him exclude pleasure and recreation from thence,
unless he have a forehead to set against the whole world, and a face to be at
defiance with all countries. For otherwise why have the feastmakers provided
meats for the mouth, sightes for the eye; perfumes for the nose, yea why have
they strowed Violets and Roses for the feet to walk upon, but to allure and
detain their guestes with all manner of delectation? And must the ear sleep
all this while? No, there are questions of nature, of policy, or manners to be
disputed on as amongst the Persians. There are riddles and mystical speeches to
be explicated (for examples sake, A man and yet no man of an Eunuch, a stone
and yet no stone of a pumeise, a bird and yet no bird of a reremouse) as
amongst the Grecians. You may eat books in time of meals as did Alexander
Seuerus: you may give ear to tragical and comical Poets as did Hadrianus. Or
if such table talk be too grave for your light humor, bring in young children
to find you occupied with their apish prattling as amongst the Abydens. Bring in
fools and iesters (the very skornes and reproaches of nature) to delight you
with their toies as amongst the Romans. And I pray why not Music as well as
al these? sure if I were privy to any reasons of yours, which either are few
and will shrink in the nu^bering, or light and will vanish in ye weighing, I would
never suffer my pen to belie my heart: either I would bend al my force to
convince them, or if I could not, utterly forsake the defense of Music. In the
meantime if I err I am glad that my error is not young or selfwilled but sprung
eue^ from the most ancient and best approved manners of many countries. The
Arcadians (what speak I of the Arcadians?) veteres: The ancie^ts (for so in
Athenaeus the patents are general, and concern other places) were enioined by
virtue of their laws and statutes in time of feasting to sing forth praises
unto their gods. Cato his originals for ought I know are not extant amongst
us. Howbeit if we will be tried by one of Cato his peers, Tull. in Brut.
Tullie can tell us that every guest was bound in musical sort to express the
feats of arms and chivalry attempted and performed by their noble captains.
I am bold to say they were bound, Stuckius.
for their Feasts in those days represented even the whole body of a
Commonwealth. They had Regem and Legem, their King and their laws, and every
inferior upon pain of some mulct or other sworn to alleagiance. Now amongst
these decrees one was that a Laurel or myrtle bough should pass through out the
table from hand to hand as an ensign or standard for each man in his time and
course to sing under. Afterward they were put to the harp, and he that refused
it sped no better than we read Themistocles did. For Habilis est indoctior.
Tuscul.
He was condemned of ignorance and vnkilfulnesse. What need I specify
Lacedaemo^ or Athens? we need not travel far to be seen in their
antiquities. Every Historiographer especially in this argument, has matter
enough to cloy and ouercharge the hungriest mind. And that one song in
comme^dation of Harmodius and Aristogiton for rooting out the tyranny and
memory of Pisistratus (...): Cael. Rhod.
Thou art not yet dead sweet Harmodius (for his name was revived in every
banquet) makes it a clear case touching the Athenians. The Sibarits besides
all variety of minstrelsie brought in horses at their times of feasting, to
tread the measures. But to set the Sun against the lesser stars, I mean
the son of Sirach against all profane authors (for how can I but confound my
self and the readers in so ample a maze of authorityes?) he compares Music in
a feast to an emerauld or carbuncle set in gold: if it be perilous why does
the wiseman commend it to us in his writings? if vile why does he match it with
two so excellent and precious stones? But his bare word is to me a better
warrant for the ratifieng of it than al their peeuishe and scarce colorable
wra^gling to reprove it. I come to marriages, 3 In marriages.
wherein as our ancestors (I do willingly harp upon this string that our younger
wits may know they stand under correction of elder judgments) did fondly,
Plutarch.
and with a kind of doting maintain many rites and ceremonies, some whereof
were either shadows or abodements of a pleasant life to come, as the eating of
a quince pear, to be a preparatiue of sweet and delightful days between
the married persons, the joining of Mercury and Venus together, as a token that
love must be preserved and fostered by courteous speeches, with other not
unlike: so in the time of solemnising the same they had choice and set songs
appointed for the purpose. In auibus.
The Grecians generally by report of Aristophanes one of their Poets sang
Hymen, O Hymaenaee, O Hymen. Calling upon the name of him whom they made their
chief superintendent over such matters. And Plato in his book entitled
Gorgias makes mention of this dittie as peculiarly belonging to those festiual
times. Formosum esse, and diuite^, and been valere, summu^ existimatur bonu^.
Will thou be blessed and happy indeed?
Be fair, rich and healthy, if thou will speed.
The Athenia^s one of ye best flours in greece sang inco^ditu^ carmen, perhaps
some black saunt without order or distinction, and it is reported to be this:
Bonos ama, timidos repelle, scimus enim timidoru^ parua^ esse vbique gratia^.

Embrace and love the good, the carpet knights repel,
How little favor they have found elsewhere who knows not well?
4 In funerals.
I will end with death the end of al mortality, which though it be the dissolutio^
of nature, and parting of the soul from the body, terrible in it self to flesh
and blood, and amplified with a number of displeasant, and vnco^fortable
accidents, as the shauing of the head, howling, mourning apparel, funeral
boughs of yeu, box, cipresse, and the like, yet we shall find by resorting to
antiquities, that music has had a share amongst them, as being unseasonable
at no time. I let pass the Thracia^s with their triu^phes and iubilies for the
happy estate of their deceased friends and kinsfolk. Theat.
The Lybia^s most honorable mention of those principally which were slain
either by elepha^ts or other wild beasts or spent their blood and liuelihood in
ye field for maintenance of their country, I cannot omit without injury to their
tha^kfulnes and mine own cause. The rather since ye cause which moved the^ to
these exige^ts cannot be ungrateful to any loial and well disposed ears. Autumn
winds are not so common as authorities if I would use the^. Every gra^mer
scholar that opens but an orator, poet, or historiographer shall see trumpets,
pshalms, and singings attributed to funerals. And to reduce al vains to the
heart, and al autorities to one head, if there were no such remembering of the
dead, why have they deified a gods of these songs, Varro Terentius.
that as Ianus amongst them was the first god to open the door and entrance of
their lives, so Maenia should be the last to do them any service, by quickening
them after their deaths, and raising up a second life, by a wailful and yet
musical commemoration of their laudable deserts.

THE PARTICVLER USE of music in warlike matters. CHAP. VIII.
NOw because music is reported to be, belli and pacis alu^na vel comes,
Stuckius.
either the daughter or co^panio^ both of war and peace, I will set the palm and
olive together: and as I have bin short in declaring her peaceable use, so I
will take the nearest course that may be in this warlik treatise. Though
painters and Poets are commonly allowed to ly, Pliny.
yet I am sure Theon expressed no more colors than is true in life when he
drew an armed man in complete harness ready to make excursion upon his
enemies, and to all men's thinking animated and encouraged thereunto by the
clamorous soundes of a Musician. I appeal not now to men's integrity, and
uprightness of judgments. I make provocation to them as they are men. Let
them speak if the drum, fife, and trumpet do not excite their spirits, and
make their hearts even to swel to the overthrow of their enemies. Alexan. ab
Alexandr.
The kings of Persia first sang a song to Caster and Pollux, and then made
encounter with their adversaries. The Lacedaemonians used Pshalms: whose
captain Agesilaus being demanded of one not so wise as curious (I will not say
he was a ringleader to our froward questionists now adays to what end and
purpose be did it) made answer that hereby he was assured of every man's mind
and courage. For if his pases were consonant and according to measures, then it
argued he was not appalled. If disagreeing, it argued that he was faint hearted.
Now if it be expedient for a captain to know whether his soldiers be hearts
or Lions, whose good and cheerful hearts are the first step to the winning of
the field, then it is consequent, that Music should be a Lydius lapis, the
right touchstone to try their minds.

Now besides the advertisement given hereby to the captain, Music
encourages our own parts and terrifieth the adverse. Alex. ab Alex. and
Clemens Alexand.
our own side is incited, the adverse parts amassed and astonished. For which
causes all nations civil and barbarous though in diverse sorts, yet upon one
and the self same ground have made even the earth shake, and the heavens ring
either with outcries, braying, howling, singing, and clattering of their armor
as the old Germans and frenchmen, or with tabering upon their wagon pelts, as
the Cimbrians, or with drums, and great iron ha^mers, as the Parthians, or with
a gentler and remisser kind of Music, with their harping, or piping, or
winding the cornets, or sounding trumpets, or tinkling their cimbals, as the
Lydians, Hetrurians, Arcadians, Cicilians, Corinthians, Syrians, Trojans,
Egyptians, Arabians, and to speak in one word, no one word so true, al
countries. Amongst which Athens the mother and nurse of the best literature was
accustomed to sing hymns to Apollo and Jupiter, for the better speeding of
their doubtful voiages. And Rome the lady and Queen of al other cities (if
they may be credited in their own cause, used first an ox horn til Tyrrhenus
had devised the brazen trumpet, provided notwithstanding that in any expeditio^
of silence, they gave but a watch word only without any sound of instruments.

THE LAVVFVL USE OF MUSIC IN THE CHVRCH confirmed by the practice of the
church. CHAP. IX.
NOw although there be none but few men so senseless and blockish by nature,
or of disposition so peuish, and waiward, that taking no delight in Music
themselves, and measuring ye worth and price thereof, by their own affections,
do account of it as a thing either vain and unlawful, or idle and unprofitable,
yet there be many, who albeit they allow a moderate, and sober use of it, in
civil matters: do notwithstanding cast it out of the church, as an unclean
thing, and will vouchsafe it no place in the service of God. But if the use
thereof be proved to be not lawful only in the church, but profitable also and
decent, by the practice of the church at all times, the opinion of the best
learned in all ages, and the authority of the Scriptures themselves in many
places: I trust that these men will reform their opinions from thinking so
basely of it, or refrain their tounges from inueighing so bitterly against it.

And first as touching the practice of the church, they are not ignorant, that
the most ancient church of the Jews (which received the doctrine of truth,
which it believed, the precepts of life, which it observed, the order of
discipline, which it practiced from God himself) used no one spiritual
exercise more than singing unto the Lord. When the Ark (which was unto them a
visible sign of Gods presence among them, and unto which they resorted to ask
counsel of the Lord, and to pour out their prayers, as we do unto the
church) was brought into the city of David, 1. Chron. 23.5. 2. Sam. 6.4.
not only the four thousand Leuits whom David had assigned this office to
praise the Lord with instruments which he had made, song and made melody, but
David himself also sang, reioiced, and daunced before it. Afterward when the
Temple was builded by Solomon, and the Arc, with other things dedicated
thereunto by David, were brought into the temple, the Leuits according unto
their office, sang unto the lord, songs of praise and thanksgiving, lifting up
their voices with trumpets and Cimbals, and with instruments of Music: which
service the Lord did so gratefully accept, that he vouchsaued his visible
presence, 2. Chron. 29.25.26.
and filled the temple with his glory. And when as Ezechias opened the temple
which had been shut, and reestablished the service of the lord, which had been
intermitted by the wickedness of Ahas among other things, there is especial
mention, that he restored this exercise: for he appointed the Leuits in the
house of the Lord, with cimbals and vials, and with harpes, according to the
commandment of David, and Gad the kings seer, Isid. de offic. Eccle. lib. 2.
cap. 13.
and Nathan the prophet: for the commandment was by the hand of the lord, and
by the hands of his prophets. And his holy ordinance, which the lord himself
had sanctified, continued in that church as other parts of his service did,
though corrupted, even unto the coming of Christ in the flesh. Neither was it
then, as a bodily and unprofitable exercise, abolished, but retained as a
spiritual service unto the Lord, albeit not in that order and form as before.
And Isidor testifies that Ad antiquum morem Psalmistarum in veteri ecclesia
Iudaeorum, etc. of the ancient custom of singers in the old church of the
Jews, the primitive church took example, to noorish singers, by whose songs
the minds of ye hearers, might be stirred up to god. And ye psalmistor singer
ought to be most excele^t both in voice and art, that he may the better delight
the hearers with the sweetness of his Music, yea even our savior Christ
used this divine exercise, for when he had eaten the passover with his
disciples, S. Matthew adds, Math. 29 30.
and when he had song a psalm they went out into the mount of Olives. As for
the times wherein the apostles themselves lived, it cannot be denied, but that
this exercise was used in the churches which they planted: for many
exhortations are by them made in their epistles, as it shall after appear,
unto their churches that then flourished, concerning this matter, and I trust
their practice then was agreeable to their exhortatio^s. Plin. in epist. ad
Tra. epist. li. 10. and Eusebius. lib. 3. eccl. hist. cap. 30.
Pliny in an epistle he writes to Trojan the Emperor (whiles yet S. John was
living) testifies that it was the custom of the Christians to sing himnes
unto their Christ in their assembles before day: for they could not freely come
together by day, for the persecutions that the^ raged against them. Afterward
when the church of Christ had a breathing time, and might freely serve their
God, they did that openly in their churches, which before they used secretly in
their assemblies. Look upon the East and the West, the Greek and Latin
Churches, and you shall find this to be true. It had his beginning in the East
Church, and from thence being derived unto the West, spredde it self unto all
Churches, as Saint Augustine reports in his confessions. Lib. 3. cap. 7.


It were too long to run over all the particular Churches, which frequented
this exercise, Lib. 2. cap. 24.
it shall be sufficient to take a view of the patriarchall seats, by whom
the others were to be directed in matters of doctrine and discipline. 1
Antioch in Syria under Flauian and Ignatius.
Theodoret reports that Flauianus and Diodorus ordained in the Church of
Antioch that the Psalms of David should be song interchangeably by a quire
of singing men, divided into parts, first at the monumentes of Martyrs, and
afterward in the Church, and hortabantur, says he, socios sui ministerij
vt in Ecclesia sanctissimum Dominum nostrum hymnis celebrarent, And they
exhorted their fellow Ministers, to praise their holy Lord Christ, with
hymns and songs. Ibidem.
The which order once begun at Antioche was deryued farther and farther even
unto the utmost parts of the world. In Zozomenus likewise it is recorded,
Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 23. and Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 43.
that when the people of Antioch had intelligence, that the Emperor Theodosius
was incensed against them for a sedition raised in their City, they made their
prayers unto GOD, to allay and mitigate his rage, using thereunto mournful
songs and melody. The which when Flauianus the Bishop had caused to be
song before the Emperor, as he satte at meat, the story says, that
Theodosius was thereat not only moved to pytty, but forgave the offense also,
and himself with tears increased their lamentations. Zozom. lib. 3. cap. 29.
And in another place he says, that the Clergy and people of Antioch dividing
themselves into two parts, did according to their accustomed manner, praise God
with himnes and songs. To these former autorities accords Socrates, who
although he attribute not the original of this singing of Antiphones and
psalms in the church of Antioche, to Flauianus and Diodorus as Theodoret both,
but unto Ignatius one auncienter than they (for he was the third bishope of
that place after Peter, and was very conversant with the Apostles themselves)
yet he agrees with him in the verity of the matter whereof I speak, affirming
that Ignatius, Socrat. lib. 9. cap. 8.
having seen a vision of Angels lauding the holy Trinity with himnes
interchangeably sung, constituted in the church of Antioche that form and
manner of singing, which had been manifested unto him in that vision. And
albeit this may seem some what fabulous (as perhaps it is, Cent. 2. cap. 6. de
pub. congres.
and as the Magdeburgenses are of opinion, saying that this is not a matter of
so great moment, that therefore Angels should come down from heaven and
appear singing:) yet this clause which they ad, especially because the church
in those days wanted neither psalms nor himnes, is a sufficient proof of
mine assertion.

Now concerning the church of Alexandria as I do confess, 2 Alexandria in
Africa under Athanasius. Tripart. hist. lib. 4. cap. 11. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 4.
this exercise was not so much used there as in Antioch: so must I needs say
that sometimes it was there also frequented: for proof whereof I refer the
reader to Socrates and the tripartite history, where they declare how
Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria being by the Arrians deprived of his
Bishopric, escaped out of the hands of Sirianus, the Captain of that army,
who came with a band of 3000. soldiers, beside the aid of the Arrians which
were in the city, as well to place Gregorius in that sea as to apprehend
Athanasius. For the history says thus: The evening grew on, and the people
watched all night, because they looked for a communion. The Captain placed his
soldiers round about the Church: the which when Athanasius perceived, all his
care was, that for his sake the people might receive no harm. Wherefore he
willed the Deacon to end his prayers, and commanded they should sing a Psalm.
Now while the Psalm was singing, with sweet and pleasant concent, the whole
congregation went out at one door: all this while, the soldiers were silent,
and made no uproar: but Athanasius in the midst of the throng escaped the rage
of his enemies without harm. Whereof I gather that as in other churches, so
also in this of Alexandria they used this divine exercise: which also S.
Confess. lib. 10 p. 33.
Augustine testifies, though not in so full manner, when he wishes, that ye
order of singing were used in the Church where he was, which Athanasius
observed in the Church of Alexandria who commanded him that read the
scriptures, that he should so te^perate and moderate his voice, yt he might
rather seem to speak treatably than to sing, to the end he might be the better
understood of the people. And yet nevertheless S. Auste^ calling to mind, how
wonderfully himself had been moved with the singing of the church at his
conversion to the faith, and what operation it works in the hearers, although
doubting, confesses in the same place, that he does allow singing in the
church, that by the delight thereof the weak mind might be brought into a
feeling of Religion.

As for the Church of Jerusalem, I think it a matter needless to stand long in
proof of that, 3 Jerusalem in Palestina.
which no man can deny, especially seeing this exercise was in use among the
Apostles themselves (as may appear by that of Paul, I will sing with the
spirit, 1. Cor. 14.15.
but I will sing with the understanding also) and none were bishops of that sea,
but such as were either Apostles themselves, or scholars of the Apostles. Yet
least I should seem to say nothing in so large a matter, Niceph. lib. 3. ca.
25.
I will allege only one testimony for confirmation hereof. There is extant
among the epistles of S. Hierom, one of S. Hieroms own making: Hieron. in
epist. Paulae and Eustochij ad Marcel. tom. 1.
but under the name of Paula and Eustochius written to Marcella, the argument
whereof is to entreat Marcella which was then at Rome, to come unto Jerusalem
where Paula and Eustochius remained. Among many co^mendations of the place, and
diverse reasons to persuade her, this is one, Hic vox quidem dissona, sed vna
religio, tot Psallentium chori, quot gentiu^ diuersitates: Here, say they, are
diverse la^guages, but one religion, and so many quiers of singers, as there is
diversities of nations. And in the same epistle they ad, In christi villula,
Here in christ his village, is no pride but al plainnes, and besides the
singing of Psalms, nothing but silence. The husbandman holding the plough
sings Alleluia, the harvest man sweating at his labor does solace himself
with Psalms* and he which cutteth the vines sings some Psalm of David.
These are our verses in this country, these are our amarous songs. These be
the tunes of our shepherds, and these be the instruments of our husbandry, 4.
Constant. in Thracia under Chrysostom. Socrat. li. 6. cap. 8.
etc. The fourth patriarchal seat was Constantinople, wherein as in a place
consecrated to the service of god, was to be heard the most sweet and pleasant
voice of the Church, singing Psalms and Hymns unto the Lord. For Socrates
reports that Chrysostom ordained in the Church of Constantinople, the manner
of singing by course, that is, quiers interchangeably singing, which he did by
emulation of the Arrians, Zozome. lib. 8. cap. 8.
which in their meetings and assemblies without the City, used this kind of
singing with a great show of holiness and devotion. The which order once begun
upon this occasion, continued, as Zozomenus notes, a perpetual custom in
that Church. Hilar. in Psalm. 64.
Insomuch, that S. Hilarie in his Commentaries upon the Psalms gives this
testimony to the Church of Constantinople. They began (says he) the day in
prayers unto God, they ended the day with Hymns to him in the Church: and
again: In Psalm. 65.
Let him which is without the Church hear the voice of the people making
their prayers, let him consider the excellent sound of their Hymns. Niceph.
lib. 17 cap. 27. and 28.
We read also that Justinian the Emperor, in the 8. year of his reign after
the fifth general Council at Constantinople, wherein were 165. Fathers
assembled, to condemn the errors of the Origenists, made a song, the
beginning whereof was, The only begotten son, and word of God, and gave it to
the church of Constantinople to be song. They were also wont to sing the
Psalms of David, and certain Letames, which they did at the commandment of
Anastasius the governor of the City, to the end they might take heed of
sedition, wherewith the City was often times molested. Many mo testimonies
might be alleged to prove the frequentation of this exercise in their
patriarchal seats, but that I judge these are sufficient, and my purpose is to
show, that as this custom begun in these chief and mother Churches of the
East: so it flowed from them as from fountains, not only into all other
inferior Churches of the East, but as if it had taken force in the course
thereof, derived it self unto their sister church of Rome and al other
christian co^gregations in the west.

And first concerning the other east churches: Edessa in Syria under Ephraim.
we read of the church of Edessa, where Ephraim a Syrian (a man commended and
had in admiration of S. Basil for his excellent knowledge and learning) was
Deacon: that there in his time this divine exercise was embraced. For when
Harmonius an heretic, Theod. li. 4. cap. 27. and Zozome. lib. 3. ca. 15. and
Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 18.
had set wicked and impious songs to most pleasant and delectable tunes, and
thereby had allured the minds of many: this Ephraim is said to have made holy
and godly ditties, and to have applied them to the sweet notes and tunes of
Harmonius: whereby it came to pass that afterward the Syrians his countrime^
sang in their asse^blies the songs of Ephraim, observing therwt the musical
consent of Harmonius, which was to the^ not only most pleasant, Neocaesaria
under Basil.
but wonderful profitable and commodious. And this custom prevailed also in ye
Church of Neocaesaria. In the time of Basil, who in an epistle he writes to
certain of the clergy of Neocaesaria, answers the reproaches of Sabellius
and Marcellus, which found fault with the singing used in their church, and for
that cause had separated themselves from the congregation, his words be these:
De nocte populus consurgens, etc. Basil in epist. ad clericos Neocaes. epist.
63.
The people rise before day, and hie them to the house of prayer, and there
after that in mourning and in heaviness, and in continual tears, they have
confessed themselves unto god, standing up from their prayers they begin the
Psalmodie, and being divided into 2. Consuetudo Asiaticar. and African.
parts, they sing together the one part answering the other: whereby they
strengthen themselves in the exercise and meditation of the word of god: and
being atte^tiue with their hearts, confirm their minds, rejecting al vain and
frivolous cogitations, and so with variety of psalms, and diversity of
prayers, sometimes singing, and sometimes praying, they spend the night. As Soon
as the day appears, altogether as it were with one mouth, and with one heart,
offer a psalm unto the lord: if for these things ye avoid our company, ye must
avoid likewise the churches of Egypt, of Lybia, them of Thebes and also of
Palestina, of Arabia, of Phaenicea, of Syria, and al those that border upon the
river Euphrates, where the use of singing psalms is frequented. Where I note,
that though I should have held my peace, yet S. Basil proves for me the
generality of this practice, seeing in his last words he affirms, that this
order was agreeable to all the other Churches of God. For the churches in
Egypt, I have not only S. Basils bare assertion (as in this place appears,
Aegyptus under Nepos. Dionys. Alex. li. de promis. 2.
which nevertheless were sufficient for my purpose) but also the testimonies
of ancient writers. Dionysius Alexandrinus, as Eusebius reports, in his 2.
book De promissionibus commends Nepos a Bishop of Egypt, Propter fidem,
sedulitatem and exercitium in scripturis, and propter multam ipsius psalmodiam,
qua etiamnum multi ex fratribus delecte^tur: Eusebius. eccle. lib. 7. cap. 19. and
Niceph. lib. 6. Cap. 21.
That is, for his faith, for his diligence in preaching, and for his exercise
in the Scripture, and for his making and setting of diverse Psalms and Hymns,
wherewith even til that day, many of the brethren were delighted. The same
Eusebius cites out of Philo this testimony, for the use of this exercise in
the churches of Egypt. Eusebius. eccle. lib. secundo ca. 16.
Non contemplationi se solum, etc. They do not only give themselves to
co^te^plation (for thereof he had spoken before) but they make also, Songs and
Hymns, with most exact qualities and measures of verses, which they sing in
the honor and praise of god. Time will not suffer me to speak of those churches
severally which are mentioned in S. Basils catalog: wherefore I will content my
self with his authority, thinking his assertion as forceable to persuade the
reader, as my proofs and allegations. And to conclude this former part
concerning the practice of the East Churches, I verily persuade my self, that
the churches of Corinth, of Colossa, Cor. Colos. Ephesus.
of Ephesus and the rest used this exercise in their divine service. In which
opinion, I am the more confirmed, for that so often mention, 1. Cor. 14.15.
Coloss. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.18.
and so many exhortations hereof are extant in the epistles of the holy Apostle
to these congregations.

As Italy and the western parts in former times were beholding to Greece for
humane learning: The west Churches.
so at the first propagatio^ of the gospel, they were much more bound to the
greeks and east regions for the knowledge of God, and true religion. The
substance whereof, as they received pure and undefiled at the first, and
altogether unspotted with men's traditions, as a treasure delivered unto them vy
the Apostles themselves: so withal they received also the holy ceremonies and
customs of the same, so as they and the holy Ghost had thought it most
convenient. And forasmuch, as nothing of price is begu^ and perfected at once,
but increasing by little and little afterward grows to a full and absolute
perfection: therefore it is recorded that the west and latin churches, first
received the substance of religion, as the fu^dation, and afterward the rites
and ceremonies thereof, as beautiful adjuncts and ornaments of the building.
For whereas the doctrine of Christ had continued in these parts ever since the
preaching of the Apostles, we read that this part of divine service was not
entertained into the Latin churches before ye time of S. The church of Millen
under S. Ambrose.
Ambros bishop of Millen, which was after Peter's death at Rome almost 300.
years. So that of all the churches in the west, the church of Millen was the
first that used this solemnity, and that in the days of Ambrose the holy man
of God, by whose means and advise it was received. Whereof we have the
testimonies as well of Sygibertus and Iuo in his chronicle, Magdeb. cent 4. cap.
6.
which attribute ye first institution of singing of Anthems and Hymns in the
latin Churches unto Ambrose, as the writers of Magdeburge justify: as of
Austen also, who affirms that at what time Iustina the mother of Vale^tinian
the emperor, Aug. confess. lib. 9. cap. 7.
favoring the heresy of the Arrians, persecuted the true Church of Christ, the
manner of singing Psalms, which was used in the east churches, begun to be
freque^ted in the church of Millen by the counsel of Ambrose, least the people
being in continual watchings and labor should faint and pine away for sorrow.
The which use he says, was not only retained there, but was also received and
embraced, of all the churches and co^gregations of christ throughout the west.
To these former authorities agrees Isidorus, who speaking of Ambrose records
that he not only made Hymns himself which were song in the church of Millen,
Isidor. de eccl offic. lib. 1. cap. 6. Hymni. Ambr.
and called Ambrosiani after his name, but also was the first, that instituted
the singing of Anthems in his church to the example of the greeks, who divided
aquier of singing me^ into 2. parts, which should sing by course, like the 2.
Seraphins, or the 2. testame^ts answering one another in order, adding also,
Cuius celebritat is deuotio postea per totius occidentis ecclesias
obseruabatur. The church of Rome under Damasus.


I think it a matter of more labor than necessity to go about to show the
frequentation of this solemnity in the Church of Rome, I mean not that which
now is, but that which was in the time of the primative Church, especially
seeing that as that was the place, whither all nations made great recourse: so
nothing was there omitted which might in any respect make to the setting forth
of the Gospel and divine service of GOD. Nevertheless least I should seem to
speak only by ghesses and conjectures, I will allege antiquity for my
proof. Isidor. lib. 10. eccle. offic. cap. 8. Antiphonae. Responsoriae.
Isidorus Archbishop of Hispalis in Spain of whom I spoke before, makes a
difference and distinction between Anthems and Responsories: for Anthems he
said as I affirmed before, that Ambrose was the first that translated them from
the Greek into the Latin Church: but for Responsories he shows that they
were long before that time used in the Churches of Italy, and were so called
because when one sang, the quire answered him singing also, and then it was the
use either that every man should sing by himself, or sometime one alone, or at
some other times two or three together, the quier for the most part making
answer. Pontianus likewise the sixth bishop of Rome, which was long before S.
Ambrose, ordained, that in all churthes psalms should be song night and day,
as Fasciculus temporum has observed. Cent. 2. cap. 6.
Now as I easily confess that this was not that exquisite kind of music
which afterward was in use: so it cannot be denied, that they embraced the
other also. Damasus wrote unto S. Hierom then being at Jerusalem by Bonifacius
a priest, Epist. Damas. ad Hieron.
that he would send him Psallentiu^ Graecorum, the manner of singing of the
Greeks in the East. He complains also in that epistle of the simplicity of
the Roman Church, that there was on the sunday but one epistle of the Apostle
and one Chapter of the gospel rehearsed, and that there was no singing with the
voice, nor co^lines of hymns known among the^. Whereupon S. Rescripsit
Hieronymus ad Damas.
Hierome in his answer sent him that, which he requested, and besides that
counseled him, that at the end of every Psalm, he should cause to be song,
Glory be to the father, etc. Wherefore for certainty of this matter, we have
the affirmation of Platina, who records that Damasus was the first which
caused the Psalms to be song Alternatim, Platina in v^ta Damas. 1.
by course interchaungeably in the Church of Rome. The which when M. Harding
alleged against Bishop Jewel, so as he would thereby confirm, either singing
in an unknown tongue, or that the quier only song in the primitive Church: the
Bishop answers unto by denial, Bishop Jewels answer to master Harding, fol.
159.
not of the thing: for he granted they used singing, but of the illations: for
although they used singing (says he) yet they used it not in an unknown
tongue, and though they used singing interchangeably by sides: yet the quier or
sides song not alone but the people also, which he confirms out of the
decrees of Gregory, Did. 92.
distinct. 92. who forbad the priest that said service to sing, and in the end
adds this conclusion. Hereof we may gather (says he) that Damasus divided
the whole people into 2. parts, and willed them to sing the psalms in their own
tongue, the one part making answer by course to the other. Now here me thinks I
perceive some exult as if they had gotten confite^te^ reum, because I confess,
the quiers did not only sing in ye primative church, but the people: and ye
verily I do confess, neither is it my purpose to deny any manifest truth,
and I doubt not, but to reconcile these contrarieties in their proper place
sufficiently, where I shall answer al objections fully that can in any respect
be alleged against this exercise. In the mean season I have got hereby so
much as I desired in this place, namely that this part of Gods service was used
in the Roman church and other congregations of Italy.

Neither did this service contain it self only within the bounds of Italy,
Poyters in France under S. Hilar.
but took root also in the churches of France and Germany, and other places.
For in the time of Saint Hylary Bishop of Poyters in France, it is testified
by Isidorus that this custom was confirmed in the church. Isid. de eccl.
offic. li. 2. ca. 6. Hymni Hilar.
In so much that Hylary himself a man of wonderful eloquence, made Hymns which
were song in his church and called after his name Hylariani. The same may be
said of the churches of Africa as Carthage, The churches of Africa. Carthage.
Aust. retract. lib. 2. cap. 11.
and Hyppo: for the church of Carthage S. Austen says thus much: Hylarius
quida^ vir. tribunitius, etc. A certain man called Hilarie, being incensed, I
know not upon what occasion, against the ministers of god, did revile with
co^tumelious speeches, whersoeuer he came, that custom of singing Hymns at
the Altar out of the book of Psalms, either before the offering, or after
that which was offered was distributed to the people, which was begun in
Carthage, saying that it ought not so to be. To him did I make answer, says
S. Augustine, being commanded so to do by the brethren.

Cent. 5. cap. 6.
So Victor in his history de Vand. persecutione says: That at Carthage in the
feast of Easter the people assemble themselves together in the palace of
Faustus, and there sing Hymns in the night season in honor of the time. Hippo.
As for the church of Hippo where S. Augustine himself was ruler and chief
Bishop, it is not likely that he would defend the use of that against Hylarie
which he would not allow in his Church: especially seeing himself was not
only wonderfully therewith delighted: but in his conversion (as was noted
before) had the effectual working thereof in himself. It were an infinite and
endless labor to rehearse every particular Church after this order, considering
that even the very names of them are infinite: nevertheless if these
particulars will not suffice, harken to the general voice of the Doctors, who
with one consent agree, that nothing was more frequent in the assemblies of the
faithful: First S. Hierom has these words: Hier. in Psalm 64.
Matutinis vespertinisque hymnis ecclesiae delectatur Deus, per animam fidelem,
quae relicto inanium superstitionum ritu eum deuote laudauerit. God is
delighted with the morning and evening hymns of the church by a faithful
soul, which rejecting the ceremonies of vain superstition praises him
devoutly. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 3.
And Eusebius writing the exercises of ye Christians in their meetinges makes
this catalogue. They used prayers, singing of Psalms, celebration of the
Sacraments, and thanksgiving. To whom agrees S. Basil, Basil. in Psalm. 114.
templa Martyribus dedicarunt, etc. They dedicated churches to the holy Martyrs
with hymns and giving of thanks, whereunto they came together even at
midnight as then their manner was. And in the same place, Interdu^ concionandi
materia ex Psalmis illis desumpta est quos prius decantarunt. Sometimes the
arguments and texts of their Sermons were taken out of the Psalms which they
had sung before. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 27. Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 21.
So Eusebius and Nicephorus against the cauils of Theodotus and Artemon and
other heretics make mention of Psalms and songs which faithful men had
made, attributing therein to Christ, divine Godhead, and praising him with
sweet concent. And it may easily be gathered out of Saint Augustine,
August. de ciuitat. Dei lib. 22 cap 8. Theodor. lib. 3 cap. 27.
that godly men in their assemblies sang praises unto GOD, and made their
prayers to their Lord. So Theodoret makes mention of dauncings and ba^quets,
which christians were wont to use in their merry meetinges after any notable
and strange deliverance. Epiphan. contra haeres. lib. 3. tomo 2. in fine, in
cap de fide catholic.
And Epiphanius to this purpose speaks: Morning hymns are continually song
in the church, and evening prayers, yea both Psalms and prayers by candle
light. But most evident is that testimony of Rabbi Samuel, who writing to
Isaac the Israelite has these words: Rabb. Samuel in lib. de aduentu Messiae
sect. 24.
Paueo, mi domine, quod dictu^ est de Apostolis illud Esaiae, etc. I am afraid
(Sir) of that which Esaias speaks of the Apostles: they shall declare the
holy one of Jacob, and preach the God of Israel: the ignorant shall receive
knowledge, and Musicions shall know the Laws. We manifestly see that ignorant
men and Musicions teach our Law: And who are these ignorant men, but the
Gentiles? and who are these Musicions, singing our Psalter and our Prophets in
their Churches, but the christians? And a little after, His omnibus
consideratis, etc. All these things considered, me thinks, Sect. 25.
we do amiss in judging of the sacrifice of their praise which they offer in
the church of God, singing: especially seeing we find both commandment for it
in the law of God, and the example of David. For commandment it is said,
Praise him with Virginals and organs, praise him with cimbals, Psalm. 150.
praise him with high sou^ding cimbals, let every thing that has breath
praise the Lord Jesus Christ. For example we read that David dau^ced before
the ark, 2. King. 6.
who^ his foolish wife Michol did therefore reprehend, but he answered, O
foolish woman, will God suffer me in his service to be despised? And all the
children of Israel sounded the trumpet as they carried the Arc. Now what are
we which laugh at the solemnities of these singers but foolish Michols? and
who are these that sing, but the christians dancing and singing to God in
humbleness of heart as David did? But for conclusion of this point, my last
proof shall be out of Isidore which speaks most plainly to this effect.
Isidor. de eccl. off. lib. 1. cap. 5
Dauidis Psalterium idcirco cum melodia cantilenarum suauium ab ecclesia
frequentatur, quo facilius ad compunctionem flectantur. The Psalter of David is
therefore accustomed to be song in the church with the melody of pleasant
songs, that men may the more easily thereby be brought to a remorse of
conscience and sorrow for their sins.

THE LAVVFVLL USE OF CHVRCH MUSIC proved by authorities out of the Doctors.
CHAP. X.
TO the pracise of the church, it may seem superfluous to ad the opinions of
the fathers for that it is likely, that they which used Music in their
churches, allowed it in their opinions. And yet because the fathers set down
the use thereof in ecclesiastical matters, that we may leave no place of cauil
for the adversary, I think it not amiss, though in few words, to add their
particular speeches to this purpose. Justinius Martyr, who flourished about the
year of our Lord 164. in his questions, which the Gentiles proposed to the
Christians, moving a question touching this matter makes answer thereunto.
His question he puts down in this form. If verses and songs were invented by
them which detested religion, Justin. Martyr Quaest. 107. Quaest. a Ge^t.
christian. propositarum.
purposely to deceive, and were commended to them which lived under the law for
their weakness only, and because they were to be trained up as children: why
should they which have received perfect gifts of grace, and different from
those means which we have spoken of, use singing in their churches, to the
imitation of those which were under the law as children and infants? His
answer is this: To sing does not at all become children, but to sing with
dumb instruments, and with dancing and cimbals. Therefore the use of such
instruments and others which are fit for children, is thrust out, and expelled
the church, and singing only is retained: for it inflameth the heart with a
fervent desire of that which in singing delights us, it subdueth the motions
of the flesh, it drives away those wicked cogitations, which our invisible
enemies put into our minds, it waters the mind, and causes it to bring
forth fruit of heavenly things, it armeth and strengthens the reuerencers of
religion with patience in adversity, it ministers a remedy unto the godly
against those molestations which spring of worldly affections. This Saint Paul
calls the sword of the spirit, wherewith he furnishes christian
soldiers, against their spiritual enemies: for the word of God is that, which
being meditated upon, song, and sounded out, chaseth away and puts to
flight the devils themselves. It is of force to adorn the mind with christian
virtues, which spring up in them that reverence religion with ecclesiastical
songs. Thus far Justinius Martyr. Of which words being in themselves so
clear and evident to prove the lawful use of Music in the church, I say
nothing but this, that as he plainly allows singing, so he excludes not
all Musical instruments, but such as are fit for children. Athanasius Bishop
of Alexandria in Africa, who lived about the year of our Lord 329. Athan. ad
Marcel. de int. psalm.
writing to Marcellinus of the interpretation of the Psalms, among other
things which he speaks in the commendation of this excellent gift of God,
shows why it pleased God to ordain the use thereof. As we do utter (says
he) and deliver our inward thoughts by our words: so god willing to have the
melody of our words to be a sign of the spiritual consent which is in our
minds, Psalmos vt modulis canerentur instituit, and cu^ huiusmodi harmonia
recitari voluit, ordained that Psalms should be song with Music and would have
the^ recited with such harmony: Vt inde co^cinnitas animoru^, etc. That thereby
the quietness of the mind which is weldisposed may be known as it is written, If
any man be sorrowful let him sing And a little after speaking of instrumental
music he uses these words: to praise god upon the well tuned cymbals, upon the
harp and psaltery of ten strings, is a note and signification that there is
such a consent between the parts of the body, as there is among the strings.
And sure this his saying is proved by experience: for as even our senses
witness unto us, Baptist. Port. Magiae Nature lib. 2.
that if we strike only one string of any instrument the rest of that tone
also give a certain kind of sound, as if the striking of one partained to the^
all: so in our body, if any thing be pleasant or grievous to any part, it is
also pleasant or grievous to the whole. Good reason therefore that the tou^g
profess in divine service, yt which ye heart believes: and what both heart
believes, and tou^g confesses, good reason that both hand and whole body
testify to their power. Aug. in praefat. in Psalm.
The like has S. Austen in the prologue he writes before his enarrations of
the Psalms. Because (says he) that the holy Ghost did see that man's mind by
nature did forsake the way of virtue and incline to the delights of this life,
and that it might be incited and stirred up to tread the paths of virtue by
sweet harmony, he mingled the efficacy of singing with his doctrine: that
whiles the ears are delighted with the sweetness of the verse, the profit of
the word of God might by little and little distill into their minds: much like
unto a skillful Physician: who when he will minister any sharp or bitter potio^
to his patient uses to anoint the mouth of the cup with honey: least the
diseased or sick person, should refuse the profit for the bitterness thereof. And
least we should think that he speaks not this of the Music in the church,
he defines a Psalm to be one voice of the whole church: whereupon in the
same place breaking into a wonderful commendation of Psalms, he adds,
Psalmus tranquillitas animarum est, etc. A Psalm is the quietness of souls,
the sta^dard bearer of peace, a restrainer of the perturbations and rage of our
cogitatio^s, repressing wrath, brideling wantonnsse, inciting to sobriety,
making friendship, bringing those to concord which were at variance, and a
reconciler of utter enemies. And in another place telling first how he became a
christian, he uses these words, Quantu^ fleui in ca^ticis tuis, etc. Augu.
confess. lib. 9. cap. 6.
How great abundance of tears did I shed at the hearing of thy hymns and
Psalms, and how inwardly was I moved with the voice of thy sweet singing
congregation? Greg. Nazia. in funeb. orat.
Among other virtues Gregory Nazianzen commends this one in his sister
Gorgonia, that she was skilful in singing, and used it very often. And surely
no marvel, seeing Chrysostom attributes these divine properties thereunto.
Musica, says he, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 148. in principio.
mentem e terra abducit, etc. Music does withdraw our minds from earthly
cogitatio^s, lifts up our spirits into heaven, makes them light and
celestial. And therefore it is that Tertullian gives this general
exhortation, sonent inter duos Psalmi, Tertul. lib. 2. ad vxorem loquitur de
viro and coniuge.
etc. Let Psalms and hymns be song even of two, and let them provoke one an
other, whether of them can sing better to his God. Athanasius in the place
above cited gives this reason, why we should not only sing, but also sing
cunningly and artificially to our maker: Modulatim recitare Psalmos, Athan. de
interp. Psalm. ad Marcellinum.
etc. To sing Psalms artificially is not to make a show of cunning Music, but
an argument, that the cogitations of our minds do aptly agree with our
music, and that reading, which observes the law of feet and numbers, is a
sign of a sober and quiet affection in the mind. For both to praise God upon
well sounding cymbals, and upon the harp and psalterity often strings, is a
note and signification that the parts of our body are so conjoined and linked
together as be the stringes etc. To the same purpose speaks Athanasius at
large in the same place, and his meaning is as well to show how good and
comely an ornament Music is in the church, (which as in those days it was
not doubted of, nor once called in question, so needed no exquisite apology)
as to declare the profitte and use which it has even in private meditations:
for says he, they that sing so, as the melody of words with the quantity of
them, may agree with the harmony of the spirit, be those which sing with the
tung and with understanding also, neither do they delight themselves only, but
also bring wonderful help to those that hear the^. For he that sings well
does frame his mind to his song, and brings it, as it were, from an
inequality to a certain equality and proportion, not that he is moved by any
thing, but rather that he does perceive thereby the affections and
imaginations of good things, and stirs up in his mind a greater desire to do
good afterward. For the soul being intentive to the words does forgette
the affections and perturbations: and being made merry with the pleasant sound
is brought to a sense and feeling of Christ, and most excellent and heavenly
cogitations. To their former authorities, it were an easy matter to add more
innumerably: but I will content my self and the reader with a few. Eusebius.
praepar. Euang. 12. ca. 14. ex Platon.
Eusebius in his twelft book de praepatione euangelica uses these words: vt
pueri animus legem ita sequatur, vt vna cum ea etc. To the end that the minds
of children may so follow the law, that they may together therewith rejoice and
be sorrowful, let them learn and sing often such odes and songs as contain
the praises and dispraises of those things which the law does praise and
discommend: and he adds this reason: Quoniam teneriores animi rationem
virtutis non suscipiunt, ludo atque cantu praeparantur: Iure igitur apud nos
prophetarum odae a pueris addicuntur. For the tender minds of children are
therefore to be prepared, with daliance and mirth, because they cannot conceive
the reason of virtue at the first. Good therefore is that use amongst us, that
the Psalms of the Prophets should be learned by children. And S. Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 134. ver. 3
Chrysostom upon these words of the 134. Psalm, Psallite nomini eius quia
suaue est: has this sentence, Hoc dicit, ostendens rem ipsam habere quandam
vel per se voluptatem vna cum vtilitate, etc. This he says to show that the
thing it self has of it self, a certain pleasure with profitte: for the
principal gain thereof, is, to sing himnes unto God, to purge the soul, to
lift our cogitations on high, to learn true and exquisite knowledge, to argue
of things present and things to come. Besides these things it has also by
melody great pleasure and some comfort, and recreation, and makes him that
sings grave and reverend. And that it makes men such, it is manifest, in as
much as one interpreter says, it is a comely thing, and an other, it is a
pleasant thing: for both say true: for although he that sings be never so
outrageous, yet while he does reverence the psalm, he does pacify the tyranny
of his outrage. Although he be overwhelmed with mischeifes, and overcome with
the heaviness of his soul: yet while he takes pleasure in singing he eases
his heart, extolleth his cogitations, and lifts up his mind on hie.

This part might wonderfully be amplified as with the speeches of ancient
fathers: so also with the practice and example, not only of themselves, as is
before declared, but also of most noble and renowned Emperors: as of
Constantine the great, Justinian, Theodosius the younger, Valens the emperor,
and Carolus Magnus: which may be confirmed by the testimones of Eusebius,
Nicephorus, Gregory Nazianzen, and Carrion in his thronologie. Eusebius. lib. 4. de
vita Constan.
Eusebius thus testifies of Constantine: Cantare primus incaepit, vna orauit,
conciones sacras reuerenter audiit: adeo vt rogatus vt consideret, respo^derit:
fas non esse dogmata de Deo remiss and segniter audiri. He first began the
psalm, prayed together with the people, heard holy sermons with reverence,
insomuch that being desired to sit down, he answered, it was not meet that
those things which were declared concerning God should be heard remisly and
negligently. Nicephorus speaking of Justinian says, Nicepho. lib. 17. chap.
28.
Iustinianus imperator octauo sui imperii anno, constituit vt in concionibus
ecclesiasticis concineretur illud: Vnigenitus filius and verbum dei etc.
Justinian the emperor in the eight year of his reign, instituted that that
ditty, the only begotten son and word of God etc. should be song in
ecclesiastical meetings. And of Theodosius the younger, Niceph. lib. 14 cap. 3.
Theodosius minor imperator, cum tota ecclesia supplicationem fecit pro
serenitate, and ipse quidem medius hymnis canendis praeiuit priuati habitu
incedens, Theodosius the emperor made his supplications with the whole church
for fair wether, and went in the midst before them in the habit of a
private person while they song their hymns. So Nazianzen speaks of Valens.
When the emperor Valens entered into the church where Saint Basil preached
(...), Greg. Nazian. in funebre orat. de Basilio. Cario. chro. li. 4.
hearing the sound of the psalms was stricken as if it had been with thunder.
So does the history record of Charles the great. Quandocunque fuit in
vrbibus accessit ad psalmodiam, etc. When so ever he came to any city he
went to the Psalmody and sang himself, appointing unto his sons and his
other Princes, Lessons to be song, and joined his earnest prayer with the
godly.

The epistle of the bishops, which were of the counsel of Antioch against
Paulus Samosatenus the heretik, among other things lays this to his charge,
Eusebius. eccles. hist. lib 7. cap. 24. episc. epist.
quod psalmos and cantus, qui ad honorem Domini nostri Jesus Christi decantari
solent, ta^quam recentiores, and a viris recentioris memoriae editos
exploserit. That the has thrust out of the church as new and made by me^ of
late memory those psalms and songs which were wont to be song in the honor
of our lord Jesus Christ. Whereby it may appear that as all the reverent
assembly disliked of the attempt of Paulus in abolishing the use of singing, so
also they thought it a meet ceremony and ornament for their churches. To
these antiquities of former times, it shall not be vnneedful to ad the
opinions of later writers: as of Bullinger, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Wolphius,
Beza and others; who all with one consent (although some I confess be earnest
against prickesong and artificial music in the church) yet make this
resolution, that as all other things, which of themselves be good, may be both
well and evil used: so Music likewise has doubtless a good and profitable
use in the church, howsoever in the time of popery, the right and lawful use
thereof has been quite extinguished and forgotten. And surely if any man
think that I have in this treatise, taken upon me the defense of the unlawful
use thereof, he may well take just occasion of offense. But I am so far from
allowing of the abuse, and of popish church Music, that I detest both the one
and the other. Look upon the several tractes of these men, who^ I last
mentioned, Bullinger in his 5. Decad and 5. Sermon: Peter Martyr upon the 5.
chap. of the Judges: Calvin in his Institutions and in his commentaries upon
the Psalms, namely upon the 4.48.67. and 98. Psalms: Wolphius upon the 12.
chap. of Nehemiah: Beza upon the 3. chapter to the Colossians, and in diverse
other places, and you shall find all the contention to be against the abuse: no
one word against the right and lawful use thereof. Brentius Homilia 14.
Here I willingly omit Brentius and all the Lutherans: with whom I see no reason
why in this point we should not most constantly agree: so that all things be
done to edifieng and to the praise of God. Wherefore I will conclude this part
with that saying of S. Ambrose in his Hexameron: Quis sensum hominis gerens,
non erubescat sine psalmorum celebritate diem claudere, cum etiam aues
minutissimae sole^ni deuotione and dulci carmine orius dierum ac noctium
persequantur: Who is he bearing the sense of a man which is not ashamed to end
the day without the singing of Psalms, Ambr. Hex. lib. 5. cap. 12.
seeing even the little birds with solemn devotion and sweet notes do both
begin and end the day?

Sentences of the Scripture, for the use of Church Music. Chap. 11.
BEcause it may seem a matter impertinent, to heap a great number of
testimonies of the Scripture, for the proof of that, which can by no reason be
denied, I mean, after some few testimonies and grounds of the Scripture
alleged, to touch the point and quick of this controversy. For as much
therefore as I have hitherto sufficiently proved by the practice of the Church,
and authority of Fathers, that there is a lawful use of Music in the
Church, I will content my self with these sentences of Scripture which I shall
here cote, for confirmation of the same, meaning in one conclusion, to prove
those two things which are in question: that as well artificial as also
isntrumental Music may be used in Gods congregation. My grounds therefore
are these: first the testimonies in the old Testament, whereof I will cite
some, because all are infinite. Psalm. 33. Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous:
Psalm. 33.
for praise becomes well the just: praise the Lord with harp, sing unto him
with vial and instrument of ten stringes: sing unto him a new song, sing
cheerfully with a loud voice, etc. Likewise in the last psalm: praise him in
the sound of the trumpet, praise him upon the vial and harp, praise ye him,
Psalm. 150.
with timbrell and flute, praise ye him, with Virginals and organs, praise ye
him, with sounding cymbals, praise ye him upon the high sou^ding cimbals: let
every thing that has breath praise the Lord. Ad hitherto Psalm. 81. the 5.
first verses: sing we joyfully unto God our strength, etc. I willingly for
breuities sake omit al other speches of the psalm. Read besides these the
particular examples of Miriam, Exodus 15. of Debora and Baruck, Exodus 15. Judges
5.
of Anna the mother of Samuel, 1. Sam. 2. of all the tribes of Israel, Nehem.
the 12. 2. Chron. 5. 1. Esdras 3. and infinite more? Whereof I gather not only
precept, as in the former places out of the Psalms: but also example and
practice as out of these places last alleged. And surely considering that
Music is no ceremonial thing, and therefore not abolished with those things
that are ceremonial, I see no sufficient cause, why that which was so
excellent an orname^t to divine service in those times, should now in these
latter days, be cast out as an unclean thing, and have no place, nor use in
Gods Church.

Neither is this practice and service of God, a thing either unused in the
Primative church, Coloss. 3.6.
or not heard of in the new testament: which is manifest by these testimonies.
Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously, in all kind of wisdom, teaching
and admonishing your own selves, in Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,
singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord. And again, Ephesians. 5.19.
speaking unto your selves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing
and making melody to the Lord in your hearts etc. Hitherto join also the
examples of Christ and his disciples, Mat. 26. of Zacharias and the virgin
Marie, Luke the 1. and tell me, why both the commendation of this exercise,
given by the Apostle, (for I will not call it precept) and the example, both of
our Savior, and other blessed Saints of God may not be a sufficient warrant
for us, to practice that in our Churches, which they performed in former ages.
And surely if every action of Christ be our instruction, and an example,
whereunto we should frame our selves: why should Christ have bin author of that
which he allowed in himself, and in his Apostles: if he were not willing,
that we should take example thereby to imitate both the^ and him? Now if we
consider to what end the custom of singing was used: we shall perceive, that
it was not so used, as that singing and the sou^ding of organs, should be a deed
meritorious, to obtain remission of sins and life eternal (as the Jews
imagine of their songs, and the heathen of their sonnets) or as the
hypocritical Monks and Friars sang their seven canonical hours that the
doing of that work, whether with understanding, or without understanding, it was
not material, yet the bare performance of it, should be meritorious for the
sins of the quick and the dead: But so, that the Lord might decently be
praised, whether with humble and hearty prayer, as in the time of heaviness,
when grief oppresses: or with singing of Psalms, and playing on
instruments, as in the time of joy and mirth, according to that counsel of
the Apostle, If any man be afflicted let him pray, and if any man be merry,
James 5.13.
let him sing Psalms.

In mine opinion, excellent is that interpretation of Master Calvin, upon
these words in Luke, Calvin. in Lu. cap. 2. verse. 13.14.
Then was with the angel a multitude of heavenly soldiers praising and
singing, glory be to God on high. The Lord says he by the example of this
heavenly melody, would commend unto us, the unity of faith, and stir us up
here on earth, to sing the praises of our God etc. Wherefore a good argument
may be gathered out of diverse places in the Revelation: That for as much as our
life here on earth should with all industry and endeavor, apply it self to be
like that heavenly life which the angels live above, where the 24. Elders fall
down before the Lamb, Revel. 5.8.
having every one harpes, and goulden viols in their hands. Re. 14. ver. 23.
The voice of which harpers, harping with their harpes, John himself
testifies he heard, and that they sang as it were a new song before the
throne, etc. We therefore ought not to omit any part of that service, which may
either stir us up in devotion, or make to the testifieng of our earnest and
hearty setting forth of divine service, and beautifieng of the church of God.
And surely in the praising of God, whom should the Church militant follow,
rather than the Church triumphant? And whom should the Saints on earth
imitate rather than the Saints in heaven? who behold the Lord face to face,
1 Cor. 13.12.
and know even as they are known.

Doubtless there can be no greater comfort for a pensive soul, than to
think, that he is partaker of the same salvation, with the Saints. And no
one thing can pierce deeper into the heart of man than that he is called, to
the same state of praising and lauding GOD, with the holy Angels. Howbeit
because I would displease no man, nor give just occasion of offense unto any: I
put this as a principle: that as nothing is to be taught, so nothing to be
song in the Church, but either that, which is set down in the express word of
God, or that may certainly be showed to be collected out of it. For I profess
that rotten rythmes of popery, and superstitious invocation or praying unto
Saints does not give greater cause of vomit to any man than to my self: and al
either unwritten, or vnwarra^table verities, I so far abhor, as that I judge
the^ fitter for Grocers shops, and fishmongers stals, Persius
than for Gods congregation. So that I thus far agree with the greatest
adversaries of our profession, that I would not admit any other matter, than is
contained in the written word of God, or consonable thereunto: only herein we
differ, that they would have no great exquisite art or cunning thereunto,
neither the noise of dumb instruments, to fill up the measure of the praises of
god: and I allow of both. Wherein if I be not too much affectioned, me thinks
they do great injury to the word of God, in that they can contentedly permit
it to be song plainly, denying the outward helps and ornaments of art, to
add more grace and dignity thereunto. And truly if in all other faculties, it
be not only lawful, but commendable also, as in painting and speaking, to set
out their matters with coulors and eloquence of words: I see no reason, why to
add more grace to the ditty, with the exquisitenes of Music, should be
conde^nable in the church. Wherefore I am of opinion that few of our adversaries
can answer this reason, which seems to me a general rule, and infallible
demonstration for the allowing as well of the cunning and exquisite art of
singing, as of the use of organs and dumb instruments. The Psalms may be
used in the church as the author of them appointed: But the holy Ghost, the
author of the Psalms, appointed and commanded them by the Prophet David, to be
song, and to be song most cunningly, and to be song with diverse artificial
instruments of Music, and to be song with sundry, several, and most
excellent notes and tunes: Therefore in our English church, the psalms may be
song, and song most cu^ningly, and with diverse artificial instruments of
Music, and song with sundry several and most excellent notes. For proof that
the holy Ghost would have them song, he calls diverse Psalms by the name of
the Hebrew word Shir, which is a song, and such a song, as ought of necessity
to be song: as Psalm 7. and 120. That he would have them song most cunningly,
he directs many Psalms especially and by name Lamnazzeath, that is, to the
skillful chanter, or to him that excels in Music, as Psalm 4, etc. That he
would have them song, with diverse artificial instruments of Music, gittith
and neginoth, and diverse other kinds of musical instruments are expressed in
the titles of certain Psalms, as Psalm 6. and 8. That he would have the^ song
with sundry several and most excellent notes and variety of tunes, in diverse
parts and places of sundry Psalms, it is to be seen by the word Sela set
down in sundry places, as Psalm 77. etc. which Hebrewe word properly
signifies, now change your voice and that cunningly, now lift up your voice,
and that with an other excellent tune, that the people may be more attentive;
and the word Sela is never written, but where the matter of the Psalm is most
notable.

A REFVTATION OF OBJECTIONS AGAINST the lawful use of Music in the Church.
CHAP. XII.
IN this last part of my treatise I might seem to undertake a matter far above
my ability: were it not that either their objections were too weak to prove
their purposes: or those which are of any force, mistaken and grounded upon
false principles. Nevertheless that I may proceed orderly therein, it shall
not be amiss, to see what diversity of opinions are concerning this matter: of
Music in the church. Ob. Exquisite Music not to be used, because all the
congregation cannot sing together. Answer.
alleging, that they would have all the people sing together: I answer, that
if all could it were not amiss, but because it cannot be I see no reason, why
the people may not take as good edification by the singing which others sing,
as by the prayers that others read, especially, if they so sing as they may be
understood. 2. Object. Exquisit Music confused and hard to be understood.
Yea but (say they) this cunning and exquisite music, wherein the base and
contratenors, and other parts sing with full quier, with often repetitio^ of the
same things, is so confuse and vndistinct, that the very ditty cannot be
understood, much less any edification taken. If any thing will satisfy these
men, Answer.
me thinks this which I shall say may be in steed of a reasonable answer:
That the singing of so many parts together, causes the ditty not to be
understood, it is vitium hominu^ non artis, the fault is in them that so sing,
and not in the art. For no doubt but a full quire of good and distinct voices,
may be as well understood, as two or three pronouncing the same thing. Again,
because in deed this obscurity can hardly be avoided, it has bin well
provided for in the church, that nothing should so be song, but such things, as
are very familiar and known unto the people. And whereas they object the often
repetition of the same thing, as a fault, me thinks they blame that, which by
their own reason should rather be commended. For if some things by the number
of the voices be hardly understood at once, then surely the 2.3. or 4.
repetition is a mean to cause it to be understood the better: neither if it be
understood at the first is it therefore a fault to repeat it again, because
the often ingeminating and sounding the same thing in our ears does cause the
thing repeated to take deep root, and work effectually in our hearts. The
third reason is, because exquisite Music makes us more inte^tiue to the note,
3. Ob. Cunning Music pleases more with the note tha^ the matter. Confess.
lib. 10. cap. 13.
than to the matter. And to this purpose, they allege the place of S.
Augustine, where he says, that he did sin mortally when he was more moved
with the melody, than with the ditty, that was song. Answer.
Verily I do in no wise allow that me^ at the reading of the chapters should
walk in the body of the church, and when the Organs play, give attentive
heed thereunto: as if the whole and better part of service did consist in
Music. For this is a wonderful abuse. But if they would learn to lay the
fault where the fault is, they might easily learn to satisfy themselves
herein: For it is not the fault of music if thou be too much therewith
allured, but thine own. And Saint Augustine in that place does not condemn
Music for the sweet sound thereof, but his own frail and weak nature,
which took occasion of offense at that, which in it self was good. Again, as
it carries away some men, with the pleasure of the note: so for a recompense,
it causes some other, to give greater heed and attention to the matter: even
as the sound of the trumpet in the war is to the dastardly, and white liuered
knight, a cause of fear, but to the valiant soldier, a hartening and
encouragement. Wherefore for a final answer unto these, me thinks a man
out of their own words, may gather this good collection against the^. Singing
in the church they allow: whereupon I infer: If the worst sort of singing be
allowable in the church, then the better much rather. But artificial singing
is far better than their plain Music, for it strikes deeper, and works
more effectually in the hearers: Therefore much rather to be allowed in Gods
congregation.

Touching the second opinion, which excludes Music wholly without exception,
I mean severally to make answer to such their objections, as seem to be of
greatest importance. 1. Objection.
The first objection bears great show of truth, affirming (which we can by
no means deny) that GOD is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth, and requires not the outward actions and service of the body, but the
inward motions of the heart: the which as it is true indeed, so it is also
declared by the testimony of Gregory: who in did. Decret. Gregor. Pont. did.
92. In Sancta Romana.
92. in sancta Romana, co^plaineth that it falls out oftentimes, vt dum
blanda vox quaeritur, co^grua vita negligatur, and cantor minister Deum moribus
stimulet, cum populu^ vocibus delectat. That while a pleasant voice is sought,
honest life is neglected, and that the singing man oftentimes offends God,
while he indeuoreth to delight the people with his voice: adding in the same
place those common verses, Non vox sed votum, no^ cordula musica sed cor,
Non clamans sed amans cantat in aure Dei.


And hereupon the fathers in the 4. Counsel of Carthage decreed, that when the
chaunter of any place was chosen, he should say: Vide vt quod ore cantas, cord
credas: and quod cord credis, opere comprobes. See that thou believe that with
thy heart, which thou singest with thy mouth: and that thou perform that in
work, which thou beleeuest with thine heart. Al which testimonies as they
seem to make against us, so carry they the greater force with them, because
they are grounded upon a truth. But the same answer before, Answer.
to that objection out of Saint Augustine may satisfy these. For what if many
men be more carried away with the pleasure of the sound then with the thing and
ditty, is this Musickes fault? or is it not rather the fault of them, which by
that which is good, take occasion of evil? If some intemperate person, take
surfeit of pleasant and wholesome meats, are the meats to be reprehended, or
the man? And although God be a spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and
truth, yet forasmuch as he has made both the soul and the body: as well
the faculties of the one, as the parts of the other are to be referred to his
glory. For what kind of collection is this? God is to be worshipped in
Spirit and truth: There-fore we must not endeavor to please and worship
him with our outward and bodily actions. Or, the inward service of the
heart is accepted, therefore the outward service of the body may be
omitted? When we therefore commend the outward service of God, we do not
deny the inward. But we require that they which do sing, sing with the tongue
and with the understanding also: Atha. ad Marcellinum de inter. Psalmi.
Now they which so sing as the melody of words by the singing of voices may
agree with the harmony of the spirit be those which sing with the tongue and
understanding also, and profit not only themselves but others, 2. Objection.
as before was declared out of Athanasius. Secondly they urge us, that because
pricksong is not verbally nor literally comanded in the Gospel it may not
therefore be allowed. Whereunto I answer, Answer.
that being not ceremonial, it is sufficient for any christian being clear
and free from the Manichees opinion, that the old Testament has approved it.
Again, grant that it has no commandment, in either the old or new Testament,
is it therefore without all advise and consideration to be rejected? Verily
many things have been very acceptable unto God, which have had no express
commandment in the Scriptures: As the gold, incense, and mirre, which the
three wisemen offered unto Christ, the precious box of spiknard, wherewith
Marie Magdalen anointed his blessed feet, the costly oders, Mat. 2. Luke. 7.
John. 19.
wherewt Nicodemus did embalm his glorious body, the bows of trees and
garments, which the people broke down, Mark 11.
and spread in the way, as he went to Jerusalem, and infinite other more, which
were done without any warrant of holy Scripture. Wherefore as in the building of
the temple the service of them, which brought lime and mortar and other base
things, and as in the beautifieng of Christ's body, these things of small
price and value were acceptable unto the Lord: so no doubt but the songs of
the faithful may be as a sweet odor of incense unto him, and most grateful in
his sight.

Thirdly, 3. Objection.
this use of singing is a ceremonial thing,, and if there were no other, yet
this were a sufficient cause, why it should be excluded out of the church. I
answer, that Music was no ceremony: Answer.
for every ceremony in the time of the law was a type and figure of somewhat,
the substance whereof coming in place, the ceremony was abolished: Now because
we find nothing in the Gospel, which answers to Music in a certain
agreement of similitude, as unto his type and figure: we may therefore safely
pronounce, that Music was neither ceremonial in the time of the Law, nor to
be abolished out of the church in the time of the Gospel. Many other reasons
of small moment, may be brought against us: but seeing so little force in the
stronger, I thought it an unnecessary point to trouble my paper, and the
reader with the weaker.

And surely I do not mislike the good counsel and endeavor of any well disposed
man, that is earnest in correcting abuses, and in separating that which is
good, from that which is evil. But me thinks it is a desperate remedy, for
some few abuses, and inconveniences, which might be better amended, to root
out al Music from the church. Val. Max.
Much like the counsel of Fabritius and other senators of Rome, which by
abolishing gold and silver, or at leastwise the use thereof, thought to take
away covetousness and ambition. Plu. in Lycur.
Or the devise of Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians, who for hatred of
dru^kennes caused all the vines in the country to be dug up by the roots.
Now as these men being otherwise wise and politic, as diverse others their
actions testify, took not herein a right course of reforming those faults
which were amiss, because they might better have taken order against
covetousness, and drunkenness, by permitting a lawful and decent use of money
and wine, than by quite abolishing of them: even so those which reprehende
certain things in Church Music, may better reform them in permitting a
moderate use, than in plucking it up by the roots: For as a man may be
covetous without money, and drunken without wine: so a frail and weak mind,
will find other prouocations to call it from the dittie, though Music
should be wanting. Wherefore for conclusion of this matter, as I easily
grant to Master Bullinger, that this is no good argument: The East Churches
use singing, the West Churches use not singing: Therefore the West Churches are
no Churches. Dec. 5. cap. 5.
So I hope Master Bullinger, and any other good man whatsoever will grant as
much to me, that this is as false a collection: The West Churches use not
singing, the East Churches do use singing, therefore the East church is no
church. Seeing then, that there is no precept in the new Testament, whereby
Church-Musicke is either commanded or forbidden, as it is apparent, that as
those Churches which used it not, cannot be compelled to receive it: so those
churches which do use it can by no place of the Scripture therefore be
condemned. And this is the resolution of al our late divines, Bucer, Bullinger,
Calvin and the rest, which with one consent agree, that it is an indifferent
thing, having no hurt, but rather much good in it, if it be discreetly and
soberly used. Why then is it not as lawful for me to incline to this part, that
it should or may be used, as it is for the^ to incline to the contrary, that it
should not or may not in any wise be used, considering that neither my singing
makes me less the servant of God, nor their not singing them the more holy
and devout men?

Lastly therefore it remains that having answered the chiefest arguments that
make against us, I now bring certain reasons for my positio^. sciences and the
knowledge of the civil law, and all good and honest arts, might by as good
reason be used in ye church because they are also the invention and good gift
of God. For if they knew, how to refer every of these things to their neat
and proper end, they might perceive that as the end of those other sciences, is
first to know, and then to serve to the glory of God, so the vent and only end
of music is immediately the setting forth of Gods praise and honor. song
than those which they hear barely spoken and pronounced. Traian his time as I
before showed, and it was translated from the religious of the heathen, which
in hymns and songs, yielded all reverence and honor to their gods of wood and
stone. And surely if there be any one thing in man, more excellent than
another, that is Music: and therefore good reason, that he which has made
us, and the world, and preserves both us and it, should be worshipped and
honored with that thing which is most excellent in man, dividing as it were his
soul from his body, and lifting up his cogitations above himself. Such was
the zeal and feruencie of the kingly prophet David, 2. Sam. 23.1.
that he was therefore called by the title not only of the anointed of the God
of Jacob, but also of the sweet singer of Israel. And S. Austen says of
himself, That the voices, of the singers, Aug. confess. lib. 9. cap. 6.
did pierce into his ears, and Gods truth did distill into his heart, and that
thence was inflamed in him an affection of godliness which caused tears to issue
from him so that he felt himself to be in a most blessed and happy state.

FINIS.

