A Prayer very Comfortable and necessary to be used of all Christians every
Morning and Evening, amongst their Families, that it would please the Lord God
to be appeased in his wrath, and to withdraw his heavy hand and grievous
visitation from among us.
O Almighty, Omnipotent, and eternal God, most just, and yet most merciful
Father in Christ Jesus. We most wretched and miserable sinners, acknowledge,
that in regard of our manifold sins, it is no marvel that we be
afflicted with sundry kinds of miseries, grief^s, and extraordinary
visitations. If we should go about to reckon up our perteculer sins, we know
not where to begin, or how to make an end, they are more in number then the
hairs of our heads, they are far more then we can possible feel or knew:
For who knows the height or depth of his corruptions? Who knows how often
he offends? We acknowledge (O Lord) that our sins have greeuouslie
provoked thee, not only to take vengeance of our bodies and goods, but even
also to separate both our bodies and Souls from thee to everlasting
destruction of both. It is no marvel therefore (nay it were to be maruailed
at) in respect of our monsterous sins, that thou should not speak unto us
by thy strange Judgments: that thou should not visit us with storms and
tempests: that thou should not strike us with thunder and lightning: the
earth also to quake and shake under us, and out of the belly and bowels
thereof, to send forth such strong exhalations and brethings, as may so infect
ye air, as shall breed amongst us ye murren and pestilence. And not without
just cause, for we have abused all thy good guiftes, and ouerburthended the
Earth with our sins and transgressions. The very waters, the air and all the
creatures are infected and corrupted with our uncleanness, wherein we wallow
like Swine in the mire, never entering into consideration, either of thy
mercies, or our own miseries. And therefore it is thy judgment, that all
things should be armed by thee against us. And although we like rebellious
Traitors, yield no obedience unto thee, yet are they raady to do thy will in
punishing us: O Lord, if we did but look a little back, to behold thy late
love and abundant mercy bestowed upon us (the people of England) yea even when
to the eyes of the World we were bereft of all help or hope of help (our
Consciences accusing us) expecting nothing but wrack both of our soul, body and
goods. O Lord, we cannot but acknowledge thy exceeding great mercy, that in
stead of war, thou have sent us peace: in stead of scarsity, plenty: in stead
of Popery, thy Gospel still established amongst us, to our everlasting
comfort: and in stead of all cursses which we have justly deserved, thou
sendest all blessings which we have not deserved. Al which mercies considered,
might long since have moved us to a greater measure of thankfulness and
obedience, then we have any way performed unto thee: For like she dog to his
vomit, and the swine to the mire, do we from fullness, return to filthiness:
from fasting, to feasting: from blessing, to curssing: and from all religious
exercises, to all irreligious practices. So that we can justly expect nothing
but fearful Judgments to be powered down upon us. Wherefore we beseech thee (O
Lord) that yet at last we may fall down under thy hand, and profit by thy
chastisements: that we may tremble before thee when thou do roar, and
submit our selves, when thou sendest out thine armies against us.

O Lord teach us that we may deny the world, and considering that all is
but vanity, our desires may be drawn up to that life and happiness which is
for ever. We humbly beseech thee, in the midst of thy wrath, to be
mindful of thy mercy, make thine anger to cease, and power out thy judgments
upon the wicked. Clear us from the contagion of sin, and we shall be cleared
from the infection of the pestilence, so that it shall not hurt us. But this
(good Father) belongs unto thee, and thou must do both the one and the
other. Thou can deliver our spirits from the venom of that dragon the
devil. And also thou can keep our bodies in safety from the other
infection wherewith that Basiliske the plague does insect us. Our help (O Lord)
is only in thee, other men of the world (who have their pleasure altogether in
the vain things of this life) th^nke to escape by such means as flesh and
blood do prescribe unto them, and therefore all their hope is in the
preservatives of Phisicians, in shifting of places, in Magical cunning, and
such other unlawful witcheries: but contrariwise, we (howsoever we use the
remedies that are fit one convenient, to show our obedience unto thee) yet
flee we unto thee alone, and know that thy good blessing can only make the
means profitable unto us. Thy hand we know cannot be avoided, for if thou will reach us, thou can find us out wheresoever we be. There is no safety
but in thy presence. Be at hand therefore O Lord to help us. Take away (O
Lord) the filthy infections of sin, which cleaves as an infection upon the
whole face of this land, and dam up the pestiferous pits of corruption, that
have ascended up, even up to heaven: and turn us, O Lord, unto thee, and we
shall be turned, and when we shall be turned unto thee, thy wrath shall cease.
If we shall humble our selves, and meet thee with true faith, and unfeigned
repentance, with hartye tears, and true fasting in Sackcloth and Ashes, then
thou shall call in again thy messengers, and show mercy upon us. If we shall
fear thy judgments, and love thy commandments, detest sin, and fight
against the corruption of our hearts: if we shall advance righteousness, and
prefer obedience before our lives, then shall thou purify both our souls
and bodies, and prepare us to that everlasting kingdom and glory, which thou
have purchased for us, by the blood of Jesus Chrst, thine only begotten Son,
our Lord and Savior, Amen.

Printed for T. Pauyer, and are to be sold at his shop entering into the
Exchange.


