PRAYERS OF HOLY FAthers, Patryarches, Prophets, Judges, Kings, and renowned
men and women of either testamente.
The prayer of Moses to the Lord, for the sins of the people. Exodus 32.
LORD, why waxes thy wrath hot against thy people, which you haste brought
forth of ye land of Egypt with a great power, and with a mighty hand?
wherefore should the Egiptyans speak and say, he works craftelye with them,
even to rydde them out of the world? Turn away thy fyerce wrath, and
have compassion over the wickedness of the people. Amen.

An other prayer of Moses unto the same. Exodi. 32.
OH, this people has sinned an heinouse sin, and have made the^ golden
gods, Either forgive them this offense, or else wype me out of this book,
which you have wryte^. Am^.

For the si^ne of the people what time they murmured, a prayer of Moses. Nume.
14.
THe Lord is long er he be angry and is full of mercy, sufferyng sin and
trespass, and leaving no man innocente, which visitest the unrighteousness
of ye fathers upon ye children, even upon the third and fourth generation. Be
merciful I beseech the therefore unto ye sin of this thy people, according unto
thy great mercy, and according as thou have forgeuen this people, coming
from Egipte even unto this place.

An other of Moses and Aaron for the people. Nume. 16.
O Most myghtie God of the spirits of all flesh, one ma^ne has sinned, and
will thou be wroth with all the multitude?

For the stubbernes of the people: the true preacher on this wise as Moses did,
may make his prayer unto God. Deute. 9.
O Lord God, destroy not ye people and thine inheritance which you have
delivered through thy greatness and which thou have brought out of the Egypt of
this world. Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and look not
unto the stubbernes of this people, neither consider yet their wickedness and
grievous offense, for it is thine own people and thine enheritaunce which thou
have challenged for thine own in thy great might and in thy stretched out arm.
Am^

The prayer of Solomon in the dedicacion of the temple of Jerusalem. 3. King.
8.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, which has fulfilled with his hand that
he spoke with his mouth unto David my father, Lord God of Israel, there is no God
like yt in heaven above, or in the earth beneth, that kepest appointment and
mercy with thy servants, yt walk before thee with all their hertes, which
also have kept couenaunte with thy ser^aunt Dauyd my father that you promisedest
him. Now then O Lord God of Israel, let thy word be stable, which thou
spakest unto thy servant David my father But in deed can God dwell on ye earth
Behold neither heaven, nor heaven above all the heavens are able to conteyn
thee, how much less then this house that I have buylte: but look to the
prayer of thy servant and his supplicacion. O Lord my God, give an ear unto
the voice and prayer, which thy servant prays before ye this day And when
thy people shall have sinned against the (for there is no man that synneth not)
thou shalt be angrye with them, yet if they turn again with all their
heart, and do repent in their heart, making their prayer unto thee, saying,
we have sinned, we have dealte unjustly, we have dooen wyckedly, and so
return again unto the with all their heart and all their soul, and make
supplicacyon unto the: then thou shalt hear from Heaven, even from the
firmament of thy seat their prayers and peticions, and shall be merciful
unto the sins of thy people, which have offended the, and shalt show them
justice and mercy for they be thy people and thine enherytaunce, which thou
broughtest out of Egypt from the fournesse of yern and let thine eyes be
opened to the prayer of thy servant, and unto the prayer of thy people Israel,
to harken unto them in all that they call unto thee for. Amen.

A prayer of Esdras for the sins of the people. 1. Esd. 9.
MI God I am ashamed, and dare not lift up mine eyes unto ye my God for our
wickedness is grown over our head, and our trespaces are waxen great unto
the Heaven even from ye time of our fathers, yea: and oureselues also have
greuouslye sinned unto this day, and because of our wickedness, have we, and
both our kings, and our priests be delivered into the hand of the Kings
of the nations, into the sweard, into captivity, into spoil, and into
confusion of face, as it is come to pass this day. But now is there a little
and so dayne graciousnesse, come from the Lord our God, so yt some of us are
escaped, that he may give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may
light our eyes, and give us a little life in our bondage. For we are bond
men, and our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has inclined
mercy unto us in the syghte of the kings of the Persyans, that he should give
us life, and promote the house of our God, and to set up the desolacion
thereof, and to give us an hedge in Judah and Jerusalem. And now o our God,
what shall we say after this, for we have forsaken thy commandments, which
thou haste commanded by thy servants and prophets, and said. The land
whereunto ye goo to possess it, is an unclean land, through the fylthynesse
of the people of ye lands, in their abhominacions, wherewith they have made it
full of uncleanness on every side. Therefore shall ye not give your daughters
unto their sons, and their daughters shall ye not take unto your sons, and
seek not their peace and welthe for ever that ye may be strong, and enjoy
the good in the land, and that ye and your children may have the
inheritance of it for evermore. And after all this that is come upon us,
because of our most naughty deeds and our great trespace: thou our God
haste spared our wickedness and haste given us a delyueraunce as it is come
to pass this day, to the intent we should not turn back, and let gooe
thy commandments: neither be joined in matrimony with the people of these
abhominacyons, will thou then be wroth at us, till we be utterly consumed,
so that nothing remain and till there be no delyueraunce? O Lord of Israel
thou art ryghteous, for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day. Behold
in thy presence are we in our trespace, for hereupon is there no standing
before the.

The prayer of Nehemias for the sins of the people before the Lord. Nehem. 1.
O Lord God of Heaven, thou great and terrible God, thou that kepest
covenant and mercy with them that love thee, and observe thy
commandments: let thine ears harken, and thine eyes be open, that thou
may hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray now before thee day
and night for the children of Israel thy servants and knowlage the sins of
the children of Israel, which we have committed against the. And I and my
fathers have sinned also, we have been corrupt unto thee, in that we have not
kept thy commandments, statutes: and laws, which thou co^maundest thy
servant Moses. And they are thy servants and thy people whom thou have
delivered through thy great power and mighty hand. I beseech the Lord let
thine ears bow down to the prayer of thy servant: and the prayer of thy
servants: whose desire is to fear thy name. Amen.

A confession and solemn prayer of the Levites and of the church for sins
with a rehersall of the benefits of God. 2. Esd. 9.
Lord, thou alone haste made Heaven, and the Heaven of all heavens, with all
their host, the earth and all that is thereupon, the sea and all that is
contained therein: thou geuest life unto all, and the host of Heaven bow
theimselues unto the. Thou art the Lord God that haste chosen Abram and
broughtest him out of Vr in chaldea and calledst him Abraham, and foundest his
heart faithful before thee, and made a couenaunte with him: to give unto him
and his sede the land of the Cananites, Hethytes, Amorites, Pheresites,
Iebusytes, and Gergesites. Thou haste made good thy words, for thou art
ryghteous, and haste considered the myserye of our fathers in Egypt, and
heard their complaynte by the red sea: and shewedst tokens and wonders upon
Pharao: and on all his servants: and on all ye people of his land For thou
know that they were presumptuous and cruel against them: and so made thou
ye a name: as it is this day. And ye red sea did thou divide before them:
so yt they went through the mids of the sea dry shodde. As touching their
persecuters thou threwest them into ye deep as a stone: in the mighty waters,
and leddest thy people on the day time in a clowdye pyller: and on the night
season in a pyller of fire: to show them light in the way that they went.
Thou came down also upon mount Sinai: and spakest unto them from heaven:
and gave them right judgments: true laws: good commandments and
statutes: and declaredst unto them thy holy Sabbath and co^maundedst them
precepts: ordynaunces and laws: by Moses thy servant: and gave them
bread from heaven when they were hu^gry: and broughtest forth water for them
out of the rock when they were thyrstie and promisedst them, yt they should
gooe in, and take possessyon of ye land over which thou had lift up thine
hand, for to give them. But they and our fathers were proud and hardnecked,
so that they followed not thy commandments, and refused to hear, and did not
rem^mbre the wonders that thou dyddest for them, but became obstinat and
heddy: insomuch that they turned back to their bondage in their disobedience.
But thou my God forgauest, and wall gracious, merciful, pacient, and of
great goodness and forsokest them not. And though they made a molten calfe and
said: this is thy god, that brought ye out of the land of Egypt, and did
great blasphemies, yet forsokest thou them not in ye wilderness, according to
thy great mercy. And the cloudy pillar departed not from them, on the day
time: to lead them the way, neither the pyller of fire in the night season,
to show them light in the way that they went And thou gave them thy good
spyryte to enfourme them, and with helpest not thy Manna from their mouth,
and gave them water when they were thursty. Forty years long made thou
provision for them in the wilderness, so that they lacked nothing, their
clothes wared not old, and their fete swelled not, and thou gave them
kingdoms and nacyons, and thou diuydest them according to their porcyons, so
that they possessed the land of Sehon king of Esebon, and the land of Og the
king of Basan. And their children multiplyedst thou as ye stars of heaven,
and broughtest them into the land: whereof thou had spoken unto their
fathers, that they should gooe into it, and have it in possessyon. And the
chyldrenne went in and possessed the land, and thou subduedst before them
the inhabytauntes of the land, even the Cananytes, and gave them into their
hand, and their kings and the people of the land, that they might do with
them what they would. So they wanne their strong cities: and the fat land,
and took possessyon of houses that were full of all manner of gooddes, weiles
dygged out, vyneyardes, oylegardens, and many fructfull trees, and they did
eat and were filled, and became fat, and lived in wealth thorough thy great
goodness nevertheless they were disobedyente and rebelled against thee, and
did cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets (which
exhorted them so earnestlye that they should convert unto ye) and did great
blasphemies, therefore thou gave them over, into the hand of their enemies
that vexed them. And in the time of their trouble they cried unto thee, and
thou heardest them from heaven, and through thy great mercy thou gave them
saviors, which helped them out of the hand of their enemies. But when they
came to rest, they turned back agayde to do evil before the. Therefore
leftest you them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had the dominion
over them. So they converted and cried unto thee, and thou herdest th^im from
heaven, and many times haste you delivered them according to thy great mercy,
and testytiedst unto them, that they should turn again unto thy law.
Notwithstanding they were proud and herkened not unto thy commandments, but
sinned in thy laws (which a man should do and live in them) and turned the
shulder a way, and were styfnecked and would not hear. And many years
dyddest you forbear them: and testifiedst unto them through thy spyrite, even
by the office of the Prophets, and yet would they not hear. Therefore gave
thou them into the hand of the nacyons in the lands. But for thy great
mercies sake thou have not utterly consumed them, neither forsaken them for
thou art a gracyous and a merciful God. Now our God, thou great God, mighty
and terrible, thou that kepest couenaunte and mercy, regard not a little all
the travail that has happened unto us, and our kings, princes, priests,
prophets, fathers and all thy people sythens the time of the Kings of Assure
unto this day. Thou art ryghteouse in all that thou haste brought upon us, for
you haste dooen right. And we on our behalf have been ungodly, our kings,
princes priests and fathers have not done after thy law: nor regarded thy
commandments and thy earnest exhortacions, wherewith thou hacte exhorted
them, and have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness
that thou gave them, and in the large and plenteous land which you gave
them and they have not converted from their wicked works. Behold, therefore
are we in bondage this day yea even in the land yt thou gave unto our
fathers to enjoy the fructes and gooddes thereof, behold there are we bond
me^ne. And great is ye increase of it unto the kings, whom thou have set over
us because of our sins and they have dominion over our bodies and cattle and
we are in great trouble. And in all this make we a sure covenant, and write
it, and let our princes, Levites and priests seal it.

A prayer of the church for sins Sapi. 15.
THou (O our God) art sweet long suffering and true, and with mercy ordrest
thou all things Though we sin, yet are we thine for we know thy greatenes.
If we sin not, the^ are we sure that with thee we be allowed. For to
know thee is perfect righteousness, yea to now thy righteousness and power, is
the rote of immortalite.

An other for sins. Hiere. 3.
LO we are thine, for thou art the Lord our God, the hills fall, and all the
high pride of the mountains, but the health of Israel stands upon God our
Lord. Confusion has devoured the labor of our fathers from our youth up,
yea their sheep and bullockes their soonnes and daughters. So do we also
sleep in our confusion, and shame covers us, for we and our fathers even
from our youth unto this day have sinned against the Lord our God, and
have not obeyed the voice the lord of our GOD.

The lamentacion of Hieremie for the sins of the people. Hiere. 13.
PIteously let me weep, and let the tears gusshe out of mine iyes. For ye
lords flock is taken, tell therefore the king and the rulers, humble your
selves, set you down on the earth, for the croune of your glory shall fall
from your hedde The citees of the southe be shut up, and there is no man to
open them All Judah is carried away captive, so yt none remains, lift up your
iyes, and behold them that come from the North, where is the flock that was
given thee, thy noble catell, to whom will you make thy moan, when he cummeth
upon thee for you have taught the^ thyself against thyself and made the^ masters
over thee. Shall not sorrow come upon thee, as on a woman traualyng with child?
And if thou would say in thine heart, wherefore come these things upon
me? Surely even for the multitude of thy wyckednes thy hinder parts and thy
fe^e be discovered. If the manne of Inde can change his skin, and the cat of
the mountain her spots, then may ye that be exercised in eiuill do good.
Therefore will I scatter you like as the stouble that is taken a way with the
south wind. This shall be your lot and the portion of your measure, where
with ye shall be rewarded of me, saeith the Lord, because ye have forgotten
me, and put your trust in discritfull things. Therefore have I turned thy
clothes over thy hedde and discovered thy thighs that thy priuities might be
seen, thy adueutry, thy deddely malice, thy beastlynes, and thy shameful
horedome For upon feldes and hills I have seen thy abhominacions, woe be to
thee O Jerusalem, will thou not be clensen sithe thou art yet unclean?

The prayer that Baruch prescribed unto the captives in Babylon for their
sins. Batuch. 23.
THE Lord our God is righteous and we with our fathers are brought to open
shame, as it is to see this day. And as for these plages that are come upon us
already the Lord had devised them for us yet would we not pray unto ye Lord
our God, that we might every ma^ne turn from his naughty ways. So the Lord
has caused such plages to come upon us, for he is righteous in all his
works, that he has commanded us, which we also have not dooe^ nor herkened
unto his voice, for to walk in the commandments of the Lord, that he had
given unto us. And now O Lord God of Israel thou that have brought thy
people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, with tokens and wonders
with thy great power and out stretched arm and have gotten thyself a name, as
it is come to pass this day. O lord our God we have sinned, we have dooen
wickedly, we have behaved our selves ungodly in all thy righteousness. Turn
thy wrath from us (we beseech thee) for we are but a few left among the
Heathen, where thou have scattered us. Hear our prayers (O Lord) and our
peticions, bring us out of captivity for thine own sake, get us favor in the
sight of the^ which have led us a way, that all lands may know, thou art
the Lord our God, and that Israel and his generation calls upon thy name, O
Lord look down from thy holy house upon us, incline thine ear and hear us.
For the dedde that be gone down to their graves, and whose souls are out of
their bodies, give unto the Lord neither praise nor righteous making, but the
soul that is vexed for ye multitude of her sins, which walks heavenly and
weakly, whose iyes begin to fail, such a soul gives the praise and
righteousness unto the Lord. O Lord we power out our prayers before thee,
and require mercy in thy sight, O Lord our God, not for any godlynes of our
forefathers, but because thou have sent out thy warthe and indignation upon us
according as thou did threaten us by thy servants the Prophets saying.
Thus says the Lord, bow down your shulders and necks, and serve the king
of Babylon, and so shall ye remain still in the land that I gave your
fathers, if ye will not do this, nor hear the voice of the Lord your God,
to serve the king of Babylon. I shall destroy you in the citees of Judah within
Jerusalem and without, I shall also take from you the voice of myrthe and the
voice of joy, the voice of the brydegrome and the voice of the bryde, and
there shall no man dwell any more in the land, but they would not harken
unto the voice to do the king of Babylon service, and therefore have thou
performed thy words, that thou spakest by thy servants the prophets namely
that the bones of our kings and the bones of our fathers should be translated
forth of their place. And lo now are they laid out in the hete of the soon,
and in the cold of the night, and they be dedde in great mysery, with honger,
with sword with pestilence, and are clean cast forth. As for the temple,
wherein thy name was called upon, thou have laid it wast, as it is to see this
day, and that for the wickedness of the house of Israel and the house of Judah,
O Lord our God thou haste entreated us after all thy goodness and according to
all thy great loving mercy, like as thou spakest by thy servant Moses in the
day when thou did command him to write thy law before the children of
Israel saying. If ye will not harke^ unto my voice, the^ shall this great
multitude be turned into a very small people for I will scatter them abroad,
notwithstanding I am sure that this flock will not hear me, for it is an
hardenecked people but in ye land of their captivity they shall remember them
selves and learn to know, that I am the lord their God. When I shall give
them an heart to understand, and ears to hear: then shall they praise me
in the land of their captivity, and think upon my name. Then shall they turn
them from their hard backs, and from their ungodliness. There shall they
remember the things that happened unto their fathers, which sinned against
me. So will I bring the^ again into the land, which I promised with an oath
unto their fathers Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and they shall be lords of it, yea I
will encreace them, and not minishe them. And I will make an other covenant
with the^: such one as shall endure, namely that I will be their God, and
they shall be my people, and I will no more drive my people the children of
Israel out of the land that I have given them. And now O Lord almighty:
thou God of Israel, our soul that is in trouble and our spirit that is
vexed cry unto thee. Hear us (O Lord) and have pit upon us, for thou art a
merciful God, God be gracious unto us for we have sinned before thee. Thou
endureste for ever, should we then utterly perish? O Lord almighty thou God
of Israel hear now the prayer of the dedde Israelites and of their children,
which have sinned before thee, and have not harkened unto the voice of the
Lord their God, for which cause these plages hang now upon us Oh Lord
remember not the wickedness of our forefathers, but think upon thy power and
name now at this time, for thou art the Lord our God, and thee (O Lord) will
we praise. For thou have put thy fear in our hearts, to the intent we
should call upon thy name and praise thee in our captivity and that we might
turn from the wickedness of our forefathers that sinned before thee. Behold
we are yet this day in our captivity, where as thou have scattered us to be
an abomination, curse, and sin, like as it has happened unto our
forefathers because of all their wyckednes and departing from thee, even from
thee yt art the Lord our GOD. Amen.

The prayer of Daniell the prophet for his own sins and for the sins of
the hole nation. Daniell. 9.
O Lord thou great and fearful GOD, thou that kepest couenaunte and mercy
with them which love thee and keep thy commandments, we have sinned we
have offended, we have been disobedient and have gone back, yea we have
departed from the precepts and judgments, would never foloe thy servants
the prophets, yt spoke in thy name to our kings and princes, to our
forefathers and to all the people of the land. O lord righteousness
belongs unto thee, and to us pertains nothing but open shame as it is come
to pass this day unto every manne of Judah and to them that dwell at
Jerusalem, yea unto all Israel whether they be far or nighe, through out
all lands, wherein thou have scatttered them because of the offenses they did
against thee. O lord unto us to our kings and princes, to our forefathers
even unto us all that have offended thee, belongs open shame. But unto thee
(O Lord God) pertains mercy and forgeuenes where as we on our behalf are gone
back from thee, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his laws which he laid before us his servants the prophets, yea all
Israel have transgressed and gone back from thy law, so that they have not
herkened unto thy voice, wherefore the curse and the oath, that is written in
the law of Moses the servant of God, against whom ^e have offended, is poured
upon us. And he has performed his words, which he spoke against us, and
against our judges that judged us, to bring upon us such a plage as never was
under heaven, like as it is now come to pass in Jerusalem, yea all this plage,
as it is written in the law of Moses, is come upon us, yet we never made any
supplication before thee, O lord, that we might turn again from our
wickedness, and think upon thy troth. Therefore has the lord made have to
bring this plage upon us, for the lord our God is righteous and all his
works which he does, and the cause hereof was that we would not harken to
his voice. And now O lord our God thou that with a mighty hand have brought
thy people out of Egypt to get thyself a name (as thou have at this day)
we have sinned O Lord and dooen wickedly against all thy righteousness. Let
thy wrothfull displeasure be turned away I beseech thee from the city
Jerusalem thy holy hill, for through the heinous offense of us and our
forefathers, is Jerusalem and thy people abhorred of all them that are about
us. Now therefore O our God hear the prayer of thy servant, and let thy face
shine over thy Sanctuary that lies waste O my God incline thine ear and
harken, at least for thine own sake, open thine iyes and see, how we be
spoiled, and the city desolate, which is called after thy name, for we do
not cast our prayers before thee in our own righteousness, but only in thy
great mercies, O lord hear, O lord forgive, O Lord considre, tarry not over
long but for thine own sake do it O my God, for thy city and thy people is
called after thy name.

PRAYERS IN time of aduersytie and for a man's own sins.
The prayer of Jacob to be delivered from his brother Esau. Genesis ^^, 32
O GOD of my father Abraham, and God of myfather Isaac, Lord which sayde^te
unto me, return unto thy country and thy kindred, and I will do all well
with thee, I am worthy of the least of all the mercies and truth, which thou
have showed unto thy servant, for with my staff came I over this Iordane, and
now have I gotten two droues. Deliver me from the hands of my brother Esau,
for I fear him least he will come and smite the mother with the children. Thou
saidest that thou wouldeste suerly do me good, and would make my sede as
the sand of the sea which cannot be numbered for multitude.

The prayer of Joshua what time the people fled in the battaill. Joshua. 7.
AH Lord almighty wherefore have thou brought this people over Iordane, to
deliver us in to the hands of the Amoretes, to destroy us. Would God we had
adue^tured* and dwelte on the other side Jordan, O Lord what shall I say when
Israel turns their backs before their enemies. Moreover the Cananites and
all the inhabitaunces of the land shall hear of it and shall come about us
to destroy the name of us out of the world and then what wyle thou do unto
thy myghtie name?

A prayer and an open confession of the people of Israel to be delivered from
their enemies. Iudic. 10
WE have sinned against thee, for we have forsaken our own God and have served
Baalim: Lord we have sinned: do thou unto us, what soever please thee, and
deliver us only at this time. Amen.

The prayer of Samson unto God, that he might revenge him against the
Hhilistines. Iudic. 16.
MI Lord almighty think upon me: and strengthen me at this time one^y O God
that I may be avenged of my enemies, and for the loss of my two eyes: that I
may revenge me ones. Amen.

In wars against Turks and inuadours, the prayer of king Asa. 2. Paral. 14.
Lord, it is all one with thee to help them that have no power with few or
with many. Help us O Lord our God, for we trust to thee, and in thy name be
come against this multitude. Thou art the Lord our God: let no man preuail
against thee. Ame^.

An other of king Iosaphat. 2. Paral. 22.
Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven, and raygnest not thou
on all the kingdoms of the heathen? And in thine hand is power and might, yt
no man can stand before thee. Art not you our God which dydest cast out yt
enhabitauntes of this land, before thy people Israel, and gave it to the
sede of Abraham thy lover for ever? and they dwelt therein and have buylt the a
temple therein unto thy name, and said: when evil comes upon us, as the
sweard of judgment, pestilence or honger: then if we stand before this house
and before thee (for thy name is in this house and shall cry unto thee in our
tribulacion thou shall hear and help. See therefore how proudely our
adversaries now assault us. O our God, wylt you not judge the^? for we have
no might against this company, that comes against us, neither wot we what
to do, but our eyes be unto thee.

The prayer of Nehemias what time the heathen defied him. Nehem. 4.
Hear O thou our God, how we are despised, turn their shame upon their
own head, yt thou may give them over unto despisyng in the land of
captivity. Cover not their wickedness, and put not their sin from thy
presence, for they have laughed to sco^rne the buylders.

If God send thee trouble either for a punishment of thy sins, or to prove
thy patience therewith. Pray thus. Tobia. 3.
O Lord thou art ryghteous, and all thy judgments are true, yea all thy
ways are mercy, faythfulnes and judgment. And now O Lord be myndfull of
me: and take no vengeance of my sins: neither remember my misdeeds, neither
the misdeeds of my elders: for we have not been obedyent unto thy
commandments therefore are we spoiled brought into captivity: into death,
into derision and shame unto all nations: among whom thou haste scatered us.
And now O Lord thy judgments are great: for we have not done according to
thy commandments: neither have we walked innocentlye before thee. And now O
Lord: deal with me according to thy will, and command my spirit to be
received in peace: for more expedyent were it for me to dye: then to live.

The prayer of Manasses king of Judah, when he was in prison, for remission of
sins, and for Gods favor, and delyueraunce. 2. Paral. 36
O Lord almyghtye, God of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and of the
ryghteouse sede of them: which haste made heaven and earth with all the
ornamente thereof: which haste ordained the sea by the word of thy
commandment, which have shut up the deep, and have sealed it for thy
fearful and laudable name: dread of all men and honorable before the face of
thy virtue, the fearce anger of thy thretenyng is importunate heavy to sinners.
But the mercy of thy promise is great and unsearchable: for thou art ye Lord
God most high above all the earth: long sufferyng and exceadyng merciful,
and repentaunt for the malice of men. Thou Lord after thy goodness have
promised repentance of the remission of sins: and thou that art the God of
the ryghteouse: haste not put repentance to the ryghteous Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, unto them yt have not sinned against thee, but because I have sinned
above the nombre of the sands of the sea, and that mine iniquities are
multiplied. I am humblied with many bands of yern. And there is in me no
breathynge. I have provoked thine anger and have dooen evil before thee in
co^mittynge abhominacions and multiplyeng offenses, and now I bow the knees
of my heart requiring goodness of the Lord. I have sinned Lord I have sinned
and know mine iniquity, I desire thee by prayer O Lord, forgive me, and
destry me not with mine iniquities neither do thou always remember my euels
to punyshe them, but save me which am unworthy after thy great mercy and I
will praise thee everlastingly, all the days of my life, for all the virtue of
heaven prayseth thee, and unto thee belongs glory world without end. Amen.

The prayer of Judith for the delyueraunce of her country from the tyrau^t
Judith. 9.
O Lord God of my father Simeon, which gave him a sweard for a defense
against the enemies, that used violence and wylfulnes and that rauyshed thy
virgin and put her to dishonestye. Thou that gave their wives into a pray,
and their daughters into captivity, and all their pray for a spoil unto thy
servants, which bare a zele unto thee, help me a poor wydowe. O Lord my
God, I beseech thee, for you have dooen all things even from the beginning. And
look what thou have taken in hand and devised, it evermore came to pass: for
all thy ways are prepared, and thy judgments are dooen in thy everlasting
foreknowlage. O look now upon ye armies of the Assirians, like as it was thy
pleasure sometime to look upon the host of the Egiptians, when they being
weaponed, persecuted thy servants: and put their trust in their charets,
horsemenne, and in the multitude of their men of war. But thou lokedst upon
their host castyng a thycke darckenesse before them: and when they came into
the deep, the waters overwhelmed them, Even so Lord let it goo with these
that trust in the power and multitude of their men of war: in their
charettes, arowes, and spears, and know not that thou only art our God:
which destroyest wars from ye beginning and that thou art the Lord, O lift
up thine arm now: like as ever from the beginning, and in thy power bring
their power to naught: cause their might to fall in thy wrath. They make
their boaste that they will defyle and vnhalowe thy Sanctuary: waste the
tabernacle of thy name and cast down the horn of thine altar with their
swearde. Bring to pass O Lord: that the pride of the enemy may be cut down
with his own swerd that he may be taken with the snare of his eyes in me, and
that thou may smite him with ye lyppes of my love: O give me a steadfast
mind: that I may despise him and his strength, and that I may destroy him.
This shall get the an everlasting memoryall: if the hand of a womanne
overthrow him, for thy power (O Lord) stands not in the powir of men: nether
have you any pleasure in the strength of horses There was never proud person
that pleased thee, but in the prayer of the humble and meke has thy pleasure
been evermore. O you God of heavens: thou maker of waters: and Lord of all
creatures: hear me poor woman calling upon thee: and putting my trust in
thy mercy. Remember thy covenant, O Lord: and minister words in my mouth,
and stablyshe this device in my heart, yt thy house may continue still in
holiness, and that all the heathen may know and understand that thou art God,
and that there is none other but thou.

An other prayer of Judith whiles she went about to slay the enemy Holofernes
Judith. 13.
STrengthen me (God of Israel) and have respect unto the works of my hands
in this hour like as thou haste promised, and granted that by thee I may
perform the thing which I have devised through the belefe yt I have in thee,
Oh strenthen me I beseech thee at this hour.

The prayer of Mardocheus in the pursure of Haman for all the Jews nation.
Aester. 13.
O Lord, thou valiant and mighty king (for all things are in thy power) if
thou will help and deliver Israel, there is no man can withstand thee: for
you haste made both heaven and earth: thou art Lord of all and there is none can
resist thee O Lord. Thou know all, thou wotest Lord it was neither of malice
nor of presumption, neither for any desire of glory yt I would not how down
myself, and worship the most proud Ha na^, for I would gladly if it might
have turned Israel to good, have kyste even his footsteps, but I feared least
I should have given Gods glory unto a man, and because I would worship none but
only thee. And therefore O Lord, you God and king have mercy upon thy people, for
they ymage^ how to bring us to naught, ye their desire is full set to destroy
and overthrow ye people that has ever been thine. Oh despise not thine own
good which you haste delivered and brought forth of Egypt: even for thine own
cause. Hear my prayer, be mercyful to thy people, whom thou have chosen for
an heritage to thyselfe. Turn our complaint and sorrow into joy, so as we may
line. O Lord, and praise thy name, O Lord, suffer not the mouths of them that
praise thee to be destroyed.

The prayer of queen Hester for her self and all her country men. Hester.
13.
O My Lord: thou only art our King, help me a desolate woman: which have no
helper but thee, for my misery and destruction is hard at mine hand: of a
child. I learned of my father, that thou tokest up Israel out of all peoples
and our fathers out of all their progenitors: that they should be thy
perpetual enheritaunce: and look what thou dyddest promise them, thou have
made it good unto the^. Now Lord we have sinned before thee: therefore have
thou given us into the hands of our enemies, because we worshypped their
gods: Lord thou are ryghteous, nevertheless, they are not satisfied that
they oppress us with most heavy thraldom, but also imputing the strength of
their hands unto ye power of their ydols, they will change thy promises: and
destroy thine enherytaunce and stop the mouths of them that praise thee,
and quench the glory of thine house: and thine altar, to open the mouths of
the heathen: that they may praise the power of ydols, and magnify the fleshly
king for ever. Lord give not thy scepter unto them that be nothing worthy:
least they laugh at our fall, but turn their deuyce upon theimselues, and
punyshe him yt has begoon to rage upon us. Think upon us O Lord: and show
thy self in the time of our distress. Strengthen me O thou king of gods,
thou Lord of all power give me pleasant speech in my mouth before the Lion.
Turn his heart to hate our enemy: to destroy him and all such as consent to
him. But deliver us with thy hand and help the forsaken woman which have no
help nor defense but only the Lord, thou know all: thou wotest I love not
the glory of the unrighteous and hate the bed of the vncircu^cysed and of all
heathen. Thou know my necessity that I abhor ye token of my preeminence
and worship, which I bear upon my head what time I must show myself and
be seen and that I abhor it as an unclean clothe. Thou know also that I
thy hand maiden have not eaten at Hamans table, and that I have had no
pleasure in the Kings feast, that I have not drunk the drink offrynges and
yt I thy handemayde have had no joy sythens the day I was brought hither,
unto this day but only in thee. O Lord, O thou God of Abraham, O thou mighty
God above all, hear the voice of them which have none other hope, and
deliver us out of the hand of the wicked, and ryd me out of my fear. Amen.

The oracion and blessing of Job in his most greuouse aduersytie and loss of
his goods. Job. 1.
Job shaued his head, fell down upon the ground, worshypped God and said.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again. The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, as it has pleased the Lord: so
it is dooen. Now blessed be the name of the Lord. Amen.

A prayer that we may be delivered from our adversaries. Esai. 37.
O Lord of Hoostes, thou God of Israel which syttest upon Cherubin, Thou art
ye God alone of all the kingdoms of the world, thou only haste created
Heaven and earth. Incline thine ear Lord: and consider, open thine eyes and
see, deliver us from the hand of our adversaries, that all the kingdoms of
the earth may know, that thou only art the Lord. Amen.

The prayer of Esaye when the people were fore plaged. Esaye. 63.64.
Look down from heaven, and behold the dwelling place of thy sanctuari and
thy glory, how is it that thy gelousye: thy strength the multitude of thy
mercyes and thy loving kyndnesse will not be entreated of us? yet art thou our
father. Abraham knows us not neither was Israel acquaynted with us. But thou
Lord art our father and redemer: and thy name is everlasting. O lord wherefore
haste you led us out of thy way? wherefore have you hardened our hearts that we
fear thee not? Be at one with us again for thy servants sake yt are of the
generation of thine heritage. Thy people has had but little of thy sanctuary
in possession for our enemies have taken it in. And we are become even as we
were in ye beginning what time we were not under thy dominion nor called not
upon thy name. O that you would cleave the heaven in sondre and come down:
that the mountains might melt a way at thy prece^s, like as an hot fire, and
that the malicious might boil as the water does upon ye fire, whereby thy name
might be known emonges thine enemies and that the Gentiles might tremble
before thee. That thou might come down with thy wounderous strau^g works,
then should thilles melte at thy precens, for sithe^s the beginning of the
world, was none (except thou O God) that heard or perceived, neither has
any iye seen what you dooest for them that put their trust in thee Thou
helpest him that does right with cherefulnes, and them yt think upon thy
ways. But lo thou art angry, for we offend and have been ever in sin, and
there is not one hole, we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses are as clothes stained with the flowers of a woman, we fall
euerychone as the leaf, for our sins tarry us a way as the wind. There is
no ma^ne that calls upon thy name, that stands up to take hold by thee.
Therefore hydest thou thy face from us, and co^sumeste us because of our
sins. But now O Lord thou that are our father, we are the claie and thou
art our potter, and we are all the work of thine hand. Be not to sore
displeased (O Lord) and keep not our offenses to long in thy remembrance, but
consydre that we all are thy people. The citees of the sanctuarye lie waste.
Syon is a wyldernes and Jerusalem a deserte. Our holy house which is our
beutie, where our fathers praised thee, is burnt up: yea all our commodities
and pleasures are wasted away, will thou not be entreated (LORD) for all
this? Will thou hold thy peace, and scourge us so sore?

An other prayer of Hieremye. Hieremie. 7.
Heal me (O Lord) and I shall be hole, save me and I shall be saved, for
thou art my praise. Be not thou terreble unto me, O Lord, for thou art he in
who^ I hope when I am in parell, let my persecutors be confounded, but not
me, let them be afraied and not me, Thou shalt bring upon them the time of
their plage, and shall destroy them right sore. Amen.

An other prayer of Hieremie. Hieremie. 31.
O LORD thou have chastised me, and thy chastenyng have I received as an
untamed calf Convert thou me and I shall be converted, for thou art my Lord
GOD for as soon as thou tournedst me I repented myself. And when I understood I
smote upon my thigh, I confessed and was, ashamed, because I suffered reproach
of my youth.

A prayre of Hieremie under the person of Christ, which every Christen may
say in time of aduersite. Lamenta. 5,
THou have heard my voice O Lord and have not turned away thine ears from
my syngyng and criyng. Thou have approached unto me, when I called upon thee and
have said, fear not. Thou (O Lord) haste mainteyned the quarrel of my soul,
and have redeemed my life. O Lord thou have seen my blasphemers take thou my
quarrel upon thee. Thou have well considered how they goo about to do me
harm, and that all their cou^sailes are against me. Thou have heard their
despitefull words (O Lord) yea and all their imaginacions against me, the
lips of mine enemies and other devices that they take against me, all the
day long. Thou see also their sittyng down and their risyng up: they make
their songs of nothing but of me. Reward them O Lord according to the
works of their hands. Give them the thing, yt their own heart is afraied
of: even the curse. Persecute them, O Lord: with thine indignacion, and rote
them out from under the heaven. AMEN.

A prayer of Hieremie in the day of trouble, and in the destruction of
Jerusalem. Lament. 5.
CAll to remembrance O Lord what we have suffered, consider and see our
confusion. Our enheritaunce is turned to the strangers: and our houses to
forenners we are become careful and fatherless, and our mothers are as the
widows. Our neck is under persecucio^, we are werie and have no rest Our
fathers which now are gone have sinned, and we must bear their wyckednes.
Servants have ye rule of us, and no ma^ne delivers us out of their hands.
The wives are ravished in Syon, and the maidens in the citees of Judah. The
princes are hanged up with ye hand of enemies, they have not spared the old
sage men They have committed abominable lechery with young men and the
bodies are hanged up upon trees. The elders sit no more to determine right and
equity, and the young me^ne use no more plaiyng of musyke. The joy of our
heart is gone, our merry quere is turned to mournyng. The garla^de of our hedde
is fallen, alas that ever we sinned so sore. Therefore our heart is full of
heuinesse, and our iyes dymme, because the hill Syon is destroyed, so that now
the foxes ru^ne upon it. But thou O LORD that remainest for ever more and thy
seat world without end. Wherefore will thou still for get us and forsake
us so long? O Lord turn thou us unto thee, and so shall we be turned. Renew
our hearts as in old times, nay thou have banished us utterly, thou art
sore displeased with us.

The prayer of Susanna when she was in danger to be ravished of the two
elders. Daniell. 13.
Susanna sighed and said Alas I am in distress on every side, if I do this
thing it will be my death and if I do it not I cannot eskape your hands,
well: it is better for me to fall into your hands without the deed dooyng,
then to sin in the sight of the Lord.

An other prayer that she made, which should have been led to death, Daniell:
15,
O Everlasting God, thou sercher of secrets, thou that know all things
before they come to pass, thou woteste yt they have borne false witness
against me: and behold I must die where as I never did any such things, as
these me^ne have maliciously inverted against me.

The prayer of Jonas when he was as yet in the fisshes belly,
IN my trouble called I unto the Lord and he heard me, out of the belie of
hell I cried and thou heardeste my voice. Thou have cast me down into the
deep, even unto the mids of the sea and the floude compassed me about, yea
all the waves and streams of water went over me I thought I had been a cast
away out of thy sight: but I will yet again look toward thy holy temple. The
waters compassed me, even to ye very soul, the deep lay about me and the
surges covered my hedde: I went down to the bottom of the hills, and was
barred in with earth for ever, but you O Lord my God have brought up my life
again out of corrupcion. When my soul fainted within me, I thought upon the
Lord and my prayer came unto thee: even unto thy holy temple. They that hold
of vain vanites will forsake his mercy But I will do sacrifice unto thee
with the voice of thankesgeuyng and will pay that I have vooed for my save
guard unto the Lord.

The prayer of Judas Machabeus when he should encouetre with his enemies, 2.
Macha: 4:
BLessed art thou O savior of Israel: which did destroy the violente
power of the gyaunt in the hand of thy servant David and gave the hooste of
the Heathen into the hand of Jonathan the soonne of Saull, his weapon bearer.
Put this host now into the hand of thy people Israel, and let them be
confounded in their multitude and horse men. Make them afraid and disco^fite
the boldness of their strength that they may be moved through their
destruction. Cast them down through the sword of thy lovers, then shall
all they yt know thy name praise thee for ever with thankesgeuyng Amen.

The prayer of the priests against the tiraunt that he might not prospere
against the holiness of God. 1. Macha. 7.
Forasmuch as thou lord God have chose^ this house that thy name might be
called upon therein, and that it should be an house of prayer and peticion to
thy people be avenged of this ma^ne and of his hooste, and let them be
slain with the swearde. Remember the blasphemies of them, and suffer them not
to continue any longer.

The prayer of Nehemias and the prestes for the people oppressed of the
Heathen. 2. Machabe. 1.
O Lord God maker of all things, thou fearful and strong thou righteous and
merciful, thou that art only a gracious king only liberal, only just,
almighty and everlasting, thou that deliuerest Israel from all trouble, thou
that have chosen the fathers and hallowed them: receiuyng the offering for the
hole people of Israel, preserve thine own portion and halowe it. Gather those
together that are scattered abroad from us.

Deliver them that are under the heathens bondage, look upon them which are
despised and abhorred, that ye Heathen may know and see, how that thou art
our GOD. Punish them that oppress and proudely put us to dishonor. Set
thy people again in thy holy places like as Moses has spoken. Amen.

The prayer of Eleazar when he was drawn to execucion and ready to die, 2.
Machab. 6.
Lord God which have the holy knowelage, thou knoweste full well yt where as
I might have been delivered from death, I suffer these sore pains of my
body, but in my mind I am well content to suffer them be cause I fear thee.

THANKESGYVYNges and praises unto GOD, of the Fathers.
The song of Moses and the children of Israel for their diliueraunce from
Pharao. Exodi. 15.
LET US SING unto the Lord, for he is become glorious, ye horse and the
horseman. The Lord is my strength and my song, and is become my salvation, he
is my God and I will glorify him, he is my fathers God and I will extolle him
up on high. The Lord is as a strong manne of war, almighty is his name.
Pharaos charettes and his hooste, has he cast in the sea. His pyked capitaines
are drouned in the red sea. the deep waters have covered the^ they sounke to
the botome as a stone. Thy hand Lord is glorious in power, thine hand has
all to dasshed thine enemies and with thy great glory thou have destroyed
thine adversaries. Thou sentest forth thy wrath and it consumed them even as
stubble with the brethe of thine anger. The water gathered together and ye
fludes stood still as a rock, and the deep water congeled together in the
midst of the sea. The enemy said I will foloe and over take them and will
divide the spoil, I will satisfy my lust upon thiem, I will draw my swearde,
and my hand shall destroy them. Thou bluest with thy brethe, and the sea
covered them, and they sou^ke as lead in the mighty waters. Who is like unto
thee O Lord emo^ges the gods? Who is like thee so glorious in holiness,
fearful, laudable and that show wonders?

Thou stretchedest thy rightha^de and the earth swalowed them, with mercy
thou cariedest this people which thou deliueredst, and broughtest they with
thy strength unto thine holy habitacion. The nations heard, and were
afraied, panges came upon the Philistines. Then the Dukes the Edomites were
amassed, and tre^blyng came upon the mightiest of the Moabites, all the
enhabitauntes of Canaan wared fainte hearted. Let fear and dredde fall upon
them, through thy greatenesse of thine arm, and let them be as still as a
stone, while thy people pass through. O Lord, while thy people pass
through, which thou haste gotten. Bring them in and plant them in the
mountains of thine enheritaunce, ye place Lord which thou have made to dwell
in, the sanctuarye Lord which thy hands have prepared. The Lord reigns
ever and alwaie. For Pharao went on horseback with his charettes and horsemen
into the sea, and the lord brought the waters of the sea upon the^. And the
children of Israel went on dry land through the sea.

The form of blessyng the children of Israel. Numeri. 6
ON this wise shall ye bless the children of Israel and say unto the^. The
Lord bless thee and keep thee. The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and
be merciful unto thee. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee: and give
thee peace The priests shall make invocation to my name over Israel: that I
may bless them.

Anna thankyng the Lord of his benefit, on this manner syngeth to God: 1.
Kings. 2.
MY heart reioyseth in ye Lord mine horn is high in ye Lord and my mouth is
wide open over mine enemies for I rejoice in thy saving. There is none so holy
as the Lord, no there is none save thou. Neither is there any strength like
unto our God Talk not so much proudely, let old things depart out of your
mouths, for the Lord is God of knowlage, and judges the thoughts. The bows
of the strong are broken and the weak endued with strength They that of late
were full, have let forth them selves for bread, and the hungry be
satisfied, in so much that the baren has borne seven, and she yt had many
children is waxed feeble. The Lord kylleth and quickens again, he brings
down to hell, and fetteth up again. The Lord makes poor and makes eych,
brings low and heueth up on high, he rayseth up the poor out of the duste,
and lyfteth up the beggar from the donge hill, to set him amongst Princes,
and make him hold the seat of glory. For the pyllers of the earth are the
Lords, and he has set the round world upon them. He will keep the fete
of his saints, but ye wicked shall keep silence in darkness. For in his own
might shall no man be strong The Lords adversaries shall be made to fear
him and out of heaven he shall thunder upon them. The lord shall judge the
coasts of the world, and shall give might unto his king, and exalte the horn
of his Christ. Am^

For benefytes received at Gods hand, the prayer of David. 2. Reg. 7.
WHat am I Lord almighty and what is my house: that thou should thus auaunce
me? And is this a small thing, in thy syghte? Lord almighty? but that thou
wouldeste speak also of thy servants house for a great while to come? Is
this a law among men. Lord almighty? And what can Dauyd say more unto
thee, seeing thou knowe^^ thy servant Lord almighty. Even for thy words
sake, and a cordyng to thine own heart, haste thou dooen all these great
things to make them known unto thy servant, wherefore thou art great: O
Lord God, and there is none like thee, nether is there any God save thou,
acordyng to all that we have heard with our ears. And what one people in the
earth is like thy people Israel, which God went to deliver to be his
people, and too make him a name, and to show them great and terrible things
in the earth, before thy people: which thou redemedest to thee out of Egypt
even for the people and for their gods. And thou haste ordained thy people
Israel to be thy people for ever. And thou Lord art their God, and now Lord
God, the thing yt thou have said of thy servant and of his house make it good
for ever, and do as thou haste said. And let thy name be great for ever,
that men may say, the Lord of hoostes is the God of Israel, and let the house
of thy servant David be stablyshed before thee. For you Lord of hoostes, God
of Israel, have told in the ear of thy servant saying, I will build thee an
house. And therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this
prayer unto thee: ^nowe Lord almighty, thou art the God and thy words must
be true for thou have told this goodness unto thy servant, and now goo to:
and bless the household of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before
thee. For thou Lord almighty haste said that with thy blessyng the house of
thy servant shall be blessed for ever.

A song that David saunge unto the Lord in the day that the Lord delivered
him our of the hand of his enemies. 2. Reg. 22.
THe Lord is my rock, my castle and my delyuerer, God is my strength and in
him will I trust my shylde, and the horn that defends me, mine high held and
refuge O my savior save me from wrong I will praise and call on the Lord,
and so shall I be saved from my enemies, for the waves of death have closed
me about, and the floudes of Belial have feared me, the corde^ of hell have
compassed me about, and ye snares of death have overtaken me in my
tribulacion. I called to the Lord, and cried to my God, and he heard my voice
out of his temple, and my cry entered into his ears. And ye earth trymbled and
quoke, and the foundacyons of Heaven moved and shook: because he was angrye.
Smoke went out of his nosethrylles, and consumyng fire out of his mouth, that
coals were kyndled of him, and he bowed the heaven and came down, and
darkness underneath his fete And he code upon Cherub and flewe, and appeered
upon the wings of the wynd and he made darkness a tabernacle round about
him with water gathered together in thick clouds. Of the bryghtnesse that was
before him, coals were set on fire. The Lord thundered from heaven, and the
most high put out his voice, and he shot arrows and scatered them, and
hurled lyghtenyng and turmoyled them. The botom of ye sea appeered, and the
foundacyons of the world were seen, by reason of the rebukyng of the Lord,
and through blastyng of the brethe of his nosethrylles, he sent from above and
fette me, and plucked me out of mighty waters. He delivered me from my mighty
enemy and from them that hated me and were to strong for me, when they had
compassed me in the day of my tribulacion, the Lord stayed me up, and brought
me out into roumth: and delivered me because he delyghted in me. The Lord
rewarded me according to my righteousness, and a cordyng to the pureness of
my hands he delte with me. For I kept the ways of the Lord, and did no
wickedness forsakyng my God. But I had all his laws in my syghte, and turned
my face from none of his ordynaunces. I was pure unto hymwarde, and kept
myself from wickedness. And the Lord did to me again a cordyng to my
righteousness and after my pureness that I had in his sight, with the holy
thou shall be holy, and with the man that is incorrupt, thou shall be
vncorrupt, with the pure, thou shalt be pure, and with the froward thou
shalt be froward also. Certainly the people that are in adversity thou shall
help, and on the proud shalt thou cast thine eyes. Thou art my light, o
Lord: and the Lord shall light my darkness, with thine help. I will run
through an host of men and by the aid of my God, I will spryng over a wall.
The way of God is undefiled, and the word of the Lord fined as gold, and he
a shilde to all yt trust in him. Who is a God save the Lord, and who mighty
save our God? God is my strength in war and ryddeth the way clear before me. He
makes my fete as swyfte as an hyndes, and sets my fete fast upon my high
hold. He teaches my hands to fight, that a bow of brass is to weak for
mine arms. And thou have saved me with thy shylde, and kepest me ever in
meekness. Thou made me space to walk in, that my fete should not stumble. I
followed mine enemies and destroyed them: and turned not again until I had
consumed them. I wasted them and so clouted them, that they could not
arise, but fell under my fete, and thou comparedest me about with might to
battle, and made them that rose against me: to stoop under me. Thou
made mine enemies to turn their backs to me, and them that hated me, and
I destroyed them: they looked for help, but none came to save them, unto the
Lord they cried, but he heard them not. And I will beat them as small as the
dust of the earth and will stamp them as the durte in the street, and will
sprede them abroad, Thou delyueredst me from the dissencion of my people,
and kepst me to be an head over nations, for the people which I knew not,
became my servants, and the alientes crouched unto me and obeyed me at a
word and the alientes that shrynke away shall tremble for fear in their
defe^sed places. The Lord lives, and blessed be^ he my strength, and exalted
be God the strength that saves me. It is GOD that auengeth me, and that
brings down the people under me, and delyuereth me from my enemies, thou
lyftest me up on high from them that rise against me, and delyuerest me
from the wicked men. Therefore I will praise thee, O Lord among the
heathen, and will sing unto thy name. For thy great and manyfolde saving of
thy king, showing mercy unto thine anointed, even unto David and his sede for
ever.

A blessing of Tobias the elder, wherewith he blessed the Lord in the end of
his life. Tobi. 13.
Great art thou, O Lord, for evermore, and thy kyngedome world without
end. For thou scourgest and healest, thou leadest unto hell and bryngest out
again. And there is none that may escape thine hand. O ye children of
Israel: give thanks unto the Lord, and praise him in the syghte of the
heathen. For among the heathen which know him not, has he scatered you, yt ye
should show forth his marvelous works, and cause them to know, there is
none other GOD almyghtie, but he. He has chastened us for our misdeeds: and
for his own mercyes sake shall he save us. Consider then how he has dealt
with you, and praise him with fear and dread, and magnify ye everlasting king
in your words. Certes I will praise him even in ye place of my captivity, for
he has showed his majesty, unto a sinful people. Turn you therefore, O ye
sinners, and do ye ryghteousnes before God, trustyng verily he will show his
mercy upon you Certes I and my soul will rejoice in God, praise the Lord all
ye his chosen, hold the days of gladness, and be thankeful unto him. Oh my
soul bless thou the Lord. Amen.

The thankesgeuing and song of Judith for the victory and for the delyuery of
the country from their enemies. Judith. 16.
Begin unto the Lord upon the tabrettes, sing unto the Lord upon the
Cymbales, sing unto him a new song of thankesgeuyng be joyful and call upon
his name. It is the Lord that destroys wars, even the Lord is his name,
which has pytched his tents in the mydst of his people, that he might
deliver us from the hand of all our enemies Assure came out of the mountains
in the multitutde of his strength, his people stopped the water brooks, and
their horses covered the valleys. He purposed to have brent up my land, and
to sley my young men with the sweard He would have carried away my children and
virgins into captivity, but the almyghtye Lord anneyed him, and delivered
him into the hands of a womanne, which brought him to confusyo^. For their
mighty was not destroyed of the young men It was not the sons of Tiran that
slew him, neither have the great gyauntes set them selves against him,
but Judith the daughter of Merari: with her fair beawtye discomfyted him and
brought him to naught. She laid down her wydowes apparel, and decked
herself with the tire of myrthe in the reioysyng of the children of Israel.
She anointed her face, she bound up her hear to begyle him, her slyppers
rauysshed his eyes, her beawtye raptiuated his mind, with the swearde smote
she of his neck. The Persyans were astonyed at her steadfastness, and the
Medes at her boldness. Let us sing a song of thankesgeuyng unto ye Lord A
new song of praise will we sing unto our God, Lord Lord: thou art a great
God, mighty in power, whom no man may overcome. All thy creatures should
serve thee, for thou speak but a word, and they were made: thou sentest
thy spirit, and they were created, and no man can withstand thy voice. The
mountains shall move from the foundacyons with the waters, ye stony rock
shall melte before thee: like wax. But they that fear thee shall be great with
thee in all things, woo unto the people that rise up against my generation.
For the almighty Lord will avenge himself of them, and in ye day of
judgment will he vyset them.

The blessyng of Seraphin. Esaias. 9.
HOly art thou, holy art thou, holy art thou, thou art the Lord God of
Hoostes: all the earth is full of thy glory.

Thankynges. Esaias. 25.
O Lord, thou art my God: I will praise thee: and magnify thy name for thou
bryngest meruelouse things to pass, a cordyng to thine old counsayles truly
and steadfastly.

An other of the same. Esaias. 26.
O Lord give us peace, for you workest in us all our works. O Lord our God,
though such lords have dominacion upon us: as know not thee, yet grant:
that we may hope only in thee: and keep thy name in remembrance.

A blessing with an admiracion of the meruelouse counsayles of God. Iere. 32.
O Lord God, it is thou that haste made heaven and earth with thy great power
and high arm: and there is nothing to hard for ye. Thou show mercy upon
thousands: thou dooest recompense the wickedness of ye fathers: into the bosom
of ye children that come after them. Thou art the great and mighty God: whose
name is ye Lord of hoostes great in council, and infinite in thought. Thine
eyes look upon all the ways of men's children to reward every one after his
way, and according to the fructes of his inuencions. Thou have dooen great
tokens and wonders in the land of Egypt upon ye people of Israel: to make thy
name great, as it is come to pass this day: Thou have brought thy people of
Israel out of the land of Egypt with tokens, with wonders, with a mighty
hand, with a stretched out arm, and with great terriblenes, and haste given
them this land: like as thou had promised unto their fathers. Namely,
that thou would give them a land, that flows with milk and honey. Now
when they came therein and possessed it, they followed not thy voice, and walked
not in thy law, but all that thou commaundest them to do, that have not they
dooen. And therefore come all these plag^s upon them. Behold there are
bulwarks now against ye city to take it and it is won of the Caldes, that
besege it with swearde with honger and death, and what soever thou have spoken
that same is come upon them.

The song and thankesgyuyng of Mary the virgyne. Luke. 1.
MI soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit reioyseth in God my savior For
he has looked upon the poor degree of his handemaide. Behold now from
henseforth shall all generacions call me blessed, for he that is mighty has
dooen to me great things, and holy in his name And his mercy is on them yt
fear him throughout al generacio^s He shows strength with his arm he
scatereth them that are proud in the imaginacion of their hearts. He puts
down the mighty from their seats, he exalts them of low degree. He
fillith the hungry with good things, and sends a way the rich empty. He
remembers mercy: and helps his servant Israel. Even as he promised to our
fathers: Abraham and to his sede for ever.

The prophecy and gyuyng of thanks of Zachary. Luke. 1.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people. And has raised up an horn of salvation unto us in the house of his
servant David. Eue^ as he promised by ye mouth of his holy prophets, which
were sythens the world begone that we should be saved from our enemies and
from the hands of all that hate us. To fulfill the mercy promised to our
fathers and to remember his holy couenaunte. And to perform the oath which
he swear to our father Abraham to give us, that we delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, all the days of our
life, in such holiness and righteousness as is accept before him. And thou
child shall be called the prophet of the highest and thou shalt goo before
the face of the Lord to prepare his ways. And to give knowelage of salvation
unto his people for the forgeuenes of sins. Through the tender mercy of our
God, whereby the day spryngeth from an high has visited us. To give light to
them that satte in darkness and in shadow of death, and to guide our fete
into the way of peace.

The praises of the angels at the birth of Christ. Luke. 2.
GLORY unto God on high and peace on the earth, unto men reioysyng.

Gyuyng of thanks of Symeon. Luke. 1.
LORD, now letteste thou thy servant depart in peace acordyng to thy
promise, for mine iyes have seen the savior sent from thee, which thou have
prepared before the race of all people. A light to lighten the Gentyles, and
the glory of thy people Israel.

Thanks of Paull for his conversion unto Christ. 1. Timothi. 1.
Unto GOD king everlasting immortal, invisible, and wise only but honor and
praise for ever and ever. Amen.

A song of the triumphers over the beast Apoca. 15.
Great and meruelouse are thy works, Lord God almighty, just and true are
thy ways king of saints. Who shall not fear O Lord, and glorify thy name?
For thou only art holy, and all Gentiles shall come and worship before thee
for thy judgments are made manifest

A blessyng of the people by king Solomon. 3. Kings. 8.
BLessed be the Lord, that has given rest unto his people Israel according
to all that he promised, so yt there is not one word escaped of all the good
promises which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant. And the Lord
our God be with us as he was with our fathers and forsake us not, neither
leave us, but he may bow our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways and to
keep his commandments, ordinances, and customs which he commanded our
fathers. And these my words which I have prayed before the Lord, be nighe
unto ye Lord our God day and night, that he defend the quarrel of his
servant and of his people Israel evermore, that all nations of the earth may
know that the Lord he is God, and none other but he, and I pray God that
your hearts may be found with the Lord our God, to walk in his
ordinances and to keep his laws as we do this day.

The blessyng and praises of saint Ambrose and Augustyne. Te Deum laudamus.
WE praise thee (Oh Lord) we knowelage thee to be ye Lord All the earth
might worship thee which art ye father everlasting To thee cries forth all
angels, ye heavens and all the powers therein. To thee thus cries Cherubin
and Seraphin continually, holy art thou, holy art thou, holy art thou. Thou art
the Lord God of hoostes. Heaven and earth are fulfilled with the glory of thy
maiesti. The glorious compaigne of ye Apostles praise thee. The goodly
feloshippe of the propheies praise thee. The fair felo^shippe of Matters
praise thee. The holy congregation of the faithefull throughout all the world
magnify thee. They knowlage thy honorable and very only soonne. The
knowelage the holy ghost to be a conforter. Thou art the king of glory O
Christ. Thou art the everlasting soonne of the father. Thou (when thou
should take upon thee our nature, to deliver manne) did not abhor the
virgins womb, when thou had over come the sharpenes of death, thou
openeddest the kingdom of heavens to them that believed in thee. Thou sit
on the right hand of God in the glory of the father. We believe you shall
come to be our judge, wherefore we pray thee help thy servants who^ thou
have redeemed with thy precious blood. Make the^ to be no^bred with thy saints
in joy everlasting O Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage. Govern
and also lift them up into bless everlasting, we praise thee every day, and
we worship thy name ever world without end. O Lord let it be thy
pleasure to keep us this day without sin. O Lord have mercy upon us, eue^
as me trust in thee In thee O lord do I trust let me not be confounded for
ever Amen

PRAYERS FOR SVCcours and reliefes of life, for wisdom, for humylitie and for
other natural gifts.
The request of Jacob for sustentacio^ and relief of this present life.
Genesis. 28.
IF THE LORD will be with me and will keep me in the way that I shall walk
in, and will give me bread to eat and clothe to wear and that I may return
again unto my fathers house in sauerie: the^ shall the Lord be my God, and
this stone which I have set up an end, shall be gods house, and of all that
thou shalt give me, will I give the tenth unto thee.

Thus prayed Anna unto the Lord that she might obtein a child. 1. Kings. 1.
LORD of hoostes, if thou will look on the wretchedness of thine handmaide,
and shall remember me, and not forgette thine handmaide, and shall give thine
hand maid a ma^ne child: I will give him unto the Lord all ye days of his
life.

The prayer of Solomon for wisdom well to govern his people, daiely to be
prayed of all princes and other rulers. 3. Kings. 3.
THou have showed unto thy servant David my father great mercy, acording as he
walked before thee in troth, in righteousness and in playnesse of heart with
thee, And thou haste kept for him this great mercy, that thou haste given
him a soonne to sit on his seat. And now Lord my God, it is thou that haste
made thy servant king in the rou^e of David my father, and I am a young lad
and wot not how to order myself. And thy servant is in the midst of thy
people which thou have chosen, a people that are so many, that they cannot be
nombred for multitude, give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to
judge thy people and to deserve betwne good and bad, for who is able to judge
this thine so great a people?

A prayer of Solomon for a competency of life. Proverbs. 30.
TWo things I require of thee that thou will not deny me before I die. Remove
from me vnnitie and lies, give me nether poverty nor rich, only grant me a
necessary living, least if I be to full, I might happily deny thee, and
say what feloe is the Lord, or constrained through poverty, I might fall
unto stealyng, and forswear the name of my God. Amen.

A prayer for obteinyng of Wisdom Sapiense. 9.
GOD of my fathers, and Lord of mercies, thou have made all things with thy
word, and ordained manne throught thy wisdom, that he should have dominion
over the creature which thou haste made, that he should order the world
acordyng to equity and righteousness, and execute judgment with a true
heart, give me wisdom, which is ever about thy seat, and put me not out
from among thy children. For I thy servant and soonne of thy handemayde am a
feeble person, of a short time, and to young to the understanding of judgment
and of thy laws. And though a man he never so perfect among the children
of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing worth Oh
send her out of thy holy heavens and from the trone of thy majesty, yt she
may be with me and labor with me that I may know what is acceptable in
thy sight. For she knows and understands all things, and she shall
conducte me sobrely in my works, and preserve me in her power. So shall my
works be acceptable. AMEN.

A prayer for mekenes and the obteinyng of chastity. Eccle. 23.
O LORD thou father and God of my life, let me not have a proud look. But
turn a way all volupteousnes from me. Take from me the lusts of the body
let not the desires of uncleanness take hold upon me, and give me not over into
an unshamefast and obstinate mind. Amen.

The prayer of Jesus the soonne of Syrache, in necessity and for wisdom.
Eccle. the last.
I Thank thee O Lord and king and praise thee O God my savior I will yield
praises unto thy name, for thou art my defender and helper from the snare of
traitors tou^gues, and from them that are occupied in lies. Thou haste been
my helper from such as stood up against me, and haste delivered me acordyng
to the multitude of thy mercy, and for thy holy names sake. Thou haste
delivered me from the roaryng of them that prepared theimselues to devour me,
out of thy hands of such as sought after my life from the multitude of them
that troubled me and went about to set fire upon me on every side, so that
I was not burnt in the mids of the fire. From the deep of hell, from an
unclean toungue, from liyng words from ye wicked king, and from unrighteous
toungue. My soul shall praise the Lord unto death, for my life drewenie unto
hell. They compassed me round about on every side, and there was no man to
help me. I looked about me if there were any manne yt would succoure me, but
there was none. The^ thought I upon thy mercy O Lord and upon thy acts that
thou haste dooen ever of old, namely that thou deliueredest such as put
their trust in thee, and riddest them out of the hands of the Heathen Thus
lifted I up my prayer from the earth, and prayed for deliverance from death,
I called upon the Lord my father, that he would not leave me without help in
the day of my trouble, and in ye time of the proud. I praised thy name
continually yeldyng honor and thanks unto it, and so my prayer was hard.
Thou sauedest me from destruction and deliueredest me from ye unrighteous
time. Therefore will I acknowelage, and praise thee, and magnify the name of
the LORD When I was yet but young, or cun I went a straye, I desired wisdom
openly in my prayer. I came therefore before the temple and I sought her very
busyly. The^ flourished she unto me, as a grape that is sone ripe. My heart
reioysed in her, then went my foot the right way, yea from my youth sought I
after her, I bowed down mine ear and received her. I tounde in my self much
wisdom and prospered greatly in her. Therefore will I ascribe the glory
unto him that gives me wisdom, for I am advised to do thereafter, I will
be gelouse to cleue unto the thing that is good so shall I not be confounded.
My soul has wresstled with her, and I have been di^igent to be occupied in
her I lift up mine hands on high the^ was my soul lightened through
wisdom, that I knowelaged my foolishnes. I ordered my soul after her, she and
I were one heart from the beginning, and I found her in clennesse: and
therefore shall I not be forsaken. My heart longed after her and I gat a good
treasure. Through her the Lord has given me a new tongue: wherewith I will
praise him Oh come unto me ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of wisdom,
withdraw not youreselues from her, but talk and comen of these things: for
your souls are very thurstye. I opened my mouth and spoke. Oh come and bye
wisdom without money, bow down your neck under her yoke: and your soul
shall receive wisdom: she is hard at hand and is content to be found. Behold
with your eyes, how I have had but little labor: and yet have found much
rest. Oh receive wysdom, and ye shall have plenty of silver and gold in
possession. Let your mind rejoice in his mercy: and be not ashamed of his
praise: work his work by times and he shall give you your reward in due
time.

The prayer of Abacuc Prophet for ignorauncy. Abacuc. 3.
O Lord when I heard speak of thee, then I was afraid. The work that thou
have taken in hand, shalt thou perform in his time. Oh Lord when thy time
comes: thou shall declare it. In thy very wrath thou thynkest upon mercy.
The Lord God is my strength: he shall make my feate as ye feet of hearts,
and he which gives the victory shall bring me to my hye places syngyng upon
my psalms. Amen.

The prayer of our Lord Jesus which he taught his discyples, Math. 6.
Our father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them that trespace against us.
And let us not be led into temptacion. But deliver us from evil: for thine
is the kingdom, and the power: and the glory for ever. Amen.

A prayer of the faithful congregation that they may speak the word of God
boldly. Acts. 4.
LOrd thou art God, which have made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in
them is, which by ye mouth of thy servant David haste said: why did the
heathen rage, and the people ymagyne vain things? The kings of the earth
stood up and the rulers came together against the Lord and against Christ.
For of a truth against this holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed: both
Herod and also Pontius Pylate with the Gentyles and the people of Israel
gathered them selves together, to do even what soever thine hands and thy
counsel determined before to be dooen. And now Lord behold their
threatenynges, and grant unto thy servants with al confidence to speak thy
word, and that thou stretche forth thine hand to the intent that healyng:
signs and wonders may be dooen by the name of thy holy child Jesus. Amen.

A prayer of Christ unto his father for his little ones which trust and repose
theimselues upon him. Johan. 17.
FAther the hour is come, glorify thy son: that thy son may glorify
thee: as thou have given him power over all flesh, yt he should give
everlasting life, to as many as thou haste given him. This is life everlasting:
that they might know thee that only very God and whom thou haste sent Jesus
Christ. I have glorified thee on the earth. I have finyshed the work,
which you gave me to do. And now glorify me, thou father: with thine own
self, with the glory which I had with thee ear the world was. I have
declared thy name unto the men which thou gave me of the world. Thine
they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept my sayenges. Now they
know that all things what soever thou gave me, are of thee, for I have
given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received
them, and know surely, that I came out from the, and they believed that thou
dedest send me. I pray for the^. I pray not for ye world, but for them which
thou have given me, for they are thine and all mine are thine, and thine are
mine, and I am glorified in them. And now am I no more in the world but they
are in the world: and come unto thee. Holy father keep in thine own name
them which thou haste given me, that they may be one: as we are, while I
was with them in the world. I kept them in thy name Those that thou gave
me have I kept, and none of them is lost: but that lost child, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled. Now come I to thee: and these words spoke I
in the world, that they might have my joy full in them. I have given them
thy words, and the world has hated them, even as I am not of the world.
I desire not that thou should take them out of the world but that thou keep
them from evil. They are not of the world: as I am not of the world.
Sanctify them with thy truth. Thy saying is true As thou sentest me into
the world, even so have I sent them into the world. And for their sakes
sanctify I myself, that they also might be sanctified: through the truth.

I pray not for them alone, but for them also which shall believe on me,
through their preaching, that they all may be one: as thou father art in
me, and I in thee: that they may be also one in us, that the world may
believe that thou haste sent me. And that glory that thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one: as we are one. I in them and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, and the world may know that thou
haste sent me, and haste loved them: as thou haste loved me. Father, I will
that they which thou haste given me, be with me where I am, that they may
see my glory: which thou haste given me. For thou louedest me, before the
making of the world. Oh ryghteouse father, the very world has not known
thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou haste sent me.
And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it that the love
wherewith thou haste loved me: be in them, and I in them.

CERTAIN Psalms picked forth very mete for daily prayers unto God.
To be delivered from the ungodly that we peryshe not with them, that
endeuer theimselues by all means; to withdraw us from the way of truth and
that all good men, may continuallye be enuironued with Gods proteccion.

The prayer of David. Psalm. 5.
HEAR my words (O Lord) considre my calling oh mark the voice of my
peticion: my king and my God. For unto thee, will I make my prayer. Hear my
voice by times (oh Lord), for early in the morning, will I get me unto thee:
yea and that with diligence, for thou art not the GOD that have pleasure in
wickedness, there may no ungodly person dwell with thee. Such as be cruel
may not stand in thy sight thou art an enemy unto all wicked dooers. Thou
destroyest the liars, the Lord abhors the bloudthurstye: and the
deceytefull. But I O Lord will come into thy house, trustyng upon the
multitude of thy mercy. And reverently will make my supplicacion in thy holy
temple. Conduyse me, Oh Lord) in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies
and make thy way plain before me. For there is no faythfulnesse in their
mouths: they dissemble in their hearts their throat is an open grave, with
their tongues they practyse deceytes. Punysh them (Oh God) that they may
peryshe in their own imaginacions, cast them out because of the multitude
of their ungodliness: for they rebel against thee. Again, let all them
that put their trust in thee: rejoice, yea, let them ever be geuyng of
thanks, because thou defendest them, that they which love thy name, may be
joyful in thee. For thou Lord geuest thy blessyng unto the ryghteous, and
with thy favorable kyndnesse thou defendest him as with a shylde.

To escape Gods wrath and to obtain his mercy, thus shall thou pray with
David. Psalm. 6.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, chasten me not in thy heavy displeasure,
have mercy upon me, Oh Lord: for I am weak. Oh Lord heal me: for my bones
are all to shaken. My soul also is in great trouble, but Lord how long
will thou tarry? Turn thee (Oh Lord) and deliver my soul. Oh save me for
thy mercyes sake, for in death no man remebreth thee. Oh, who will give thee
thanks in the hell. I am weary of gronynge, every night wash I my bed and
water my couch with my tears. My countenance is changed for very inward
gryefe. I consume away. I have so many enemies. Away from me all ye wicked
dooers, for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, the Lord has
heard mine humble peticyon, the Lord has received my prayer. All mine
enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed, yea they shall be turned back
and put to shame, and that right soon.

If thou be falsely belyed, and maligned of thine aduersarye, accustom
thyselfe unto this prayer of David, which he song unto the Lord, upon the
words of the son of Iemini. Psalm. 7.
O Lord my God: in thee do I trust, save me from all them that persecute
me, and deliver me least he catches up my soul like a lion: and tear it in
pieces, while there is none to help. Oh Lord my God, if I have dooen any such
thing if there be any unrighteousness in my hands: if I have rewarded evil
unto them that has dealte friendly with me, or hurt them that without any
cause are mine enemies: then let mine ennemy persecute my soul and take me,
yea let him tread my life down in the earth, and lay mine honor in the
duste. Stand up (O Lord) in thy wrath: lift up thy self over the furious
indignacion of mine enemies, arise up for me in the vengeance that thou have
promised, that the assemblye of the people may come about thee: for their
sakes therefore lift up thyselfe again. The Lord is judge over the people:
avenge me then (Oh Lord) a cordyng to my righteousness and innocence. Oh
let the wickedness of the ungodly come to an end, but maintain the just:
thou ryghteous God that tryest the very hearts and raynes: my help comes
of God: which preserve them that are true of heart. God is a ryghteous judge,
and God is ever threatenyng, if men will not turn: he has whet his
swearde: he has bent his bow, and made it ready. He has prepared him the
weapons of death and ordained his arrows to destroy. Behold: this fellow
trauayleth with mischief, he has conceived vnhappenes, and brought forth a
lie. He has graven and dygged up a pytte, but he shall fall himself into the
hole that he has made. For his unhappiness shall come upon his own head, and
his wyckednes shall fall upon his own pate. As for me I will give thanks unto
the Lord, for his ryghteousnes sake, And will praise the name of the Lord the
most high.

A sanctifieng for the mercy of God showed us in temptacions and adversities
and for the marvelous subversion and destruction of our adversaries. Psalm. 9.
Will give thanks unto thee, I (O Lord) with my hole heart. I will speak of
all thy marvelous works, I will be glad and rejoice in thee, yea my songs
will I make of thy name. Oh thou most highest. Because thou haste driven mine
enemies a bake, they were discomfyted, and peryshed at thy presence For thou
haste mainteyned my right and my quarrel, thou syttest in ye trone and art the
true judge. Thou rebukeste the Heathen and destroyest the ungodly: thou put
out their name for ever. The enemies sweardes are come to an end, thou haste
overthrown their cities, their name is perysshed with them. But ye Lord
endures for ever, he has prepared his seat unto judgment. He governs
the world with ryghteousnes, and ministers true judgment unto the people.
The Lord is a defense, he is for the poor a defense in the time of trouble.
Therefore they that know thy name, put their trust in thee. For thou (oh Lord)
never faylest them yt seeks thee. Oh praise ye the Lord which dwells in
syon: show the people of his doings: and why, he makes in quisicion for
their blood, and remembers them. He forgets not ye complaynte of the
poor. Have mercy upon me (Oh Lord) consydre the trouble, that I am in among
mine enemies, thou that lyftest me up from the gates of death that I may show
thy praises wtin the ports of ye doughghter of Syon and rejoice in thy saving
health. As for the heathen: they are sonken down in the pyt that they made yea
in the same net which they spread out pryuely is their own feet taken Thus
the Lord is known to execute true judgment, when the ungodly is trapped in
the works of his own hands. So he is. The wicked be turned unto hell, and
all the heathen that forget God. But the poor shall never be out of
remembrance, neither shall the pacient abidyng of such as be in trouble,
peryshe for ever. Arise Lord, let no man have the upper hand, let the
heathen be condemned before thee. Oh Lord set a scolemaister over them, yt
the heathen may know theimselues to be but me^

A lamentacyon and waylinge unto God, while Antechrist triumphs and sleeth
the holy ones of God, persecuteth the Gospel. Pfal. 10.
WHy art thou gooen so far of, O Lord, will thou hyde thyselfe (...) their
heart is sure, that thine ear herkeneth thereto, help the fatherles and poor
unto their right that the ungodly be no more exalted upon earth.

That we be not wrapped in the blyndnes of the wicked, and that we perish
not for ever. Psalm. 13.
HOW long will thou forgette me. Oh Lord, will thou forgette me for ever? How
long will thou hyde thy face fro me, O how long shall I toss counsailles in
my mind? how long shall I be thus vexed in my heart? How long shall mine
enemy triumph over me? Consider and hear me Oh lord my God lighten mine
iyes, that I sleep not in death, least mine enemy say, I have prevailed
against him, for if I be cast down, they that trouble me will rejoice at it.
But my trust is in thy mercy and my heart is joyful in thy saving health. I
will sing praises of thee O Lord, yt dealest so louyngly with me

That the heavenly father will not suffer us to shrink at so mighty
adversaries and so cruelly pursuing which floue full of pleasures of the
world thus we may pray with the Prophet praiyng in the person of Christ.
Psalm. 17.
HEAR mine innocence (Oh Lord) consydre my complain hearken unto my prayer,
that gooth not out of a feigned mouth, let my doom come forth from thy presence
and look upon ye thing that is egail Thou have proved and visited my heart in
the night season, thou have tried me in the fire, and have found no wickedness
in me, for I utterly purposed yt my mouth should not offend. Because of ye
words of thy lips, I have kept me from the works of men, from the ways
of perverse persons Direct my gooynges into thy paths that my fotsteppes
slip not, for unto thee I cry. Hear me oh God, enclyne thine ears unto me,
and herke^ unto my words. Show thy marvelous loving kyndenes, thou that
sauest such as put their trust in thee From such as resist thy righthande
keep me as the apple of an iye. Defend me under the shadow of thy wings,
from the ungodly that trouble me, from mine enemies which compass my soul
round about which maintein their own welthynesse with oppression, and their
mouth speaks proud things. They lie waytyng in our way on every side,
tournyng their iyes down to the ground like as a lion yt is gredy of his
pray, and as it were a lions whelpe, lurkyng in his den. Arise Lord
disappoint him, and cast him down deliver my soul with thy swearde from the
ungodly with thy hand O Lord reseue me from the men of this world, which
have their portion in this life whose bellies thou fillest with thy treasure.
They have children at their desire and leave the rest of their substance for
their babes, well I will behold thy presence in righteousness, and when thy
glory appears, I shall be satisfied

With much affiaunce of heart upon God, a prayer for sins and for the
grauntyng of his holy spirit, for it is not possible but GOD will hear us a
cordyng to Christ's promise in the Gospel. Psalm. 25.
Unto to thee (Oh Lord) I lift up my soul. My God I trust in thee, let me
not be confounded, least mine enemies brag over me. For no doubt all they
that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed, but such as be scornful despisers
without a cause, they shall be put to shame. Show me thy ways, Lord and
teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy troth and teach me, for thou art the
God of my health, and in thee is my hope all the day long. Call to
remembrance, oh Lord, thy tender mercies and thy loving kyndnes, which have
been ever since the beginning Remember not the sins and offenses of my
youth but a cordyng to thy mercy think upon me, oh lord, for thy goodness.
Oh how friendly and righteous is ye Lord, therefore will he bring again sinners
into the way, he leads the simple a right and such as be meke the^ he
instructs his ways. All the ways of the Lord, are very mercy and
faithfulness, unto such as keep his testament and covenant. For thy names
sake, oh lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. What soever he
be that fearethe the Lord he shall show him the way, that he has chosen.
His soul shall dwell at ease, and his sede shall possess the land. The
secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and he shows them his
couenaunte. Mine iyes are ever lokyng unto the Lord, for he shall pluck my
fete out of ye net. Turn thee unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am
desolate and in misery. The sorrows of my heart are great wherefore bring me
out of my troubles, look upon mine aduersite and misery and forgive me all my
sins Considre how mine enemies are many, and bear malicious hate against me.
O keep my soul and deliver me, let me not be confounded for I have put my
trust in thee. Let innocency and righteous dealyng wait upon me, for my hope
is in thee. Deliver Israel, O God out of all his distress.

In the affliction or passion both of the spirit and of the flesh, thus may
we pray with Christ and with ye godly Psalm. 31:
IN thee, O Lord is my trust, let me never be put to shame, but deliver me
in thy righteousness. Bowdoune thine ear to me, make have to deliver me, be
thou my strong rock, and a walled house, that thou may save me For thou art
my strong hold and my castle, wherefore be thou my God, and co^ducte me for
thy names sake. Draw me out of the net, that they have laid privily for me,
for thou art my strength. Into thine hands I commend my spirit thou have
delivered me oh Lord thou God of truth I hate them that hold of vanities, and
my trust is in the Lord I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou
have considered my trouble, thou have known my soul in adversity. Thou have
not cast me over, into the hands of the enemies, but haste set my fete in a
large room. Have mercy upon me Oh Lord for I am in trouble, mine iyes is
censumed for very heuines, yea my soul and my body. My life is consumed with
heuenesse, and my years with mournyng. My strength fails me because of mine
adversity, and my bones are dried up, I am become a very reproach among all
mine enemies my neighbors and they of mine own acquaintance are afraied of
me, they that seem in the street, convey theimselues from me, I am cleave
forgotten and out of mind even as a dedde manne. Lo I am become like a broken
vessel For I have heard the sklenderous reapportes of the multitude, every
manne abhors me, they have gathered a counsel together against me, and
are purposed to take away my life. But my hope is in the Lord, and I say
thou art my God. My days are in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine
enemies, and from them that persecute me. Show thy servant ye light of thy
countinaunce help me for thy mercies sake, let me not be confounded, O
Lord, for I call upon thee, but let the ungodly rather be put to
confusion, and brought unto the pit, let the liyng lips be put to silence,
which cruelly disdainfully, and despitefully speak against the righteous. O
how great and manifold be the good things which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee? How great things bryngest thou to pass for them that
put their trust in thee, in the sight of the soonnes of men? Thou hidest
the^ in ye secrets of thy countenance from the proud men, you kepest their
secretly in thy tabernacle from the strief of toungues. Thanks be given to
the lord who has showed me marvelous great kyndnes out of the strong city.
For when ye soudain fear came upon me, I said I am cast out of thy sight.
Nevertheless thou hardest mine humble prayer, when I cried unto thee. Wherefore
love the Lord (all ye his saints) for the Lord preserves the faithful and
plenteously acquiteth ye proud dooers. Be strong therefore and take a good
heart unto you all ye that put your assiaunce in the LORD.

A sanctifiyng of GOD, for that the earth is full of his mercy, and that by
his mighty word he wrought all thing. Psalm. 33.
Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous, for it becomes well ye just to be
thankful. Praise the Lord with harp. Sing Psalms unto him with the lute
and instrument of ten strings. Sing him a new song, yea sing to him with good
courage. For the word of the Lord is true, and all his works are sure. He
loves mercy and judgment the earth is full of the Lords goodness. By the
word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all ye furniture of them by the
breath of his mouth. He gathers the waters together as it were in a bottell
and laid up the deep in secret. Let all the earth fear the Lord, and let
all them that dwell in the world, stand in awe of him. For what he says, is
dooen and what he commands stands fast. The Lord disperseth the
counsel of the Heathen, and makes frustrate the devices of ye people. But
his own cou^saill endures for ever, and the thoughts of his heart from
generation to generation. Blessed are ye people that hold the Lord for their
God, and blessed are the folk who^ he has chosen to be his heritage. The
Lord looks down from heaven, and beholds all the children of men. From
his strong seat he considers al the^ that dwell in ye world. He only has
fashioned all the hearts of them and knows all their works. A king is not
helped by his own great host neither is a gyaunte saved through ye might of
his own strength. A horse is but a vain thing to save a man, it is not the
power of his strength yt that can deliver him. Behold ye iyes of the Lord
be fixed upon their that fear him, and repose theimselues in his mercy That
he may deliver their souls from death, and feed them in the dear time. Let
our soul patiently abide the Lord, for he is our help and shylde. So shall
our heart rejoice in him, because we have hoped in his holy name Let thy
merciful kyndnes, O Lord, be upon us like as we have reposed our trust in
thee.

A stablisheme^t of the mind against such as slander us that we again
vpbrayde not them which thing is the great gift of God. Psalm. 39.
I Was determined to keep my ways that I offend not in my toungue, and so I
shut my mouth While the ungodly lay in a wait for me, I held my toungue, I
was dome, I kept silence, for a good purpose, but it was pain and grief unto
me. My heart was hot within me, (...) myes, and in his truth shall he destroy
them. Wherefore I will offer unto thee, and praise thy name. Oh Lord, because
it is so comfortable, for thou have delivered me out of all my trouble, so
that mine eye sees his desire upon mine enemies.

That being lightened with Gods grace we may know here in earth the way
that leads to God whithe is a sure confydence upon God and charity toward
the neighbor. Psalm. 67.
GOD be merciful unto us, bless us, and show the light of his countenance
upon us. That we may know thy way upon earth, thy saving health among all
heathen. Let the people praise thee O God, yea let all people praise thee.
Let the people rejoice and be glad, for that thou iudgest the folk
ryghteouslye, and gouernest the nations upon earth. Let the people praise
thee, Oh God, let all people praise thee. God, even our own god, gives us
his blessyng, that the earth m^^e bring forth her increase. God blesses us,
and let all the ends of the world fear him.

Against Antechrist pursuynge and kyllyng the holy ones of God and defilyng
the mysteries of Gods word. Psalm. 79.
OH God the heathen have invaded thine heritage, ye holy temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones. The dead bodies of thy
servants have they given unto the fowls of the air to be devoured, and the
flesh of thy holy ones unto the beasts of the land Their blood have they
shed like water on every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to burye
them, we are become an open shame unto our enemies, a very scorn and
verision unto them that are round about us Lord: how long will thou be
angry, shall thy gelousye burn like fire for ever? Power out thy indignacion
upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the kingdoms: that call not upon
thy name, For they have devoured Jacob, and laid wast his dwelling place. Oh,
remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for we
are come to great mysery Help us, Oh God, our sauyoure for the glory of thy
name. Deliver us and forgive us our sins for thy names sake. Wherefore shall
the Heathen say, where is now their God? Let the vengeance of thy
servants blood that is shed, be openly showed upon the Heathen in our
syghte. Let the sorrowful sighing of ye prisoners come before thee, and
acordyng to the strength of thine arm, preserve those that are appointed to
dye. And for the blasphemye wherewith our neighbors have blasphemed thee,
reward them Oh Lord: seven fold into their bosom. So we that be the
people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever, and will
always be showing forth thy praise more and more.

A prayer and yeldynge of thanks for that we be redeemed by Christ from
eternal death. Psalm. 86.
Bow down thine ear, Oh Lord, and hear me: For I am confortles and poor.
Keep my soul, for I am gyltlesse. Oh my God help thy servant that puts
his trust in thee. Be merciful unto me, Oh Lord: for I call daily upon
thee. Comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee Oh Lord, do I lift
up my soul. For thou Lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all
them that call upon thee. Give ear Lord unto my prayer, and ponder my humble
desire. In the time of my trouble I call upon thee, for thou hear me. Among
the gods there is none like unto thee. Oh Lord, there is not one that can do
as thou dooest All nations whom thou haste made, shall come and worship before
thee, Oh Lord, and shall glorify thy name For thou art great, thou dooest
wondrous things: thou art God alone Lead me in thy way, oh Lord that I
may walk in thy truth. Oh let my heart be light in fearing thy name. I
thank thee, oh Lord my god and will praise thy name for ever. For great is thy
mercy toward me, thou haste delivered my soul from ye nethermoste hell. O God
the proud are risen against me, and the congregation of the mighty seeks
after my soul, and set not thee before their eyes But thou, oh Lord God, art
full of compassion, and mercy, long sufferyng, great in goodness and truth.
Turn thee O Lord: unto me, have mercy upon me, give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thine handmayd, Show some token upon me for
good, yt they which hate me may see it: and be ashamed because thou Lord
haste helped me, and comforted me.

When we be clean put out of all comfort, we may pray with the prophet
in the person of Christ. Psalm. 88.
OH Lord God my sauyoure, I cry day and night before thee Let my prayer
enter into thy presence: enclyne thine ear unto my calling. For my soul is
full of trouble, and my life draws nigh unto hell I am counted as one of them,
that goo down unto the pytte. I am even as a man that has no strength. I
am found among the dead, like unto them that lie in the grave. Which be
out of remembrance and are cut away by thy hand. Thou haste driven me into
the low pytte, into darkness out of which can no man wade Thy displeasur
lies hard upon me and thou vexest me with all thy floudes. Thou haste put
away mine acquayntaunce far fro me, and made me to be abhorred of them. I
am so fast in prysone, that I can not get forth. My syghte fails for
very trouble, Lord I call daily upon thee, and stretche out my hands unto
thee Do thou show wonders amongst the dead? Can the phisycions raise them
up again: that they may praise thee? May thy loving kyndnesse be showed in
the grave, or thy faythfulnesse in destruccyon? May thy wonderouse works be
known in the dark, or thy righteousness: in the land where all things are
forgotten Unto thee I cry, Oh Lord, and earlye comes my prayer before the
Lord why put thou away my soul? Wherefore hydest thou thy face from me? My
strength is gooen for very misery, with fearfulness do I bear thy burdens.
Thy wrathful displeasure gooeth over me: the fear of thee oppresses me. They
come round about me daily like water, and compass me together on every side.
My lovers and friends haste thou put away from me, and turned away mine
acquayntaunce.

A bewaylyng of our corrupt nature and of the misery of this life, by reason
of sin. Psalm. 93.
LORD, thou art our refuge from one generacio^ to an other Before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made:
thou art God everlasting and world without end. Thou iournest men to
destruccyon again, thou say come again: ye children of men. For a
thousand year in thy sight are but as yester day that is paste, and like as it
were a night watch. As Soon as thou scatrest them they are even as a sleep,
and fade away suddenly like grass. In the morning it is grene and grows up,
but in the euenyng it is cut down and wythered. For we consume away in thy
displeasure, and are afraid at thy wrathful indignacion. Thou set our
misdedes before thee, and our secret sins in the sight of thy countenance.
For when thou art angry, all our days are gone. We bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told. The days of our age are about.iii.
score years and ten, and though men be so strong that they come to four
score years, yet is their strength then but labor and sorrow: so sone passes
it away, and we are gone. But who regards the power of thy wrath? thy
fearful and terrible displeasure? O teach us too nombre our days, that we
may apply our hearts to wisdom. Turn thee again (O Lord) at the last,
and be gracious unto thy servants. Oh satisfye us with thy mercy: and that
sone: so shall we rejoice and be glad all the days of our life. Comfort us
again, now after the time that thou haste plaged us, nnd for the years
wherein we have suffered adversity. Show thy servants thy work, and
their children thy glory And the glorious majesty of the Lord our God be
upon us. Prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, prosper thou our
handye work.

A sanctificacion of the Lords name for that he made all things, and all be
in his hand. Psalm. 95.
OH come let us praise the Lord let us heartely rejoice in the strength of
our salvation. Let us come before his presence with thankesgeuyng, and show
ourselfes glad in him with psalms. For the Lord is a great God, and a great
king above all gods. In his hand are all the corners of the earth and the
strength of the hyls is his also. The sea is his, for he made it and his hands
prepared the dry land. Oh come let us woorship and bow down ourselves let
us knele before the Lord our maker. For he is our God, and we are the people
of his pastur, and the sheep of his hands. To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts as when ye provoked me in time of temptacion in the
wilderness, where your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw ray works.
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, they ever erred
in their hearts, they verily have not known my ways. Therefore I said unto
them in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.

Whiles we seem to be in the mids of tribulacion and forsaken of men yea
and of God also. Psalm. 102.
Hear my prayer (O Lord) and let my crying come unto thee Hyde not thy face
from me in the time of my trouble. Inclyne thine ears unto me, when I call,
hear me, and that right sone. For my days are consumed away, like as it
were a fire brande. My heart is smytten down and wythered like grass, so yt
I forgette to eat my bread. For the voice of my gronyng my bones will scarce
cleue to my flesh. I am become like a pellicane in ye wilderness, and like an
hole in the broken wall. I wake, and am even as it were a sparowe, sytting
alone upon ye house top Mine enemies reuyle me all the day long. they laugh
me to scorn and are sworn together against me. I eat ashes with my bread:
and myngle my drink with weeping. And yt because (...) The children of thy
servants shall continue, and their sede shall prospere in thy sight.

A merry thankesgeuyng for all the benefits conferred unto us by Christ Psalm.
103.
Praise the Lord, oh my soul and all that is within me, prase his holy name.
Praise ye Lord oh my soul, and forgette not all his benefits which
forgeuethe all thy sins, and heals all thine infirmeties. Which saves thy
life from destruction, and crouneth thee with mercy and with loving kyndenes.
Which satisfies thy desire with good things, making thee, young and lusty as
an egle. The Lord executes righteousness and judgment for all them that
suffer wrong. He showed his ways unto Moses, and his works unto the children
of Israel. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long sufferyng and of
great goodness. He will not alwaie be chydyng, neither will he keep his anger
for ever. He has not delte with us after our sins, nor rewarded us acordyng
to our wyckednes. For look how high the heaven is in comparion of the
earth: so great is his mercy also toward them that fear him, look how
wide the east is from the west: so far has he set our sins from us. Yea
like as a father pittieth his own children, even so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him. For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers
that we are but duste. That a man in his time is but as grass, and
flourishes as a flower in the field. For as soon as the wind gooeth over it:
it is gone and the place thereof knows it no more But the merciful goodness
of the Lord endures for ever, upon them that fear him, and his righteousness
upon their chyldrens children. Namely to such as keep his couenaunte and
think upon his commandments to do them. The LORD has prepared his seat
in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all. Praise the Lord ye his angels,
ye that be mighty in strength, fulfillyng his commandment that men may
have the voice of his words. Praise the Lord all ye his hosts ye servants
of his yt do his pleasure. Oh speak good of the Lord all ye his work: in
every place of his dominion: Praise thou the Lord o my soul.

An other geuyng of thanks and praise. Psalm. 104.
Praise the Lord o my soul, O lord my God thou art become excedyng glorious,
thou art clothed with majesty and honor. Thou deckest thyself with light as
it were with a garment: you spredest out the heaven like a curtain. Thou voltest it
above with waters, thou make ye clouds the chariottes, and gooeste upon the
wings of the wind. Thou make thy angels spirits, and thy ministers
flames of fire. Thou have laid the earth upon her foundation, that it never
moves at any time. Thou couerest it with the deep like as with a garment: so
that the waters stand above the hills. But at thy rebuke they fly, at the
voice of thy thoundre they are a fraied. Then are the hills seen alofte, and
the valleys beneth in their place, which thou have appointed for them Thou
have set them their bounds which they may not pass, that they turn not
again to cover the earth. Thou causest the wells to spryng up among the
valies, and the waters to run among the hills that all beasts of the field
may have drink, and that the wild asses may quench their thriste. Above
upon the hills, have ye fowls of the air their inhabitacion, and sing among
the branches. Thou watrest the hills from above, the earth is filled with the
fructes of thy works. Thou bryngeste forth grass for the cattle, and grene
herbs for the service of me^ne. Thou bryngest fode out of the earth, wine to
make glad ye heart of man, oil to make him a cherfull countenance and
bread to strength man's heart. The trees of the Lord are full of sap even the
trees of Libanus, which he has planted. There make the birds their nestes,
and the fur trees are a dwelling for ye storke. The hills are a refuge for
the wild gootes, and so are the stony rocks, for the conyes. Thou have
appointed the moon for certain seasons. The son knows his gooyng down.
Thou make derkenesse that it may be night, where in all the beasts of the
foreste do move, yea and the young lions, which roar after their pray, and
seek their meat at GOD. But when the sun does arise, they get them
away together, and lie them down in their dens. Then gooeth manne forth to
his work, and to tille his land unto the euenyng. Oh Lord how manifold are
thy works, right wisely have thou made them all. yea the earth is full of
thy riches. So is this great and wide sea also, where in are things creapyng
innumerable, both small and great beasts. There goo the ships over, and
there is that leuiathan, whom thou haste made to take his pastime therein They
wait all upon thee that thou may give the^ meat in due season. When thou
geuest it the^ they gather it, when thou openest thy hand, they are filled
with good. But when thou hidest thy face, they are sorofull. If thou take
away their breath, they dye, and are turned again to their duste. Again when
thou letteste thy breathe gooe forth, they are made, and so thou renewest the
face of the earth. The gloriouse majesty of the Lord endures for ever, and
the Lord reioyseth in his works. The earth trembles at the look of him, he
does but touch the hills, and they smoke, I will sing unto the Lord, as long
as I live, I will praise my God, while I have my being. Oh that my words
might please him, for my joy is in the Lord. As for sinners they shall be
consumed out of the earth, and ye ungodly shall come to an end, but praise
thou the Lord, oh my soul.

A halowyng and praysyng of the Lord that he meruelously anaunseth his, as
well in heaven as in earth. Psalm. 113.
PRaise the lord (o ye servants of the Lord) praise the name of the LORD.
Bless the name of the Lord, from this time forth, for ever more. The Lords
name is worthy to be praised, from the risyng of the sun until the gooyng
down of the same. The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory is above
the heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling so
high, which humbles himself, to behold that is dooen in heaven and in
earth. Which takes up the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out
of the mire. That he may set him among the princes even among the princes of
his people Which makes the baren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful
mother of children.

A commendacion of the Lords mercy that he has vouchsaue to call us Gentiles
and Heathen persons unto his faith. Psalm. 117.
Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles laud him all ye people. For his merciful
kindness is ever more and more toward us, and the troth of the LORD endures
for ever. Praise the everlasting.

A prayer that God himself may led rule, teach, and direct us in his way in
his precepts and in his Gospel, and that he may keep us from the doctrine
and tradicions of men. Psalm. 119.
BLessed are those that be undefiled in ye way, which walk in the law of
the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies and seek him with their
hole heart. Which walk in his ways and do no wickedness. Thou haste
given straight charge, to keep thy commandments. Oh that my ways were
stablished to keep thy statutes, so should I not be confounded. Wyle I have
respect unto all thy commandments, I will thank thee with an unfeigned
heart. Because I am learned in thy judgments of thy righteousness I will keep
thy statutes, oh forsake me not utterly. Wherewithal shall a young manne
cleanse his way even by rulynge himself after thy word. Wherefore with my
whole heart do I seek thee. Let me not goo astraie out of thy
commandments, thy words have I hid in my heart that I should not sin
against thee. Praised be thou o Lord Oh teach me thy statutes. With my lips
will I be tellyng out all the judgments of thy mouth. I have as great
delight in the way of thy testimonies as in all manner of riches. I will
exercise myself in thy commandments, and have respect unto thy foot
paths. My delight shall be in thy statutes, I will not forget thy words. Oh
do well unto thy servant yt I may live and keep thy words. Open thou mine
iyes, and so shall I espy out wounderous things in thy law, I am a stranger
upon earth. Hide not thy commandments fro me. My soul breketh out, for the
very fervent desire yt I have alwaie unto thy judgments. Thou rebukest the
proud cursed are they yt depart from thy commandments. Oh turn fro me
shame and rebuke, for I keep thy testimonies. Princes also sit and speak
against me, but thy servant is occupied in thy statutes In thy testimonies is
my delighte, they are my cou^sailers. My soul cleaves to the dust, but
quicke^ thou me a cordyng to thy word. I knowlaged my ways, and thou herdest
me. Wherefore teach me thy statutes. Make me to understand the way of thy
commandments, and so shall I talk of thy wounderous works My soul melts
away for very heuenes. Set me up a cordyng to thy word. Take fro me the
way of liyng, and grant me thy law, I have chosen the way of truth, thy
judgments have I laid be for me. I stycke unto thy records, Oh Lord
confound me not.

I will run in the way of thy commandments, when thou have conforted my
heart. Teach me oh lord the way of thy ordinances, and I shall keep it
unto the end. Give me understanding and I shall keep thy law Yea I shall keep
it with my hole heart Lead me in the path of thy commandments, for that is
my desire. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies. and not to coueteousnes. Oh
turn away mine iyes, lest they behold vanity, and quicken me in thy wais.
Stablishe thy word in thy servant, yt I may fear thee. Take away the
rebuke that I am afraid of. For thy judgments are amiable. Behold my delight
is in thy commandments. Oh quicken me in thy righteousness. Let thy loving
mercy come unto me Oh Lord, and thy saving health a cording to thy word. That
I may give answer unto my blasphemers, for my trust is in thy word. Take
not the word of troth utterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in thy
judgments. So shall I alwaie keep thy law: yea for ever and ever. And I will
walk in thy liberty, for I seek thy commandments. I will speak of thy
testimonies even before kings, and will not be ashamed. My delight shall be in
thy commandments which I love. My hands also will I lift up unto thy
commandments which I love and my talkyng shall be of thy statutes. Think
upon thy servant, as concerning thy word, wherein thou have caused me to
put my trust. For it is my confort in my trouble, yea thy word quickenethe
me. The proud has me greatly in derision, yet shrynke not I from thy law, I
remember thine everlasting judgments, oh Lord, and am comforted. I am
horribly affride for the ungodly, that forsake thy law. Thy statutes are my
songs in the house of my pylgrimage. I rhynke upon thy name, Oh Lord, in the
right season and keep thy law. And I pray thee let this chance unto me that
I may keep thy commandments. Thou art my portion Oh LORD, I am purposed to
keep thy law I make my humble peticion in thy presence, with my whole heart,
Oh be merciful a cordyng unto thy word. I call mine own ways to
remembrance and turn my fete into thy records. I make haste and prolonge not
the time, to keep thy commandments The congregacions of the ungodly have
robbed me, but I forgette not thy law. At midnighte stand I up to give
thanks unto thee, for the judgments of thy righteousness. I am a
compaignion of all that fear thee, and keep thy commandments. The earth,
Oh Lord, is full of thy mercy, teach me thy statutes Oh Lord thou have
dealte frendely with thy servant, a cordynge unto thy word. Teach me thy
kyndenesse, nourtour and knowlage, for I believe thy commandments. Before I
was troubled, I went wrong, but now I keep thy word. Thou art good and
friendly, wherefore of that thy goodness teach me thy statutes. The proud imagine
lies upon me, but I keep thy commandments with my whole heart. Their heart
is congeled as a lou^p of fat, but my delighte is in thy law. It is good for
me that I have been in trouble, that I may learn thy statutes. The law of thy
mouth is dearer unto me, then thousands of gold and silver. Thy hands have
made me and fashioned me, give me understanding, that I may learn thy
commandments. They that fear thee, will be glad when they see me, because
I put my trust in thy word. I know Oh Lord, that thy judgments are right,
and that you of very faithfulness haste caused me to be troubled. Oh let thy
merciful kyndnes be my conforte, a cordyng to the prom^s that you have made
unto thy servant. Let thy loving mercy come unto me, that I may live, for
thy law is my delight. Let the proud be confounded, which handle me so
falsely. But let such as fear thee, and know thy testimonies, be at one with
me. Let my heart be undefiled in thy statutes that I be not ashamed. My soul
longethe for thy saving health, for my trust is in thy word. My iyes long
sore for thy word, sayng, Oh when will thou conforte me? For I am become
like a bottell in the smoke, yet do I not forget thy statutes. How many are
the days of thy servant? when will thou be avenged of mine adversaries? The
proud have dygged pittes for me, which are not after thy law. All thy
commandments are true, they persecute me falsely, but be thou my help.
They have almost made an end of me upon earth, but I forsake not thy
commandments. Oh quycken me after thy loving kyndnesse, and so shall I keep
the records of thy mouth. Oh Lord thy word endures for ever in Heaven.
Thy truth also remains from one generation to an other, thou haste laid
the foundacyon of the earth, and it abides. They continue this day a cordyng
to thine ordinance, for all things serve thee. If my delyght were not in thy
awe, I should peryshe in my trouble. Wherefore I will never forgette thy
commandments for with them thou quyckenest me. I am thine, help me. For I
seek thy commandments. The ungodly lay wait for me, to destroy me, but I
consider thy testimonies. I se that all things come to an end but thy
commandment is exceeding broad. Oh what love have I unto thy law, all the
day long is my talkyng of it. Thou thoroughe thy commandment, haste made
me wyser then mine enemies, for it is ever by me. I have more understanding
then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my study. Yea I am wyser then
the aged, for I keep thy commandments. I refrain my fete from every evil
way, that I may keep thy words. I shrynke not from thy judgments, for
thou teach me. Oh how sweet are thy words unto my throat? Yea: more then
honey unto my mouth. Thoroughe thy commandments I get understanding:
therefore I hate all false ways. Thy word is a lantern unto my fete, and a
light unto my patthes. I have sworn and am steadfastly purposed to keep the
judgments of thy ryghtuousnesse. I am troubled above measure: quicken me, oh
Lord: a cordyng unto thy word. Let the free sacrifices of my mouth please
thee, oh lord and teach me thy judgments. My soul is always in my hand,
yet do not I forgette thy law. The ungodly have laid a snare for me, but
yet swerve not I from thy commandments. Thy testimonies have I claymed as my
heritage for ever, and why they are the very joy of my heart. I apply my
heart to fulfill thy statutes always, even unto the end, I hate the ungodly,
but thy law do I love. Thou art my defense and shield, my trust is in thy
word. Away fro me ye wicked. I will keep the commandments of my God. Oh
stablysh me a cordynge unto thy word: that I may live, and let me not be
dysapoynted of my hope. Hold thou me up: and I shall be safe, yea and I shall
ever be talking of thine ordinances. Thou treadeste down all them that
depart from thy statutes, for they ymagyne but deceyte. Thou putteste away all
the ungodly of the earth like draffe, therefore I love thy testymonies. My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am affrayed of thy judgments. I
deal with ye thing that is lawful and right. Give me not over unto mine
oppressoures. Be thou suertie for thy servant, to do him good: that the
proud do him no wrong. Mine eyes are wasted away with lookynge for thy
health, and for the word of his righteousness. Goo to, deal with thy
servant a cordyng unto thy loving mercy, and teach me thy statutes. I am thy
servant. Gh grant me understanding: yt I may know thy testimonies. It is
time for thee, Oh Lord: lay to thine hand, for they have destroyed thy law.
For I love thy commandments, above gold and preciouse stone. Therefore hold
I strayghte all thy commandments: and all false ways I utterly abhor. Thy
testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them. When thy
word gooeth forth, it gives light and understanding even unto babes. I open
my mouth and draw in my breathe, for I desire thy commandments. Oh: look
thou upon me, and be merciful, as thou use to do unto those that love thy
name. Order my gooynges after thy word, that no wickedness raygne in me.
Deliver me from the sclaunders of men, so shall I keep thy commandments.
Show the light of thy countenance unto thy servant, and teach me thy
biddynges. Mine eyes gushe out with water, because men keep not thy law.
Ryghtuouse art thou: Oh Lord, and true is thy judgment. The testimonies
that thou haste commanded: are exceadynge ryghtuouse and true. My zeal has
even consumed me, because mine enmyes have forgotten thy words. Thy word is
tried unto the vttermoste, and thy servant loves it. I am small, and of no
reputacion, yet do I not forget thy commandments. Thy righteousness is an
everlasting ryghtuousnesse, and thy law is true. Trouble and heuinesse have
taken hold upon me, yet is my delight in thy commandments. The
ryghtuousnesse of thy testimonies is everlasting, Oh grant me understanding:
and I shall live. I call with my hole heart, hear me: Oh Lord. I will keep
thy statutes. Yea: even upon thee, I do call, help me: and I shall keep thy
testimonies. Early in the morning do I cry unto thee, for in thy word is my
trust. Mine eyes preuente the might watches, that I might be occupied in
thy words. Hear my voice, Oh LORD, a cordynge unto thy loving kyndnesse,
quycken me a cordynge as thou art wont. They draw nygh, that of malice
persecute me, and are far from thy law Be thou nygh at hand also, oh Lord
for thy promyses are faithful. As concerning thy testimonies. I have known
ever sythens the beginning, that thou haste grounded them for ever. Oh
consider mine adversity, and deliver me, for I do not forget thy law Mainteyn
thou my cause, and defend me: quycken me, a cordynge unto thy word. Health is
far from the ungodly, for they regard not thy statutes. Great is thy mercy
Oh Lord, quycken me as thou art wont. Many there are that trouble me, and
pursue me, yet do not I swarne from thy records. It greueth me when I see
that the transgressoures keep not thy law. Consider, Oh Lord, how I love thy
commandments, and quicken me with thy loving kyndnes Thy word is true for
ever, all the judgments of thy ryghtuousnesse, endure for evermore. The
tyrauntes persecute me without cause, but my heart stands in awe of thy
words, I am as glad of thy word, as one that fyndeth great spoils. I hate
and abhore lies, but thy law do I love. Seven times a day do I praise thee,
becauce of thy ryghtuouse judgments. Great is the peace that they have which
love thy law: and they are not offended at it. Lord I look for thy saving
health, and do after thy commandments. My soul keeps thy records, and
loves them exceadynglye. I keep thy commandments and testimonies: for all
my ways are before thee, Let my complaynte come before thee, Oh LORD, give me
understanding a cordyng unto thy word. Let my supplicacion come before
thee: deliver me, a cordyng unto thy promise. My lypes shall speak of thy
praise, seeing thou haste taught me thy ordinances. Yea, my tongue shall sing
thy word. For all thy commandments are right, let thine hand help me:
for I have chosen thy commandments. I long for thy saving health, Oh
Lord: and in thy law is my delyght. Oh let my soul live and praise thee,
that thy judgments may help me. I gooe astraye, like a sheep that is lost,
seek thy servant, for I do not forgette thy commandments.

When we are broused and humbled in heart, and contrarywyse the world
reioyseth and triumphs. Psalm. 130.
OVte of the deep call I unto the: Oh Lord, LORD hear my voice. Let thine
ears consider well, the voice of my complaynte If thou Lord, will be
extreme to mark what is dooen amysse, oh Lord who may abide it? But there is
mercy with thee: that thou may be feared. I look for the Lord, my soul
does wait for him, and in his word is my trust. My soul does patiently
abide the Lord, from the one morning to the other. Let Israel trust in the
Lord, for with the Lord is mer^ye, and plentuous redempcyon. And he shall
redeem Israel from all his sins.

To be delivered from blood souppers, that busye theimselues to pluck us
from the way of God both by force and crafty means, and which labor to
abolyshe Gods word. Psalm. 140.
Deliver me Oh Lord, from the evil men, preserve me from the wicked men
which imagyne myschefe in their hearts, and stir up strife at all seasons.
They sharpen their tongues like a serpente adders poysone is under their
lyppes. Keep me, oh Lord, from the hand of the ungodly, preserve me from the
wycken men, which are purposed too overthrow my gooynges. The proud has
laid a snare for me, and spread a net abroad with cords, yea: and set
trappes in my way. But my saying is unto the Lord, thou art my God, hear ye
voice of my prayer: oh Lord. Oh Lord God thou strenth of my health thou have
covered my head in the day of battle. Let not the ungodly have his desire.
Oh Lord, let him not have his purpose, least he be to proud. Let the
mischeft of their own lyppes fall upon the head of them, that compass me
about Let hot burning coals fall upon them, let them be cast into the
fire, and into the pyt, that they never rise up again A man full of words
shall not prosper upon the earth, a malicyous and wicked person shall be
hunted away and destroyed. Suer I am yt the Lord will avenge the poor, and
maintain the cause of the helpless. The rightutuouse also shall give thanks
unto thy name, and the just shall continue in thy syghte.

That GOD may keep us that we sin not with our tongue, neither excuse our
sins as hypocrytes do. Psalm. 141.
LOrd, I call upon thee: haste thee unto me, and consider my voice When I cry
unto thee, let my prayer be set forth in thy sight, as incence, and let
the lyftyng up of my hands be an euenyng sacrifyce, Set a watch: Oh Lord,
before my mouth yea a watch at the door of my lyppes Oh, let not mine heart
be inclined to any evil thing, to be minded as the ungodly or wicked men,
least I eat of such things as please them Let the ryghtuouse rather smite
me frendlye: and reprove me, so will I take it, as though he had poured oil
upon my head, it shall not hurt my head, but I will pray yet for their
wickedness. Their Judges stumble at the stone, yet hear they my words. that
they be joyful. Our bones lie scatered before the pytte, like as when one
graueth and dyggeth up the ground. But mine eyes look unto thee, Oh Lord
God: in thee is my trust, cast not out my soul: keep me from the snare
which they have laid for me, and from the trappes of the wicked dooers. Let
the ungodly fall into their own nets together, until I be gooen by them.

That we may be led forth of the prison of distress, of sins and of
death unto the praise and glory of God, that we be no longer pressed upon
earth. Psalm. 146.
I Cry unto the Lord with my voice, yea even unto the Lord do I make my
supplicacion. I pour out my complaynte before him, and show him of my
trouble. When my spirit is in heaviness, for thou know my pathe, in the
way wherein I walk, have they privily laid a snare for me. I took up my
right hand, and se: there is no man that will know me. I have no place to flee
unto no man cares for my soul. Therefore do I cry unto thee: Oh Lord, and say
thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the living. Consider my
complaint, for I am brought very low, oh deliver me from my persecuters: for
they are to strong for me. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give
thanks unto thy name. Which thing if you wilt grant me, then shall ye
ryghteouse resort unto my company

When we find no merits in us, no ryghteousnes of our own, but all things
desperate. And again remember how God from the beginning of the world has
wrought wonders in his saints, and has never forsaken such as call upon
him, thus may we pray. Psalm. 143.
Hear my prayer Oh Lord, consider my desire, answer me for thy troth and
r^hteousnes sake, and enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy
syghte shall no man living be justified. For the enemy persecuteth my soul,
he smyteth my life down to the ground, he lays me in the darkness as the
dead men of the world. Therefore is my spirit vexed within me, and my heart
within me is desolate. Yet do I remember the times past, I muse upon all thy
works. Yea I exercise my self in ye works of thy hands. I stretche forth
mine hands unto thee, my soul cries unto thee, out of the thyrsty land.
Hear me Oh Lord, and that right sone, for my spirit waxes faint, hide not
thy face from me, least I be like unto them that gooe down into the grave.
Oh let me hear thy loving kyndnesse be times in the morning, for in that is
my trust, show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my
soul unto three. Deliver me (Oh Lord) from mine enemies, for I resort unto
thee. Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God:
let thy loving spirit lead me forth unto the land of ryghtuousnesse.
Quycken me Oh Lord, for thy names sake: and for thy ryghtuousnes sake, bring
my soul out of trouble. And of thy goodness scatter mine enemies abroad, and
destroy all them that vex my soul, for I am thy servant.

A thankesgeuing, that albeit we be vile, yet by the virtue of God we be
strong against all strange children that is to say, such as be not chosen
^o the inheritance of God. Psalm. 144.
BLessed be the Lord my refuge, which teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight My hope and my castle, my defense, and my delyuerer, my
shylde, in whom I trust which governs the people that is under my power.
Lord what is ma^ne, that thou have such respect unto him? or the soonne of man, yt thou so regardest him? Ma^ne is like a thing of naught, his time
passes away like a shadow. Bow thy heavens, oh Lord, and come down, touch
the mountains that they may smoke again. Send forth lightenyng and scater
them, shote out thine arowes, and consume them. Send down thine hand from
above, deliver me, and take me out of the great waters, from the hand of
strange children. Whose mouth talkyeth of vanity, and their right hand is
all falshed. That I may sing a new song unto thee, oh God, and sing praises
unto thee upon a ten strynged lute. Thou that geuest victory unto kings, and
have delivered David thy servant from the peril of the sword. Save me and
deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth talks of vanity,
and their right hand, is a righ hand of falshed, that our soonnes may grow
up like young plants, a that our daughters may be as the polished corners
of the temple. That our garments may be full and ple^teouse with all manner
of store, that our sheep may bring forth thousands, and hundredth thousa^des,
in our vilages. That our oxe^ may be strong to labor, yt there be no
mischaunce ne decaie, and no complainyng in our streets. Happy are the people
that be in such a case. Yea blessed are ye people, which have ye lord for
their god

A praisyng of God for his meruaylous mercy, and the eternal reign of his
clemency, which provides for all his creatures, and in especial for such as
fear him. Psalm. 145.
I Will magnify thee, Oh God my king, I will praise thy name for ever and
ever. Every day will I give th^nkes unto thee, and praise thy name for ever
and ever. Great is the LORD, and meruelouse worthy to be praised, there is
no end of his greatness. One generation shall praise thy works to a another,
and declare thy power. As for me I shall be talkyng of thy worship, thy
glory, thy praise, thy wounderous works. So that men shall speak of the
might of thy merueylouse acts, and tell of thy greatenesse. The memorial of
thine aboundaunt kyndenesse shall be showed, and men shall sing of thy
righteousness. The LORD is gracious and merciful, long sufferynge, and of
great goodness. The Lord is loving unto every manne, and his mercy is over all
his works. All thy works praise thee oh Lord, and thy saints give thanks
unto thee. They show the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power. That
thy power thy glory and mightines of thy kingdom, mighty be known unto
men. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom and thy dominion endures through
out all ages. The Lord vpholdeth all such as should fall, and lifts up all
those that be down. The iyes of all wait upon thee, and thou geuest they
their meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things
living with plenteousnes. The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in
his works. The Lord is nigh unto they that call upon him so that the call
upon him faithfully. He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear him, he
hearethe their cry and helpethe them. The Lord preserves all them that
love him, but scatterethe abroad all the ungodly. My mouth shall speak the
praise of the Lord, and let all flesh give thanks unto his holy name, for
ever and ever. Praise the everlasting.

A praise of God, that in only God the everlasting king we ought to trust
and not in princes, in power, in wisdom, or in the rsghteousnes of the
elements of this world. Psalm. 146.
Praise the Lord, oh my soul, while I leave will I praise the Lord. Yea as
long as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God. Oh put not your
trust in princes, nor in any child of man, for there is no help in the^.
For when the brethe of man gooeth forth, he shall turn again unto his earth
and so all his thoughts perish. Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for
his help, and whose hope is in the lord his God. Which made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that therein is. Which keeps his promise for ever
Which helps them to right that suffer wrong, which fedeth the hungry.
The Lord louseth men out of prisone, the Lord gives sight to the blind.
The Lord helps them up that are fallen, the Lord loves the righteous. The
Lord cares for the strangers, he detendeth the fatherless, and the wydowe.
But the way of ye ungodly turns he vpside down The Lord thy God, oh Syon,
he is king for evermore, and throughout all generacions. Praise the everlasting

A praysyng of the Lords name. Psalm. 147.
Praise ye the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God.
Yea a joyful and a pleasant thing it is, to be thankful. The Lord shall
build up Jerusalem, and gather together the outcastes of Israel. He heal
the the tontrite heart, and byndethe up their wounds. He tells the noumbre
of ye stars, and calls them all by their names. Great is our Lord, and
great is his power, yea his wisdom is infinite. The Lord settethe up the
mieke, and brings the ungodly down to the ground. Oh sing unto the Lord
with thankesgeuyng sing prases upon the harp unto our God. Which couerethe
the heaven with clouds, prepares rain for the earth, and makes ye grass to
grow upon the mountains. Which gives fodre unto the cattle, and fiedeth the
young ravens that call upon him He has no pleasure in the strength of an
horse, neither delights he in any man's legs. But the Lords delighte is
in them that fear him, and put their trust in his mercy. Praise the Lord
Oh Jerusalem, praise thy God, oh Sion, for he makes fast the bars of the
gates, and blesses the children within thee. He makes peace in thy borders,
and fills thee with the flour of whete. He sends forth his commandment
upon earth, his word runs swiftly. He gives snow like wolle, and
scatters the hoar froste like ashes. He casts forth his ise like morsels,
who is able to abide his frost? He se^deth out his word and melts their He
blows with his wind, and the waters flow. He shows his word unto Jacob,
his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. He has not dealte so with all the
Heathen, neither have they knowelage of his laws.

A praysyng of God from all his creatures, first heavenly and then earthly.
Psalm. 148.
OH praise the Lord of heaven, praise him in ye heigh. Praise him all his
angels, praise him all his host. Praise him sun and moon, praise him all ye
stars and light Praise him all ye heavens and ye waters, that be under the
heavens Let the^ praise the name of the Lord for he speak the word and they
were made He has made them fast for ever and ever. He has given them a
law which shall not be broken. Praise ye Lord upon earth ye whale fisshes,
and all depes. Fire and hayle snow and vapoures, wind and storm fulfillyng
his word. Mountains and hills, fruitful tries and all Cedres. Beasts and
cattle, worms and fethered fowls, kings of the earth and all people.
Princes and all judges of the world, young men and maidens, old men and
children, let the^ preyse the name of the Lord. For his name only is
excellent, and all his praise above heaven and earth. He exalts ye horn of
his people, all his saints shall praise him, the children of Israel eue^ the
people that serves him

A praysyng of God in himself that he is holy and halowyng, strong and
strengthyng, great and making great. Psalm. 150
OH praise the Lord in his sanctuary, praise him in the firmament of his
power: Praise him in his noble acts, praise him in his excellent greatenesse.
Praise him in the sound of the trumpet, praise him upon the lute and harp.
Praise him in the symbales and dance, praise him upon the sitynges and pipe.
Praise him upon the well tuned symbales, praise him upon the loud symbales
let every thing that has breathe praise the Lord.

Against the enemy of the truth. Psalm. 35.
STirue thou with their, oh lord that strive with me, fight thou against
their, that fight against me. Lay hand upon the shylde and spear, and stand
up to help me. Draw out thy sword and stop the way against them that
persecute me, say unto my soul, I am thy help. Let them be confounded
and put to shame that seek after my soul. Let them be turned back and
brought to confusion that imagyne mischief for me. Let them be as the dust
before ye wind and the angel of the lord scateryng their. Let their way be
dark and slippery, and the angel of the lore to persecute their. For they have
preuily laid their net to destroy me without a cause. Yea and made a pit for my
soul, which I never deserved. Let a sudden destruction come upon the^
vnwaers, and the net yt they have laid preuily, catch them selves, that they
may fall into their own mischief. But let my soul be joyful in ye Lord,
and rejoice in his help. Al my bones shall say, lord who is like unto thee?
Which deliuereste the poor from those that are to strong for him. Yea the
poor and niedy from his robbers. False wittenesse are risen up, and lay to my
charge, things that I know not. They reward me eiuill for good, to the
great dyscomforte of my soul. Nevertheless when they were sick I put on a
secke clothe. I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer turned into my
bosom. I behaved myself as though it had been my friend or my brother. I went
heuely as one that mo^^neth for his mother. But in myn^ ad^^^s^tie they
rejoice, and gath^^ ^heim together. Yea the very ^^me come together against
me vnwaers, making mowes at me, and cease not. With the greydie and scornful
hypocrites they gnashed upon me with their tech Lord when will thou look
upon this? Restore my soul from the wicked rumoure of them, my dearlynge from
the lions. So will I give thee thanks in the great congregation and praise
thee among much people. Oh let them not triumph over me, that are mine
enemies causeles. Let them not wyncke with their iyes that hate me with out a
cause. And why? their communyng is not of peace, but they imagine false words
against the out castes of the land. They gape upon me with their mouths,
saying there there, we see it with ^ur iyes. This thou see, Oh Lord, hold
not thy toungue then, god not far from me O Lord. A wake Lord and stand
^p, avenge thou my cause my God and my Lord. Judge me Oh Lord my God a
cordyng to thy righteousness, tha^ they triumph not over me. Oh let their not
say in their hearts, there there, so would we have it, let them no^ say
we have overcome him. Let them be put to confusion and shame that r^^^yse at
my trouble. Let them be clo^^ed with rebuke and dishonor that host
themselves against me. Let (...) also be glad and rejoice, which ^^uoure my
righteouse dealyng. Yea let them say alwaie Blessed be the Lord which has
pleasur in the prosperity of his servant. And as for my toungue, it shall be
talkyng of thy righteousness, and of thy praise, all the day long.

This psalm because it is all together Evangelical, and teachethe the
contempt of this world, we have put it at the end to the intent yt in all our
tribulacion and in the pride of the wicked we may conforte ourselves. Let no
day pass thee, but thou read this. Psalm. 37.
FRet not thy self at the ungodly be not thou envious against the eiuill
dooers. For they shall sone be cut down like the grass, and be withered
even as the grene berbe Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be dooyng good,
so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily it shall fiede thee. Delight thou
in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy hearts desire, Commit thy way unto
the Lord, set thy hope in him, and he shall bring it to pass. He shall make
thy righteousness as clear as the light, and thy just dealyng as the none
day. Hold thee still in the lord, and abide patiently about him. But grieve
not thy self at one that has prosperity, and liuethe in abhominacion, Leave
of from wrath let goo displeasure, let not thy gelowsye move thee also to do
eiuill. For wicked dooers shall be roted out, but they that patiently abide the
lord shall enherite the land. Suffer yet a little while, and the ungodly
shall be clean goon, thou shall look after his place and he shall be away.
But the meke spirited shall possess the earth, and have pleasure in much
rest. The ungodly lays wait for the just, and gnasheth upon him with his
tiethe. But ye Lord laugheth him to scorn for he sees that his day is
coming. The godly draw out the swearde, and bend their bow to cast down
the simple and poor, and to sle such as goo the right way. Nevertheless
their swearde shall goo through their own heart and their bow shall be
broken. A small thing that the righteous has, is better then great riches of
the ungodly. For the arm of the ungodly shall be broken, but ye Lord
vpholdeth the righteouse. The Lord knows the days of the godly, and their
enheritaunce endures for ever. They shall not be confounded in the perilous
time, and in the days of derth they shall have enough. As for the ungodly they
shall perish, and when the enemies of the Lord are in their flowers they
shall consume. Yea even as the smoke shall they consume a way The ungodly
boroweth and payethe not again, but the righteouse is merciful and liberal.
Such as be blessed of him, shall possess the land, and they whom he curses
shall be roted out. The Lord ordreth a good man's gooyng, and has pleasure
in his way. Though he fall he shall not be hurt, for the Lord vpholdeth him
with his hand. I have been young and now am old, yet saw I never ye
righteous forsaken, nor his sede to seek their bread. The ryghteouse is ever
merciful, and lends gentlye therefore shall his sede be blessed. Flee from
evil, and do the thing that is good, so shalt thou dwell for ever, For the
Lord loves the thing that ^s right, he forsakes not his saints, but they
shall be preserved for ever, as for the sede of the ungodly: it shall be
roted out. Yea the ryghteouse shall possess the land, and dwell therein for
ever. The mouth of ye ryghteouse is exercysed in wisdom, and his tongue
talks of judgment. The law of his God is in his heart, therefore shall not
his footesteppes slide. The ungodly sees the ryghteouse, and gooeth about to
flee him. But the Lord will not leave him in his hands, nor condemn him
when he is judged. Hope thou in the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall so
promote thee, that thou shalt have the land by enherytaunce, and see: when
the ungodly shall peryshe. I myself have sent the ungodly in great power,
and floryshyng like a grene baye tree, but when I went by, lo: he was gooen. I
sought him, but he could no where be found. Keep innocencye: and take heed
unto the thing that is right, for that shall bring a man peace at the
last. As for the transgressors: they shall peryshe together, and the ungodly
shall be rooted out at the last. The help of the ryghtuouse comes of the
LORD, he is their strength in the time of trouble. The Lord shall stand by
them, and save them. He shall deliver them from the ungodly, and help
them, because they put their trust in him.

CERTAIN Prayers short and of diverse sorts.
The prayer of Moses at the remouyng of the tents. Nume. 10.
RIse up Lord, let thine enemies be scatered, and let them that hate
thee: flee before thee. And when the arc rested, he said. Return LORD unto
the multitude of the Hooste of Israel.

The prayer of Aaron and Moses, for their sister Mari: stryken with the lepre.
Nume. 12.
OH I beseech thee my LORD put not the sin upon us, which we have
foolishly committed, that this woman be not as one that came forth dead out
of her mothers womb.

The prayer of Moses unto the Lord that he might pass up into the land of
beheste. Deuteronomy. 3.
OH Lord God, thou haste begoone to show unto thy servant thy greatness
and thy most mighty hand, for there is none other God either in heaven or in
earth, that can do thy works, and be compared to thy strength. Let me
gooe therefore over: and see the good land that is beyond Iordane that goodly
high country, and Lybanon

Esaias. 33.
THe Lord shall be our captain the Lord shall be our law geuer. The Lord
shall be our King, and he himself shall be our sauyoure.

Esaias. 45.
I Am he, I am he says the Lord that for mine owneselues sake do away thine
offenses, and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon them. Put me
now in remembrance (for we will reason together) and show what thou haste for
thee, to make thee quyte.

Esaias. 45.
Turn unto me: all ye coasts of the earth, says the Lord: so shall ye
be saved. I am the God, and there is else none. I swear by my self, out of my
mouth comes the word of righteousness, and that may no man turn, but all
knees shall bow unto me, and all tongues shall swear unto me saying. Verily in
the Lord is my righteousness and strength To him shall men come, but all they
yt think scorn of him, shall be confounded, And the hole sede of Israel shall
be justified, and praised in the Lord

Esaias. 53.
Seek the Lord while he may be found. And call upon him while he is nigh.
Let ye ungodly man forsake his ways: and the vnryghtuouse his ymaginacyons,
and turn again unto the Lord: so shall he be mercyful unto him, and to our
God for he is ready to forgive.

Hie. 10.
THere is none like unto thee, oh Lord. Great art thou and great is ye name
of thy power. Who would not fear the? Or what king of the Gentiles would not
obey thee For among all ye wise men of the gentyles, and in all their kingdoms
there is none yt may be lykened unto thee.

Hie. 10.
Now I know (oh Lord) that it is not in man's power, to order his own
ways, or to rule his own steps and gooynges. Therefore chasten thou us, oh
Lord: but with favor and not in thy wrath: bring us not utterly to naught.

Hie. 14.
WE knowlage (Oh Lord) all our misdedes, and the sins of our fathers, for
we have offended thee. Be not displeased (oh LORD) for thy names sake,
forgette not thy loving kindness. Remember ye trone of thy glory: break not
thy covenant that you haste made with us. Are there any among the gods of
the Heathen, that sends rayn: or gives the showers of heaven? Dooest not
thou it oh Lord God, in whom we trust? Yea Lord, you dooest all these things.

Hie. 16.
OH Lord my strength, my power and refuge in time of trouble.

Hie. 31.
I Will plant my law, says the Lord: in the inward parts of them: and
write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my
people. And from thence forth shall no man teach his neighbor or his
brother, and say know the Lord. But they shall all know me from the loweste
unto the hygheste, says the Lord. For I will forgive their misdedes: and will
never remember their sins any more. Thus says the Lord which gave the
son to be a light for the day, and the moon and stars to shine in the
night Which moves the sea, so that the floudes thereof wax fearce, the Lord
almighty is his name.

Eze. 33.
AS truly as I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasur in the death of the
wicked, but much rather that the wicked turn from his way and live.

Micheas. 7.
WHere is there O Lord, such a God as thou? that pardonest wickedness, and
forgeuest the offenses of the remnaunt of thine heritage? He keeps not his
wrath for ever. And why? his delyght is to have compassion, he shall turn
again and be merciful unto us. He shall put down our wickedness, and cast
all our sins into ye botome of the sea. Thou shall keep thy trust with
Jacob, and thy mercy for Abraham, as thou haste sworn unto our fathers long
agoo.

Ecclesi. 36.
Have mercy upon us, oh Lord, thou God of all, have respect unto us, show
us the light of thy mercyes, and send thy fear among the Heathen and
strangers, which seek not after thee, yt they may know there is no God but
thou, that they may show thy wondrous works. Lift up thine hand over the
outlandyshe heathen, that they may learn to know thy might and power. Like as
you art hallowed in us before them: so bring to pass that thou may be
magnified in them also before us, yt they may know thee, like as we know
thee. For there is none other God, but thou only, oh Lord renew the tokens,
and change the wonderouse works. Show thy hand and thy right arm
gloriously. Raise up thy indignacion, and power out thy wrath. Take away the
adversary and the enemy. Make the time short: remember thy couenaunte, that
thy wonderouse works may be praised. Let the fire of the wrath consume
them, that live so careless: and let them peryshe that do thy people
hurt. Smite in sunder the heads of the Princes, that be our enemies: and
say there is none other but we. Gather thy little flock together again, that
they may know there is none other God but only you: that they may show thy
wondrous works, and be thy people and heritage, like as from the beginning.
Oh Lord, have mercy upon the people yt has thy name, and upon Israel, whom
thou have likened to a first borne son Oh be merciful unto Israel the city
of thy sanctificacion, ye city of thy rest. Fill Syon with thy unspeakable
virtues, and thy people with thy glory. Give witness unto thy creature, whom
thou made from the beginning: and raise up the prophecies that have been
showed in thy name. Reward thou them that wait for ye that thy Prophets may
be found faithful. Oh Lorlde, hear the prayer of thy servants, a cordyng
to the blessyng of Aaron over thy people, yt all they which dwell upon the
earth may know, that thou art the Lord the eternal GOD, which is from
everlasting.

Ecclesi. 41.
OH death: how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man yt seeks rest,
and comfort in his substance and richesse, unto the man that has nothing to
vere him, and that has prosperity in all things, yea to him yt yet is able
for to receive meat oh death how acceptable and good is thy judgment unto the
needful, and unto him whose strength fails, and that is now in his last
age, and that in all things is full of care and fearfulness, unto him also
that is in dispayer, and has no hope nor pacyence Be not thou afraid of
death, remember them that have been before thee, and that come after thee, for
this is the judgment of the Lord: over al flesh. And why would thou be
against this pleasure of the highest? Whether it be ten, an hundredth, or a
thousand years, death asks not how long one has lived.

PSALMS OF DAVID against tirauntes and persecutours of Gods word.
That all such as live in Satan's bondage may come to the knowlage of the faith
in Jesus Christ.
LORD help, for there is not one saint more, very few faithful are there
among the children of men every man tells lies to his nyghboure, they
do but flatter with their lyppes and dissemble in their hearts Oh yt the
Lord would root out all disceytfull lyppes, and ye tongue that speaks proud
things Which say our tongue should prevail, we are they yt ought to
speak who is Lord over us? Now for the troubles sake of the oppressed, and
because of the complaint of the poor: I will up (says the Lord) I will help
them, and set them at rest. The words of the Lord are pure words, even
as the silver, which from earth is tried and purifyed.vii. times in the fire.
Keep them therefore (oh Lord) and preserve us from this generation for ever.
And why? when vanite and ydelnesse gets the ouerhand amongst ye children of
men, all are full of the ungodly.

For rulers and for common peace. Psalm. 20
THe Lord might hear thee in time of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob
might defend thee, and send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee
out of Syon. Remember will he all thy offringes and accept thy brent sacrifice.
He shall grant thee thy hearts desire, and fulfill all thy mind. We will
rejoice in thy health: and triumph in the name of the Lord our God, for the
Lord will perform al thy peticions, Now know I that the Lord helps his
anointed: and will hear him from his holy heaven, mighty is ye help of his
right hand. Some put their trust in charettes and some in horses, but we will
remember the name of ye Lord our God. They are brought down: and fallen: but
we are risen and stand up right. Save Lord and help us: Oh king when we
call upon thee.

Against the enemies of the people of God, tyrauntes: heretics, and ragyng
wolves. Psalm. 83.
Hold not thy tongue oh God, keep not still silence: refrain not thy self Oh
God. For lo, thine enemies a hurly burly: and they that hate thee: lift up
their head. They ymagine craftily against thy people, and conspire against
thy secrets. Come (say they) let us root them out from among the
people, that the name of Israel may be put out of remembrance. For they have
cast their heads together with one consent and are confederate against thee.
The tabernacles of the Edomites and Ismaelytes the Moabytes and Haparenes:
Gegal, Amon and Amalech the Phylistins with them yt dwell at Tire. Assure also
is joined with them and help the children of Loath. But too thou unto them as
unto the Madianytes, unto Gysera, and unto Iabin by the brook of kyson. Which
peryshed at Endor, and becam as the donge of the earth. Make their princes like
Oreb and zeb: yea make all their princes like zebea and Salmona, which said
we will challenge unto us the houses of God. Oh my god make them like a whele,
and as the stouble before the wind, Like as a fire that burns up the wood,
and as the slame that consumes the mountains. Persecute them even so with
thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. Make their face ashamed,
oh Lord, that they may seek thy name. Let them be confounded and vexed
ever more and more, let them be put to shame and peryshe. That they may know
that you art alone, that thy name is the Lord, and that you only art the most
highest over all ye earth. Am^.

THE TESTAMENT of Moses. Deuteronomii the.xxxii. chapter.
HArken heavens what I will speak, let the earth hear the words of my
mouth, let my doctrynegather and wax in to rain my speech may flow as
the dew, as the shower upon the grass, and as the drops upon the blades of
corn, for I will call on the name of the Lord. Give ye magnificence and
bountiful praise unto our God, ye works of God be parfecte and al his ways
are judgments. The Lord is faithful and without all iniquite, just and
right. They have offended him. They that were not his children have offended
him in filthiness. Thou crooked and perverse generation dooest yield these to ye
Lord, thou foolish and unwise people? Is not he thy father which has
possessed thee and made thee, and created thee? Remember the old days,
considre each generation. Ask thy father and he shall show thee, thy auncestres
and they shall tell thee, when the most high Lord divided the people, when he
severed ye children of Adam, he ordained the ends of peoples, a cordyng to the
nombre of the children of Israel. And ye part of the Lord, is his people,
Jacob is the cord of his enheritau^ce. He found him in a deserte land, in a
place of horroure, and hughe wilderness. He compassed him about and taught
him and kept him as the ball of his iye. Like as the Egle prouokyng her birds
to fly and flickeryng upon them casts abroad her wings and takes up her
bird and bears it upon her shulders. Only the Lord was his guide and there
was not with him any strange God. He did set him upon an high land yt he
should eat the fruits of ye feldes, yt he should suck honey of the rock, and
oil of the most hard stone. Butter of the kyne and milk of yewes with the
fatnes of lambs and wethers (of the children of Basa^.) And the gotes, with
flower of wheat, and to drink ye blood of the grape most pure. The beloved
was encrassat and winched again, engrossed, fatted, spredde abroad He forsook
god his maker and departed from god his savior. They provoked him with
strange gods and stirred him to anger in their abhominacio^s They did
sacrifice to deuels and not to god, to gods which they knew not New and
fresh gods came which their fathers worshipped not. The god yt begatte thee,
thou have forsaken thou have forgotten the Lord thy creatoure. The Lord saw
it and was stirred to wrath, for their soonnes and daughters have provoked him
and he said. I will hide my face fro the^ and consider the ends of the^, for it
is a crooked generation and the children are unfaithful. They have provoked me
in him that was no God and have angered me with their vanities. And I will
provoke them by their that is not my people by the foolish Gentiles I will
anger them. The fire burned in my fury and it shall brenne to the vttermoste
of hell, and it shall devour the earth with ye fruit thereof, and it shall
brenne the foundacions of the mountains. I will gather eiuilles upon them and
mine arowes I will finish upon them. They shall be consumed with famyne and
the birds shall devour them with most bitter bityng I will send upon them
the tieth of wild bestes drawyng them with fury upon the earth, and of
serpents Without shall the swearde make hauoke of them, and within the young
man and also the vjrgin, the suckyng child with the aged manne, and I said
Where be they? I will cause that the memory of them shall cease among men.
But for because of anger of their enemies I have differred it, lest perchance
their enemies would wax proud and say. Our hand is puyssante and mighty
and not the Lord has dooen all these things. The people is without counsel
and without prudence, would God they were wise and understood and foresawe the
ends. How one has persecuted a thousand, and two has put to flighte ten
thousa^de? It is not because their God has sold them and the Lord has
enclosed them, for our God is not as their gods, and our enemies be judges.
Of the vineyarde of the Sodomes is their vine, and of the suburbs of Gomorra.
Their grape is the grape of Galle and the clustre is most sower. The gall of
dragons is their wine and venim of aspes insanable. Be not these things laid
up with me and sealed among my treasures. Mine is the vengeance and I will
pay them in time, that their fore may slide. The day of perdicio^ is at
hand, and the times hasten to be present. The Lord shall judge his people,
and in his servants he will have pity. He shall see that their hand is
enfeabled, and they also that were kept in, fainted, and the rest were
consumed and he shall say. Where be their gods in whom they had confidence?
Of whose sacrefices they did eat the fate and drank Libamine wine Let them
rise and help you, and in your necessity protecte you. Behold that I am
alone and there is none other God but I. I shall kill and I shall make alive. I
shall strike and I shall heal, and there is none that can pluke out of my
hand. I will lift up my hand to heaven and say: I live for evermore. If I
make sharp as, the lightenyng my swearde and my hand take judgment, I will
take vengeance upon mine enemies and I will acquit them that hate me I will
make mine arowes dronken with their blood and my swearde shall devour their
flesh. Of the blood of the slain and of the captivity of the barchedde of his
enemies. Comme^de ye Gentiles his people, for the blood of his servants he
will reueng, and he will yield vengeance upon their enemies, and he will be
merciful to the land of his people.

The prayer of the Centurio^. Matthew. 9.
Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under the roof of my house,
but only speak with a word of thy mouth and I shall be healed.

The prayer of the thief on the cross Luke.xxiii.
LORD remember me when thou come into thy kingdom.

A TABLE OF the contens of this book.
Prayers for the sins of the people.
The prayer of Moses to ye Lord for the sins of the people. 1. An other
prayer of Moses to the same. 1. For the sin of the people what time they
murmured, a prayer of Moses. 1. An other of Moses and Aaron for the people. 1.
For the stubbernes of the people ye true preacher on this wise as Moses did,
may make his prayer unto God. 2. The prayer of Solomon in the dedicacion of
the temple of Jerusalem. 2 A prayer of Esdras for the sins of the people. 3.
The prayer of Nehemias for the sins of ye people before the lord 4 A
confession and solemn prayer of the Levites and of the church for sins with
a rehersall of the benefits of God. 5. A prayer of the church for sins. 9
Another for sins. 9 The lamentacion of Hieremy for the sins of the people.
10. The prayer that Baruche prescrybed unto the captives in Babylon for their
sins. 11. The prayer of Daniel ye prophet for his own sins and for the
sins of the whole nation. 14.
Prayers in time of adversity, and for a man's own sins.
The prayer of Jacob to be delivered from his brother Esau. 16. The prayer of
Joshua that time ye people fled in the battaill. 16. A prayer and an open
confession of the people of Israel to be delivered from their enemy. 17. The
prayer of Samson unto god that he might revenge him, against the Philistines.
17. In wars against Turks and inuadoures, the prayer of king Asa 17 An other
of king Iosaphat. 17. The prayer of Nehemias what time the Heathen defied him.
18. If God send thee trouble either for a punishemente of thy sins or to
prove thy patience therewith, pray thus. 18. The prayer of Manasses king of
Judah, when he was in prisone, for remission of sins, and for gods favor
and deliverance. 19 The prayer of Judith for the deliverance of her country
from the tyraunte. 20. An other prayer of Judith whiles she went about to
fle the enemy Holofernes. 21. The prayer of Mardocheus in the pursuit of Haman
for all the Jews nation. 21. The prayer of quine Hester for her and all her
country men. 22. The oracion and blessyng of Job in his most grievous
adversity and loss of goods. 24. A prayer that we may be delivered from
our adversaries. 24. The prayer of Esaye when the people were sore plaged. 24.
An other prayer of Hieremie. 26. An other of Hieremie. 26. A prayer of Hieremie
under the person of Christ, which every Christen may say in time of
adversity. 26. A prayer of Hieremie in the day of trouble, and in the
destruction of Jerusalem. 27. The prayer of Susanna when she was in danger to
be ravished of the two elders. 28 An other prayer that she made when she
should have been led to death. 28. The prayer of Jonas when he was as yet in
the fishes belly. 28. The prayer of Judas Machabeus when he should encountre
with his enemies. 29. The prayer of the priests against ye tiraunt that he
might not prospere against the holiness of God. 29. The prayer of Nehemias and
the priests for the people oppressed of ye Heathen. 30. The prayer of Eleazar
when he was drawn to execucion and redye to dye. 30.
Tha^kesgeuinges and praises unto GOD of the Fathers.
The song of Moses and the children of Israel for their deliverance from
Pharao. 31. The form of blessyng the children of Israel. 32. Anna thankyng
the LORD of his benefit, on this manner sings to God. 32. For the benefits
received at gods hand, the prayer of David. 33. A song that David song unto
the Lord in the day that the Lord delivered him out of the hand of his
enemies. 35. A blessyng of Tobias the elder, wherewith he blessed the Lord in
the end of his life. 37. The thankesgeuyng and song of Judith for victory and
for the delivery of the country from their enemies. 38. The blessyng of
Seraphin. 39. Thankynges. 39. An other of the same. 40. A blessyng with an
admiracion of the marvelous counsailles of god 40 The song of thankesgeuynge
of Mary the virgyn. 41. The prophecy and geuyng of thanks of Zatharie. 41.
The praise of the angels at the birth of Christ. 42. Geuyng of thanks of
Simio^ 42 Thanks of Paul for his conversion unto Christ. 42. A song of the
triumphers over the beast. 42. A blessyng of the people by king Solomon. 43.
The blessings and prayers of S Ambrose and Austyne. 43.
Prayers for succoures and rele^fes of life, for wisdom for humility, and
for other natural gifts.
The request of Jacob for suste^tatio^ and relief of this present life. 45 The
prayer of Anna unto the lord that she might obtain a child. 45. The prayer of
Solomon for wisdom well to govern his people, daiely to be prayed of all
princes and other rulers. 45. A prayer of Solomon for a competency of life. 46.
A prayer for obteynynge of wisdom. 46. A prayer for meekness and the
obteinyng of chastity. 47. The prayer of Jesus the soonne of Siracke, in
necessity and for wisdom. 47. The prayer of Abacuc the prophet for
ignorauncies. 49. The prayer of our Lord Jesus which he taught his
deciples. 49 A prayer of the faithefull congregation yt they may speak the
word of God boldly. 50. A prayer of Christ unto his father for his little
ones, which trust and repose theimselues upon him. 50.
Certain Psalms picked forth miete for daily prayers unto GOD.
To be delivered from ye ungodly that we perish not with them that endeavor
by all means to withdraw us from the way of truth, and that all good men,
may continually be enuironned with gods proteccio^ 52 To escape gods
wrath and to obtain his mercy, so shall thou pray with David. 53. If thou
be falsely belied, and maligned of thine adversary, acustome thyself to that
prayer of David which he song to the Lord upon the words of the soonne of
Iemini. 54 A sa^ctifiyng for the mercy of God showed us in temptacions, and
adversities and for the marvelous subversion, and destruction of our
adversaries. 55. A lamentacion and waylyng unto God, white antichryste
triumphethe and sleeth the holyones of God, persecuteth the Gospel. 56 That
we be not wrapped in the blyndnes of the wicked, and that we perish not for
ever. 58. That the heavenly father will not suffer us to shrynke at so mighty
adversaries and so cruelly pursuynge, while we be full of all pleasures of
the world, so we may pray with the prophet prayng in the person of
Christ. 58. With much affiaunce of heart upon God a prayer for sin and for
the grauntyng of his holy spirit, for it is not possible but God will hear us
a cordyng to christ's promise in ye Gospel. 59 In the affliccion or passion
both of the spirit and of the flesh, so may we pray with Christ and with
the godly. 60. A sainctifiyng of god, for that the earth is full of his
mercy, and that by his mighty word he wroughte all things. 62. A
stablishemente of the mind against such as sklander us that we again
vpbraide not them, which thing is a great gift of God. 63. For remission of
sins and of eiuill lusts that floue in us. 64 A godly prayer against the
enemies. 65. That being lightened with gods grace we may know here in
earth the way that ledeth to god which is a sure confidente upon god and
charity toward the neighbor. 66. Against Antichriste, pursuynge and killyng
the holy ones of god and defylynge the mysteries of Gods word. 66. A prayer
and yeldyng of thanks for that we be redeemed by Christ from eternal death.
67. When we be clean put out of all conforte, we may pray with the
prophet in the person of Christ 68. A bewaylyng of our corrupt nature, and
of the misery of this life by reason of sin. 69. A sainctificacio^ of the
lords name for that he made all things and all be in his hand. 70. Whiles
we seem to be in the mids of tribulacion and forsaken of men yea and of God
also. 71. A merry thankesgeuyng for all ye benefits co^ferred unto us by
christ. 73 An other geuyng of thanks and praise. 74. A halowyng and praysyng
of the Lord, yt he meruaylously auaunceth his as well in heaven as in earth
76. A co^mendacion of the Lords mercy that he has vouchesaue to call us
Gentiles and Heathen persons unto his faith. 76. A prayer that God himself
may led, rule teach, and direct us in his way, in his precepts and in his
gospel, and that he may keep us from the doctrynes and tradicions of men.
77. When we are bruised and humbled in heart, and contrarywyse the world
reioyseth and triumphs. 85 To be delivered from bloudsuppers, that busy
theimselues to pluck us from the way of God, both by force and crafty
means, and whith labor to abolishe gods word. 85. That God may keep us
that we sin not with our toungue, neither excuse our sins as hypocrytes
do. 86. That we may be led forth of the prisone of distress, of sins
and of death to the praise and glory of God, that we be no longer pressed
upon earth. 87. When we find no merits in us no righteousness of our own,
but all things desperate. And again remember how God from the beginning of
the world has wroughte wonders in his saints, and has never forsaken
such as call upon him, thus may we pray. 87. A thankesgeuynge that all be
it we vile, yet by the virtue of GOD we be strong against all strange
children, that is to say such as be not chosen to the inherytaunce of God.
88. A praysynge of God for his meruailes, mercy, and the eternal reign of his
clemency, which prouidethe for all his creatour^s, and in especial for such
as fear him. 89 A prayer of God, that in only god the everlasting king we
ought to trust and not in princes, in power, in wisdom, or in the
righteousness of the elements of this world. 91. A praysyng of the lords
name. 91 A praisyng of God from all creatures first heavenly and then earthly.
92 A praysynge of GOD in himself that he is holy and halowyng, strong and
strengthyng, great, and making great. etc. 93. Against the enemy of ye troth
93 A psalm which because it is all together evangelical, and teaches ye
contempt of this world we have put at the end, to the intent in all our
tribulacion and in the pride of the wicked we may conforte ourselves. 95.
Certain prayers short and of diverse sorts.
The prayer of Moses at the remouyng of the tents. 98. The prayer of Aaron and
Moses for their sister Mari stricken with the lepre. 98. The prayer of Moses to
ye Lord that he moughte pass into the land of behest. Other two short
prayers. Six short prayers. Four short prayers. 100. An inuocacion to God
for the aid of the faithful for the vengeance of the unfaithful
miscreauntes and for manifestacion of himself to be the selfsame God that all
the prophets has preedicate and showed before. 101 An exortacion to die
gladly for it is the judgment of the Lord over all flesh. 102
PSALMS OF DAVID against tyrannes and persecutoures of Gods word.
That all such as live in satan's bondage may come to the knowlage of faith in
Jesus Christ. 103. For rulers and common peace. 103. Against the enemies of the
people of God, tyrannes, heretics, and ragyng ^o^ues. 104 ^ The testament of
Moses. 105 ^ The prayer of the Centurio^ 108. ^ The prayer of the thief on the
cross. 108.
FINIS.
Imprinted ^n London by Richard Grafton

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

These books are to be sold at the Weste door of P^^^^s in London. By
Wyllyam Tylotson.


