THE Passionate Poet.

With a Description of the Thracian Ismarus.

By T.P.

Pallas habet plures spurios quam genuinos (...).

LONDON Printed by Valentine Simmes, dwelling on Adling hill at the sign of
the white Swanne. 1601.

To the Right honorable and my most virtuous Lady, The Lady Frauncis
Countess of Kildare. T. P. wishes all perseverance, with souls happynes.
THrice did we read what passion wrought at once,
It pleased, displeased us, and it pleased again.
Front-fallowed Athens ministered in frowns,
Which Ismarus to Comic aid reclaim.
May she propugne those wrongs, and only those,
But Thracian refuge do not we propose.
They wear not Athens furrows that offended,
And be she powerful in her reprehension,
But want of worthiness to thee ^ntended,
To thee (great Lady) life of mine invention.
It Is from thy favor, or seuerer sense,
We s^yle or take acquaintance with offense.
Vouchsafe (thou fairest of Elisaes train)
From bewties e^^ment one gracious dymple,
Th'immensiuenes whereof shall entertayne
And countenance the error of the simple.
If thou be pleased, then all are satisfide,
Or be thou pleased, so frown the world beside.
Your Ladyships in all dutiful office Tho. Powell.

To the Reader.
IT may be, some Rhetoric^^ Praelector holds it enquirable for the Title, as
professing too much of affectation thereunto. Nor do I blame him, when,
conferring the importance thereof with our impotence, he deprehend not a reason
in the very front, or first face of my Book. It shall suffice, for thy better
satisfaction, I was most inward with mine own defects: which I studied to
preserve from seuerer exposition, as thus: If any challenge me for dismembring
a good history, which might better have been continuated from the beginning,
it was not I, but Passion. If, that my Introduction be somewhat too prolix, in
respect of the maine subject proposed. All this was of Passion, that once
enlargde, is hardly called in and restrained. If that in many of these Plants,
I observe no strict method or time; I answer still, it was of Passion: One
that never speaks in numbers, never begins with a Quande^uidem, or
Quemadmodum, one that respects not the preparatiue complement of hemming or
spitting, the authenti^ue stroaking of the beard, or your demure winking.
Briefly, one of the most licentious, irregular, and vnformall Libertines of
this Age, and notwithstanding as cur^ant for excusable, as the loosers
language, or some preuaricator in a learned assembly. From hence I was advised
to assume his sh^pe, as a most spacious protection, which the rather I made
personate in the Poet, as well for suggestion of his office, which ought to be
most conversant in P^ssion out of the abuses of these times, as for
conciliation of our true Divines, whom I only admire, and not of arrogance,
as being sensible of any thing in m^e, which might maintain such professed
impo^tance. He that urges (...) further herein, gives me cause, if unlearned,
to suspect his judgment; if learned, his severity.

Farewell.
I. P. to the Author.
ONe is the stream that flows in both our veins,
Our name, our fortunes, blind of disproportion:
And shall a kinsmans interest restrain?
Thy due forbids suspect such dark extortion.
I le strain my self to prai^e, and not exceed
Th abounded bounds of thy deserving meed.
How well these Haemaroides of thy wit
Decipher to our Artists Arts true vices!
How well do^st thou thy self, thy self acquit,
Assuming that contempt which thence arises!
Laying thy stage in Thracian Ismarus,
A model of this universe diffu^e;
In it conuai'd a Theme of seriou^nes,
Of weilding common and the states affairs*
Pretending fable, where lies nothing less,
Only to call away seuerer ears.
What need^ he couch in moral, or else fear,
Whose lines are modest to the most severe?
And such are thine from meeker spirit flowing*
Cherish that spirit in her towardness:
So shall thy labors with my praises growing
Be registered, (suspicion in recesse.)
Believe (...) I suspire no fresher air,
Then are my hopes of thee, and they stand fair.
Lectori de and Poesi and Poeta Ogdoasticon.
VIlia qua mi^atur i^ers ^^dibriae vulg^t,
Qui petis (...), opera hac dictio meta tuae,
L^tera (...) habet: Nec, habet quod litera, po^dus
Litera sola d^cet: lecti^ sana dabit.
Ergo ab Atlante nepes, cerebro Iouis edita virgo,
(...) and pende^s agmen ab ore, legant.
Cateraturt a tua^ muscas venare. Ministr^
(...) hac valido propria prada. Val^.
G. O.

The Passionate Poet.
WIth that Jove's issue did provoke the God,
Whose visage is compact of salarode*
To leave his throne of waters and descend;
To give their serious Controversy end,
Urging being urged herself by hope of fame,
The young Ionsa might affect her name.
Neptune his dangling bawdricke cast aside,
Which to a well tun^d Lyre his hand did guide.
And then sustaines his scepter, which to bear
Is Isthmian labor; Thus Trident^fer
Gazing at honors worth* forsakes his Court,
Where Mermaids do for choristers resort,
Whose diuidence incestuous and unchaste
Ravished the Citizens of seas laid waste.
Upon a fair find Dolphin did he ride,
While blew Nereides lackey by his side,
And with their measuring feet check coral beds,
The richest meteor that the Ocean breeds:
The Godhead that in shape of Bull did lie,
Had not a carriage of such Majesty.
By this the Seas great Arbiter attained
The farthest bounds Oceanus had gained,
And now the yielding sand did testify
That earth shook underneath his surquedrie.
The azure God at Agas strond arrived,
The sta^^ from whence his Nerean steeds (...)
Their thriftie ^odder, Agas well suruaid
The fair ^onicke structure vnde^laid:
This infant city pl^c't in A^rica,
Was proud of his access, there did he stay.
There Pallas and ^al^mon do allow
The moderation of their randeuow.
The disputants thus have they both decreed,
That humane censure shall prefer the deed
Whereby their deities may best disclose,
Who ought so fair a title to impose.
His mother Vestaes son did invoke,
And on her bosom laid his scepters weight:
Thus the desire of Flamen and of Phane,
Causde him to wound her breast conjure her name:
Out of whose entralls did prosiliate
A horse from whom his kind is propagate.
Hereby he woed the suffrage of mankind,
And made Hyppona Goddess of that shrine:
She that unknown by Trytons side did sit,
Contemned the God and counterpois'd the gift,
Stirculeus did inspire her with his Art,
Dividing natures influence apart.
For Neptune called him Sire f^^cipotent,
And when he stood pros^^^pt to banishment:
Did he divide his heaven wrackt soul from harms,
And unto Latium bears him in his arms,
Lamenting him and his attending fears,
Made the worlds greater part a sea of tears:
Whose tears the fair Hyperion from his checkes
Extracts, and swollen with moisture kindly weeps*
The God that changed his Scepter for a scythe,
Inspird the Dame that did with Neptune strive:
He taught her exorcisines and practicke skill
To make the earth obsequious to her will.
In honor of Minerua did it yield
An Olive tree, the first that graced the field:
For this the Consistory did assign
To gratify him with Ionicke shrine.
There the Filamines with temples bound,
Present large Vrnes that are with incense crowned,
Whose flame with sovereign liquor they infuse
Conuerts to smoke and makes the air obtuse.
Hereat the envious Saturnist repinde,
His weak assumption retrograde enclinde:
Albeit they gave him temple and a flame,
Yet fortune had not equall^sde their fame.
His comicke Alcoran was desolate,
Whilst hers with Nardus fumes did suffocate:
His Priests their empty challices extend,
Her Ministers ammonius sent commend;
And through their nostthrils conduit entertain
The gentle odor they expire again:
From hence Ennosigaus did acquest
The motive which his drooping soul deprest;
And this the rather aggrauates the same,
That Athens should affect Athenaes name.
Ioue-lou'd Athena great in Athens love
Aspired the sphere where Ions star did move,
And forced him from his separable orb,
whose exhalation Neptune did absorbe:
wherewith enraged the furious Orgist raues,
And with his head subornd the purple waves.
This exit introduct a second stage,
where Athens did intend the vmpirage
Of her Athena, in whose breast appears
Legends of acts, deceiptfull characters:
There Athens in abrasiue lines did write
A borrowed name with brittle Chyrsolite:
In Times compendious book did she ymprage
A name vnguiltie of succeeding age*
Why then, O name recorded to misprision,
O time-bred shame: O book of de^^nition.
Their mutual love susp^r'd a lively heat,
When misaffecting rites were incomplete:
For many rites are intercedent there,
Where love with arts and arts with love conspire:
So Athens loud Athena for her name,
And so for love was she turned Artisane.
O happy change if never to return,
Thyn^si^^ mount with arts might ever burn.
The seeing Goddess vsd a seemly might
To make her Athens see with learnings light:
But eyes that travail underneath her zone
Sustain ecclypse of reputation:
And such as are to schollership enclind,
Learn best to see how they may best be blind.
Her Athens was the Mu^es He^^con,
For there she raisd a second Hieron*
That Gy^^afie which platane shades enchase,
Concealing it from each celestial face.
O had it bin immured with reputation,
Or had it not such civil intimation,
Then vile respect that child of ignorance.
Had not conspird with learned arrogance.
But woe is me for art lies prostitute
While ignorance does tread her under foot.
The Phocion is insatiate in his lust,
Whose hot conjunction makes my muse combust:
Thus is she most unhappy of the nine,
Thus is her ill made worse by being thine.
Like chaste Euridice she flies from fate,
Euridice fair and unfortunate.
While he pursues with Aristaean will
My muse from whom this passion does distill.
Yet were she free from any serpents sting,
If sanctuary were an holy thing:
But faction abrogates her holy use,
Art is opposd to art and Muse to muse:
She harbors envy and not emulation,
Sincerity is made self affectation.
Believe me Athens, this imputes thy worth,
That monster faction was by thee brought forth.
The love of him has made thee arrogant,
He has betrayed thee to the ignorant.
By faction did thou fall from thy estate.
It Was faction made thee first unfortunate:
That all in ill and ill in every part,
Has made thee factious Athens as thou art:
It Is art indeed whom thou have wronged in this;
It Is I for love of both made Bigamis.
I fly contempt of learning it is I
That cannot meet with true sincerity:
To me the vice of schollership belongs,
I have an inward feeling of her wrongs:
It Is I whom learning tempts to imprecation,
Being impatient of her estimation.
I challenge faction for her vile estate.
And cursing it, I still asseuerate,
Since art from Athens took her opprobrie,
And both their ills did transmigrate in me*
It was because I placed my love amiss,
Where no respect nor good opinion is.
For loving her am I opinions grate*
And out of love become thus passionate:
If this be made the vmpire of her liking,
May faint defection practice mine acquiting.
I Will change this art for some mechanicke skill,
And Athens for a modern Thracian hill:
A Muse-forsaken Thrace, an Ismarus,
Long lif'd by memory of Orpheus;
Orpheus, who dignified with legacy
Hebrus and heaven for head and choristrie.
What imputation is familiar,
If I (...) this (...),
If borrow wings to fly from Mercury;
It Is but defection not Apostasy.
When hea^'n was ^^^bulent with Io^ia^ pride,
Li^'d not Apollo by Amphry^us side^
For there he did avoid a troubled air,
And here A^^^etus he was passing fair.
At Thracian Ismarus will I repose
Within the mount Hermaphrodite, that knows
Two parts distinguished, and as different
In quality for their distract intent.
What Is Ismarus, thou'^rt so rapt with seeing?
It Is any thing but that which has no being.
Europe of her descent does vainly boast,
Much owes she unto Thrace, to England most.
The Country loves this fair Hermaphrodite,
The City knows her for the Cities type,
In Court a Courtie^, and the Courtier, it
Is nothing but a somewhat Ismari^,
In living there I shall not live abstract,
No^ to one residence my self contract:
Since Ismarus each Nation does affine,
Save Athens only all the world is mine.
The world is mine in natures sympathy*
For both sustain but contrariety:
So Ismarus earths party colored kertle,
Has one side barren and the other fertle.
Her barren part that is bare in all good parts,
Whether from outward cause or else deserts,
Or from a well beseemd distinguishment,
Or all, I doubt how safely to assent.
This only does his steril mold suggest,
Each land of every plant is not possessed;
For this blame Nature, and yet blame her not,
She Is better idle then Halsphl^^t.
If Nature were alike industrious,
Th'indifferent arbiter of (...),
Each part were reconciled, and (...)*
Should le^ell with the e^^th of (...).
But she in wisdom thought it no offense,
By rest to give to shrubs preeminence:
So we uphold the state of government,
As Natures instance makes us provident.
Admit that either side of Ismarus
Were equal apt in his material dross
To entertain each form that is vegitant
Of herb or tree or whatsoever plant.
Nature being prodigal of inst^^^ce,
Should yield her wisdom to suspicious sense.
Give unto heaven alike in every part.
Like gross densation, and Apollo^ harp,
Shall be as pale an object in the eye,
(Though set with gold) as brass pa^'d Galaxie,
And it, as much unable to reflect,
As where the Cynthides make breach vncheck^.
Repine at this, so shall thou call in question
Natures decree and by strong insurrection
Be openly rebellious to that state,
Whereby thou were thy self predestinate:
So shall thou in thine own immodestie
Look upon heaven with a Promethean eye,
Endeavor to reduce the earth again
Into her ancient indigested frame,
Rob heaven of stars, stars their intelligence,
The world of motion, light and influence.
Of this repining sect, two sects there are,
Whose fortunes (albeit vnfamiliar)
Conjure herein. The one is Atheist:
The other thinks that God is only his.
Atheism an Ismarite and Politician,
Being rich in general for his condition^
So gives all franchisement of liberty
T'aspire through an ambitious industry,
Disputes that Mighti^es must be attaind
Through broken vows through faith and conscience staind.
These dark endeavors are religion
To Atheism, other faith he knows none:
But making of devotion an extent,
Exceeds a Democraticke government,
As not sufficient spacious to admit
A general weal of equalli^de conscript.
So he repines the poorest rational
Should dwell contented by his native thrall,
Since in ambition lies his remedy,
And by neglecting curious policy*
He leaves the means whereby he may inuit
Fortune that is flexible to all alike.
Precisianisme whose zeal's at interest,
Who of himself does self conceit it best,
Exemplifies his instance in process,
And wills an vn^^ersall barrenness
Forbids the day producing chariot,
To draw about the all suruaying God:
Because his servile hand does well sustain
The needy traces of a Lyd^^ wai^e:
Enuies the government that is ^emporall.
Repines at order hierarchicall,
And in his scruple does extenuate
Whateuer office fortune or estate.
Ye faithful unto orthodoxall terror,
Religious authors of religious error,
Using her proper organs and protect
In self conspiracy which you affect,
O wherefore is the name of Magistrate
So harsh of cadence? wherefore do you hate
The purple garment or the scarlet mantle?
How ill beseemes it those rude palms to handle
The scepter or the sword, how more then ill
To slay the Judge vnroyallize the King?
The price of this strong heresy contrived,
Thy faith must be deprau'd, thy self deprived
Of all commercement with sincere devotion,
For thou art moved unto that violent motion
Of Atheism blind of God, and both agree
By different means to work equality:
The one commends the Sun for his access,
What he elates, the other does depresse,
And what they both prefer, it is to all,
Each season for an Equinoctial,
Improouing the premist necessity
Of Ismarus dispo'sd so diversely.
This Thracia^ hill contends to imitate
Man in his lively form and inward state:
And how convenient is the presidence
Of soul and mind and intellectual sense
Before the body that affects but clay,
Let the repiner in his manhood say:
Then shall he seriously affirm with me,
That speak out of mine own necessity
I speak the necessary barrenness
Of Ismarus and natures inaccesse:
Albeit I do prefer her fruitful side,
Not led by discontent that child of pride,
But by innated love of self well willing,
We wish all fruitful parts within our dwelling.
There dwell where Ismarus in iocund sense
Of Natures hand commends her excellence.
Unto that fertile part her fairer field,
Will I my poesy and my passion yield:
Fair is that field which richly shall infuse
Nature for art, spirit for Genius.
Into her Orpheus did she breath such spirit
And nature such as none since did inherit.
For since his time all study was disposd
To the ob^cu^^ties which Arts disclose.
Who cares for simples skill? or who is he,
That unto trees will play his mi^stre^^ie?
Art bears a nimbler wing the Lupricall
Is made the perch where Learning loves to fall.
Then so are aloft and shadow with your wings
A cash't Athenian, who in passion sings
To Ismarus exceeding in the fertle
Of Vine and Olive, and the conquerors Myrtle,
The Rose, the Tamarix, and the Iouian Oak,
The Laurel unacquainted with the stroke
Of thunder the Italian Cyprus tree,
The Pine, the Poplar and the Mulberie:
Lethiferous Ewe, whose nature ever craves
Some Golgotha or seat of dead men's graves:
I Will sing to Plants of others and of these,
And call no auditorie but of trees.
The fruitful ^smarus did justly boast
That she excelled in Vine and Olive most:
Then let thy song measure her symphony
In time as semblable: that thou thereby
May make their donatiue the former place
To give unto thy verse a measures grace.
The Vine.
Sing unto her generous self,
Sing her pleasance and of health:
To th'innated Ipes sing,
And the Orgists reuelling.
SOme call her Vine, as if she were invited,
Borne and yet taught, though willing, yet incited
To industry, and some do well (...)
She were no Vine, did she not apprehend
What ever neighboring tree within her tendrels,
When neighborhood is dead and trees are friendles.
But I must bless her by no other name
Then that of Vine, because she is the same.
Because she is vital in mortality,
By whose well tempered heat they live and be.
They live and be where honor health and pleasure
Admit no emulation, mean nor measure.
Of Plants, the Vine is only generous,
Powerful in medicine and Physics use,
So is she pleasures bed, trees chiefest beauty,
For at her feet they prostitute all duty.
Delight, whose complacence is gracious,
Proves her the Majesty of Ismarus;
Honor of Plants, and syluane Emperie,
A gracious Vine, a pleasing Majesty.
Assist me, O thou spirit once traduc'te
From nature of a more heroic Muse.
Thou soul of music houering in the air,
Unto thy Ismarus at length repair,
Return and stand my strong intelligence,
That I may sing the Vines fair presidence:
Excusse my fear, lest fearing I do faint
In the cold blood which shall my heart attaint:
Prevent it, O prevent it, and repute me
Able to sing her greatness worth and beauty.
That she is generous, the use makes good;
It fills the veins of Kings with royal blood.
No liquor but that of the purple grape,
Makes blood so pure* so fresh, so roseate,
It Is that extracted and essential spirit,
Which from the four a second place does merit:
It Is ever such, as ever is the same,
So luster fresh, as moist within the vein.
For why the Vine, as (...) and age aspire,
So no^^ll good does excellence acquire.
So is it pure as fresh, and who not knows,
That pure and fresh do both affect the Rose?
All celebrations do prefer the Vine:
The festall and the sacrificing shrine.
In it the deities are reconciled.
It makes the countenance of Gods more mild,
And well deserves of men, whose feasts do know,
Th'administred wine adds royalty thereto,
And grace, whereof those feasts may glory most,
Which in the knowledge of their Vine do boast.
O do not thou this grace and man disseuer,
But make the Gods propitio^s, O for ever.
She Is generous, that is most unto her self,
But she is more sovereign within the health
Of others, having both the power and will,
To search and cleanse all crude infectious ill:
And to confirm those necessary parts,
Whose dissolution utterly subuerts
The bodies state. My verse may be replete
With fair distinguishment of forms concrete,
To whose dissent the Vine does moderate
In kind observance of the better state,
Contending to make active her intent
In homogeneall and in excrement
Divided: Neither could I not relate,
How it is the vine that does assimilate
The better nutritiues, how it is she,
That purges the corrupting reliquie,
Disioynes the good from bad, digesteth all,
To prove it so, is no provincial.
Thou sovereign Plant, O cleanse this body still,
Be ever Judge betwixt the good and ill.
She Is generous great: and in salubritie
Unto that greatness she does multiply
More worth: O but the Vine's most worthy then,
Her excellence preferred into the Scene.
I do pretend that beauty whose delight
In fair applause commends it to the sight.
Pleasure the subject of true complacence,
There has she laid her primate residence.
Sing ye of this, that in adversity
Make her your refuge and your sanctuary:
That underneath her capreols do debar
The scorching heat of a Meridian star,
And with her leauie ^eguments elate
The cold of air admoued and dislocate.
Your testimony is required herein,
That ever lived securely by the Vine.
Ye Catadupae deaf unto the fall
Of Nilus, or the spheres so musical
Acknowledge thy securer Lethargy,
As from the Vine and not a Poppie tree:
Thy great dimension howsoever great,
Is by the Vine conceald from cold and heat;
To the secured, distressed, or whomsoever,
It Is in the use of refuge or of pleasure.
The body of this tree it self is small,
But notwithstanding it has arms withal,
Whose fair extent so large, so spacious
Shadows the Citizens of Ismarus,
Not borrowing light or luster from the great,
But as the Sun which makes each star repleat
With light of his, so does she lend to all,
And hence it is some do her Cynthia call,
But that is in heaven: They know her on the earth,
The chaste Alph^a or Latonaes birth;
Under her shade Apollo well discloses
Diana sleeping on a bed of Roses:
Sleep on, and sleep securely, for thy bed
Is all of Roses, mixed with white and red.
O how shall I acquit me of this tree,
Being so engaged to her amenitie?
If fly from inward pleasance, it is in vain,
Her outward greatness meets thee there again*
If I reuerse my sight as blind of these,
Her sovereign hand is seen on other trees:
That hand whose Generous beauty led me forth,
And now confounds me in her Sovereign worth.
As modern Painters in their arras story
Show many arches underneath one body:
So fares this Ode referd unto the Vine,
Whose many heads one body must conioyne,
Being all imperfect and impertinent,
As mere position and no argument.
The subtle matter is so implicit,
I suffocate in condigesting it;
And then I faint, and so did Cissus die,
She fell before the vine, and so must I.
She (by the earths advice) embraced the tree,
With iuie leaves and such like borderie,
In token of her love in ages past,
And with such iuie is our vine enchast.
With love of Cissus Cissos ever lives,
And life and love in vines are relatiues.
From this relation many do pretend
A zealous love, when life's proposd the end,
The scope the exigent, and destiny,
Of all their saffron gilded obsequie.
And such the vermin of these subtle times,
Such are th'innated Ipes of our vines,
Bred of the bodies thrift and fat increase,
Begotten by the Sun that shines in peace:
Like the Egyptian fry when Amphyt^ite
Gives slimy Nilus to the Theorite:
As Sun and slime engender those Nilites,
So hot and moist begets our ages Ipes.
Our husbandmen which travail much herein,
Do find this woorme obnoxious to the vine;
Yea some suggest that are more Chymicke wise,
These are the Ipes that anotomize
This goodly tree, that feed upon her leaves,
And what is without the rind, this worm bereaues,
And but that Hydraes waves are of such force,
That no objection counterchecks her course,
Time might produce a some-Herculean wit,
Which by elaborate hand might limit it.
Besides these Ipes, there are Orgists too,
which to the world the shapes of men do show:
But O how much inhumane are they then,
whom wholesome wine makes monsters, and no men?
Too much have they, that are immoderate,
And change the vines true use appropriate,
That surfeit in her bounty, and beguile
Their senses with the too much sweet of wine,
That being drunk dares wrong the innocent,
And in his outrage be incontinent,
Advance th unworthie rich: what dares he not
In frenzy to devise? contriue, complot,
And yet the Vine is not in cause of it,
The draft is all vnguiltie of the drift:
Their fu^ie is the better argu^st,
To prove her powerful where she does insist:
So best ^^^xers make compendious breath,
And fairest object soonest rauisheth.
I dare sustain that no infectious air
Can penetrate the Moons more solid spheare^
Nor profanation in a borrowed shape
Be entertaind within the temples gate.
So are my thoughts secure. Great God secure them,
That Vines conceal no serpents to inure them;
But make this tree the fairest of our time,
Like Sphere and Temple solid and divine;
^
^
^
To (...) th innated Ipes of our Vine.
May (...) Monster (...) of able power,
Nor serpent-^^^e in all her ^ights, devour
This goodly tree, (...) prostrate
^
The Olive.
Here is Olives (...),
And the (...)
^
(...) complete.
Whilst yet these outward senses all surchargd,
With the (...) of (...) Art enlargd
Beyond the (...) Nature knows,
And Art with Nature (...),
The sens^^e (...) and the mystery,
As yet her workmanship we did apply.
But when this (...) air was so dispergd,
We saw the Vine with (...) i^vergd.
Here written Bounty ma^^^ with Providence,
Under this offered duty did commence.
Within a girdle was the Vine empa^ld,
Much like that A^^^y^thian star entaild
In her discoulored cyrcle, (...) the (...)
Which once (...) sire bestowed upon
The vaporous (...). This fair Coronet
Was of the choysest Olive trees complet
That tree which most affects her, and from hence
We view that part of Natures providence.
Of many Olives she composed the same,
And here Th'assumption is required again,
Unto her bounty multiplied thus,
Upon this little hill of Ismarus.
If Nature be so rich in donatiue,
If see the thing that yet is blind of life,
Then may I live to her that so aduerts
When I am dead to Athens and to Arts.
And from a liberal hand with bounty crowned,
The Olive and her lenity resound.
To sing of fair accord and mutual use
In Wine and Oil the Olives expressed juice.
At Ismarus this is a worthy tree,
For there is her Tryne or best triplicitie.
Since to the Vine it holds a near access,
It Is high, it is; O but do not thou impresse
Thy lowly self within descriptions weight,
For honor is a slight suspending bayt.
And how unworthy might I there insist,
That am the Vineyards youngest herborist.
My skil's my counterfeit within this act,
And both as yet of genuine infract.
But she is suggestiue to selfe-flatterie,
Soothing her imperfections to soothe me.
And when I say the Olive tree is tall,
Of fair dimension, beautiful withal,
Her often divided root so deeply laid,
And head like blossoms on the Palm displaid:
If say her pyth is rare, and so dispersed
It Is seldom seen, though many times trauerst:
This flattering Giglot susurrates as much,
And swears this accent is a Doricke touch*
Though harsh of music, and of measuring,
Yet stops and strikes unto the self same string.
This delinition stimulates us on,
And bids me set a nice division
In gardaine Olives, and be discrepant
Betwixt the melancholy stipticke Plant
And the fat Olive, from whose subtle parts
We drayne the oil of many cheerful hearts.
This was the suffrage spousall which the Dame
Proposed to Athens for her borrowed name,
When strife was under wing, and since that time
Her branches well beseems Ionicke shrine.
This tree, as of it self is so abounding
In thriftie fat, that added moystur's drowning*
And suffocates the pure and subtle oil:
wherefore the fattest's not the fittest soil
where to insert this Olive: O but yet
It withers, if the Sun be opposite.
For wisely say our ancient her borists,
It is affected to the rorall mists:
And be it, with limitation that her seat
Be not exempt from sense of heavenly heat*
which may be able to extenuate,
And lay her foggie moisture separate,
which in a modern heat an Aprils Sun
Is powerful to attract, but not consume;
Her beries yet on tree are immature,
And (though by many years) they so endure.
which that they may attain a sauorie taste,
Our skillful husbandmen do use to place
A modest quantity of riper ones,
In a congested pile whereon enthrones
Such favorable and conforting shine,
As some makes timely ripe, some fore their time.
But in confirmed juice the oil is best,
That Is drayn'd and separated easiest
From purse or husk, and such like juice as this,
Is not with earth or earthly parts commist;
The most experienced husbandman sustaines;
Bad Olives ask no soil, the good no pains:
Good needs nor scythe nor pruning instrument,
For so unskillful husbandmen prevent
The Increase of after seasons, and such bleeding
Ads detriment unto the years succeeding.
This tree requires no hands applied to wound it.
No trident rake, nor trenching spade to sound it;
She needs not these, nor needs it us to wrong her,
Disclose the root, but take we nothing from her.
Perhaps we may the earth discumulate,
Descrie some gowte or branch adulterate,
Some tuberous prim, or superfluity
About the root of her unwittingly;
(As not a tree in fruitful Ismarus,
But these attempt t'infect and choke her thus*
And fairest Plants conceals the fowlest weed)
If any such in Olive be descried,
Incision must be used, yet warily:
Cut off th'adulterate branch, but touch no tree.
For why it well deserves, that well discernes
Preservative for good, and cure for harms.
From hence the Romans had it still in use,
When Ianus gates were open and when occluse.
For with her taglets did they stephanize
Their peace-affected heads in civil wise.
And in a foreign expedition,
When fire e^d war had leave to look upon
Their neighboring Provinces, as to prevent
And obuiate defection imminent;
Their s^ore in wine and oil did they propose,
And where these wanted, there supplied their woes.
And such was Oil. But this is serious,
I rather do propose her homely use:
To speak her as the cause of permanence
In color, light* or such familiar sense.
For when the industrious hand would feign pretend
Some (...) work unto whose end
No later age aspires, it is laid in Oil,
Whose durance neither time nor age assoyle.
And when our Lamps are niggard of their light,
Th'infused Oil makes smoke to burn more bright.
This liquor's of an ayerie quality,
And still aspires to principality:
It Is liquids president, it is auersate
With other moists to be incorporate,
Albeit that moist and dry and every thing
Retain the favor of her moystening.
So does it penetrate and find evasion
Throughout the incompacted pores dilation:
And therefore we appoint his proper place,
The solid matter of this brittle glass:
This brittle glass. And what is not glass and brittle?
The flower that scapes the sithe shall meet the sickle.
From glass this precious unguent we extract,
Though it be brittle, yet is it compact;
So should it be transparent with the eyes
Of worthy patients, not of Polities:
Because the constant vessel of our oil,
In whose behalf may all these senses toil,
Much to her self, but more for sympathy
With wine and the viniferous quality.
For Vine and Olive knows one horoscope,
Albeit the Vine first answered Natures hope
Their sometimes mother under timely birth,
And therefore justly held the heir of earth.
Yet in their mutual use we find that mean,
That Is equal different from each extreme.
The Vine is Physics powerful Emperie,
The Olive of a yielding lenity,
It Is mild in practice as a sovereign thing
Her too much use is too much nourishing
In the rank feeding bodies of our state,
Whose commessation is immoderate,
Their senses languishing in excrement,
The stomach opilate and finds no vent,
If wine not interuent, and well decide it;
And to such malady we must prescribe it.
When oil makes rank, and rancour so possessed
By powerful wine his station is deprest;
The sword of Physic purging remedy,
To indigested parts which excrefie,
It Is like the wealth of many Seas enlarged,
Whose all-conspiring waves together charged,
Disfound the highest arches and defense,
Preferring all before their violence:
Such is th'abstracted wine, as in it self,
That will not daine t'intreat the bodies health,
When it has power to search the very raines,
Th'interimies, and all that life sustaines.
It Is in the simple practice over strong,
Unless some other mixture do prolong,
Call back, and mitigate the violence
Which her sequestered spirits shall commence.
And what is so competible concreat?
What more restringing the intentive heat
Of cleansing wine, when wine admits restraint,
(As Votaries sometime direct their Saint)
Then smooth and gentle Oil of mild aspect,
That wine represt by it, may it erect?
It Is mild: so is the wine that is ministered
At sound men's tables, not the sick man's bed:
To well disposed bodies sovereign Wine,
But in prescript of potion it is enclind
To Emperie, where the disease requires
Extinguishment to opilations fires.
But oil alone infused relieues the same,
Where Oil with Wine has power to quench his flame.
Or rather sovereign Wine as it does tend
To maintenance and a preserving end.
For when it cleanses, nothing is subjected,
But some vnnecessaries which infected
The better parts: and when Purgations force
Moves other loyal members with the sourse
And strength thereof, th'enacted violence
Sauors of nothing more than providence,
That lowly rectifies by inquisition,
Least they retain some tincture from Ambition
So does in search them and so rectify,
That pure may savor naught but purity.
So is it sovereign Wine, and so alone,
As to the sound, and in abstraction:
And notwithstanding of it self consisting
T^is great in Medicine, yet in commixing
With gentle Oil it is more general,
For wine and oil are Phisicks all in all.
It is her government of Optimate^
Who under presidence confirm a State.
The vulgar Plants out of this Emperie
Reserving but a modest liberty,
Be they applied unto the outward parts,
When wine erects or inwardly subuerts
Out of occasion: when the Wine with oil
Is more of power t'establish or assoyle,
More victual: wherefore sometimes gilded age
Held their inseparable equipage,
Prescribing Wine and Oil to every grief,
The one to cleanse, the other for relief.
For both may this griefe-labouring Ismarus
Upon her arbitrating power infuse
Myriads of mulsiue Orasons whose sense
May give to wine and oil long residence.
That after seasons may present them yet
To purge and rectify each Ismar^^.
The Myrtle.
Myrsine occupies the stage,
Freshly bleeding to our age.
The Incensed Goddess in remorse
Here imposed Athens curse.
AT Athens: who names Athens here in Thrace^
Licentious Fame that holds her still in chase.
And is there yet concealed some obscure deed
From Ages past, which makes her now to bleed.
Shall Athens (O shall she) with infa^^e
Stand upright in this last Chronology?
And shall these days of ours speak Myrsines death,
The long since Myrsine, that disposed a wreath
In those enacted lusts and Tournament,
What time the Arbitrate indifferent
Ex^ending Garlands to th'applauded head,
Distinguished Conqueror and the conquered?
At Athens there the fair Myrsina lived,
Athens the same that Myrsines life deprived.
An envious Athens that proscribes her best;
Expels her Bees that Drones may be possessed.
Do greater lights obscure thy glymmering?
Or makes it way unto thy Soueraigning.
Amongst the blind that know not to descrie
Thy infinite abuse of Monarchy?
Such is their government, and so austere,
That they expose the man whom they but fear;
Fear him that but observes; and if he see;
That e^e of his peruerts his destiny.
And those fair hopes which Nature did inscoffe,
Adapting fortunes equal to his Birth.
And though thou laydst a most repining hand
Upon thy child, (act worthy to be scand
By after hours from intermitted ages,
Which shall declare to them these native strages)
Yet see thy Goddess, whose Imagerie,
Thou more esteem^st then others deity,
Abhors this deed that cannot hate thy name,
She Will challenge thee, thy infamy disclame.
See how she weeps upon Myrsinaes breast.
And swears that Athens thenceforth, dispossessed
Of her beloved, should to the self same fate
Commit all knowledge of the public state.
What else from learning? By her self she swore,
That Athens should be Athens and no more:
Art should discern of naught but what was right,
And Scholars merely seen in schollership.
Besides she swore, that Art when at the height,
Even then her reputation to be light:
Then least of estimate least priz^d; and why?
It erres in too much popularitie.
Yet she continued in this imprecation,
And yet enioyn'd her to self affectation,
To coffeehouse which shall carry her
Through stranger Nations and ^e^oted far:
Her better wits to be the most vns^^^de,
In giddie action venturous to wade
Beyond themselves, yea and her grauest h^d
Strong in eroticke sects opinioned:
To many mo of Arts the proper vices
Disease^ as manifold, which thence arises,
As Melancholy, Rheum, a hollow ^ie,
A downward looking, and the malady
Of head and headache, lean and pale aspect,
A back inured to bend and to de^lect,
A stomach nice, and apt to be offended,
Diseases to th'extreamer parts extended,
With twice as many griefs, which Art best knows,
All these th incensed Goddess did impose
At Myrsines death, and Learning since her wrack,
Mournes for the fair Myrsina all in black,
To expiate the sin whose memory
Is lif^d in Statua of a Myrtle tree.
For so the weeping Goddess did allow
No more a Myrsine but a Myrtle now.
A tree, whose better kind is very rare:
A tree, that can abide no uncouth air:
A marrish, but no muddie tegument
About the root to hinder her ascent,
A tree that is choakt with too much manurie,
Yet never thriues but by severity:
That at the bitter root is somewhat flow,
But in maturitie it does outgrow
All other Plants, and of these trees we find
Two diverse sorts, and of a differing kind:
Of which the greater is not held the best,
Nor that of earthly parts the most possessed.
For earth restraines the spirits industry,
Assimulating to her quality,
And but what is sensual from the sense bereaues,
Nor is that best, which shows the blackest leaves.
For is there any brain so foul with sud.
But knows the fiend may use a Friars hood?
Nor is that best, which first puts forth her flower,
Being all as apt to wither in an hour:
Or that, whose branching arms are ever green,
Yet never fruit on arms or branches seen.
Some Myrtle shows her fruit unto the Sun,
And shuts her flower but in such Horizon.
Yea, some performs it by the silent night;
And they are such, whose deeds do hate the light.
Some in continual labor, some in rest,
But yet no any of these kinds is best:
And that in Myrtles holds the Primacie,
That knows no daily toil nor Lethargy;
That brooks the day by night, and night by day;
That Is timely ripe, true colored, free from clay.
And such a Myrtle's manifold in use,
If so th^incensed powers can reduce*
Reuerse, and nullify th'imposed cur^^.
If they be reconcil^d, it is of force
Within the bodies cure: In other terms,
It Is not of virtue to relieve her harms.
In fields it is Myrtle, and in Athens yet
Scholars discern of naught but Schollership.
Whereas enlarged the Myrtle's physical,
And Learning manumist most meet instal'd
In public office. Be not this offense.
I wish to Learning some experience.
The Rose.
White is here vermillioned,
Mutual strife of white and red:
Here an arbitrating field,
Both the Roses reconciled.
HOw much inconstancy, what Innovation?
Has wizzard Time seen since the worlds creation.
Many September Moons which have recanted,
Transported Monarchies, and states suppl^nted.
What change in others, and what personate,
How much variety might Time dilate?
There was a time, fore Gods did disaccord,
Obscru'd none else but the first moving Orb,
Then errant stars, and then the firmament
No Motion knew, but what was violent
And from an outward cause: Yet was it thus,
Till Sons of heaven became licentious.
First was Monarchall rule, but Tyranny,
Which now no longer had his sufferancie.
Then they inquired into their optimates,
And held it for a too ambiguous state:
And then anon was f^re Democracie
Turned Pop'lar license and free Liberty:
Then subjects spheres turned head against their Mouer;
Some erred, some in their doubtfulnesse discover
A voluntary course and free incesse,
To which they toil in moving tardinesse.
And semble laggie spiders most in this,
That slow, do yet aspire the Pyramid
Of some erected spoke within the wheel
That Is downward driu'n, or Mariners in keele,
Where sails are spread before some boisterous gale;
They backward walk, with face on wind and sail,
And like rebellious Libertines insist
To make the primate violence remiss:
It forces them, they him again recall,
And still the while, Time must observe them all.
Look down on Ismarus, and Time well knows,
That in his memory it had a Rose,
An only Rose, and that, as only white,
Amongst the rest her fairest Ismarite.
It saw one age in white, so had it more,
Had not this Rose bin steep't in royal gore:
Until the greatest of Nobilities
Did gaze on beauties worth with lustful eyes;
Till Lust or'ecame, and Beauty ravished,
Then was the white turned to vermillion red.
Some say loves Queen pursuing her beloved,
Despaired, because untimely death improu'd
And checked her in the course of fairest hope,
She gave her swelling heart a pulsiue scope:
And all enraged, all naked, all unmasked,
Upon a rose^t bed herself she cast;
And the vermilion drops which issued,
Tinguisht the palefac't Rose in deepest red.
Others say it was Nectar from above,
Which when the wanton boy in dalliance strove
To free him from his mothers arms yfolding,
Checked with his wings the fair Mounteagle holding
An ample Coenophron with Nectar crowned,
Which from his hand admou'd, bedewd the ground,
And sperst his moist upon a roseat bed,
What time her white was all vermillioned.
Hower'e it was, lust caus^d them both to fall,
And Beauties wrack was the Provincial:
And now the Rose was red, and now the rather
Men loved it for the shape then for the savor.
For though it had the shape of seeming Rose,
It sauour'd but of some Abrotonos.
The sent was of a practicke deep intention,
When swelling blood exceeding veins dimension,
By strong eruption sought to cool their heat,
And turn the sourse out of his current quite.
It Was deadly imposition to the brain
Of virtue to enrage, infect, inflame:
Besides it had such strong intent of taste
As families extinguished, and laid waste
The fruitful Ismarus. This Age of red,
Long kept the Rose, and long continued;
Until the earth fearing her own estate,
Least such continuance might depopulate
Herself: least Time protracted might discover
Her nakedness to those which live above her,
Coniur'd the fair assisting hand of Nature,
By laying forth, how but a subject Creature,
Inspired by Art, had brought upon her head
Strong imputation, changed her white to red.
How red had stained her with discolored gore:
And any thing she spoke, which might implore
Or call relief; and powerfully she spoke.
For now the rose and red were separate.
And now the earth prepared a subject matter,
Able to entertain, not Art, but Nature:
A special form which might distinguish it,
From flowers of other kind, not of her sect;
A rose in which there was no ministry
For color to detain the busied eye.
But yet the while, Art out of sound invention,
Contrived to abrogate her own suspension,
Applying color of the deepest grain,
That ever did this Microcosme sustain.
Much matter of her own she ministered*
With more supply of blood disentralled,
Much more in vain of wealthy veins made poor,
Which to this work did empty all their store,
And all to little conquest or success:
For now no tinguishment might here impresse,
And every present might have been the same;
And had not white blushed at such homebred shame,
Now did she blush, that could not yet forbear,
To look upon this native massacre,
This Summers heat gave wings unto the red.
Which war ycleept and erst discomfited,
That war I count, that unto this dissent,
Prescribed a rule and strong arbitrament:
I count it war, the rather for his might,
That powerfully called back the red to white.
Thus mutually the roses d^micate:
Now this aspired* or that held principate,
Till white at length assumed a paler form,
(O crooked age! where whites in white forlorn*)
And borrowes terrible, aspect from death,
Who whilom her of sovereignty bereft.
This pale-fac't Rose was fearful to her self,
Untimely borne a Rose, and borne by stealth.
T*extirp the good^est plants that beutifide
The Tharcian Ismarus on fruitful side.
How like a Boar enlarged and free of head,
Ranging through desert soil vnpeapleld,
Where not the wandering Pilgrim has access.
Applies his fangs with doubled meagernesse
On trees and mushrom shrubs, dissheuering them,
Even from the highest capreolls to the stem?
So did he tyrannize: yet seems it me,
To speak of satiue Rose in modesty:
Suffices that the Bor's incontinent,
Proud of his prey, yea, and so insolent,
That now insulting pride seemd to implore,
Some venturous Knight t'encounter with the bore.
This called the worlds assoyler from a far,
Who now to Erymanthus did repair,
By Iunoes imposition, so to free,
The Arcadian hill, from death and tyranny.
This was the worlds rich Rose, and fairest red,
That ever palled Monster sequestered.
And now the Bore espied his Hunteresse,
Who^ (fearing lest her promised success
Might intercept his friends and call supply
From other beasts of his conspiracy)
Upon a champion strond he her accoasted,
With doubled strength, unworthy to be boasted,
Unworthy any glory, had it bin,
Had he stood Epilogue unto this Scene,
That under retinue seemed to contain
The greatest ones that did possess the plain.
How much the greater was that Victory,
Where Red or'ecame in his minority;
And wrought more wonders in his pupil age,
Than ever was presented to this stage;
That reconciled the simple to her red,
Mixture that might not be distinguished;
And this was neither red nor white I ween,
But that of Province or the Damas^ene:
That Rose, whose zulape in the fourth degree,
Is much astringent for her quality;
The Floramour of fields, that sists the course
Of bloods incontinence and liberal sourse;
That fans exulcerations feruencie,
Calls hot to temperate, cold and moist to dry:
Such is our Rose. O Gods may never she
Exceed her Province or the fourth degree.
The Tamarix.
Mutual parts and Symphonie
Of the Vine and Tamarix tree.
I Sing of Tamarix that Thracian Plant,
A tree which all uncivil Nations want:
For why? in peaceful soil it is only found,
And cannot prosper in dissentious ground.
It grows at Thrace, yet not abundantly,
For husbandmen do much mistake this tree:
Because there are so many sembling kinds,
Whose searie truncks no Myricke sap designs.
There is one noble Tamarix, for her site,
No vpland Thracian but an I mar^te.
There thriues it best, and in her better thriuing,
Requires to ripeness mickle times detriuing;
And when maturitie presents it self
In flowers, which are her only Myricke wealth,
Some envious blast disseuers all her leaves,
And on his wings transfers them to the Seas.
Through many tedious seasons she presents them,
And still the Wind or reaues or else preuents them.
Some say our Tamarix does insert the Rose.
As does the Sea that by observance flows
Or ebs unto the Moon, that that affects
No tree so much, as this of Tamarix,
Yea, and they be so mutually affi^'d,
That either seems on other to depend;
Nor can the Rose unto her self so wither,
As that our Tamarix perish not together;
Nor Myricke so improp^^ate in his fall,
But Rose must needs be inward therewithal.
Well may the Curclew yield herself relief,
But these implore as they impart their grief.
The one unable to erect his head,
If not suffulc't, suborned and furthered,
By his correllatiue; such sympathy
Confirms them both, when in their seigniorie.
And now it seems to me young Herborist.
That Rose and Tamarix should be at the highest,
As I confer this season with times past,
Not that my hopes expected have their last.
The Oak.
The I^^i^^ title plac's amiss,
H^^ ragged ry^d, her Cantharis.
SCarce is the breath dis^ol^'d to subtle air,
wherewith I called it Ionian: O how far
D^^ I mistake, when not a living tree
More subject to loves thunder than is he.
Shall I respire and call it back again?
No, first preuaricate, and may thou feign:
Say any thing, but do not temporize,
Though all the world be bent to poetize.
As says the world, love to the Oak assignd*
His name in smoother bark, not ragged rynd*
I say the bark is smooth and even set,
Where the seuerer nail can find no fret.
The world but now allowde distinguishment,
And now attributes al to his ascent.
Is It but a ascent? and is it not access,
If it reserve but a respectiuenes?
Why Jove allows a competence to state,
But the access he can not tolerate.
How continent is he, would he were many*
Supplies, but not exceedes of duties any?
The cause may be from form, or height, or station,
If these dumb shows have ought of invocation.
For Thunders either free, and such is tending
Only t'assoyle the air without offending:
Or called from Heaven by some significance
Of Characters, such as the Romans once
By power of Kingly office might produce,
Or by attractiue virtue that's infuse
Into some herb or tree, which may inuoke;
The like instinct is powerful in the Oak;
Whose greatness does inuit like Hostils charms,
That answered nothing but his proper harms
By strong attraction: Or the Prophetess
That promis^d others what was her success.
Yt now succeeds. This Plant extends as far
In earth, as it is incorporate to air.
Here other some do challenge her of pride,
That one ambitious tree should so bestride
This little I^mar^^: how far remote,
Is this ambition from the Ionian Oak,
That grows on sandy soil, as heath, or plain?
What presidence can such ambition gain,
That others can suborn* her self subdue,
To whom the least of envy does accrue,
That only hates the Persick plant: and why?
It does partake his birthrights seigniorie,
His greatest style; (vice that's familliar,
Being extraduc't from parents and from state.)
Greatness will envy greatness to the end,
And Ionian with the Ionian will contend.
Her leaves have deep incision, and the barkt,
When aged once, it is crazed and roughly cracked.
It shows her fruit when Sun exceedes the twins,
And sleeps till the solstitian heat begins:
When it puts forth her gall, or akernell*
Which yet sustein^d these earthly bodies well,
In use of bread being ignorant of grain,
From whence some say the Oak assum^d her name:
And not because the Gentile Gods replied,
From the concealing Oak so deified,
When wizzard Seers inquired: nor is it approved,
For lovers sought the names of their beloved
Ycaru'd in Oak it had her name from hence,
Being more of accent in the former sense.
The vulgar sort that never speculate
Beyond observance, do prognosticate
By the innated brood of Oaken gall,
Of after accidents which shall befall
Unto the land: If Fly, or Ant, or Spider;
Or war, or famine shall, or plague betyde her.
I look not on the fruit that hangs aloft,
Nor every thing within the senses brought.
Much less of divination; only this,
Within the Oak I view a Canthari^;
A feeding fly: And this I dare divine,
That fly shall make her wither ere her time.
The Bay.
Laurels sinews withered.
Sleeping Fame with worthies dead.
WAs this that Ismarus, or this that tree,
To whom the Lyrick tuned his minstrelsie*
Was this the price of virtue and the breath,
Which it suspir'd amidst a sea of death,
The Poets grace, Apolloes sometimes mynion?
To see the error of this fool opinion!
And shall the vilest spirit choose his seat,
Where to repose for moisture and for heat;
The whilst our general soul shall animate
A saples trunck, and be incorporate
To abstract earth? Such is erotick Love,
Whose dotage still opinion must approve.
Thou Soul, which animat'st empiricie,
And makes her out side seem sincerity;
That with thy ignorance and strong conceit
Maintein'st his life, and daily do beget
More bastard Lawreats than the world implores,
Mig^t all the world consist of theators:
Out on thee fool, blind of thy impotence,
Thou do admire but in a popular sense;
Esteeming more a Pasquils harsher lines,
Then Iliads worth which Chapmans hand refines.
What might persuade opinion, but for thee,
The Lyrick sung to such an out side tree;
Or Poets glory in their Lawracie,
When ^awrels have their veins shrunck up and dry*
And yet herhaps the seasons are inuerted,
Ours differs from the Laurels first inserted.
The (...) God admiring Daphnes worth,
Out of hi^ (...) drayn^ the spirit forth.
This season yields more Bays then did the first,
But all things near the end grow near the worst:
Witness the withered Bay that wants her juice;
Be more of witness they that are obtuse
To penetrate, and call from monument
The sleeping worth of such whose souls were spent.
In honorable terms to terminate
And yield their memory with life to fate;
Y d^^^e robbed, and bodies yet vnpurg'd:
O how accommodate might this be vrg d!
Once was there such a Sidney. It suffices,
That from the grave his only name reuiueth.
So had this age a Burrowes. O but he
Sleeps with his fame in lasting lethargy.
Norri^, and Morgan sleep, and still the while,
Our better Lawreats study to compile
Some thing prospectiue, and observe the time:
Heroes yet neglected in their shrine.
And since it was denied me to assoile
The times; I therefore studied to report
Of what was past, unable ought to wage
With the invention of this nymble age.
May others make the ears euapo^^^e,
When they unmask the times and worlds estate:
I will admire, yet never will in^ect,
I am not prone but only to reflect.
I Will write unto the dead amongst the living,
Take (...) peculiar theme without cornuing.
Enab^^ (...) Gods as I pretend,
When ye acquit and give this passion end.
The Cyprus.
Sca^e resound the policy,
Of th* Italian Cyprus tree.
IT was no Thracian tree before our time,
^ut foreign Cyprus and a transmarine,
Transferred from Italy to I^marus,
Or from those parts ^f France which are adust
With heat and bee^t I am no Florentine,
I Will speak the policy that's ^upres^ne.
This stranger tree, it is a Plant for kind,
That from an others root does ever climb
Ingraf^ed and it grows as secretly,
Yea, makes no outward show of surquedrie:
Disce^n'd from other trees and specifi^d,
For special subtlety that is vndescn^d:
Of body naked, while it is yet upright,
But when she shall aspire her greatest height,
She apprehends the opportunest wether,
And then puts forth her branch and fruit together:
To hide that indirectnes she applies,
Whilst in concealing ^eguments it lies.
How like an Ad^er wreathing many ways,
Compells her length when she expects her prays,
Administering the more encouragement,
To train him in the circuit of extent?
So manifolded is the Cipru^ tree
Under those branches: such her obloquie*
That wealth composed fills up the continent*
Which none but the discernes or deprehend.
It Is sweet in sent, O who can feed upon
Perfumed words, but some Cameleon?
It is no restoration, nor received
Into the body when it is agrieu'd:
It Is briefly to her self most provident,
But unto others always fraudulent;
Professing what it is dem'd to be,
And still concealing her ability.
The heathen Gentiles only used the same,
When they consumed their dead in Cyprus flame,
Or made them Idols out of Cyprus tree,
As best beseeming such Imagerie.
Time was they used it, and it was only Gentile,
And then Religion was but in the simple,
And knew not how for disputations sake,
T'impugne the Godhead or religious state:
But now religious and the most profane
Partake one Idol and one Cyprus flame.
Such are these latter times, that would improve
More constancy then all the Spheres they move.
I blame the times, and wreake that ill on them,
That appertains unto the sons of men,
Time-studious men: O had I liberty
To reprehend them, as I challenge thee.
The Ewe.
Taxus fatal and relieuing
Cyprus tree by her exceeding.
ANd why should Rome call Nero from his grave,
And term him good, whom erst they did deprave?
Or why should I but now impute that tree,
Which now I must commend respectiuelie?
Nero was hateful Nero, and despised*
Till the succeeding Galba tyrannized:
Cyprus engag^d, till Taxu^ tree relieved it:
And drowned his black in Eben that exceeds it.
Cyprus is only practicke in the senses,
Makes sour seem sweet, and varnisheth offenses;
When eyes see double subjects, and not see
The double dealings of the Cyprus tree.
But Ewe is fatal in the very notion,
The same Cicuta of Th'athe^ian potion,
Extending to the life by taste or savor,
To them that sleep in shade or else receive her
Into the body; yet reserving force,
When spirits are from heart and heat diuorc't.
The Cyprus is as index to the page,
Where Ewe capitulates his fatal rage.
Both know one Ismaru^, one Italy;
Both used in flame and in Imagerie:
Only the Ewe for greatness and intension,
Exceeds the Cyprus and my reprehension.
The Pine.
The Egyptians did bedew their mountain Pine,
Not with the moist of Nilus; but of wine.
How can that Pine but prosper then and flourish,
Whose tender root the purest wine does nourish?
Shall it not thrive manur^d with gracious hands?
Shall it not make a Rich-mount where it stands?
The Fig Tree and the Palm.
THeir fruit is se^suall, pleasing for the time,
But softnes does the sense and soul deline.
The present pleasure has an after vice;
The Date her leprie, and the Fig breeds lyce.
The Poplar.
HErcul^^nish, what Conquest is in that,
When Hercules himself's essen i^^te?
The Lotus.
I Pass Celaster, for it is selfe-willd,
That never thriues but in the fairest field:
The more I write unto the Mulberrie,
The less opinion's mine, if any be.
I^e blame no Ash for Hypermnestraes fate,
I know the foolish girl was desperate.
Let Cedar be ambitious in her height;
Yet be not thou in passion infinite,
And reprehend each, that is offered, vice,
Lest others think thy verses morallize:
Or rather for I fear a Symphonie
Of Ismarites wanting variety,
And change of argument delights us best,
Where Scenes affin'd induce but tediousnes.
And what in trees praise-worthie is derived,
From beauty of the outward parts contrived;
Or some inherent Virtue, so again
In the unworthy Plants we always draine
Inuectiue* either from th'ingratefull sent,
From shape, or from the quallities intent,
Or other such like vices: now the while
Good do the bad, and both themselves beguile.
Some one that's general good having his due,
Preuents the praise belongs to them ensue:
So is it in bad, and so it shall suffice,
Only to speak of one in contraries.
Virtue illustrates vice, describes defines it,
What^s not of her, she unto vice assigns it,
Hence is it, this spatiou^ subject I sustaind,
Is now at length abridg'd and much restraind
Of scope, which here I studied to compresse,
And it compel, ^earing to be distressed
Of sentence, and of words equivocate.
Unless I streine the sense, or iterate;
When words and sentence* and the self same sense,
Are often required in the subsequents.
Of many trees I have reserved one,
Some call it Lotus, others Citragon*
Her fruit is envious to the memory,
Conducing all things unto fantasy.
Believe it, sometimes has my self co^uerst
With such as wot not what they were at first,
Lot^pha^^, who ravished by taste,
Forget them selves, friends, country, and what is past.
This fruit received shall make me quite forget,
I was in p^ssion, or an I mar^^.
And now me thinks she practices her force
Upon these senses: now she does discurse,
Now seperates what sorrow did atone,
Making it but some Hemeridi^n.
My day is done, now is my passion ended,
And but her relics on mine eyes suspended.
Baccharis Coronaria.
THe toyled lims and senses erst oppressed,
Do now advise (...) where to rest.
Under Baccharis go shade thee,
Where no Serpent shall invade thee,
Where the Viper cannot live,
Nothing envious may corriue.
Strowe the Carpet all about,
With her flowers to keep them out:
Bind thy Temples with the wreathes,
Pleated in Chiroticke leaves:
Brows and eyelids feign of rest,
With the juice may they be sperst.
Here repose, for here assure thee,
Thou sh^lt sleep, and sleep securely.
Stand hope of mine confirm^d* and let me rest
In Castle guarded with a Lioness.
-- Cum tonat ocyus Ilex
Sulphur discutitur sacro quam tuque domusque.
FINIS.

