MASTER BEZAES SERMONS UPON THE THREE FIRST CHAPTERS OF THE CANTICLE OF
CANTICLES:

WHEREIN ARE HANDLED THE CHIEFEST POINTS OF RELIGION CONTROVERSED AND DEBATED
BETWEEN US AND THE ADVERSARY AT THIS DAY, ESPECIALLY TOUCHING THE TRVE JESUS
CHRIST AND THE TRVE CHVRCH, AND THE CERTAIN and INFALLIBLE MARKS BOTH OF THE
ONE AND OF THE OTHER.

TRANSLATED OVT OF FRENCH INTO ENGLISH BY JOHN HARMAR, HER HIGHNESS PROFESSOR IN
THE GREEK TOVNG IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, AND FELLOW OF THE NEW COLLEGE
THERE.

AT OXFORD, PRINTED BY JOSEPH BARNES, AND ARE TO BE SOVLD IN PAVLS CHVRCHYARD
AT THE TIGERS HEAD, 1587.

TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT AND HOnorable Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of
Lecester, Baron of Denbigh, knight of the most noble order of the garter,
Master of the Queens Majesty's horse, and one of her graces most Honorable
privy Counsel, John Harmar wishes all godly felicity, continuance of
health, increase of Honor, and graces eternal.
I WAS REQVESTED, RIGHT HOnorable, by many of my friends, to emploie the time
of this last vacation of mine from my public readinges in the University, in
the translating of Master Bezaes Sermons upon the Canticle of Canticles, which
I had a little before received from the Francfurt Mart in French, into our
vulgar and Mother tongue. The desire I had of advancing and promoting the
glory of God, which is then especially increased and farthered, when his word,
the mirror of his will, is no longer a sealed book unto the simple and
ignorant, but a volume laid open in clear and capital letters, that he that
runs may read it: enforced me principally to undertake upon my present
leisure, this more painful, then happily thankful work of translating.

Wherein, for the vtility and profit of many, as well the learned as the
unlettered who have not the understanding of the French tongue, I did the more
willingly emploie both my leisure and my pain, because I would have somewhat
to present your Lordshippe withal for a token and monument of my thankful
duty, and dutiful thankfulness, upon so many, so memorable, so utterly
undeserved benefits of your Honor, not so much collated, as congested, and
heaped from time to time upon me. For extend I the cogitation of my mind to the
farthest part of my infancy and childhoode, and draw it forth as in a
continual and even thread unto this present time, what part of my age has not
been honored with the patronage of your Lordships favor and goodwil toward
me? The ground and foundation of my first studies laid in Winchester by your
honors only means, in obtaining her highness letters for my preferment unto
that school; the rearing of the farther frame of them in this College,
wherein placed by your Lordships favor, I yet continu; my time spent to my
great desire and contentment in the parts beyond the Seas by your Honors
intercession; my room and degree I do now enioie in the University being
one of her Majesty's public professors, purchased by your Lordships
favorable mediation, do every of them in particular deserve a volume of
acknowledgements in all thankfulness and humble devotion toward your honor. And
therefore, that I might not seem unmindful of your Lordships gracious respect
and favor toward me, or drown so many benefits received in the flud of
forgetfulness and utter oblivion, I was bold to adventure the delivery of
these my simple labors in this so small a work of translation unto your
Honors patronage.

What common profit and emolument the work it self may bring unto the Church
of God among us, may be easily esteemed of them, who shall aright consider
both the argument it self deduced in this present treatise, as likewise the
author whose deduction and exposition it is, and lastly both the manner he
has used in the handling thereof, and the principal end whereunto he has
directed it.

The Argument therefore or subject thereof, I mean the Canticle it self,
entitled by an eminency of speech, the Song of Songs, that is the only Song
as it were in the holy Scripture, and of the most heauenliest and excellentest
ditty, concluded in terms and phrases of speech altogether enigmaticall and
allegorical, and containing the great mystery as the Apostle calls it of
our salvation, the mystical conjunction of Christ with the faithful his
members, and the whole order of the spiritual fraunsailes and marriadge match
it pleases Christ to contract with his Church, being always reputed so dark
and obscure, so hard and difficult, that many as well of the ancient as of the
later Church have thought this arm of the maine Ocean of holy scriptures, the
waters of life, fitter for the Elephant to swim, then for the Lamb to wade
in: that is, according to the phrase of the Apostle, rather strong meat for
such as are grown unto a perfect man in Jesus Christ, then milk for such as
are still babes and infants in understanding: it can not be denied but that the
sound interpretation thereof according unto the sense and meaning of the holy
Ghost, the uniformity and consent of other scriptures, the proportion and
analogy of christian faith, must needs be profitable and available to the
edification of the Church of God, the congregation of saints. For what
admirable comfort, and consolation utterly incomprehensible, the reading of
this part of Scripture may bring every Christian, what peace and tranquillity
it may breed in the afflicted mind and conscience, what incomparable joy it
may work in the hearts of the believing, it is easy to consider by the spouse
her self in this place representing not only the whole but every part and
member of the Church of God. My beloved, says she, is mine, and I am his. Lo
the ground of our holy assurance of the favor and love of God toward us.
The which words making and plighting in most formal sort a reciprocal donation
of the Bride to her Bridegroom, of Christ to his Church, serves as it were
for the burden of this holy and sacred nuptial song. Now this ground being of
it self so comfortable and so plain, deduced thoroughout by the way of
mutual speech in many dark and allegorical terms and similitudes, implies
a singular degree of consolation in the rest being soundly and perfectly
understood.

And albeit many have travailed in the exposition of this most comfortable part
of holy scripture, among whom some of our own countrymen have well deserved of
the Church of God for their painful labors in this behalf, notwithstanding
if I be not deceived with the love and affection I bear the author, in whose
translation I have labored (a man to be embraced and loved of all who love
the Lord and embrace his truth, but in particular to be honored and
reverenced of my self, who found him no less then a father unto me in
courtesy and good will, when I lived as a stranger in Geneua, and enjoyed the
benefit of hearing of him in lectures and sermons) there is none that has so
plainly, so perfitely, so distinctly set down and expounded it, as he has
done. Wherein let Mounsier Genebrard himself be judge, whether Master Beza
understand this Canticle or no, and leave to accuse with such shameless
impudency his ignorance and impiety.

Now for the profit and benefit of the Church of God in common, how could it
be more plainly and familiarly, more largely and plentifully, more distinctly
and particularly handled, then by this way which he took for the behoof of
his particular flock and charge, the people of Geneua, to expound the whole
Canticle by particular sermons, and so to draw from thence for instruction and
doctrine, rebuking and reproouing, warning and exhortation, comforting and
consolation, what ground and precepts soever might be offered? Which how
aptly and fitly it is done by Master Beza in these sermons, there is no man so
ignorant which in reading shall not perceive: especially observing those
special notes which contain the sum of all that which in the sermons
following he has particularly deduced and handled, every section aunswering by
the like figure unto that which is premitted in those summary contents, which
may serve both in steed of marginal notes, and an exact table unto the whole
work. And in these who so list may summarily and shortly see in what sort the
Authors whole discourses are framed and directed, according unto the natural
importance of the text it self, against the adversary.

And this is it whereat principally Master Beza has in these sermons of his
aimed, namely, to the conuincing of the adversary in the chiefest and most
fundamental points controuersed between the Papists and us, and especially
touching the principal points concerning the true Jesus Christ (for there are
false Christ's gone out into the world, and many say, here is Christ, and there
is Christ, but believe them not) and the true Church (for there is a false
Catholic Church too, resembling the true only in name) and the certain and
infallible marks both of the one and the other, which are the questions
especially debated between our adversaries and us at this day. As in deed
this is the principal end and scope which Solomon himself respected in this
song of his, namely, to paint forth unto us in most lively colors, as well the
true and essential qualities of this Bridegroom, as also the native and lively
portraite of this spouse, which is his Church. And therefore five of the
sermons of this volume, which go no farther then the third Chapter of the
Canticles (for the rest Master Beza has promised if God will hereafter, and my
self by the assistance of the same God will according to my leisure perform
the translation of them when I shall receive them) concerning the description
of Salomons Coche, and the crowning of him with a crown by his mother in the
day of his fiaunsailes, are wholly touching the usurped tyranny of the Church of
Rome over all Christendom, and the falsification, which the head thereof, who
names himself the Lieutenaunt general in earth unto this king which is here
crowned, uses, in all the ordinances and laws of God. And first in the law
moral, throughout every commandment, first, second, third, fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eight, ninth, and tenth: and then in the law ceremonial,
thirdly in confounding the law with the Gospel, and causing men, to seek
after their salvation in that which inditeth and condemns them, showing and
proouing after this how Christ is degraded from all his estates and offices by
this Apostaticall See. And first of his dignity royal, then his state
prophetical, thirdly his Priesthood. The same both touching these and other
points debated between the Papists and us, is likewise performed throughout
his whole sermons, that the diligent reading of them may furnish every one of
the simpler and ignorant sort, with store of weapons defensive and offensive
against the adversary.

Some few things, being personal matters, I must confess unto your
Lordship, I have omitted in the printed translation, which are pointed unto by
a little star, that who so list to see them may by that means consult the
author himself. I thought it for my own part not convenient, as many good men
also with me, to hinder the Church of so great a commodity, as I doubt not
this work will bring it, by occasioning any offense through some few words
which might happily breed some grieuance. And herein as I doubt not, but the
author himself, for his love toward me, will pardon me: so I hope all the godly
will hold me excused.

It remains I beseech your Lordship in all duty and humility favorably to
accept of this simple present of mine, no requital or recompense of your Honors
bounty and liberality always exhibited unto me, but a testimony and
signification of my grateful and thankful mind most affectionatelie devoted
unto al serviceable duty toward your honor.

THE Lord of Lords and God almighty, guide you ever, and direct you in all your
honorable actions with his holy spirit, and continue you long in all honor
unto his honor: for the welfare of his Church, the benefit of our common
Weal, the patronage of our University, the joy of all such as pray for your
Lordships health and prosperity. Amen.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE XLV. Psalm, serving for an Argument and preface or
abridgement of this book of the Canticle of Canticles or song of songs of
Solomon.
THis Psalm as the whole book of the Canticle of Canticles is to be taken
and altogether to be understood in a spiritual sense: and therefore there is
no appearance or show of reason to take it as some have done, for a marriadge
song of Solomon and Pharoes daughter. For besides, that the title which is in
Hebrewe over many of the Psalms would have made some mention touching this
point, we see how this marriadge is condemned, and that worthily by the holy
ghost, 1. Kings. 11. so far it is from all reason to take that alliance and
marriage of his to have bin a figure of so holy and sacred a one as that is
which is proposed unto us in this Psalm. We have therefore in this psalm an
excellent and most divine treaty touching the most strait and spiritual bond
and alliance which is between Jesus Christ and his Church, every point
thereof being prosecuted and continued under such forms and phrases of speech
as are customarily used in the treaty of the conditions of a natural marriadge
between such persons as are of an high degree and quality: as the Prophets
also have in many places retained the very same terms of Bridegroom and spouse
and of marriadge speaking of Jesus Christ and of his Church, as the Apostle
has likewise used the same, namely, Romans 7.2. and 2. Cor. 11. and Ephs. 5.

We are therefore to note in the first place that as in the matter of mariadge
the fiansailes or betrothings are first solemnized and then afterward the
marriadge, so Christ also as the bridegroom of the Church ought to be in some
sort considered after two diverse manners, first according unto his infirmity,
which may be compared unto the fiansailes: and secondly according unto his
glory which he obtained after his resurrection, being now the true husband of
his Church, replenished himself with glory, though she be yet remaining in
part upon earth. Now as touching this psalm Christ is therein proposed unto
us, as being already in his glory, and as he who has begone already to
accomplish in deed this holy marriadge with his Church.

Christ therefore as husband is this true king of his Church, so perfect in
respect of himself in all beauty, that there is nothing wanting, verse. 2. As
touching the good grace he has to win all hearts unto himself, and even to
change and turn them altogether, the same also appears in the preaching of
the gospel accompanied with a virtue and power of the spirit which cannot be
expressed. Himself in as much as he has taken upon him the nature of man,
has received in the same nature the spirit of God without measure, in such
aboundaunt wise that he poured it as it were over in all his saints.

He is girded also with a sword, and that not in show only without effect,
but which he draws and vnsheatheth in deed, namely then when he makes his
word to pearce unto the dividing of the soul and of the spirit: verse. 3.

He is besides described to be furnished and provided with arrows with which
he shoots thorough and transpearceth all his enemies, ver. 5. which makes
also that al praise ought principally and souerainly to be yielded unto him,
who shows himself of so ready and mighty a power that he is able to succor
and defend such as are his, and to break in sunder and overthrow the strength
of such as rebel against him. ver. 5. To this purpose he is introduced as
being trained in his chariot by these three horses, Truth, Meekenes, and
Righteousness, which are conducted by the word as by him that guides this
Chariot, verse. 4.

Now to declare at large the sense and meaning of every of these things here
proposed, it would require a great volume. Notwithstanding we may as it were by
the way observe somewhat out of them, if we make a comparison on the contrary
side of the train they keep, and on what chariot they cause themselves to be
carried, I mean the kings and Princes who serve that master which is opposed
altogether unto this head of the Church, in whose whole furniture and provision
is nothing but Ambition, Pride, Insolency, Cruelty, Dissolution, with an
horrible tra^pling under and oppressing of them which are their subjects. We
must also diligently note that which is added, that albeit the world will not
accept this most just and most mild government of his, that notwithstanding
this so just a king governs always most happily, and that the more men
oppose and set themselves against him, the more he makes his power to
appear, whether it be in that so just and assured defense which he causes
those who are his to feel, or whether he strike his enemies within unto death
by a most divine power, namely when he casts them into a reprobate sense to
make themselves the instruments of their own ruin and destruction. Now albeit
these things come to pass every day, inasmuch as this good king does always
defend all his elect, to the end that none of them perish, and inasmuch as he
does vengeance upon their enemies according as it pleases him to show the
marks thereof: notwithstanding this appeared most expreslie in the first
beginning of this marriage, as it seems to be here in some sort touched, when
he showed such vengeance on that ungrateful synagogue of the Jews obstinatly
perseuering in her incredulity, in which she continues unto this date,
reserving notwithstanding the remnaunt of his elect according unto his express
mercy which he promised unto the race of Abraham, how rebellious so ever it
does show it self.

Now after this king has obtained such a victory, he is here seated on his
seat of Justice and Righteousness, which is called eternal and everlasting,
ver. 6. to give us to understand that it is not of this woorld, and that not
only because that Justice establishes the seat of the king in this world, as
it is written, Prou. 27.28. but especially because here the question is of a
king who is together both true God eternal, and true Son of David according
unto the flesh, unto whom also in as much as he is man is given all power both
in heaven and in earth, being exalted above every name, as this place is
alleged, Heb. 1.8. in so much that the Church has no more many kings, then
one woman can have many husbands: neither is he whom she has for her husband
so God, that he is not also man, seeing otherwise the marriage would not agree
between him and the Church which is gathered from among men: as neither is he
man in such sort, that he is not God too, because that otherwise the Church
should not have an head and husband mighty enough to defend her.

Afterward is declared the most righteous government of this goodly kingdom,
to wit, of the Church, ver. 7. for there is no kingdom but the Church which is
governed by the true rule of a most just and moderate discretion, be it in
public charges or in private duties and particular charges, because it is in
it properly that the spirit of God does reign, which orders and directs
indeed the senses, and governs the affections of the true faithful and
believing. And the reason of this point which is added is of great weight,
namely, because that this king of the Church both in respect of his person as
also of his office, is anointed above his companions, that is to say, we must
set him by himself in another order and degree then other kings are. For even
in the most excellent kings, yea in David himself there have been many
defects and imperfections, but in such a king as this is there is nothing but
all perfection.

As for that which is added of the most exquisite robes and vestiments of this
king, verse. 8. this is referred partly unto that proper voice which the father
caused to be heard when he was baptized, saying, This is my well-beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased* by which voice is given us to understand the full and
perfect reconciliation with the father by that most sweet odor as well of the
integrity and righteousness resiant in the parson of Christ our Immanuel, as
also his obedience unto death even the death of the cross. These same
vestiments also and robes of his are referred unto that which the Apostle
says, 2. Cor. 2.15. we are the sweet odor of Christ as of him who has been
made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, 1. Cor.
1.30. which blessings he powers down upon us from those palaces of Iuory,
which are those heavenly places where he is seated, and from whence he
looks upon us, and from whence also he causes these blessings and graces of
his, to flow down upon us, yea his own self (as we may so say) after a
spiritual manner and fashion, and such as is utterly inco^prehensible unto us.

This king and Bridegroom being thus described unto us, the condition and
estate of the Church his spouse, and of their whole marriage is most amply set
down and handled verse. 9. Now in the discourse and handling hereof there are
adjoined unto the Israelites and faithful Jews which properly represent this
spouse, certain others which are the kings Daughters also to be her
companions: al which notwithstanding appertaining but to one husband represent
unto us by this means the person of one only Church truly Catholic, that
is to say universal, but yet in such sort that they are as it were placed
after this principal spouse of the people of Israel: because the first right
appertains first of al unto the holy Prophets and Apostles of the nation of
the Jews and to all the other which the Apostle calls the natural branches,
by whose ministry also we have been led and conducted into the chamber of
this king, with whose gold and glittering shining we are made bright and
shining. We are farther to note touching the ornaments of these Queens which
are the body of the Church, that it is not said that they took them out of
their own cabinets and ward-robes, but they received the^ of the king himself,
to the end it should be acknowledged that whatsoever is fair and goodly
proceeds not, as it is most true, but from his mere grace and favor who has
covered our poverty and nakedness. Whereupon it follows that she ought properly
to be held and taken for the true Catholic Church whom we see to come forth
in this place with her companions in all humility with that rich crown of the
only righteousness of Christ her king and savior, embraced by faith and freely
imputed and allowed her: although together with this righteousness of faith
there must appear besides in the faithful an actual righteousness, but never
perfect and entire, but only begun and delineated forth by little and little,
by which notwithstanding a man may always distinguish the children of light
from the children of darkness, as it seems our Lord Jesus Christ had also
respect thereunto, Math. 22.11.

Al these things being thus handled, in which almost all the secrets of our
salvation are comprised, the Prophet addresseth his speech unto the Church or
rather unto every member thereof: ver. 10.11. exhorting to study to please this
Bridegroom who cherishes and favors her so much, showing withal how she
shall do it, namely if in hearkening diligently unto him (according as faith
proceeds of that which a man hears of God himself, and without which a man
cannot please God) and ordering her self altogether unto him (which is done if
she take narrow heed unto his will which is seen in the glass of the Law)
she begins to rid her self in the whole train and tenor of her life from
al wicked spots and defilements of corruption which she has in herself
imprinted in her both from the original and beginning of her nature and being,
and from the nouriture of her Parents as also of al such as after by custom
and continuance are grown according unto the flesh and deeply rooted in her,
that so she may learn the better to obey this only Bridegroom of hers as
her true head and Lord for ever.

Afterward there is adioined an exhortation which is used in respect of the
small beginninges of the Christian Church such as it was when it began to take
her first beginning in Jerusalem, ver. 12.13.

For it is easy to be seen by the Acts of the Apostles what the Church
might be according unto the flesh when there were in the first assembly but
threescore persons and those poor people and of no countenance or appearaunce,
and therefore he comfort her and foretells that it shall come to pass,
that they even of Tire it self, under whom he comprehends the strange
nations and the very mightiest of the world, should join themselves unto her.
And yet for all this he warns her in good time that all this goodly beutiful
show and setting forth whereof he makes mention, and which he says is to be
priced above all the gold in the world without comparison and whatsoever
ornament the greatest Queens of this world might have, ought to be within and
in the heart and not without to be apparent only unto the eyes according unto
the fashion and manner of the world, ver. 13.14.15. and that yet a day should
come when it should appear so high and magnificent in this Queen and in her
Daughters, that it should surmount and exceed all the magnificency the mind of
man were able to conceive, namely then when we shall meet Christ as the Apostle
speaks, and when being entered with him into his palace we shall be and
abide with him for ever.

Now to conclude if any man demand what this Bride shall do while she waits
and expects the last acco^plishment of this souerain bliss and happiness
which this blisfull Bridegroom shall in the end bestow upon the church his true
spouse: it is said that this spouse for the time she waits for shall not cease
to bear or bring forth children unto this husband ver. 16. yea and those
excellent and good children, and such as shall resemble and prove like unto
their true ancestors, I mean the ancient Prophets and Patriarchs: and such as
shall be kings to rule over all the coasts and quarters of the world, having
therein by the virtue of the spirit of this great king subdued and overcome
satan, sin, death and themselves. Whence it follows that then here shall be in
every respect a most perfect marriage, and such a one as shall endure for ever.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON THE 1. CHAPTER. It is written as follows in the title
of the third book of Solomon. The Canticle of Canticles, or Song of Songs, of
Solomon. The principal points handled in the first Sermon.
1 That this book is canonical, but ought to be red, and expounded in the
church with great discretion.

2 That nothing contained in holy writ ought to be concealed or hid in the
church, and wherefore God has not always spoken so plainly at one time as at
another.

3 Wherefore the holy ghost has chosen and prosecuted so far the allegory of
marriage, both in this Canticle or So^g, as also elsewhere.

4 Three manners of Gods joining him self with his creature, the one general,
the other particular in the person of Christ Jesus: the third of the son of
God with his church.

5 Of the persons which are introduced and brought in in this Canticle, in
manner of a dialogue, or mutual speech, with the sum and scope thereof.

6 Wherefore this Canticle or Song, is called the Canticle of Canticles or Song
of songs, and who was the penman thereof.

7 A special observation touching the order of the three books of Solomon.

8 An enhortation for every one to make his profit by the exposition of this
Canticle.

THIS book albeit it has bin as well in the ancient church of the
Israelites, as also in the Christian church by one common consent not only
reckned amongst the number of those which the holy Ghost has spoken and
uttered to the pen, and which ought to be the rule and canon of our faith: but
also held for one of the most excellent and spiritual of all the rest: yet
has it not bin handled or red in the church as every of the other, but
reserved to be proposed unto them, who were farther advanced and grown up in
the knowledge of God, and were of a more stable and constant judgment. The
causes whereof were, first because the style and phrase thereof is altogether
allegorical and enigmatical, that is to say, delivers to our understanding
things heavenly and spiritual, by a similitude and figure of things natural
and corporal, which every man neither of himself can, nor by the help of an
other is able, so to conceive and understand, as thereby thoroughly to be
profited and instructed. Secondly because this allegory is wholly grounded upon
the conjunction and coupling of man and wife in marriadge: in the which, being
humanely and carnally considered, we shall find even from the beginning
thereof unto the end, many great wantes and imperfections on men's behalfes,
which defaultes as they have been ever rife since the entrance of sin into
the world: so we know how they have bin daily increased sithence men have for
so long a time given themselves over to all this uncleanness and wantonness,
which is no other thing then a polluting and defiling of the honest and chaste
caresses, dilections, and embrasementes in marriadge. The which notwithstanding
it has in it many defectes and blemishes, which the Lord of his great goodness
must support and cover, hinders not but that according to the saying of the
Apostle Heb. 15.4. Marriadge is honorable amongst all, and the bed thereof
undefiled. And thus you see how some considering the mischievous manners of this
world, and be cause there are in this Canticle many kinds of speeches,
according to the simplicity of that time in which this book was written, which
the world might easily abuse, have been hardly induced to interpret it in the
church, fearing least it should bring more harm thereunto, then profit and
edification. Others there have been which have gone farther, and have been so
bold and hardy, or rather so ouerweening and headdy, as to go about to raze
this book out of the canonical scriptures, as being a writing altogether
profane, and compiled by Solomon in the midst of his wanton and licencious
dissolutio^s. As touching the first sort of these men, they are herein to be
greatly commended, that they think it not good that every one should rashly
and unadvisedly be carried or led to the ha^dling of this book: according unto
the saying of the Apostle 1. Cor. 3.2. that we must begin with milk, and so
proceed and come to hard and solid meat. Which thing has bin carefully and
diligently observed both in this church and in others by the faithful pastors
and ministers. But as for those which presume to condemn this book, they are
no more to be harkened unto or regarded then those, who desperately and
arrogantly address and oppose themselves against the spirit of God. For
besides that the old and new church has from all times judged the contrary,
(this book being diligently expounded by the ancient Doctors both greek and
latin, yea even in monasteries amongst the monks used and handled, as a book
altogether contemplative more then any besides: albeit they then made solemn
profession of being far from all thought of women and marriage) this very
allegory of marriadge, is very amply to the same end and purpose prosecuted in
other books, which by a perpetual and common consent have bin always held for
holy and divine, as in the Psalm 45, which is as it were a sum and
abridgement of this whole Canticle, and in Esaias, 62.1.6. Ierem. 3. Ezech. 16.
and 23. Oseas 1.2. Math. 25. Ioh. 3.29. Romans 7.1.2. Cor. 11.2. and especially
Ephe. 5. where the Apostle uses the very same words which Adam used in the
first institution of marriadge, to wit, that the church is made flesh of the
flesh of Jesus Christ, and bone of his bones, which is, says he, a great
secret and mystery: to be short the holy Ghost in the Apocal. 17. is the
expounder and interpreter of the beginning of this book. Neither is that to be
regarded which some bring for an argument why this book is not Canonical,
because that no place of it is alleged in the new testament. For first,
beside that which I have said of the 45. Psalm, that it is an abridgment of
this book, the similitudes which are taken from marriage in Saint Paul, and in
the last chapter of the Apocalypse are drawn from hence: and by the same reason
we may condemn other books of the old testament, which are received without
contradiction or gainsaying.

2 We must therefore use and observe a mean in the exposition of this book,
handling it then and in such wise as it appertains, in the church of God. For
God will not that any thing which he teaches us by his Prophets and Apostles
should be hidden or kept secret in such sort, as to content our selves to have
it enregistred only in his word, without farther regarding and considering
what it is: as the Paynimes were wont to deal in their false religions and
worships, who feared their abuses should be discovered, if their mysteries were
known: or as we yet to this day see it practiced in the false church, where
the reading of the scriptures in the vulgar and common tongue is forbidden:
whereas the Apostles and Prophets since the beginning have spoken and written
in a common and intelligible language, to the end they might be understood of
all men. And yet is it very true, that the holy Ghost has not used throughout
the same style and manner of writing, but has spoken sometimes very plainly,
sometimes obscurely, in such sort notwithstanding, that (as one of the ancient
fathers has heretofore well observed) obscurity and darkness is tempered and
mixed with plainnes and clearnes, to the end to sharpen and quicken our desire
to search after that which we understood not at the first, and to cause us to
esteem more higher of the secrets of his wisdom, after that he has bestowed
on us the gift of knowledge and understanding of them, upon our careful
diligence of reading and conferring together the places of scripture. And this
is that which we hope to do, by Gods good assistaunce obtained by your
prayers, in the expounding of this book: seeing it is now about fifty years
that God has set up, as it were anew, his holy Iubile amongst us, causing the
holy light of his gospel to shine in such sort in this place, that now nothing
in this behalf ought to seem new and strange unto us: as if we were yet young
infantes and babes in understanding: in steed of being ashamed not to be of
the number of those, of whom it is spoken in the fifth to the Hebrews, that they
be exercised and practiced in discerning between that which is good and that
which is evil.

3 Now for the understanding of this book, it is requisite we learn and know,
what moved the holy Ghost to choose and prosecute so far this similitude of
marriadge: the which is not, as I said before, if God would deal with rigor
in examining every point thereof, without many great wantes and imperfections.
This was it therefore, to speak in few words, because there is not amongst
men, either in respect of the obligation, a more sacred and divine, or in
regard of the effect, a more strait and firm bond to be found, then this of
marriadge. For in all other contracts and bargains wherein one man is obliged
and bound unto the other, the question and point is only of the goods and
possessions of this world, and of such things as are without the persons which
bargain and contract together: or if the matter be touching the body, yet is
not the obligation reciprocal, wherein the one party is as much interessed as
the other: but may happily be as far to the disadvantage of the one, as the
advantage of the other: as for the contract of marriage, therein God himself
as principal author so deals, as that this bond continues indissoluble, if
himself say not the word to the contrary, and break this bond either by death
or by any other his ordinance. And again the obligation or bond of both
parties is so mutual and reciprocal, that neither of the parties is free and
at his own choice, and both of them become as it were one person by the
conjunction of marriage. Now, which is more, the effect thereof is rather
divine then humane, to wit, the generation and procreation of mankind. For God
by this contract uses men as his instruments to do that which is properly
belonging to himself, to wit, to the engendring of ma^kinde, whereof his
church is made and composed. For albeit this ordinance of God, Increase and
multiply, be extended generally to all the creatures, comprising man also in
the number of them: yet notwithstanding, as the creating of man, both touching
the male and touching the female, is other and different from that of the rest
of the creatures: even so we must conclude that God has led and conducted the
race and succession of mankind from the father to the son, to his effect by
a special and particular conjunction in wedlock, specially ordained and
blessed by the inspiration of his holy spirit and calling upon of his name. The
holy Ghost therefore minding to represent unto us, that which in it self is
incomprehensible, and not to be conceived, I mean that most streit spiritual
bond of Jesus Christ, with every faithful soul, to the end to engender in the
minds of the believing (the assembly and congregation of whom is called the
church) the knowledge of truth, together with all other holy motions and
operations, thereby to quicken and give life to every one of the faithful
wholly and entirely, and consequently to his whole church and congregation in
the true life which lasts for ever, could not choose a more proper similitude,
nor a more lively pattern and model thereof then this conjunction of
marriadge.

And this is also the reason, why the word of God, which is received and
fructifieth by faith, is by Saint Peter called The incorruptible seed.
Hereunto also tends that second generation and New-byrth, which is made by
the spirit, whereof our Lord Jesus Christ so largely treats with Nicodemus
Ioh. 3. which I will therefore declare unto you and handle more at large,
because this secret, whereof I now speak, is the ground and foundation of our
salvation.

4 Every one of us then is constrained to confess, that every good thing
comes from God, whether we consider the essence and being which all the
creatures have received of God, or the diverse qualities whereby they are
mayntained. Which thing is signified unto us by the Apostle Act. 17. when he
says, That in him we are, we live and have our moving, as if God the Creator
did, as I may so say, insinuate himself within his creatures, to declare unto
us the better, that divine efficacy and woorking of his, which is in them
opened and displayed, according to that measure and durance it pleases him:
although to speak properly, his divine essence, be neither within, nor
without the world, but comprehends all, it self being incomprehensible. But
there are two other manner of conjunctions, yea rather unions of God with man,
much different from that whereof I last spoke, and of an effect of greater
consequence, to wit, first of all the uniting of the eternal son of God with
a true body and true humane soul in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, by a
personal union, which to the Angels themselves is incomprehensible, by which,
the word, which is the son, eternal and coessentiall with the father, was
made flesh, Ioh. 1.14. in such sort that since, this person, which is called
Jesus Christ, Mat. 1.16. is true God and true man, without any either seuering
or confounding of the two natures: which is that great secret whereof the
Apostle speaks 1. Tim. 3. And upon this depends a third conjunction of our
Immanuel with the believing, by the which every faithful person, and so
consequently the whole church which is composed of them, is spiritually as it
were married with Jesus Christ, and made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones. Not that the body of Christ is really within our bodies, or his soul
within our soul (which the truth and verity of his body and of his soul
cannot suffer, as neither any such conjunction appertains any whit at all to
this mystery, which is altogether spiritual and tending to a spiritual life)
but because that as in an humane body, the soul, being naturally joined
thereunto, quickneth and lives all the members of the body, if so they be knit
and joined together according to the frame and building of the body: so Jesus
Christ, as the spiritual bridegroom of his church, by the and virtue of his
holy spirit, and by the means of his humane nature, by the which he
symbolizeth, that is, agrees in one part with us, is so near and so
powerfully joined with us, by the means of faith which apprehends him, that
he quickneth us to life eternal, working in our understanding and will, to
repair in us by little and little the image of God done forth and defaced by
sin, to make us in the end perfect partakers of his glorious immortality in
the later day, unto which the consummation and perfiting of this holy and
spiritual marriage is reserved. Hence it is that the Apostle has drawn these
manners of speaking, which he learned of Christ himself, when he says, That
we are in Jesus Christ. Romans 8.1. and that Jesus Christ is in us. Romans 8.10.
That he lives in us, and we in him. Gal. 2.20. and That he dwells in his
saints. Ioh. 14.23. And Jesus Christ himself to this end compares himself
to a vine, and us to the branches which fructify and bear fruit. Ioh. 15.
and his body is called our food, and his blood our drink. Ioh. 6. because
that as corporally by meat and drink this present life is maintained in us:
eue^ so by Jesus Christ incorporating himself in us, in that manner I have said,
and being as I may so say received, eaten, and digested by the inner man, we
receive and draw from him the true life everlasting. In the exposition
therefore of this book, there is no question of bringing with us unto the
understanding thereof a sensual mind and carnal, but our soul must with
Solomon conceive this husband, this marriage, and whatsoever is said thereof,
after a spiritual fashion, far removed from all carnal and filthy
cogitations, remembering the saying of the Apostle, That he which cleaves unto
the lord is made one spirit with him. 1. Co. 6.17. and that of Christ, That he
which is born of the spirit is spirit. Io. 3.6.

5 Now to understand more particularly the order of handling of this Canticle
or song, we must know, that it is written in manner of a dialogue, many persons
being introduced in a most wonderful and artificial manner, speaking and
answering one the other: to wit, a Bride addressing her speech unto her
maidens, and a Bridegroom in like sort accompanied with his friends: according
to the manner used in the celebration of such fiansailes and espousales as are
honestly and orderly made. The spouse or bride is the company of the faithful
land believing, which is called the Church, represented as it were in one only
person, (as it is also said that the faithful have but one heart, and one
soul. Act. 4.32) in the which company notwithstanding Solomon brings one in
speaking as it were in the name of the rest of the train. But farther seeing he
makes a distinction between her, which speaks as the Queen and mistress,
and the other daughters and maidens of Jerusalem, (according to that which is
written in the 45 Psalm) we may understand by these other daughters, as well
those, which are in the church rather in name then in deed, as those, which
are the true faithful, but are yet new, and as it were little children, which
follow their mother, who is as it were a Queen accompanied and waited on with
her damoysels and maidens. On the other side the bridegroom is our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whose friends, in the treatise of this marriage, we understand,
first the blessed spirits, which have at all times served Jesus Christ, and
whose ministry he uses for the building of his church, as it is said in the
34 Psalm. and Heb. 1. as also the whole scripture shows us their effects and
workings: secondly those excellent archbuilders of the spiritual temple of the
church, I mean, the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. and Apocal. 21. thirdly
the pastors and teachers who painefully and faithfully travail for the
preparing this holy Bride, as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 11.2. and gathering
together the company and assembly of the Saints, Ephe 4.12. We must farther
note, that as in marriage there be three degrees, whereof the first is the
stipulation and contracting, which we call fiansailes or betrothings, during
the which the parties are called the fiancer and the fianced: afterward the
solemn celebration of the marriage, at which day they are called the Bridegroom
and the Bride: and lastly the consummation of the marriage, after which they are
termed Man and Wife: even so in this spiritual marriage he has as it were
fianced and betrothed to himself his church, by that promise of his made unto
Adam, concerning the seed of the woman, the which seed should bruise the head
of the Serpent: which he afterward reconfirmed to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But
he has passed yet farther, when by establishing of a Leuiticall priesthood
and other types and shadows of the promises of the gospel, ( the body and
substance of which was in christ, Colos. 2.) he did as it were espouse his Love
and fianced, howbeit in absence, and as it were by substitutes. And this is the
cause why the Bride is first brought in by Solomon ravished with the desire and
longing after of the real and personal presence of this Bridegroom, who
having in diverse sorts comforted and strengthened her by most certain and
assured testimonies of his love and goodwill, does in the end present and
yield himself personally unto her. Wherein Solomon does prophetically foretell
the manifestation of the son of God in flesh, and his real conuersing among
his own: notwithstanding but for a little time, remitting the perfect and entire
celebration and consummation of this holy and more than holy conjunction,
until the later day, in the heavens, when God shall be all in all. 1. Cor.
15.28. and when it shall appear, what the church is, which shall see him as he
is. 1. Ioh. 3.2. This is it then whereunto the Bride aspireth with a marvelous
ardent desire, to wit, unto the first and second actual coming of the
Bridegroom: accordingly as it said in S. Math. 13.17. and by S. Peter of the
desire of the ancient prophets. 1. Pet. 1.10. and more plainly and expressly by
S. Paul desiring to be dislodged from this body, to be long ago with Christ.
Phil. 1.23. as all the true faithful do likewise desire, and that with
unspeakable sighings and gronings, Romans 8.26. demanding in their ordinary
prayer, the coming of his kingdom. Neither does Solomon in the mean while
forget to speak of the persecutions which should happen unto the Church, even
by her own, and the vocation of the gentiles, together with the most assured
and excellent promises, with which the Bridegroom entertaining his Bride
comfort her by the often reiteration and recital of his most ascerteined
promises, accompained with great spiritual blessing which are no less than
gages and pledges unto the Church of his second most glorious and maiesticall
coming.

6 This is then the sum and scope of this Canticle or song: which is
therefore called the Canticle of Canticles, or Song of Songs either because of
the excellency thereof above all other songs contained in the scriptures (so
far is it, that it should be rejected) or for that it is composed of many
Canticles or Songs, by reason of the persons which answer one the other. And
because no man should doubt of the author or rather the penman of this
treatise, it is said expressly, that it is composed by Solomon: by Solomon, I
say, when he was filled and replenished with the wisdom of God, and not then,
when he followed after his wantonness and folly. In whose sliding we must as
it were in a looking-glass behold our selves, desiring the Lord to grant us
his grace, so to profit in this Canticle, that we pass and surpass herein
Solomon himself, keeping carefully in our hearts, that which Solomon let slide
out of his, except we will say that in his old age (which thing may in part
be gathered out of the book of the Preacher) he had the gift of repentance,
although the Scripture make no express mention thereof, and that at the least
his Idolatries endured many years after him.

7 How ever it be, not to stay long on this point, considering the order of the
three books of Solomon, we may say that in his Proverbs he teaches men the
true guiding and direction of this life, in such sort, and after so familiar a
manner, as if a master were speaking to his scholars in the school: Afterward
in his Ecclesiastes, or the book of the Preacher, he leads us as it were
from the plain and champion country, up to an high hill, causing us thence, as
from a more high and eminent place, to behold the diverse turnings and
windings, by the which men wander and go astray, some after one fashion,
others after an other, declaring and showing himself, amidst these ways and
laberinths, which is the true way, that we be not surprised and overtaken with
the vanity of this world, but use and order our life in such sort, that it
be unto us the way, which leads unto the true and euer-during happiness and
felicity. Now lastly in this Song or Canticle, those whom he has in such
double wise instructed, he lifts here above the clouds, being as it were
ravished with the consideration and contemplation of those heavenly blessings,
as if they were already dwelling in, and inhabiting the heavens, or at the
least did already knock at the gates thereof. The which order of his book,
is by one of the ancient fathers resembled, by way of allegory, to the Temple
of the Lord built by the same Solomon: in the which was first, the utter
common court for the people, unto which the book of the Proverbs may be
compared: after that was the inner place, provided for the Priests: and lastly
the Sanctuary called the holy of Holies. Even so we may say, that the Church
is as it were lead to enter into the Holy place by the book of Ecclesiastes,
called the Preacher, and from thence by this Canticle or Song, brought even to
the entery in of the Sanctuary, or Holy of Holies, after her bridegroom Jesus
Christ, who is first entered in thither, to dedicate us the way, Heb. 9. and
there to provide us a place of abode, Ioh. 14. whereinto according to that
prayer and request which he has made to God the Father for this his bride, she
also might be received in her time. Ioh. 17.

8 It remains now that we come to the text of this Canticle or Song, which we
will not at this time begin. Let us in the mean time so heedefully consider
of these things which have been said, that we make our profit by them,
beseeching him which has showed us so great favor, as to have brought us into
his Church, out of the filthy pollutions of this world and so many Idolatries
and superstitions, that he will give us his spirit the better to consider of,
and to understand his holy Doctrine taught in his Church, that we may profit
thereby more and more in the knowledge and true fear of him, considering the
bottomless depthes of his great mercies in this, that in steed of rejecting and
casting us off, according to our merits, it has pleased him to cleanse us from
so many filthes and corruptions, to dedicate and consecrate us wholly unto
himself, as a chaste and pure virgin. Wherefore let us not grieve or make sad
the spirit of Sanctification, but contrary-wise suffer him to work mightily
and power-fully in us, waiting for his second coming, which shall be the
accomplishment of that which we must presently hope for. According to his holy
Doctrine, we will crave of him grace and mercy as follows.

Almighty God and heavenly Father, etc.
THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE CANTICLE OF CANTICLES. Our
help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as follows in the first
Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the second verse.
2 Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth.


1 A brief recital of the principal scope of this Canticle.

2 Four things to be considered in this text: and why and in what sort the
bride speaks first.

3 That the love of this bridegroom toward his bride, and the love of the
bride toward her bridegroom is reciprocal and mutual.

4 Why the bride stands so much upon kissing of the bridegroom, and the
ancient manner and fashion of kissing.

5 Why the bride adds these words, of his mouth, and of the diverse fashions
by which the bridegroom has contracted with his spouse from the beginning.

6 Of the two degrees of this spiritual marriage.

7 Of the three degrees distinctly set down by the Apostle, of this marriage.

8 How the spouse kisseth in being kissed, and the difference between these two
kisses.

9 Where the kissing of the spouse must begin and end.

10 What the kisses of the spouse must be, and who they are which indeed kiss
Christ, and are kissed of him.

WE have before summarily declared the end and scope whereunto we must refer
the contents of this Canticle, and what we are to learn out of it, namely,
that so we ought to be in this woorld, as if we were not at al in it: but be in
mind and thought ravished into heaven: Phil. 3.20. using in such wise al those
things which present and offer themselves here to our senses, that we refer the
usage of them to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.31. And to this thrise-happy
conjunction, whereunto we daily aspire, which is the perfect and entier enjoying
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he has requested of his father for us. John
17.24. Whereof we have now the holy spirit for a gage and pledge. 2. Cor.
5.5. waiting until God be all in all in his children. 1. Cor. 15.28. This is
here represented unto us in the person of the Church composed of all the
faithful, which although they be here below creeping as it were and groueling
on the ground, are notwithstanding already in a manner ravished into heaven, and
as a betrothed damsel, or rather a bride, desires the end and consummation of
the marriage: with which affection we ought every day to be stirred up and
moved, whereas above and before al other things, we daily crave and desire of
our father, That his name be hallowed, That his kingdom come: seeing, that
even our own salvation is not the farthest end whereunto we tend, but the
glory of our God therein. Whereunto the Apostle does also teach us to refer all
things, as being the last end and scope of our election. And Solomon in the
mean while forgets not the manifold turmoiles, which the Church and every
member there of must suffer, while she waits and looks for the
accomplishment of her desire: as neither the comforts and consolations which
Christ her bridegroom gives her being in heaven, and reaching forth his arms
unto her, unto the end and consummation of the world, Mat. 28.20. and Ioh.
14.16. yea moving and raising in us these vndeclareable sighings and gronings,
which are never neglected of God, To. 8.26.

2 Now in this beginning we are to consider four points. The first, who he is
that speaks: because (as we said the last day) there be in this Canticle many
persons brought in. Secondly to whom, or rather of whom it is here spoken. For
it is not said here, Kiss me, but Let him kiss me. Thirdly we must consider
what the demand is of her which speaks: and fourthly, after what fashion this
demand is made. It is then the Spouse or Bride, which speaks to her
Bridegroom. For as touching the manner of speaking, whereas the spouse says
not, Kiss me, but Let him kiss me, this is according to the use and custom
of that tongue wherein Solomon wrote, and therefore lets not, but that the
spouse addresseth her speech to her beloved. But it may seem strange and little
seeming to this most chaste and pure Virgin, that she in this sort begins
first, since honesty it self prescribes and commands in every wel-ordered
marriage, that the first words proceed from the man, and not from the maiden
or woman which he woeth. I answer that even in deed so it is also in these
spiritual fiansailes in respect of every faithful soul. For albeit the spouse
spoke first in this place, as covering and desiring her beloved, even as the
hind brayeth after, and desires the refreshing of the rivers of water. Psalm.
42.1. notwithstanding we must take diligent heed how we think, that this
desire of hers which opened the mouth, began from her. It is then the
Bridegroom which has spoken first unto her, and prepared her within to seek
and search after him as it is said, Psalm. 116.10. I have believed, and
therefore I have spoken. And in an other place, With the heart a man believes
to righteousness, and afterward with the mouth he confesses to salvation, Romans
10.10. And indeed Ezechiel cap. 16. declaring the beginning of this contract of
marriage, shows us well, that it proceeded-not from the spouse, whom he
compares to a poor maiden coming newly forth out of the womb of her mother
altogether bloody and polluted. Which S. Paul plainly and without figure
expounds unto us, Ephesians. 2.5. calling us poor and wretched carrions, dead in
sin. And this is it which the iustest of us al must avouch and confess, that
it is the Lord which has loved us first, and therefore has washed us. Apoc.
1.5. 1. John. 4.10. and elected and chosen us, not in our selves (no more than
he has made us by our selves) Psalm. 95. but in his well-beloved: not that we
were already holy, but that we should be made holy, Ephesians. 1.4. Will we have
examples hereof? Abraham followed the Lord, but it was because he was then
called, when he was a poor and miserable Idolater among others. Ios. 24.2.
Isaacke was the child of promise apprehended by his father Abraham by faith,
and therefore was he engendered beyond and above the order of nature. Genesis 18.13
Romans 4. for it is God which must give children unto Abraham, that is to say,
make himself a Church, it is not in Abraham to give a Church unto God. Jacob
inherited the blessing, because God loved him, and not Esau: Genesis 25.23. and
Mal. 1.2. Moses is sent to deliver the people, but it is as it were mawger
himself. Exodus 3.11. The people is brought into the land of Chanaan, but it is
being forced thither as it were by constraint. The prophets have spoken, but it
was because the spirit of God was upon them: the Apostles followed Jesus Christ,
yea, but being then called, when they thought on naught else but their nets and
their fishing. Saint Paul was a chosen instrument of God, but by a special and
singular grace, then when he was a blasphemer and persecutor. 1. Tim. 1.
Briefly, to go no further for examples, of every one of us which are here
assembled, as it were out of al quarters of the world, every man taking a view
of himself, is there any one to be found, who can rightly and in conscience
say, that he first knew God, and has first spoken unto him? Nay let us all
on the contrary side protest and confess before the face of the Lord, that
which is spoken by Esaie, namely, that he has made himself to be found of
them which sought him not. Esaias. 65.1. And who is he which has given him
first? Romans 11.5. seeing we cannot of our selves, so much as think of the
things of God. 2. Cor. 3.5. To return therefore to our matter, the spouse
speaks here, the Lord having first spoken unto her in her heart, according to
that which is said in the 51. Ps. Open thou my lips, and they shall show forth
thy praise: to speak in a word, she was drawn of God. Ioh. 6.44. to the end
that every mouth should be shut, to give the glory only to God, as being the
beginning, middle, and end of our salvation. For how could the spouse sigh
after her beloved, if she were not assured by faith of his love toward her?
Romans 10.14. Now faith is not of our selves: Ephesians. 2.8. but it must be given
us to believe. Phil. 1.29.

3 But let us on the other side remember that which the spouse teaches us by
these words, namely, that the free love of the Lord toward us, engender in us
that other love, with which we love God, and with which the faithful love one
another in the Lord, things so linked and knit together, that they cannot be
separated. For as this is a sure testimony that we are the sons of God, if
we love him: 1. Ioh. 3.10. so again the love which we bear unto God is
showed herein, that we love one another: 1. Ioh. 4.20. as the Lord himself so
carefully aduertiseth and warns us in that excellent last sermon of his,
which he made to his Disciples going to his death: and which was afterward so
many times reiterated by his well-beloved Disciple in his first general Epist.
And the lord himself says in S. Luke. 7.47. of that poor woman which was
such a sinner, that she loved much: whence he would have them to gather, that
many sins were pardoned her. We also therefore on whom the Lord has bestowed
so many tokens of his favor and grace in this our time, let us follow this
advertisement, witnessing by a true conversion unto God, and as well by loving
of him, as mutual charity one to another, that we are in deed of the number of
them whom he has truly loved.

4 But now to come to the third point, let us consider what this spouse
demands. He unto whom she addresseth and directs her speech, is exceeding
rich, passing bountiful and liberal, having in his hand, all the goods and
blessings both of this life which is present, and of that which is to come. Yet
this spouse desires and demands nothing else, but to be kissed and kissed
again with the mouth of her beloved: neither must we wonder at this familiar
demand of hirs. For the spouse, which is the Church of God, has not received
the spirit of fear by the condemnation of the Law, Romans 8.15. but the
assurance of that holy hardines and boldness which does thrust us forward even
to the throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. not for any opinion of our selves, but by an
holy assurance grounded on him which is our peace, Ephesians. 2.14. as his spirit
bears us witness in our hearts, Gal. 4.6. yea so far as to verify that which
is said, that the kingdom is even as it were snatched and caught away by
violence, Mat. 11.12. the lord himself yet suffering himself to be as it were
overcome in plain wrestling, by his Israel, according as it is described, Genesis
32. Now touching this kissing which is here spoken of, we have to note that
men by a certain address and instinct of nature, to declare their mutual love
and amity one toward an other, have accustomably used certain manners of
outward actions, having some agreeablenes with the same thing which they would
witness to be within them, some after one fashion, others after another. As for
example, this custom of putting off the cappe and vailing bonnet, this bending
and bowing of the body, this kissing, in witness of love and reverence one
toward another, by which outward gesture a man makes himself inferior to
another to do him curtesy. The like is that of giving the hand one to another,
to witness that a man is ready to make mutual delivery of his heart and all that
he has. But among all other gestures kissing has I know not how the most
evident and express representatio^ of that which is within. For whereas the
life consists in respiration and breathing, and that our breathing is by the
mouth, kissing is a sign, that a man is ready to communicate and as it were to
infuse his own proper soul into his friend. And this has been used to be
done above all others amongst the people of the East, and especially among the
people of God, yea in the ancient Christian Church both East and West:
witness, that of Saint Paul, Romans 16.16. and in many other his Epistles, as
also in Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 5.14. which thing as touching the ceremony is yet
observed among the Monks, and in that which they call the Pax in their great
and solemn masses in the popish Church, where in the mean while
notwithstanding, the communion of the holy Supper, to the preparation whereof
this kissing was used as a testimony of all true concord and mutual charity, is
taken away and abolished. But it is come to pass in this, as in many other
ancient and laudable customs, which have been so villanously and filthily
abused, that it is a very hard thing to use it holyly and sincerely: for which
cause also they may not be rashly and lightly brought in use again. Howbeit
notwithstanding this holy spouse in this place speaks of an holy and sacred
kind of kissing and more chaste a great deal without comparison, than any kiss
can be between any husband and wife, the chastest that ever were, or possibly
can be: understanding by this kiss a most certain and most evident testimony
of her hoped conjunction with her beloved.

5 But wherefore will she be kissed with the mouth of her husband, seeing
properly to speak, there is no kissing but with the mouth? Let us note here
first of all, that hereby is shown us the ordinary mean by which God ioineth
himself unto his Church, and his Church unto him: which is by the preaching of
his word accompanied with the virtue and working of his holy spirit: which
word of his, is here understood by the word Mouth, which is the instrument
thereof: insomuch that this word is called the power of God to salvation to
every one that believes: Romans 1.16. and the incorruptible seed of the Church.
1, Pet. 1.23. which is properly attributed unto the holy ghost, Ioh. 3.18. but
this is not all. For if we consider very nearly of the whole matter, we shall
find that whereas the spouse never wanted this word, without the which the
church could be no church, it is evident that in this place she dema^deth some
farther matter than this. Therefore she seems here thus to say, you have
saluted me hitherunto, and as it were kissed me with letters and messages, but
now I desire and crave the presence of your self in proper person, otherwise I
cannot be satisfied or contented. Although then the Lord and Savior of the
woorld has from the beginning contracted himself with his Church in the
persons of Adam and Eve, of and from whom he would have it to be drawn and
descended, and albeit he has afterward renewed his fiansailes by other his
promises reiterated, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as with the fathers of
the believing, yet was this but a stipulation and contract of marriage, by
words of the future: and although afterward the fiancer Christ himself, did as
it were represent himself in the ceremonial Law, by which he approached more
nearer unto his fianced, his Church, and did as it were espouse and marry her
by words more plain and express, yet was it done (as says the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews) but after an imperfect manner, Heb. 1.1. and by
shadows, the body and truth of which is Jesus Christ himself: Colos. 2.17.
And this was sufficient to salvation for the ancient fathers, by means of
their faith, insomuch that the place of the blessed, is called the bosom of
Abraham: Luke 16.22. who saw the day of the Lord and rejoiced thereat: Ioh.
5.56. yet nevertheless this did not altogether satisfy and content them,
knowing that their hope respected that which was to be accomplished and
fulfilled in his time, namely, then when the heir should come himself in
person into his vineyearde, Mat. 21.38. And therefore our Lord Jesus Christ
said, Luke 10 24. Many kings and prophets have desired to see that which you
have seen, and have not seen it, and to hear that which you hear, and have
not heard it. The which thing is also witnessed by Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 1.11.
This is it then which the spouse in this place means, as if she should say: O
Lord my Savior and my beloved, I have received commendations enough, messages
enough, testimonies enough, that thou will come in person, and accomplish thy
marriage: but when, when will this blessed hour and time come, in the which thou will join thy self really unto me, with the chaste and holy kisses of thy own
mouth? For in very truth it may and ought to be well said, that the son of
God has kissed us, yea more than kissed us, by ioining himself in such wise
and so near unto us, that the man whom he has taken unto himself, is not only
the image of God his Creator, as was the first Adam, but is true God and true
man in one only person: and that in such sort, that this ioining and uniting
himself with our nature neither is nor shall be ever severed or broken: by
this means his mouth has ever, and does yet remain, as it were glued upon
ours, by this holy kiss of his.

5 But yet this is not enough to understand this holy kiss which the spouse
does so wish for and desire. For albeit the son of God, which is this
Bridegroom, has taken upon himself this nature common to al mankind, yet
has he not kissed al men. No: but his church only, his only spouse. And
therefore as every man is not one flesh with every woman, nor every woman with
every man: but besides the humane nature which is in general common to them
both, there must be also a special conjunction between them of bodies, to have
one man made one flesh with one woman: so to have Jesus Christ become the
Bridegroom of his Church, and so to make her flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bones, as it is spoken, Ephesians. 5.30. there must be between him and his Church
a matrimonial conjunction, whereof the spouse speaks in this place.

6 Now touching this spiritual contract, the Scripture again teaches us two
degrees thereof. The first in this present life, which is made by the promise
of the Bridegroom, and received by faith of the spouse: the instrument whereof
is the Gospel, which is preached unto us, the seals are Baptism, and
principally the Supper of the Lord. The second degree whereunto we aspire and
contend, is this real and entire actual union, whereunto we shall come in the
later day, when that which we are already by hope neither vain nor uncertain
shall be then perfitly effectuated: then, I say, When we shall see him, as he
is. 1. Ioh. 3.2. when God shall be al in all, 1. Co. 15.28. when we shall know no
longer in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. but shall be eternally with him. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

Furthermore when the spouse speaks here not simply of one kiss but of the
kisses of his mouth, she declares that she desires not this coming only of
his in flesh into the earth: albeit she knew that the bridegroom should then
come in person, but wishes and desires kiss upon kiss, knowing that this
corporal presence of his here below, should endure but a small time, and that
the place of the true consummation of this marriage is not in earth, but in
heaven, in which this king should crown his spouse, making her partaker of his
glory, according to that petition and request of his made unto the father: Ioh.
17.24. that whither he went, thither we might also come. She knew, I say, that
this her beloved should come down to the earth, not to stay here himself, but
to draw us after him into heaven: Ioh. 12.32. being gone himself before to
prepare a place for this wedding: Ioh. 14.12. And therefore not content with
one kiss, she aspireth and hastes to this later day, staying no whit in the
midway: as the Lord himself also teaches us to pray every hour, and every
moment, that his kingdom come, calling also this day the day of our
deliverance, at the approaching and drawing near whereof, we are warned to lift
up our heads: Luke 21.28. This is that desire which made the Apostle to cry
out, miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans
7.24. and in another place, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ:
Phil. 1.23. confessing that he had not yet obtained the price, but that he
still runs after it, Phil. 3.13. yea which more is, the same Apostle is
elsewhere accustomed to set down three degrees, before he come to the highest
of his desire, put off and delaied to this latter day, unto the which, says
he, the crown of righteousness is kept and reserved for me: 2. Tim. 4.8. The
first degree is when the Bridegroom christ joins himself unto us in this
life by his holy spirit: Ioh. 14.23. the second is at our departing out of this
world, waiting for the later day. For albeit at their departing out of this
world the spirits of the faithful are gathered unto God, and as it were kissed
in person by the son of God their beloved, according to the saying of Jesus
to that poor thief on the cross, Luke 23.43. and the prayer of Saint
Stephen, Act. 7.59. yet notwithstanding one part of us, to wit, the body
lying in the dust and ignominy of death, these full kisses are respected and
delayed until this later day, when we shall meet him, and he meet us with this
blessed speech, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world. For then shall it be, when the bridegroom
coming, the virgins shall go to meet him, Mat. 25.6.

Farther, though we respected only this present state here below, yet must we
observe, that the spouse, when she demands and craves not one kiss but many
kisses of her beloved, she desires a continuance and increase of faith, hope
and charity, and al other graces necessary to salvation. And for this cause is
the life of a christian compared to a race, in which we must run still on
forward to the end of the list where the crown is: as the Apostle in many
places warns us, as elsewhere he also says, that Jesus Christ must grow in
us, and we in him: Phil. 3.12. Ephesians. 4.13.

8 To go on, although the spouse speak not here of kissing, but of being
kissed; notwithstanding, whereas the one cannot be done without the other, we
must know that it is our duty also to kiss the Bridegroom: but we must
kiss in being our selves kissed, otherwise our kisses would be foul and
unclean, if they either should begin, or end in our selves, as are all the
worshippings and services of God, which come out of the forge of men's brains,
Esaias 29.13. yea all those moral and philosophical virtues which proceed from
elsewhere, than from the spirit of regeneration. Romans 4.2. Phil. 3.8. seeing,
which more is, even the kisses of the Bride, kissed by her Bridegroom, though
they be reciprocal, are notwithstanding very unequal in quality unto those of
her Bridegroom. For the kisses of the spouse are of no valewe in themselves,
and that it pleases the Bridegroom to approve and like of them, proceeds of
his only favor and grace.

9 Now in kissing this bridegroom, to do him that fealty and homage (which the
greatest monarcks of the world, as it is in the Psalm. 2.12. owe him) we may
not be so presumptuous and malapert as to hoise our head up at the first to
kiss his mouth, but we must begin at his feet, after the example of that
poor sinful woman, who washed them with her tears, and wiped them with the
hair of her head, and anointed the^ with her sweet ointment, Luke 7.38.
being her self first inwardly anointed by him. We must therefore begin our
kissing with a true acknowledgement of our sins, after the example of the
poor Publicane (daring not to approach at the first, but standing a far off)
Luke 18.13. and thence bringing that contrite heart which is never despised of
God, but is a sacrifice unto him of a sweet smell. Psalm 51.17. we must so
come unto his feet, and finally demand in faith with this spouse, that he
will receive us to the kissing of his holy mouth, from which we shall hear
this most precious speech, Thy sins are forgiven thee, to be brought in the
end to the true consummation of this holy conjunction.

10 Lastly, to come unto the fourth point, we must observe and note after what
manner of fashion these kisses are desired, namely with a most full and lively
affection of a most assured faith, and with so ardent a zeal and desire, as
none can be greater. And this shows the fruit which the spirit of God
brings forth in us, by this repentance of which I spoke, I mean a true
assurance of conscience thoroughly pacified and quieted, then, when by the grace
and favor of god apprehended by a true and lively faith, we are resolved of the
love of God, by the testimony and witness of his spirit of adoption, teaching us
what God has determined of us, 1. Cor. 2.16. the which gift of God is such,
that it is never altered or changed. Romans 11.22. so that we can never be
separated or removed from this love, Romans 8.35. And thence is framed in us
that ardent desire, which making us to forget all other things, without
looking back any whit at all behind us, furnishes us with forces to strive
and go on with all our power in this race, according to the example of the
Apostle, without staying any thing at all in the way, until we come to the end
of the list, where the Bridegroom waits for us, saying with David, Psalm.
16.5. Thou art my lot and mine inheritance: and not this world, whereunto we
must be crucified, Gal. 4.14. and again, Psalm. 17.15. When thy glory shall
appear, then shall I be satisfied. Who is then this Bride which is kissed of
the Bridegroom, and that kisseth him again reciprocally? Certainly not they
who look behind them, and who seek themselves and the world. For the heavens
are not in the earth; and none has part with this Bridegroom, save he which
seeks after him indeed, and above al things renounceth himself. For when the
spouse says, Let him kiss me, she declares that she expects al things of
him, and that she utterly forgets her self, to seek after him and to find
him. Nether are those they whose god is their belly, and who desire nothing else
but to be kissing the cup: neither the covetous, which desire only to be
kissing of their gold, and their silver. For we cannot serve God and Ma^mon,
Job. 31.24. Mat. 6.24. To be short, whosoever he be that will have part in this
coniu^ctio^ which is here understood by these kisses, in which our assured and
everlasting felicity consists, he must cleave unto the lord to be one spirit
with him, 1. Cor. 6.17. renou^cing the Prince of this world, and himself, and
every other thing whatsoever, which may turn him never so little from this holy
affection. Which thing being true, and seeing how it is practiced among us
(among who^ there are yet to be found so many mischievous vices and
dissolutio^s, notwithstanding the ordinary and continual warnings here used,
accompanied with so many of Gods judgments before our eyes) I know not what
to say or think, but that, if we change not and return, and that betimes,
there will fall on us, without the singular mercy of God, that divorce whereof
there is mention in Ezech. 23. if our estate and condition become not yet far
worse, according to that which the Lord threatens to Chorazin, Bethsaida, and
Capernaum, Mat. 11.21. Nether may we here allege that we have renounced our
idolatry to kiss the Bridegroom, for the most dangerous kind of Idolatry,
which is invisible, reigns yet in the midst of us. Now it is nothing to have
renounced Satan and superstition, if we put not on Jesus Christ. We are alas a
great part of us of the number of them, of whom the lord speaks by Esaias,
29.13. This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from
me. And this is called the kiss of Ioab when he killed Abner, 2. Sam. 3.27.
and the kiss of Judas, not the kisses which are here desired, and mutually
given of the spouse: agreeable with that of David, Psalm. 42.1. that his soul,
like unto the poor hind which pants after the waters, longs after the
living God. For, to attain unto this conjunction, we are not to keep our
selves from al such thoughts, words, and deeds, by the which the holy spirit,
which teaches us to sigh after this Bridegroom, is manifestly made sad and
grieved, and in the end chased and driven out of the midst of us, whereby it
comes to pass, that the later estate is made worse than the first, Matthew.
12.45. as alas we see too many examples thereof at this day before our eyes:
but we must stand also diligently upon our guard, to take heed that these
kisses do follow one upon another in a continual tenor and train, after that
god of his grace has begun once to be working in us: for our enemy is crafty
and subtle, and can, to surprise and snare us, serve his turn even with those
graces and blessings which God bestows on us, to make them so many
instruments to our ruin and destruction. For who is he, which having said or
done any thing but some thing well, is not incontinently tempted with an
opinion of himself? Ye see then how soon al is marred, if we stand not
carefully upon our guard. Abraham and Sara had a singular desire of seeing the
race and seed which was promised them, neither were they without a true and
lively faith, without which they had not so carefully looked for it. But behold
Satan in his scout watch, who bestirreth himself so well, that amidst this
faith, he sows so great impatie^ce, that there is nothing wanting on the part
of Abraham and Sara, that they be not deprived of their longing, thorough their
own great fault and folly. For what does Sara? She persuades her husband to
take Agar the bond maid, to have of her this issue and seed, of whom Ismael is
borne, the persecutor of Isaac the child of promise and only heir thereof.
Look we likewise on Rebecca, who believed that which was told her of her two
children, being yet in her womb, Genesis 25.23. notwithstanding being narrowly
watched and snared by Satan, when she saw Isaacks intent and purpose was to
bless Esau: it wanted not through her impatience, that al was not ouerthrown
and turned vpside down, as it had indeed notoriously come to pass, had not God
by his grace and holy spirit governed Isaak in the end and issue of this
matter. And among other causes we must principally attribute the great
afflictions, which after befell Jacob menaced by his brother, to this sly
touch of hers, though God drew light out of darkness. We have hereof also a
notable example in Martha the Sister of Marie, who not knowing how to govern
and rule in good sort that good and holy desire she had of receiving and well
entertaining of Christ in her house, chose not the better part, but that, for
which she was reprehended Luke 10.42. Let us therefore all of us little and
great be careful, not only to demand of God his graces and blessings, but also
that principal grace which governs all the rest: as we here see that the
spouse speaks not simply of one kiss, but of kisses in the plural number,
and adds moreover of his Mouth: to teach us that to come unto this so much
desired conjunction we must demand of God grace upon grace, which graces do
truly part from his mouth, being not only produced, but also entirely governed
by his spirit, without any mixture of our leaven. As for example, conformably
to that which I even now alleged of Martha, you the woorshipful the
magistrates are much busied and encombred in the dispatch of civil causes and
administering of Justice unto every man (which is an holy vocation and calling,
with which the Lord has honored you, wherein I beseech him to grant you his
grace to bear your selves well, and uprightly, and diligently.) But if you so
employ your selves herein, that the desire you have to do justice in civil
causes, cause these rooms to be void which ought to be filled with your
persons, to hear the word of God, which should rule and direct you in your
charge: this is called under the color of doing well, to forget the chief and
principal business. Again, behold a preacher which will be diligent and painful
at his study, to provide wherewith to feed his sheep. This is a most holy and
necessary desire: but if he give himself in such sort to his book, that while
he is at his study, Satan catches one of his sheep, this is not to do the duty
of a pastor or shepherd, who should not only attend unto reading, according to
the admonition of Saint Paul: 2. Tim. 1.13. but also to watching over his
flock, both in general and in particular, according to the example of our
Apostle, Act. 20.26. Behold likewise an householder and houswife, who is careful
to travel according to the commandment of god for the maintenance of her
family: look on an honest mercha^t, which endeuoreth to follow his calling in a
good conscience, for the profit of the common weal (which is a thing very rare
and seldom in this world) these are holy and honest desires: but if to atte^d
on these things, a man be then at his shop, when he should be at a sermon,
to do better: this is nothing else but to do evil, when we think to do our
duty. And therefore I say again, that we must be watchful and stand upon our
guard, to desire above al things, the kisses of the mouth of the Lord: and that
with a pure, holy, and ordered affection, after the example of this spouse,
unto who^ the lord of his grace conform us: which thing we will demand of him
saying,

Almighty God etc.
THE THIRD SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc.
2 For thy dilections are better then wine.


1 That the whole contentment of the spouse or Bride proceeds from this, that
the Bridegroom has loved her first.

2 The woork of creation is the first testimony of Gods love and dilection
toward man.

3 The work of redemption is a more admirable testimony of this dilection, but
is particularly belonging unto the spouse.

4 The testimony of this love is declared unto us in the holy Scriptures.

5 In what sense these dilections are preferred before wine, and why the spouse
uses this word in the plural number.

6 The mutual and enterchaungeable dilection or love which is dew unto the
Bridegroom, is the sum of the Law. And the principal abuses which are
committed in dilection or love, and in hatred.

7 That God alone ought properly to be loved.

8 That knowledge must go before love, and how man before his fall knew and
loved God.

9 Whether Adam and Eve had the knowledge of evil, thereby to have hated it,
before their fall.

10 Men before they be regenerate, cannot, nor will not learn to love or hate
aright.

11 The only spirit of God, which created us, teaches the spouse this lesson,
but yet not without resistance.

12 The marvelous combat of the Bridegroom for his Bride.

13 The war of the spirit against the flesh is not by and by ended.

14 How we ought to love one another, and the other creatures.

15 The hatred of us against the devil ought to be irreconciliable.

16 How we ought to hate the wicked.

17 Abuse in hating the creaturs which are made for our use.

18 A conclusion of the treatise of orderly dilection and hatred.

WE have heard how the spouse forgetting all other things whatsoever
without exception, protested that she desired no other thing than the kisses
of the mouth of her Bridegroom. Now to the end that every one of us may
know that she speaks not as a fond passionate body, but as one which is
indeed sage and sober, and which knows to make good difference between that
which she ought to desire and that she ought to shun, she adds a peremptory
reason of her so ardent desire, to wit, the dilections of her Bridegroom.
Which thing because it may be taken in two sorts, either of the love of the
Bridegroom toward the Bride, or of the Bride toward the Bridegroom, we must
first of al understand, that this here is meant of the dilection wherewith the
Bridegroom does love the Bride. For otherwise the Bride should brag and boast
of her self, which the Saints of God are never wont to do. This therefore is
the sense and meaning of this place, that it is not, but upon great ground and
reason, that the spouse forgetting all other things, yea even her own self,
desires nothing else than to be loved of Jesus Christ her Bridegroom, and to
enjoy her wel-beloued, seeing there is nothing to be compared unto the
dilection and love of God toward us: whence it follows reciprocally, that
is, back again, that there is nothing which we ought to love besides him. But
first we must begin with him which has loved us first, because that without
this, we could never know him aright unto salvation, nor love him.

2 But who is able to sound this bottomless depth, whereinto we now enter, I
mean the special dilection of God toward his church? Truly our God is infinite
and incomprenable in all his works, even in the smallest of them, since there is
no proportion at al, between that which is infinite, and that, which is bou^ded
and limited, and we can go no farther in co^prehending that which is
inco^prenable, than to know it to be incomprenable. But God having made man,
not to be comprehended of him, but yet to be known notwithstanding and adored
in the government of this world, has given him a soul endued with
understanding, which may attain as it were to the borders and skirts of his
Majesty, having for his object this goodly theater of the world above and
beneath, witnessing sensibly (that is by a corporal object, and such a one as
may be perceived by the corporal senses) the eternity of the Creator, together
with all his power, wisdom, bounty and favor in particular, toward the
flowar of all his works, which is man. Psalm. 8. and 19. and 23. Romans 1.20. And
this was the first testimony of the infinite dilection of God toward man, to
wit, the creation of the world (which he has made subject unto many works
worthy of perpetual admiration, as we are taught, Psalm. 8.3. and which is
called the wisdom of God, 1. Cor. 1.21. and the mirror of his eternity and
power. Romans 1.20.

3 But what? Man having put out the eyes of his understanding not to see, or
know any more, such a favor and exceeding grace of his Creator in the woork of
his creation, behold this Bridegroom which appeared with an infinitely more
clear and evident testimony of his love and dilection in the work of
redemption, than he had done in the woork of the creation of the world for man:
yea without al comparison, whether we consider the manner he has used to make
this second work, or whether we have regard unto the work it self. For in
the creation, it was doutles an exceeding bounty and passing measure which
moved him to make man after his own image: so excellent and so perfect he made
him. But what is this unto this infinite love and charity which moved him to
make this second work, by which he has drawn, even out of the corrupt mass
of mankind, sanctified notwithstanding by his holy spirit, not only another
man more holy, and more perfect without comparison than ever the first was, but
a Man-God, by uniting his son personally, and for ever with our flesh, yea
with all our infirmities for a time in the flesh, sin only excepted, and
which is more, charging all our sins upon him? And for whom? For us his
enemies, out of whom he has chosen, and made to be borne this beloved spouse,
to the end that being ravished with the Apostle, we should cry out at this
most high, most great, and most profound secret of secrets, Ephesians. 3.18. and
5.32. O the profound riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God.

4 But behold yet another kind of incomprehensible dilection and love which
manifests it self in this work of our redemption. For because that this
corporal presence of his in the world should not always endure, the son of
God being not come into the world to consummate and end his marriage here with
his Church: but contrariwise to seek after her, and to draw her up on high,
into that most holy place whereinto he is entered first: Heb. 9.24. to provide
there for us an eternal habitatio^, Ioh. 14.2. 2. Cor. 5.1. To the end
notwithstanding, that this lively image of the Son of God should not leave
therefore to be always before our eyes: Gal. 3.1. he has left us his lively
pourtrait in his doctrine written by the Apostles, co^prising whatsoever is
behoofull for us to know, either touching his person, or touching all the
counsel of god his father concerning our salvation, Act. 20.17. and this after
so evident a manner, as if, yea more spiritually, than if we saw it with our
carnal eyes only, hard it with our ears, touched it with our hands, as many
did, which notwithstanding knew him not, nor understood him as they ought to
know and understand to salvation. What more? Behold dilection upon dilection.
For because it were in vain to present the fairest thing in the world to those
which are blind, behold wherefore together with his word so preached by
himself, and after written by his Apostles, he has sent in full abundance (as
much as was necessary, to know and follow this good way) his holy spirit into
his Church, according to those promises of his made by his Prophets, and
namely by Joel as S. Peter expounds the same: Act. 2.17. to lead us into al
truth: Ioh. 16.13. giving us eyes to see, and ears to hear: in a word, to be
and reign himself in our hearts unto the end of the woorlde, which shall be
the full consummation of this holy marriage: Mat. 28.20.

5 Maruail we then if this spouse to whom only it is given to savor indeed
such a sweetness, being altogether ravished herewith, neither loves, nor
desires any thing else, than the kisses of her Bridegroom, saying, that the
wine is nothing in respect of his dilections? For by this word wine she
means not only that creature of God of which it is specially said, that it is
made to rejoice the heart of man, Psalm. 104.15. but all delicatnes, yea without
exception every other creature in the which a man may delight and take
pleasure. And therefore this spouse speaks of the dilections of her
Bridegroom in the plural number: not that there be many in the essence of
God, in whom all things are but one, as himself is but one, but in respect of
us: because that not only in this world God bestows on us an infinite
diversity of his graces, as well in quality, as in quantity: but above al, in
respect of that great treasure of felicity, which he will heap upon his Church,
when God shall be all in all, 1. Cor. 15.28. giving her those things which never
eye has seen, never ear has hard, never heart has conceived: Esaias 64.4. 1.
Cor. 2.9.

6 Last of al, let us learn of this spouse the true use of considering of
these infinite dilections of this Bridegroom, namely, to the end that as he
has loved us more than he needed, so that we love him because he is only
worthy to be loved: whereupon it is requisite and needful that we here
treat at large of true dilection, and well ordered hatred, which are two
affections which rule, as I may say, all the other.

Our Lord Jesus Christ Math. 22.36. being asked his opinion touching the
greatest commandment, sends us back to the first table of the law, which
he reduces into this sum: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy thought: and indeed mutual love and
amity, be it good or bad, leads us thereto, that he which loves truly,
seeks after nothing so diligently and so affectionatly, as to do that which
he knows to be agreeable and pleasing to him, whom he loves. And therefore
the faithful soul which is here brought in, to show us what and how ardent
the true affection of the faithful soul is toward God, began her speech with
the testimony of her extreme desire she has to be joined most nearly with
Jesus Christ her Bridegroom, to wit, to be united altogether unto him, yea to
be as it were with him, to serve and to honor him with all her heart and al her
might. And this is also the true, the right and the last end and scope of not
only all our actions, but also of our whole understanding and will, to the end
that we may say with the Apostle, that Jesus Christ lives in us and we in him:
Gal. 2.20. So then as among all the rest of the affections, love is the most
ardent, so are the effects thereof most vehement, according to the saying of
Christ: Where the treasure is, there is the heart also, Luke 12.34. but al lies
in this point, that a man love that which he ought to love, and so as he ought
to love. And this is it wherein men do ordinarily deceive them selves, loving
that which they should hate, and hating that which they should love: or if
happily they love that which they should love, or hate that which they should
hate, yet not loving nor hating in such sort and so far as they ought, but ever
either more or less then they ought, or for some other end then they ought.

7 To correct therefore al these defaults, the spouse teaches us here first by
her own example, that it is God alone, to speak properly, whom we ought to
love, without giving any part of our heart to any other thing whatsoever. Which
thing reason it self may in general teach us, how corrupt and perverse so ever
it be. For there are two things which naturally draw men to love, to wit,
beuty and virtue: which if a man will not be deceived, must never be
separated, witness the common proverb, That a fair feature with foul
conditions is nothing worth, beuty by it self being nothing else, but a vain
bayte and allurement, which draws to an evil end. Now we must of necessity
confess that God alone is properly beutifull and good, yea beuty and virtue or
goodness it self in infinite perfection, seeing whatsoever is good and
beutifull among the creatures, is but a small glimmering beam of that which is
wholly entire and essential in the Creator.

8 But because that God is incomprehensible not only to our outward senses, so
that we ca^ neither see, nor hear, nor taste, nor smell, nor touch him, but also
to our understanding: it seems that it may be thence concluded, that
therefore we cannot any way neither know, nor love him, seeing we must know him
before we love him, nor by consequent serve him aright; whence it would follow,
that our faith and hope are things vain and frivolous, which would be the
overthrowing of all religion. You see then why this matter is to be understood
yet more clearly. The Scripture therefore teaches us that the Creator having
created al things for his glory* Proverb. 16.4. that is to say, to be thereby
glorified (which could not be if he made not himself to be in some sort
known by them) has not made notwithstanding al creatures capable of this
knowledge, but only Angels and men. As for the Angels we will not speak of them
in this place. But touching men, Moses shows us by this word of image and
likeness of God, according to the which he says that God created man, that the
Lord creating the soul of the first man engraued together in his understanding
a marvelous light and knowledge naturally infused, to know his Creator, and
that in a very high degree of knowledge: and likewise a most excellent
vprightnes and integrity in will, to have no affection whatsoever which were
not correspondent to the nature and will of God, perfectly just and perfectly
good. The which thing is expounded by the Apostle by the words of truth in
understanding, and of righteousness in will, when he declares what was this
image and resemblance of god, Ephesians. 4.24. and all this that God might be known
and glorified by him. Beside these two graces the Creator had also engraued in
all his creatures innumerable testimonies both of his infinite wisdom and
liberality, and of al other his perfections, in yealding the government of them
next under himself unto man, as having made them for his use, as is declared
among other places in the eight Psalm: to the end that this knowledge of God,
and vprightnes of affection might by the object of the creatures be maintained
and confirmed in man, having always before his eyes so many mirrours or
looking-glasses to behold the perfections in God, as were creatures in the
world: and so many testimonies of the goodness of God toward him, as were
creatures made for the use of man, and subjected to his government. And of this
it follows, that man is not only bound to give God thanks for that which he
has received from him, in himself, but also for all the gifts which God has
bestowed upon all other creatures for man, which are as it were preachers of
the glory of God unto men, Psalm. 19. and if they had understanding and mouths,
would cry with a loud voice, both above and below saying, Ye men, for whom we
are made, thank God for us, glorify him in us: Whereas since the fall of man,
by the sin of whom they have been brought to this miserable estate whereunto
they have been subject, Genesis 3.17. they cry and demand vengeance of god, Romans
8.22. The creatures therefore being fair and good every one in his degree, as
Moses also distinctly specifieth the same in the history of the creation, and
as I have said, beauty and goodness being the objects of dilection, it
follows that man naturally before his fall (which was also requisite for the
right government of al those things which were committed unto him, seeing none
takes pleasure to maintain and govern that which he hates) bare an
affection unto all the creatures, but yet so, that in the beuty and goodness of
them, he did contemplate the author and giver, and therefore by consequent
loved not, to speak properly, the creatures, but the Creator in contemplating
and beholding the creatures.

9 Now seeing that love and hatred are so directly contrary, and that the one
puts forth the other, it must needs be that man before his fall hated that
which was foul and ill, seeing he loved that which was fair and good. But,
how can this be true, whereas before the fall of man all was fair and good in
the world, as the Lord had made it? Genesis 1.31. I answer, that truly seeing
there was nothing foul or evil in the world, man before his fall hated
nothing, but loved his Creator in all things. But seeing he was endewed with
understanding to know wherein he ought to love his Creator, he had also in
himself the mean to know, that he ought to hate the contrary if he should
meet with it: as indeed alas he met it with a mischief, when Satan (which
remaining not in his first estate had made himself most foul and most wicked)
discovered himself enough unto him for such a one as he was, and most worthy
to be hated and rejected, when in tempting of him, he accused the creator of
envy and lying. And behold here wherein Eve, and after her Adam did fail
inexcusably, to wit, that in steed of using that address and help which they
had to know well enough and to hate this deceiuer, they suffered themselves to
be persuaded of him, and so enthralled and captiuated themselves with all their
posterity in this corruption: Romans 7.14. which makes that he is now most
blind and most bad together in loving and in hating.

10 For if we examine the whole course and train of the world, what shall we
find else, but some deceived in the difference between good and fair, and
evil and foul: others wittingly loving that which is worthy of hatred, and
hating that which they ought to love? For example, if the question be touching
that which directly concerns the love and service of God, behold the
superstitious and Idolaters so bewitched, that not only they cannot, nor will
not know and love the truth, but they stop their cares that they may not hear,
and their eyes that they may not see, and which more is, they persecute it with
fire and sword. Behold on the other side the Atheists and mockers of all
religion, with which the whole world at this day stinketh, the earth it self
demanding vengeance of God. If we speak of the life of men toward men, and
consider whereunto all apply and give themselves great and small from morning
to evening, we shall find that some burst with the plenty and abundance they
have, and would sell paradise out of hand for a lickerous morsel, others
travail not to serve God by their life, but only to maintain this life,
fearing they should die for famine, and will not stick, so they may save a
farthing, to loose their soul, and the word of their salvation: others possess
not their goods, but are possessed of the^ in body and in soul, others welter
and walowe like hogs in their wanton lusts, others are insatiable in
swallowing down of honor to fill themselves with wind, others give themselves
to ten thousand vanities, as this wise king Solomon himself has at large
declared in his book of the Preacher. In a word, see how by not loving and
hating as they ought, every man departs out of this life, without knowing, or
without well thinking thereon, what he came hither to do.

11 You see the^ what this evil is and what is the original cause thereof. But
what remedy is there? To have recourse unto him which has made us, and who
alone can make us anew, by the same power, which is his holy spirit,
enlightening the eyes of our understanding: Ephesians. 1.18. Act. 26.18. framing a
clean heart within us, Psalm. 51.12. creating in us both to will and to do.
Phil. 2.13. in a word, making us from the head to the feet new creatures, 2.
Cor. 5.17. that is to say, such as this spouse is set before us here to be,
which is at large described unto us by Ezechiel, both in her first estate and
condition, and also in this whereunto she is exalted, Ezech. 16. in such sort
that rightly the Apostle calls the Church the woorkemanshippe of God. 1. Cor.
9.1. yea of him alone in respect of the effect, 1. Cor. 3.7. and a work so
long, and so hard and difficult, because of our rebellion, that the spirit of
God cannot, as I may so say, come to the end thereof but with time, and by
plucking us up as it were by a pully. Which seeing it is so, let us consider
what this perfect love and charity of ours ought to be toward God and our
neighbor, the portraiture whereof, is set down in the two tables of the Law,
and has too in some sort been known and marked by a Painim, saying, (in
speaking of the mutual frindship of men,) that true and perfect love and
frindship is shown in this, that the one desires that which the other
desires, and will not that which the other will not, which is as much to say,
that he loves that which the other loves, and hates that which the other
hates. This is an excellent rule to direct our whole life by, if we take the
Law of God for the ground and foundation of that which we ought to love and
to hate, and by consequent presuppose, that the will of the Bridegroom which
is the head, whose will is declared in his Law, gives a Law unto the will of
the spouse, witness that which we crave every day in our prayer, saying, Thy
will be done.

12 And to show how necessary this pattern is, behold Jesus Christ, that is to
say the Bridegroom himself, who being come into the world to co^quer and win
this Bride, and to kiss her, as her self desired, with his own mouth, being
in co^bate with him, which held her from him, utters this strange speech
Notwithstanding not that which I will, but which thou will. Mat. 26.39. And what
means this? Was there a strife and rebellion between the will of Jesus Christ
and the will of God his Father? None at all. For were it so, he could not have
been either God, or so much as a good man, much less our Savior, as indeed
and truth he is. For as much then as the person of the father and of the holy
Ghost, and his, are one and the same God, his will also is one and the same will
with the father and the holy ghost. And in as much as he is man he had another
will, as it were another nature, but without all repugnancy notwithstanding
against his divine will. Who is it the^ which speaks thus? Jesus christ, God
and man, but according to his humanity: against which distinctly this combat
was addressed, because it was in it, that he should make his combat and
overcome as it were himself, in as much as he is God the judge and revenger of
sin, in such sort that in one person alone, he is assailed and assaulted, and
is always conqueror. And what caused him so to speak? Not any rebellion of
his humane will against his divine will, but only a diversity proceeding from the
apprehension of that most frightfull and most horrible feeling of the curse and
malediction of God, against all the sins of the elect, which he had upon
himself, although he had no blemish at al in himself: an apprehension
notwithstanding entirely subiecting it self unto the will of God, and in every
point well ordered and governed. And if the Bridegroom speak thus being
altogether perfect, what must the Bride and spouse do, in whom this
orderlinesse and good regiment of will is scarcely begun?

13 Behold therefore, I say, why this change, by which it is given unto this
Bride to love that which her Bridegroom loves, and to hate that which he
hates, is not a work of an hour, not of a day, not of a month, not of a
year, but a continual combat, so long as life lasts between the spirit of
the regenerate man, and the flesh of him which remains still in his old
skin. And therefore this which the spouse here speaks, and shall tell us
heareafter of the affection which she bears unto her Bridegroom, in whom
she seeks her whole rest and contentment, is not fainedly spoken or in
hypocrisy, for the Church is not the school of fainednesse and hypocrisy,
but of truth and syncerity. But this ought to be understood, as of her in whom
sin raighneth no more, Romans 6.14. and yet leaves not to be in her
notwithstanding, Romans 7.17.18. and to fight as much as it is able against the
spirit, Gal. 5.17. the Apostle himself one of the most perfectest members of
this faithful and chaste spouse may be more than a sufficient witness hereof unto
us, crying out that he does yet the evil which he would not do, and does not
that good which he would do: and again crying forth, miserable man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this mortal body, Romans 7.19.24. Let us therefore
confess, that through the grace of God, this spouse, which is the company of
the true faithful, is reformed, both in her understanding, to discern between
that which is good and that which is evil, and in her affections to love and
follow after that which is good, and to hate and fly that which is evil: but yet
notwithstanding she must still grow both in this knowledge from faith to faith
Coloss. 1.10. 2. Pet. 3.18. and in the practice not only of loving and of
hating rightly and soundly, but also so far and in such measure as she ought,
the which thing is especially hard to observe.

14 Yet is it an easy matter to know it, to wit, that seeing a man must love
God with all his heart, he may not divide and part this dilection to other
things: and touching the love due unto a man's neighbor, being loved next after
God, and for the obedience we owe unto God, this dilection is nothing else, but
a stream flowing from the fountain of that love due entirely unto God alone,
and not, to speak properly, another dilection, for which our heart is parted
and divided into two. For God which is jealous of his spouse and of his glory,
will have either all or none. That which I speak of our neighbor, yea of all
men, ought to be practiced toward all the creatures made for our use, unto the
which we must take heed we transfer not our love, as the covetous do which
make an idol of their substance. Ephesians. 5.5. The riotous and gluttons which
have no other God but their belly, Philip. 3.19. and in general all those
which make their soul and their body to serve any other creature, according
unto their passions and lusts, in steed of using them with giving of thanks,
praising and blessing the Lord in them: 1. Tim. 4.4. and keeping our selves
from all disorder and vnmeasurablenes, be it in quantity, or in quality, or
principally in the end and scope of the right usage of them, which is the glory
of god, 1. Cor. 10.31. as we are warned by diverse aduertisements sowed here
and there, touching this point, throughout the Scriptures. Thus you see what
this dilection is of the true spouse, addressing and turning her heart thither,
where her treasure is, according to that measure of grace which is bestowed
upon her.

15 But what shall we say of the hatred which is jointly opposed to love and
dilection? It is easy to understand, that we must as much hate that which is
evil, as love that which is good. But whereas evil is not a creature of God,
but a vicious quality fallen on that which was created good, we must put a
great difference between the Creature and the vice, as much, I say, as may and
can be put. This I add, because of one creature, the which is so corrupted,
and so far cursed of God, because it has been the original and spring of al
vice and of al evil, as well in it self as in man, and consequently of sin
and of death: that it is, and shall ever be worthy of all hatred and execration,
I mean the Devil and his Angels. And behold my brethren, behold him which
being perpetual enemy of this Bridegroom who has bruised his head: Genesis 13.15.
and trodden it under his own feet and under the feet of his spouse, Romans
16.20. and seeking nothing else but as a greedy Lion to devour us: 1. Pet. 5.8.
this old red Dragon I say, pursuing this spouse with all manner of rage, Apoc.
12.3. this is he whom we must hate with an irreconciliable hatred, this is he
against whom we must armor our selves with all the pieces of our armor:
Ephesians. 6.13. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. in a word this is he whom we must perpetually
detest and abhor.

16 As for the other creatures there is choice to be made. For first because
man alone amongst all the creatures is infected with the poison and venom of
this serpent, yea and that wholly and entirely both within and without, we must
consider of him also distinctly: and behold how we must govern our selves
herein. It is true that mankind is altogether corrupted and consequently every
man being such, even from his conception, Psalm. 51.7. is culpable of the wrath
of God: Ephesians. 2.3. It is also true that the Law of frindship requires, that a
man be a frind of his frinds frinds, and an enemy of his frindes enemies. But
because that God of his infinite goodness would not adiudge every man
particularly unto everlasting destruction, as he has done Satan and the Angels
his co^plices, but contrariwise would draw his spouse and his Church out of
this corrupt mass, in such manner as I have before spoken: and thereupon we
cannot (and therefore consequently we ought not) but by very uncertain
presumptio^s discern those, which he has destinated or not destinated unto
this favor: therefore leaving unto God his secret judgments, we must indeed
be frinds unto the frinds, and consequently enemies unto the enemies of our
beloved, but indefinitely: that is to say, without giving of sentence of this
man, or that man to set and sort him among the number of the reprobat. On the
contrary side knowing by experience of our selves, that of being his enemies by
nature, Ephesians. 2.3. he has made us his friends, Romans 5.8. Ephesians. 2.11. we must
irreconciliably hate the evil, that is to say, the corruption, and all the
fruits thereof, first in our selves, then in every one besides, and yet not
hate the persons, but contrariwise seek by all means to make them partakers of
the same grace, which is showed on us by our continual prayers unto god,
beseeching him, That his kingdom come: (which consists in the accomplishment
of the number of his elect in the last day, 1. Cor. 15.24.) and by all duty of
charity, even toward strangers themselves, to force them to enter in unto the
banquet, Luke 13.14. toward the domestical, which shut out themselves, to the
end to make them ashamed to stay without, 2. These. 3.14. yea toward the
persecutors themselves, Mat. 5.14. being apparent by the first sermon of Saint
Peter, Act. 2.37. that the Lord prayed not in vain indefinitely for them
which crucified him, Luke 23.34. and by the conversion of Saint Paul, that
Saint Stephen prayed not in vain for them which stoned him, Act. 7.60. And
thus we must understand the saying of David, to wit, indefinitely, that he
hates yea entierly hates those which hated God, Psalm. 139.21. and the
imprecatio^s which he uses in many places of his Psalms, excepting such as be
prophetical, of which sort there are also some in Saint Paul, Gal. 5.12. and
2. Tim. 4.14. which we must take good heed we draw not into consequence,
according to that advertisement which Jesus christ gave his disciples in this
behalf, when they would rashly imitate the zeal of Elias, Luke 9.55. And yet
we are likewise commanded to fly, yea to detest the companies of the
dissolute and wicked, 1. Cor. 5.9. although Jesus Christ himself took his
repast with sinners and Publicanes, whereof he yields a reason, Mat. 9.13.

17 As for other creatures which are made for our use, there is no question of
hating or flying of them in themselves, being good creatures of god. In the
which point some fantastical me^ do fail, of who^ the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim.
4.3. and some others, which would bring up again the legal distinction and
difference of meats, Coloss. 2.21 and yet to this day certain superstitious
hipocrites, of whom it is spoken: Math. 23.24. make a conscience of smelling
unto a nosegay: whereas this spouse said not, that wine is naught, but that
the dilections of her Bridegroom are a great deal better. We must therefore
love them less then to set our whole heart upon them, as has bin handled by us
alitle before. For rather we must fly all things which estrange and turn us
from the love of God, without excepting father or mother, wife or children,
which is meant by this word of hating where mention is made of hating, that is
to say we must set all things without exception after the glory of God and our
vocation, Deu. 33.9. Luke 14.26. In a word, it is this spouse who in this
respect, is crucified to the world, and the world crucified unto her, Gal.
6.14. using the world as if she used it not, according unto the saying of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.31. and being so in the world that she is not of the
woorlde, Ioh. 17.11.16.

18 Ye see then my brethren what the love and dilection of the Bridegroom is
toward his Bride, whence proceeds our salvation: you see on the other side
how we ought reciprocally to love him which has loved us so much, wherein
consists the testimony of our election and salvation. 1. Ioh. 4.12. Lastly
you see how we ought in this world to order and rule our love and hatred, which
is the sum of a Christian man's life. God of his mercy give us grace thoroughly
to know and to follow this way, which we will demand of him together with
all other things necessary for us, beseeching him as follows.

Almighty God our heavenly father, etc.
THE FOVRTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the third verse.
3 Because of the odor of thy excellent perfumes, thy name is poured forth as a
perfume, and therefore the virgins love thee.


1 The consideration of the excellency of the Bridegroom, is that which
engenders in the Bride a desire of knowing him, as the savor of that which is
odoriferous, makes a man to covet after it.

2 What the sacramental perfume which represented Christ was, whereunto the
spouse has respect in this place, and wherefore he speaks in the plural
number.

3 These odours savor not but to the spouse, and are considered in Jesus
Christ according to both natures, notwithstanding in diverse respects.

4 The first relation and correspondence between that sacramental perfume and
the perfections of Jesus Christ.

5 The second correspondence.

6 The third correspondence.

7 That it behooved that this perfume should be poured forth, first toward god,
to appease him toward us by his sweet smell.

8 Secondly upon every member in the Church, represented by this spouse, to
be perfumed with the wisdom, obedience, righteousness and purity of this
Bridegroom, by imputation.

9 Another effect of this perfume in our sanctification, and how our good works
are a sweet smell unto the Lord, not for their value, but because they are
perfumed therewith.

10 An exhortation to take heed of all stinking filthiness opposite to this so
sweet smelling perfume.

11 In what sense it is requisite that every Christian be a Virgin, and the
abuse committed of old in this point.

12 The conclusion and summarie con(...) of this third verse.

THE end and scope whereunto we ought to refer this whole Canticle, is in sum
to show us, that every faithful soul, yea all the true Church, is in such
sort in this world, that her whole heart is ravished into heaven, tending only
to the full and perfect conjunction and enjoying of him, in whom lies al her
treasure, which is our Lord Jesus christ her beloved. And therefore this holy
spouse having opened and declared her so ardent affection, adds now, that it
is not without just cause that she makes no reckoning of whatsoever
withholdeth men here below, in comparison of him, whom she desires and
longs after, because says she, there is nothing of so good and sweet a
smell as he, whose perfume she and her companions smelled.

2 Whereupon we are before all other things to note that she uses this word
of perfumes, having regard properly and specially to the perfumes ordained and
appointed in the Law. For albeit the use of these precious perfumes were from
al times usual and accustomable among the people of the East, which is to be
seen as well by sacred as profane histories, notwithstanding, the spouse had not
properly respect unto this, but to that sacred perfume which was in such sort
composed of earthly sweets, that notwithstanding the receipt and composition
thereof came not from man, but was expressly prescribed of God, Exodus 30.23.
with an express forbiddall of applying it to any use else save to the holy
and sacred service of God: Exodus 30.32. This perfume therefore was a sacrament
and distinguished from other perfumes, as the water of Baptism is
distinguished from common water, and the Bread and Wine of the holy Supper of
the Lord from common bread and wine, I mean in respect of the use: the signs
always remaining in respect of their natural substance and matter entirely as
before. This sacrament, I say, as al other sacraments, was composed of a sign
and of a thing signified, sacramentallie joined and united, that is to say, by
a signification tending not only to represent and bring to our mind the thing
signified, but also to assure us, that that which was so signified to our
external senses, was certainly and truly presented and given unto every
faithful soul. And this is the cause why the name and effect of the thing
signified are often attributed unto the sign: as when outward Baptism, is
called the washing away of our sins, Act. 22.16. which is properly belonging
unto the inward washing, which is made by the holy Ghost, 1. Pet. 3.2. and
Mat. 3.11. as also the names of the body given for us, and of the blood shed
for us, are attributed to the bread and wine of the holy Supper in the
institution thereof. So also in this place, he that was signified in Salomons
time, by these holy perfumes, namely Jesus Christ, is called by the name of
perfume and that in the plural number, for the reason which I shall tell you
anon. It is then the Bridegroom of the Church and of every faithful soul, of
whose perfumes it is here spoken, and not of any other: according to that which
is said of the Apostle, that he is the body and substance of all the shadows of
the Law. Colos. 2.17. the perfections of whom being without measure, and most
excellent in the sovereign degree, are meant by these perfumes in the plural
number.

3 Now Jesus Christ being true God and true man, this is a thing without all
doubt, that in respect of his divinity he is the fountain of all goodness,
and of whatsoever we can imagine perfect and complet, wherewith all his
creatures at the beginning were perfumed, in as much as he engraued in them such
testimonies of his goodness and beuty. But the question is here of a perfume
communicated unto his spouse by this sweet odor and smell, and not unto the
world remaining in his uncleanness and filthiness. And therefore we will
consider of these perfumes of Jesus Christ both in his divinity and in his
humanity jointly considered, that we separate not and divide his two natures
(as certain heretics called Nestorians have taught) but in such sort
notwithstanding, that we know that these excellent smells proceeding from the
divinity and godhead, are powered into the humanity and manhood by which he is
united and joined unto his church, to make her as well partaker of his gifts and
graces, as of his glory and life everlasting. And this is also the cause why
the Apostle said not simply, that Jesus Christ is the only mediator between
God and man, but also expressly named him Man; not that he is not a mediator
also between the father and us according to his divine nature, agreeable with
that, which was well said by an ancient father, that his divinity is not a
mediatrix without his humanity, nor his humanity without his divinity: but
because it is by the interuention of his humanity by the which he joins
himself with us, that we ascend up unto God, and to eternal life* 1. Tim.
2.5. Heb. 2.14. The same then which is called by Saint John the spirit which
the son has received without measure, Ioh. 3.34. and which was represented
by the dove in his Baptism, is that very same which the spouse means here by
these Perfumes, as also Esaias has thereof spoken, using the very same figure,
being as it were a commentator upon this place, Esaias. 61.1.

4 Now in all sacraments there must necessarily be some conuenience and
correspondence betwixt the sign and the thing signified: for which cause under
the new covenant the Lord minding to signify the spiritual washing of our
sins and blots, took the sign of Water: and minding to show from whom we
draw eternal life, chose bread and wine to signify it. The same must
therefore be found in this sacrament of Perfume. Therefore we must note first
of all, that as the receipt and composition of this Perfume proceeded from God
and not from men: so the graces of which it is here spoken, are in the humanity
of Jesus Christ, in as much as the son of God has taken on him this humane
nature of the substance of the virgin descended from David, and consequently
from Adam, in whom this nature of man was deprived of the image of god and made
the bondslaue of sin, Romans 7.14. but he is borne according to the flesh
without any sin, with his graces, in as much as the corporal mass of his
body was so taken from the substance issued from Adam, that notwithstanding it
was through the virtue of the holy Ghost, that the body of Christ was formed
thereof, the power of the highest (that is to say the holy Ghost) having fully
sanctified it, to be a most holy and sacred palace and perpetual dwelling
place of his most holy soul, endowed above every other creature with all
integrity and perfection: and especially that this humanity should become the
true and perpetual temple of the person of the eternal and only son of God
his father, from the time it was conceived in the womb of the Virgin, to the
end that Jesus Christ might become true God and true man, man I say most
righteous, and just, and the holy of holies.

5 Secondly as the mixtures of the divine receipt of this legal perfume were
earthly creatures of themselves, so by these gifts and graces, of which the
humanity is the subject, and whereof the spouse speaks in this place, we must
understand not that which is essential in the divinity of Jesus Christ, in
which thing the Eutychians abuse and deceive themselves, but the qualities
created by this divinity in the humanity of Jesus Christ, of whom we which
are his members could not otherwise draw them by any manner of participation,
Ephesians. 2.21. These things are very high I confess and surpass al natural
knowledge: Ephesians. 5.32. but having heard God spoken of so long in this Church,
we should and ought to have our senses used and practiced in them, Heb. 5.14.
When we say therefore that God is wise, righteous, good, we speak according
unto the capacity and conceit of our understanding: but to speak more
properly, and to come more nearer his nature, we must say that he is
wisdom, righteousness, goodness it self, yea essentially, that is to say,
considered in his own essence and being, and not that he is so or so affected,
to be such or such, as it is said of the creatures. But by these perfumes we
will understand the effects and operations, of these perfections of the
divinity, poured upon the head of our great and perpetual Aaron, according as
it is spoken, Psalm. 133.

6 Thirdly the better to understand the conuenience and correspondence of the
sign and of this thing signified, we must consider wherefore these graces,
with which the divinity perfumed his humanity, are called perfumes. It is
therefore to show us first of al, that as a good perfume hinders and chaseth
away the stench of any thing that is stinking and infecteth: so the sovereign
perfection which is in the humanity of our mediator mortifieth and puts
away from God all the stench of our corruption, and of whatsoever arises
thence, in such sort that in him, who is by good right most acceptable unto
him, Mat. 3.17. we be also acceptable unto him, Ephse. 1.6. Farther as the
odoriferous fume mounteth up on high, albeit it be powered forth, and perfumeth
all which come near it: so the graces of Jesus Christ which are powered forth
upon us to perfume us, as they came from above, so tend they upward and serve
not to hold us here below: for which cause also Jesus Christ, for either of
these reasons, is called the man from heaven: 1. Cor. 15.48. and we are taught
by him when we pray and say Our father, to ad, which art in heaven, whither
we lift up our selves, as being already by God sitting with him in the
heavenly places, whither this spouse aspireth and contendeth, and we with her
if we be his true children, Colos. 2.6. Ye see then what we are to gather
upon these three points, I mean, touching this sign, figured in the Law by
those corporal and sensible holy perfumes, and the thing signified by them,
namely the perfections with which Jesus Christ is endowed in all perfection,
(in as much as he is our elder brother) and thirdly touching the
correspondence, which is between this sign and the thing signified.

7 Jesus Christ therefore is the only vessel in which all these most excellent
and most perfect odors and smells are contained: but this were but in vain in
respect of the spouse, if they were so enclosed and shut up there, that the
vessel only were perfumed with them. And this is the cause that the spouse
says not, Because of thy excellent perfumes, but because of the odor of thy
most excellent perfumes: and not thy name is as it were a perfume: but thy name
is as it were a perfume powered out. We are therefore now to consider of the
sweet odor of this perfume, and toward whom it is powered forth. And that
was, as we have above touched, first toward God the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has taken such a pleasure in the smell thereof, that he is for
ever appeased toward us, for whom (says the Apostle Ephesians. 5.2.) the well-beloved
son has offered up himself a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto
God. Fot albeit in infinite many places this very same thing is attributed by
Moses to the sacrifices of the law: yet notwithstanding this must be so
taken, in as much as they were the true figure hereof, and not that the blood
of bulls and of goats had any such force at al in themselves, either in
whole, or in part, Heb. 10.4. And this is the cause why Saint John calls him
the lamb which takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.36. and Saint Peter
says that he has borne our sins in his body upon the tree, 1. Pet. 2.24. to
the end (says the Apostle, Romans 5.19.) that as by the disobedience of one man
sin entered into the world and by sin death: so by the obedience of an other
man righteousness and life were given us, this obedience stretching it self
unto death, even the death of the cross, Philip. 2.8.

8 Secondly this odor was powered, and is powered forth from day to day, upon
every member of his church, as al things were sprinkled with blood under the
law, Heb. 9.18. which is expounded of the blood of Christ, by S. Peter, 1.
Pet. 1.2. And this is the cause why the Angels announcing unto the sheepheards
his birth, and the real and actual pouring forth of this perfume, whereunto
this spouse even in the time of Solomon aspired, says not only a Savior is
borne to day, but a Savior is borne unto you to day, and consequently the
Angels in that excellent song, sung not only Glory to God on high, but added
and in earth peace, goodwill toward men, Luke 2.11.14. This is then that sweet
odor, which only brings us that unspeakable peace unto our consciences,
which the world cannot give, Ioh. 14.27. Romans 5.1. and Philip. 4.7. and that
not without cause, seeing Jesus Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. taking away by this means all
that which makes us stinking before God, and insteede of that uncleanness,
perfuming us with all that which may make us acceptable unto the father. For
first of all, the whole and entire pure wisdom of him, in whom are enclosed
all the treasures of wisdom and understanding, Coloss. 2.3. being
communicated unto us and allowed us by faith, our ignorance and blindenes,
which infected our whole mind, are covered therewith: moreover all our sins
being blotted clean out by the satisfaction of him, who died, the Just for the
unjust, 1. Pet. 3.18. and which is more, the full and perfect accomplishment of
all the commandments of God being found in him, which made himself subject
unto the law, Gal. 4.4. to the end to accomplish for us al righteousness: Mat.
3.15. all this being reckoned and allowed us, and applied unto us by the
instrument of faith, we are not only delivered from the stench of our
unrighteousness, but also clothed with the odoriferous smell of the entire
obedience of our elder brother, not only to escape death, but which is more,
to enter into life. Besides this, this perfect restoration of our nature in
his person, being also allowed us, and because it cannot be, that he which
has given us him, should not give us also al other things with him, Romans 8.32.
it follows, that insteede of many most infected and filthy soylings, which
the Lord being altogether holy, and altogether pure, cannot suffer, he
finds us in the person of his son, altogether pure and clean without spot
or blame, and consequently of a most sweet savor, as it is he in whom alone we
are made acceptable, Ephesians. 1.4.6.

9 What more? Besides this, this very same power which is the holy Ghost, by
whom we were in the beginning created unto the image and likeness of God, and
which has afterward fully sanctified our nature in Jesus Christ our brother:
by reason whereof he is also called our annoyntment, 1. Ioh. 2.27. powers
forth the effects of the same holiness and uprightness into the hearts of
the believing, abolishing by little and little that old most stinking nature,
and making on the contrary side a new and altogether another nature to be born:
1. Pet. 1.23. to will and to do according unto our measure, those things which
are acceptable unto God, Phil. 2.13. besides the special and particular gifts
which the same spirit distributeth unto us, drawing them from him which is the
fountain of them, Ioh. 16.15. 1. Cor. 12.11. as all the scripture witnesses
speaking of our second creation or regeneration. And this is also the cause why
the works of Christians being perfumed by our Lord Jesus Christ, who works
in our hearts by his spirit, Romans 8.14. are acceptable unto god, Romans 12.1.
among the which the principal is the invocation of his name, of which the
prophet speaking and having respect unto this sacramental perfume, said, Psalm.
141.2. Let my prayer appear before thee, as the perfume, and the lifting up of
my hands as the evening sacrifice: as it is also said Apoc. 8.4. The works of
charity toward our neighbor come after in the second place, ascending up also
even unto the lord by this perfume, Act. 10.4. and Phil. 4.18. by reason
whereof the spouse also compares his name to a perfume poured forth. For for
this cause is he called Christ, that is to say the anointed of the Lord, and
we also are named Christians, that is to say anointed or perfumed, with this
his perfume, which brings us salvation. This is the cause also why he is
named Jesus, that is to say, he which has delivered us from all mortal
uncleanness and filthiness which was in us: Matthew. 1.21. But let us take heed in
the mean time that we attribute no worthiness of merit or desert unto our
works, neither in quality of satisfaction, nor of any righteousness which
deserves any wages or reward: for this were nothing else, but to mar and
pollute this perfume with the vilest stench that may be. But let the
worthiness and perfume of Jesus christ alone suffice us, in whom we are fully
complet: Colos. 2.10. although of mere grace and mercy it pleases him to
accept of and to crown the fruits of his spirit in us.

10 What are we then to do? Even this in a word, that according unto the
example of this spouse, nothing savor us but Jesus Christ, holding the rest, as
being infected by us* for doung and filthiness, I say as being infected and
polluted by us. and by reason of us. For when Moses says that God cursed the
earth because of the sin of man, as he had before made and blessed it for
man, Genesis 3.7. he teaches us in general, that there is nothing in this world
which has not some spot of the curse of God, as experience it self does also
show us the same. But this is especially declared by that pollution which
consists in this, that men pollute and defile both themselves and all the
creatures of God, when neither they can, nor they will, so long as they remain
in their own nature, use them as it appertains, that is to say, in good
measure, with an upright conscience, and to the honor of the Creator. I speak
of those which are otherwise lawfully to be used, and of which the use were
pure, if we used them well: as for example, trauail for to get our living,
eating, drinking, clothing, loving of father, of mother, of country, and of
other things, in which we shall ever find some default or excess: and above al,
this most infectious vice, of not referring al unto the glory of God. And what
shall we say of those things which are directly contrary to the will of God,
with which the world is wholly infected both within and without? The Lord of his
mercy give us grace to know thoroughly indeed such our filthy and stinking
uncleanness, and contrariwise to seek after this so precious and sweet odor,
with which this spouse is said to be perfumed, running down from the Iuorie
palaces, of which mention is made Psalm. 45.8. Learn therefore ye covetous, how
infected and stinking this filthiness of yours is before God: and insteede of
seeking after your pleasure, and putting your trust in uncertain and
transitory riches, 1. Tim. 6.17. have your heart and your treasure in the true
and pure and not perishing riches. Ye ambitious, learn, what the vanity of
those honors and false great states, is, with which you are bewitched. Ye
drunkards and gluttons, to whom nothing sauoureth but wine and meats, the end
whereof is stench and rottenness, learn to seek after the living water which
refreshes to eternal life, and that true bread of life, and that wine which
rejoices the heart of man, with a true and perfect joy. Ye adulterers and vile
unclean persons, very hogs and swine with two feet, how long will you wallow
in your abominable and filthy infections? Contrariwise my brethren let us
harken, (if we will have any part in the true life and in these sweetes whereof
it is spoken: Psalm. 23. and 138. and 36.9. opposed to vain and corruptible
delites, of which it is spoken: Psalm. 17.14. and to that which has been taught
throughout the book of Solomon in the Preacher)

11 Let us harken I say, to that which the spouse says here in these words,
And therefore the virgins love thee. Let us be therefore, both men and women,
young and old, these virgins, of whom it is here spoken, and in the Apocal.
14.4. or rather let al of us be this pure spouse as she is named by the
Apostle: 2. Cor. 11.2. which speaks here, and warns us with her self. For
concerning corporal virginity, there is no such matter here meant or imported:
in the which simply the kingdom of God does no more consist, then in eating
and drinking: 1. Cor. 7.36. and Romans 14.17. as also no man is the holyer
because he is married: but al consists in behauing a man's self holily, be
he married or unmarried. This pertains then nothing at al, as I have said,
unto corporal virginity, opposed both to marriage and other uncleanness forbidden
by God: but signifies here that chastity and spiritual purity, opposed to
all unclean affections and actions of the flesh, which the Scripture calls
the old man: which if we renounce not, and which if we suffer not the spirit
of god to destroy by little and little in us, but remain in our old skin, we
have no part with Jesus Christ, nor consequently with the kingdom of God: 1.
Cor. 6.9. Romans 8.9. They therefore who have so highly praised and commended
virginity, as to make it the sum of Christian perfection, have gone too far and
exceeded in this point. Wherewith Satan, contrary to their intent, has so well
served his turn, that binding at the last their poor consciences with the vow
thereof against the meaning of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.35. he has in the end
made the world a Sodo^ and Gomorrha, both by the clergy of Rome to this day and
many ages heretofore, and specially by these sinks of stews, and brothelhouses
of men and women, the stench and infectio^ of which, ascends up into heaven.
And that this is here very much beside the purpose alleged for virginity, it
appears at least by this, that in the time of Solomon, there was no mention
at all of such virginity among the people of God, but he which married not his
daughter, was thought to do wrong and injury to his tribe and family. But
besides this, if we should take the name of virgins thus in this place, we
must exclude out of this company, the chief and principal men of it: I mean,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the Patriarckes, and almost all other the renoumed Godly
before the coming of Christ. Nay which more is, Saint Peter himself, whom
they make the head of their Church, must be shut out Mat. 8.14. and the other
Apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, 1. Cor. 9.5. yea Saint Paul himself
also, if a man will believe most of the ancient and renoumed expositors, upon
the place of the Philip. 2.20. To return to our purpose, the spouse teaches
us here three most necessary points: the first that to be partakers of this
conjunction with Jesus Christ, we must be virgins, that is to say, sin must not
reign in us any more, but as our God is holy, so we must give our selves unto
all holiness, mortifying our members which are upon earth, being followers of
Christ, and walking as he has walked, Colos. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.1. and 1. John
2.6. Secondly by what means we pass from our uncleanness to this purity,
to wit, being perfumed with the graces of the Bridegroom, by whom it is
given us to believe: Philip. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.8. and to will and to do, according
to his free goodwill: Philip. 2.13. And thirdly what is the principal effect
of this perfume, powered into our hearts, namely, the love of God opposed to
the love of the world, and which love is as it were the light of the lamp of
those wise virgins, of whom mention is made, Matt. 25. as also it is expreslie
reiterated by Jesus Christ, in that excellent and last sermon which he made
unto his Disciples going to his death, and by Saint John almost throughout his
first canonical Epistle.

12 We have therefore in this third verse an excellent abbridgement of al true
Christianity to discern it from the false, which leans to it self in whole or
in part, and likewise the most certain and perpetual mark of true Christians:
to be of the number of which, it suffices not that the persume of the gospel
be powered upon us, but we must be sprinkled within with the blood of the
Bridegroom, and with the power of the spirit of sanctification, 1. Pet. 1.2.
being received by a true and lively faith, and witnessed truly by good works:
to the end that that being accomplished in us which is written in the 133.
Psalm. namely, that this precious perfume with which our true head Jesus Christ
was anointed descending down unto us, so to love him as he has loved us,
Ephesians. 5.25. we may be in the later day really and fully perfumed and filled
with his eternal glory in heavenly places, to whom in the unity of the father
and of the holy spirit, be all glory for ever. Amen.

THE FIFTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the fourth verse.
4 Draw me, we will run after thee: when the king shall have brought me
into his privy chambers, we will be merry and rejoice in thee, and will celebrate
thy dilections which are better then wine.


1 How much this word of Drawing imports, and how greatly repugnant the
nature of man is to God and his truth.

2 Two most pernicious errors against this doctrine.

3 We had need to be drawn during the course of our whole life.

4 The imperfection of man appears both in the universal body of the church,
and in every member thereof.

5 With what coard the Bridegroom draws his Bride unto him.

6 We must one draw the other to run al together.

7 An application of this doctrine as well against those which are idle and
negligent, as those which draw back and turn aside.

8 This is not all, to run: but we must run after the Bridegroom, and of
what turnings we must take heed in this race.

9 What have bin, and are, and shall be the secret chambers we are admitted
into, there to be merry.

10 How we must make more reckoning of the dilection of this Bridegroom, then
of al things else without exception.

11 Wherefore special mention is made of wine, and how detestable a thing
drunkenness is.

12 The conclusion of this doctrine.

HITHERUNTO we have understood what has bin the most ardent desire of the
spouse, ravished with the consideration of the excellency of her Bridegroom,
with whom she wishes and desires to be entierly and happily joined and
united. All which may seem not to accord and agree with that which she now
adds, demanding to be drawn by him, whereas they which march forward of
themselves with all diligence, as this spouse does, which seems rather to fly
the^ to run, need not be drawn, no more then a free horse needs the
spur, but they which are slow and heavy, and they much more which are
altogether restiffe. And therefore we must wey well this word of Drawing, to
make our profit the better by it. We must therefore first of all confess,
that if we have in us any good motion at al, that is to say, tending in such
sort as it ought, to the glory of god, be the same never so small, it
proceeds not from our nature, either in whole, or in part. For contrariwise
there is in our nature nothing but most desperate and most obstinate rebellion,
until the spirit of God do drive away, first the darckenesse of our
understanding, which cannot, nor will not of it self, so much as think upon
the things of God, 2. Cor. 3.5. and that secondly it correct the frowardness
of our will, which is an enemy of God, and of whatsoever is truly good, Romans
5.10. and 8.7. And this is the cause why the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.1. says not
simply, that we are wounded, but that we are naturally dead in our sins and
offenses.

2 We must therefore in this place take heed of two most false doctrines,
whereof the one is of those, who being ignorant of the effect of the fall of
the first man in his whole posterity, even unto the little children which are
yet in the womb of their mother, have thought that man being provided of some
natural understanding and judgment, had no farther need of the law of God
then to be better and perfectlier informed of the will of God his Creator: as
a child that has a good wit, need no more then a good master, or as a
fair white paper, which is fit to receive all that a man will write in it. The
other of these false doctrines is of them, which compare our nature unto a lame
man, that has no need but of one to stay him up, to go upright. And this is
the opinion of those Sophists, which confess indeed that we have need of the
grace of God to prevent us, and accompany us, by reason of that natural
infirmity which is befallen us by the hereditary corruption which we draw
from our first father: but they will have the grace of God to serve us but for
a pair of crutches, hereby afterward to establish their own merits. The first
therefore utterly take away the supernatural grace of God, which is the first
ground and foundation of our salvation: and therefore have they been
heretofore rightly condemned and detested: but the other, desiring to part
stakes between that which they call Free Will and the grace of God, fall by an
other way into the same inconvenience and mischief. For toward God, the
former of these doctrines is as good as the later, whereas we ought to avouch
and confess, that it is the mere and only grace and mercy of God, not which
aideth our nature being weakened, but which changes it altogether in quality,
bringing us out of darckenesse into light. Act. 26.18. and Ephesians. 5.8. and from
death unto life, Ephesians. 2.1.5. and He which knows not this grace and that so
far too as this point reaches, knows not what the gospel means, or the
words of the Lord, Ioh. 6.44. No man comes unto me except the father draw
him. They reply hereupon that we then transform men into blocks and stones,
depriving them utterly of understanding and will: which conclusion they falsely
draw from our doctrine. For we know well enough, God be thanked, that the fall
of the first man has not deprived him of understanding and will, by the which
faculties, man does yet ciffer from bruit beasts: so far we are from
transforming of him into wood or stone, although the scripture call the heart of
the man unregenerate, a heart of stone, opposed to an heart of f^^sh, that is to
say, made soft and tender by the grace of God, Ezec. 36.26. But we say, that
in that which concerns the knowledge of the true God unto salvation, that is
to say, touching the doctrine of the gospel, which is the power of God to
salvation to all that believe, Romans 1.16. flesh and blood reueile it not unto
us, neither in whole nor in part, Mat. 16.17. but the son of God must reueile
it unto us, Ioh. 1.18. not as if we had eyes and there needed nothing else but
to present the truth unto them to make us to see, but giving us first eyes,
that is to say in the language of the Apostle Ephesians. 1.18. enlightening the eyes
of our mind, to wit, which were before clean put out in respect of this
knowledge of our salvation. The like is to be said of the will utterly out of
rule, and repugnant to that of God. Our understanding therefore remained unto
us, but filled with ignorance and incapable of knowledge: yea an enemy to the
truth of God, Romans 8.7. We have also a will, but replenished and filled with
all wickedness and vanity, by reason whereof the Lord speaking of this first
grace uses the word of New Birth, Ioh. 3.3. which declares the first
original and beginning of our spiritual life and being, I mean touching
these new qualities of both parts of the soul, and not in respect of the
essence of them. To conclude therefore that which the Apostle says, that man
before this first grace, is sold under sin, that is to say, is made a slave of
sin: Romans 7.14. and that the natural man, that is to say, that the man which
is not otherwise quickened and made alive in his soul, the^ now it is naturally
in him, cannot conceive the things of the spirt of God, is most true of man
entirely considered in his own nature without any manner of exception, or
qualification whatsoever.

3 And yet all this notwithstanding, this manner of drawing cannot be applied
to this spouse, as appears by the words which went before, by which she
most plainly and unfeignedly declares, that she was already drawn, yea and as
it were ravished above the clouds by this grace, witnessed by a most vehement
desire of hers of passing yet farther. And therefore we must add unto that
which we have already said, that if the first grace be altogether necessary for
us, even so is the second, and after the second a third, and so on, in such
wise, that even to his last breathing, every faithful soul must every minute
and moment cry out: Draw me, draw me: such repugnancy and resistance there is
yet remaining in those, which are most obedient, such heaviness and lumpishnes
in those which are most ready and diligent: and all these graces which come one
on the head of an other, must proceed from the same fountain from which the
first did, I mean from the mere and only free bounty and liberality of our
God, which moves him to perfect his work begun in us; and that not to
crown any merits of our works, but to keep his pomise as freely with us, as
he made it at the first. So that this distinction of works going before faith
and only preparatory, as the Sophists speak, from the works which follow and
come after faith, of which they make their merits of condignitie, were verily
forged in the shop of Satan, who could by no better and readier means lead
men unto destruction, then by persuading them, that they be of some price, and
deserve some thing before God. The Apostle speaks far another language: Romans
7.24.25. who feeling in himself the residue and remnant of the corruption
which was yet in him, how regenerate soever he was, and crying out miserable
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death, goes not to vaunt
himself of his travails, but gives God thanks through Jesus Christ our Lord,
protesting elsewhere, (albeit he was well assured of the crown promised unto
them which run well, and to loyal and faithful servants: 2. Tim. 4.8. that he
will be found, having, says he, not my own righteousness which is of the law,
but that which is by faith in Christ, Philip. 3.9. in such sort as that saying
of Leo an ancient Bishop of Rome, overthrowing the indulgences and pardons
forged by his wicked successors, is most true, namely, that the righteous gave
not crowns, but received crowns, and that from the constancy of the
faithful are proceeded examples of patience and not the gifts of
righteousness. It is not therefore enough that God form in us a desire to
know him, and to serve and walk after him, but he must succor, maintain, and
give continual forces to this desire, which otherwise would suddenly die and
come to nothing, and our latter estate and condition become worse then the
first. Alas we see at this day but too many examples of that which is
written: Mat. 12.45. and 2. Pet. 2.20. Our spouse therefore when she says
Draw me, it is as much as if she said, Alas my beloved, although I cry, yet I
see not that thou come any thing the nearer unto me. This, this is the
extreme desire the fathers had, whereof Jesus Christ spoke Mat. 13.17. and 1.
Pet. 1.11. I must therefore (says the spouse) approach nearer thee. But alas
although I do that which thou give me power to do, me thinks I have no
legs, so heavy, so benumbed, and so asleep they are. I would gladly fly unto
thee, but I trayle the wing, and therefore draw me. The like ought we to say
every day, although we may say, that this Bridegroom or beloved, is come
nearer unto us now, then he was in Salomons time, and that he is as it were
painted out before our eyes.

4 And we must note here that this prayer pertains not only to every
member of the Church in the feebleness of his spirit and will, but to the whole
body of every Church, yea of the whole Church, Catholickly, that is
universally considered, so vexed and troubled as al ancient histories do
witness, both by heretics in matter of doctrine, and so defaced and
disfigured with infinite scandales and offenses in the discipline and
government thereof: which thing should be well considered, both of them which
seek here below a perfection in every member of the Church, as the
Catharistes of old, and in our time the Anabaptists, and of them which forge
unto themselves an Idea of a Catholic Church, which should be without spotte
or wrinkle, which they afterward apply to their phantasme of the Sea of Rome,
without any either scripture or reason. And yet for all this the true Church
leaves not to be the receptacle and gardien of the truth of God, who never
suffers that this foundation should not remain and abide firm and sure.

5 But in saying Draw me, we must withal take the cord in our hand by which we
are craned up and drawn unto him: for to speak thus, and in the mean time to
refuse the mean which is presented us to draw us, were but to mock God. That
which I call the cord is the preaching of the Gospel, the ordinary instrument
of the spirit of God, to open our heart, to the end to make it heedful and
attentive, and to pearce our ears to hear, and to give us eyes to see, in a
word to lead us into al truth, and to confirm and comfort us unto the end:
and this is it in which the ordinary exercise of all Christians consists. It
is but in vain therefore for such as are ordinary and common contemners of
Gods word to say Draw me. For it is no more then if they should say unto God,
make me to live without a soul, make me to see without light.

6 But to go on: a man may demand why the spouse says in the singular number
Draw me and not Draw us, seeing that anon after she speaks also of her
companions And we will run after thee. Let us therefore understand that this
spouse here represents not one only person, but the whole company and
assembly of the true faithful already instructed, and bringing forth every day
as a fruitful mother children unto God: which are here understood by the
companions of this spouse. She meant not therefore to forget her company in
speaking particularly of her self, but to show by her own example the rest
of her train what they ought to do. And thus must they do which have
profited more then others in the Church of God, they must be instruments of
grace toward others, and so take one another by the hand, and ascend up
together to this holy house of God whereunto we aspire: Esaias 2.3. which thing
is principally required in the pastors and teachers which are sent to this
effect and purpose.

The spouse therefore adds, joining her self with her company, And we will
run after thee. By which words is shown us the effect of that which she
required, when she desired to be drawn, to wit, to the end that she might not
only march forward and go on with more courage but rather run. And this is
opposed to that negligence and slownes which is in the greatest part of them
which are of others most enabled, and al for want of taking courage to
themselves and making the graces of God to be powerful in them, profiting
from faith to faith, and from good to better, as it is said, Psalm. 84.7.
without fainting and being weary in running well, Heb. 12.12. Wherefore the
Apostle exhorting us, and proposing himself for an example, says, That we
must forget those things which are behind, and follow hard after those things
which are before, and draw to the mark, that is to the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Philip. 3.13.14. the life of man being
elsewhere compared unto a race, in the which, says he, many do run, but one
only receives the price, namely he which runs to the listes end, and
seaseth upon the price, 1. Cor. 9.24. And if they be to be reprehe^ded, which
run not swift enough, they are much less to be excused which go not but pace
by pace. But what shall become of them who recoile and go backward in steed of
going forward? what shall become of them which not only draw back but flatly
turn the back, returning as swine unto their mire, and as dogs unto their
vomit? 2. Pet. 2.22.

7 And what may I say hereupon? even thus much in few words, that albeit the
Lord by a more then admirable continuing of his graces and singular patience to
inuit, to draw, to summon us, us, I say, of this City, yea crying so loud
and so shril, that this voice of his has been hard in all corners and quarters
of the world: yet notwithstanding I dare not say that there are found any
ru^ners amongst us, but too many idle, too many deaffe, too many lame, too many
cold, yea too many which draw back. I speak it to my great regret and grief,
co^paring the time which I have seen, in the which there was so great zeal to
the word of God, that the pastors and teachers were not sufficient to furnish
men therewith, and that not without goodly and great fruits, both in respect of
the good order observed in the state public, and in private families, which
did ring of Psalms and praises of God: one neighbor warned and instructed
another, open scandals and offenses were not hidden and dissembled, the
strangers forgate their oaths, and other their evil manners, as soon as they
entered but the gates of Geneua: to be short in comparison of the time wherein
we now are, men did not go, but did run unto God, and God did bless them,
withholding and staying the fury and rage of their greatest enemies, during
their greatest fiery zeal and courage. And now what? Hardly do we retain the
name of that, of which before we had the true substance, and our fire is a
fire of chafe. And therefore it is unto us, that that reprehension made by the
Apostle to the Galathians pertains, that having begun in the spirit, we end
in the flesh: Galat. 3.3. Every one is given unto himself, covetousness and
distrust have possessed every man's heart, there are no laws which can bridle
our pompes and superfluities, in such a time, when we should be rather clad
in sackcloth and ashes, as neither the gammings, fornications, and adulteries
of some amongst us. In a word in steed of going forward we go backward,
every man doing so, as if a man to run would charge himself with a furred
and heavy coat, instead of putting himself into his dublet, yea into his
shirt if our clothes did hinder us. Every man foldeth and wrappeth him self in
the cares and thoughts of this woorld, insteede of meditating and putting that
in ure, which retireth and plucketh us from the world, that we perish not with
it. Every man is cold insteede of being hot and fervent in zeal of
knowledge. To be short, every man fatteth himself so gross, that it will be
impossible hereafter to pass through the strait gate: a thing lamentable, and
whereof I warn you in the name of God: while he yet says Come unto me, and
whiles the door is yet open, or at the least only half shut. If we will not,
God will show us to our cost (and we are very blind if we perceive not that
he does already prepare himself thereunto) that if we think not on it, he
will think on it, and when we shall cry, it shall be answered us, as it was
them which were invited to the banquet, Matthew. 22.8. as the workers of
iniquity, Mat. 7.23. as the foolish Virgins: Mat. 25.12. from the number of
which the Lord keep us. In sum therefore the faithful as strangers and
wayfarers in the woorlde do protest in this place, that they labor to come
unto that City whereof God is the maker and builder, Heb. 11.10. not only
to walk thither, but also to run thither with all their forces they have
received of him which draws them thither.

8 But we may not forget these words After thee. For it is not enough to run,
but we must first run in the right way, and secondly we must run right,
without straying either to the right or to the left hand, and thirdly we must
tend and go forward unto the mark unto which we ought to tend, if we will not
have our pains to be frustrate and lost. Al these things are given us in Jesus
Christ solely and alone. For first, besides that it is of his spirit that we
receive as well the desire of running, as the power to run, Phil. 2.13. He is
the way, the truth and the life, and for to follow him without straying, and
to obtain the price at the end of our race, he must always run before and we
must run after him. They therefore, who to go to eternal life devise unto
themselves new ways, that is to say any serving of God according to their own
pleasure, or happily follow the inventions and devises of other men
whatsoever, although these ways be never so common and frequented, and as old
and ancient as a man can wish: how ever they reply that these are not other
ways, but only certain paths, which bring them into the high way, as those
men dream which make themselves believe, that the merits of works agree very
well with grace: and the invocation of holy men departed with the office of
mediation of Jesus Christ alone: and his corporal and essential presence in the
mass with the verity and truth of the body of Jesus Christ, and with the
ascension and second coming of him, and other such conclusions necessarily
contradictorie: yet notwithstanding not holding the right way after him, they
shall not find him at their iourneyes end, and consequently they shall have no
other fruit of their travail, then that which Esaias speaks of 29.13. and the
Apostle: Colos. 2.18. Ye see then al false worshippes and religions condemned
in one word, of which the Apostle in that place of the Colos. 2.18. handling
this very matter sets down three kinds. The first is of those which are
grounded upon certain vain speculations, having an appeara^ce of some great
wisdom. As when at this day, men ground the Intercession of Saints upon this,
that men go not to kings and princes, but by mediators. Item that if holy
personages have had credit with God being in this woorld, they have a great
deal more being received with him into paradise. Item that we must satisfy
God in this woorlde, or in the other. Item that because the perfection of
every estate consists in unity, there must be one general head in the
administration and government of the catholic Church, or other like
conclusions of theirs who forge and devise a religion after their own fancy,
taking their humane discourse (a very bad rule and squire) to rule and squire
out their building by. The second kind consists in gross superstitions, and
such as are manifest unto all, except it be to them, which are altogether
blind and so will be. Such have been from all time infinite manners of
fancied things and doings, by which men have dreamed, first that their sins
were thereby done forth, and finally that God himself was endebted unto them
for them, as are at this day in the Church of Rome holy water, holy wax,
paternosters or beads, going on pilgrimage, certain signs of the cross,
certain kinds of weeds and attires and other such bables, in which there is
neither sense nor reason, neither with God nor with men.

The third sort was in the Apostles time of them, which yet held and retained
the Iudaical ceremonies, willing to mingle them with Jesus Christ. In the room
of this have succeeded at this day the traditions of men, and an infinite number
of devotions, by which not only the commandments of God are taken away and
abolished, and Christians brought into a most miserable servitude and bondage:
but the grace also of Jesus Christ himself is utterly made void and of none
effect, and there is nether doctrine nor sacrament remaining uncorrupted. Now
all this is nothing else but to run in vain after strange Gods, although a
man give them not this name but that all this is disguised under these fair
words of serving of God, of the authority of the Church, of Antiquity, and
of good Meaning. But in lieu of all this we are sent here unto Jesus Christ
alone, and consequently to his holy and only word preached, and wholly put in
writing, first by the Prophets according to the measure and dispensation of the
times, and finally by his Apostles, without being lawful even to the Angels
themselves, to change any thing therein, to ad or diminish, the Church being
founded and grounded upon this ground-plat and foundation, and no other
whatsoever, Ephesians. 2.20. Apoc. 21.14. the whole Scripture also giving us most
certain witness hereof: which without this would not be sufficient for the
barring and shutting out of all false doctrines and heresies: which thing
cannot be said without great blasphemy. Ye see then what are our listes, what
is our race and course, and what the price is which is set for us at the end
thereof. Neither does this point concern only the doctrine which is common to
the whole true church, but this aduertiseme^t must also guide us in all our
particular thoughts, deliberations and practices, in which we must always
demand of God the address and direction of his holy spirit, that we never go
beyond him, but always walk after him, having him and his commandments
before our eyes, as we are taught at large in that excellent Psalm. 119. and
Psalm. 1.2. And herein committed Saint Peter a very great fault, by and by after
he had made that excellent confession of faith, by reason whereof he was called
Cephas, that is a stone or rock: when he would needs be meddling in
counsailing his master, for which cause he was called Satan, and had it said
unto him, Go behind me, thou understand not the things of God, but the
things which are of men. Afterward Jesus Christ adds, If any man will come
after me, let him renounce himself, and take up his cross and follow me. And
therefore to conclude, if we will be Christians we may not go before Jesus
Christ, but we must follow.

9 The spouse adds The king having brought us into his privy chambers, we will
be cheerful and merry. Declaring by these words that she is indeed the true
Church, cheering her self so greatly with that which notwithstanding yet she
saw not but in part. 1. Cor. 13.12. but holding herself so assured of the
rest, for which she has so sure pleadges: 2. Cor. 1.22. that it seems her,
she is as it were already placed in heavenly places: Ephesians. 2.6. according to the
example of the Prophet crying out Psalm. 84. O eternal God of hosts, how are
thy tabernacles to be desired, as he also wishes and longs after them most
fervently. Ps. 42. and rejoices himself herein: Psalm. 133. speaking of the
shadows, the body and substance of which are in Jesus Christ. The secret
chambers therefore of him who is here called the king, and is so indeed,
according to the ordinance of the father which no man can break or infringe,
Psalm. 2.6. are first of all the revelations of the secrets of God touching our
salvation in Jesus Christ, by the mouth of his Prophets: which we may call the
porch or fore-chamber unto the palace of heaven, into the which the Saints
and holy men being brought before the manifesting of the Lord in flesh, have
seen and as it were saluted the promises a far off: Hebr. 11.13. looking in
into the holy court thorough the veil, for the which vision and sight, it is
said by the Lord, that Abraham reioysed, Ioh. 8.56. So does the spouse also in
this place, declaring notwithstanding that she looks for some better thing,
namely that which is called The great secret of piety and Godliness, that her
beloved would make himself to be seen in flesh, would be justified in the
spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
and received into glory. 1 Timothy 3.16. This was then the time when this spouse
was brought in into the Cabinets and secret chambers of her beloved, meaning
thereby the more near and plain opening of all the will of his heavenly
father, Ioh. 15.15. and himself being really exhibited, In whom are ratified
all the promises of salvation. 2. Cor. 1.20. For which reason Esaias calls the
Gospel the arm of God. Esaias 53.1. and Saint Paul says that it is the power of
God to salvation to all that believe. Romans 1.16. And therefore it is not
without cause that Simeon holding our Savior in his arms received a most
singular and unspeakable contentment, Luke 2.29. and that our Lord said unto
the Apostles that they had a great advantage above the ancient just men and
Prophets. Math. 13.17. But yet notwithstanding we see yet but as it were
through a cloud, and know not but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. not appearing as yet
what we are, which is differred unto his later coming: 1. Ioh. 3.2. We are
therefore entered into the secret chambers, but beholding as it were from behind
the door the glory of the Lord, as it were in a glass, 2. Cor. 3.28. looking
till he bring us into the innermost of these secret chambers, which he is gone
to prepare for us, Ioh. 14.3. to see him as he is in his true kingdom, and to
be eternally with him, 1 Thessalonians. 3.17. to see that which eye never saw, to
hear that which ear never hard, and to know that which never ascended into
the heart of man. 1. Cor. 29. And thus you see what the cabinets and secret
chambers are, and the true place called the holy of holies, not earthly but
heavenly, unto which every faithful soul aspireth, as unto the place of their
true and everlasting rest, and their unspeakable joy, even to the Lord, as here
it is said: not only because that all this glory proceeds of his only
grace, but also because he is the last end thereof: the faithful desiring to be
saved for no other cause but to glorify him, (not staying so much on that
which shall betide themselves to sing that goodly song unto God with full and
perfect joy, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory
for thy goodness and faithfulness sake, Psalm. 155.

10 It is not then without just and great cause (the which notwithstanding no
man understands but he which is born of the spirit, and which has his
senses fashioned thereunto and purified, to discern rightly betwixt that which
is good and that which is il: Heb. 5.14. that this blessed company promises
that she will forget the wine, that is to say, all the most alluring delicacies
of this life, to take her whole pleasure in the meditation of the dilections of
this her beloved, using again a word of the plural number to signify more
expreslie the plenty and abundance of that which God has reserved in store
for his, as also before she made mention not of one cabinet and secret chamber,
but of secret chambers, according to that which the beloved afterward said,
that there are many lodginges and chambers of abode for the elect in his
fathers house: Ioh. 14.2. and we may not doubt but that by this word of
Delicacies we are to understand, not only that which is besides the
necessity, which is required to the entertainment of this life, according to
the saying of the Apostle, that having food and raiment we be therewith
content, seeing we brought nothing into this world nor shall carry any thing
out of it: 1. Tim. 6.7. but also that we must go so far, if we be true
Christians, that nothing, be it of the highest, middle or lowest quality, no
not our own selves, which we should not cast far from us, and to which we
should not say I know thee not: Deuteronomy. 33.9. so far as it should turn us
never so little from that duty which we owe unto God. And this is that which
Jesus Christ signifies by those forms of speaking, of hating of father and
mother for the love of him: Luke 14.26. of cutting off the hand and the foot,
and putting out the eyes: Matthew. 18.8 and not seeking to saueour life: Mat.
16.25. For we may not understand these speeches according to the letter after
the manner of certain fantastical men, so to become a murderer of a man's self:
nor after the manner of hipocriticall monks, as if it were a work of
perfection to forsake father and mother to retire a man's self into a desert
for contemplations sake, unprofitable both to ones self and to others: but
according as the first table of the Law, which rules the second, teaches us,
when we are commanded to love God with all our heart: which cannot be done, if
the things of this woorld have never so little a part of it: for it is another
thing so to use this world, as to refer all things thereof to the glory of
the Creator without seeking after any thing else in it but the use, with
giving of God thanks. And this is that which Solomon himself has taught us at
large in that excellent book of the Preacher, in the which he has walked us
through the whole labyrinth and mizmaze of this life, showing us the knowledge
of using it well without abusing of it, according as the Apostle does also warn
and advertise us: 1. Cor. 7.31* and 1. Tim. 5.17. and the psalmist most amply
Psalm. 49. Therefore although it be here said, that a man must think more upon
the dilections of the beloved the^ upon wine, we may not so take it, as if
we might give our heart over to them both, but more unto the one then unto the
other: but this must be taken to signify that neither the present life, nor
ought at al in it, should possess the affection and mind of the spouse. So
when it is said Ps. 52.5. thou love that which is evil better then that which
is good, and Ioh. 3.19. that the world loved dracknes better then the light, we
must understand hereby that that which was evil was loved, as also darkness,
and not that the good and light were less loved, that is, loved indeed, but
not so much loved as evil and darkness.

11 Neither must we marvel that this word of Wine is taken here generally,
rather then any other word, to signify unto us the abuse of the good creatures
of God. For if there be any thing in the world which the world has for all
time and in all places abused, it is wine: in such sort that for one murderer,
one covetous person, one adulterer, or such other like vicious man, yea for one
glutton, there shall be found a thousand drunkards, or abusers otherwise of wine,
be it of the vine, or of other natural or artificial drink: a thing so much
accustomed, that men have a long time made it a common trade, yea a virtue, as
Esaias hereof bears us witness, Esaias. 5.11. and 22. since which time we se to
our great grief how the most part of the world is grown to be worse and
worse in this point, the Apostle not having spoken in vain. Ephesians. 5.18. That
therein is excess, and that which an ancient writer, who never hard Jesus
Christ spoken of, says, That drunkenness was the Metropolitan or capital Cytty
of all the whole province of vices. In steed of this, the Apostle in the place
above alleged warns us to be filled with the holy Ghost, as before him the
Lord himself does, crying so loud by Esaias. 55.1. Come take wine without money
or money worth. How ever it be, the sentence given by the Lord shall be executed,
to wit, That drunkardes shall have no part in the kingdom of heaven, 1. Cor.
6.10. Besides the horrible judgments which God executes daily upon the bodies
of drunkards witnessed by that common proverb being most true, The pot sleyeth
more men then the sword. To return to our purpose and so to conclude, this
holy Queen and her companions, acknowledging that al goodness comes from the
mere grace of god, drawing us unto himself, protest in this place, that being
once admitted and let in into the secret chambers of the king, they will forget
whatsoever they have had and received without him, that is to say, they will not
look back, to sorrow for this or for that, nor have their minds and affection
any where else, then on the glory and praise of this king, whom they shall then
enioie: which shall be truly and fully accomplished in the later day, but must
be happily begun and constantly pursued after of us here below, not following
the example of Lots wife: Luke 17.32. but making in verity and truth the same
protestation which David makes: Psalm. 16.5. and the Apostle Galat. 2.20. and
6.14. to wit, that God is our true foundation, and that we live not in our
selves, but that Jesus Christ lives in us, and that the world is crucified
unto us, and we crucified unto the world. According to this holy doctrine,
etc.

THE SIXTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the fourth and
fifth verses.
4 The upright love thee.

5 I am black but comely ye daughters of Jerusalem (I am) such as the
tabernacles of Kedar, and the pauillions of Solomon.


1 A summarie rehearsal of the sermons going before, and wherefore the spouse
changes her speech, casting her eyes upon the company which followed her.

2 The small number is on the Churches side.

3 Every small number or great number is not the Church, but that of the
upright.

4 True vprightnes and the love of god are things inseparably lincked together.

5 This spouse is accompanied with three sorts of maidens, whereof some of
them are indeed her companions, others her enemies, others are as it were
betwixt both.

6 Why these here are called daughters of Jerusalem, and the mean to bring
them to their true mother.

7 In what sense this spouse faith, that she is black, that she is of that
comely hew which is contrary to the tanned and parched color.

8 The inward beuty of the spouse is never taken from her, but she may well be
spoiled of her outward ornaments for a time, when it pleases her Bridegroom.

9 Examples of this poor estate of the spouse in the ancient Church.

10 Examples of the same in the Christian Church.

11 This spouse is sometimes so disfigured, that she is not known of men.

12 But yet she is always fair and shining before God, and such as are of a
clear sight.

13 That this doctrine is of all others most necessary in this our time.

WE have hitherto understood the earnest and ardent desire of the spouse,
thinking on no other thing, then on this real conjunction with her beloved, in
which consists her whole felicity, and for this cause desiring him, that
either he would come unto her, or else (being forced as it were to make this
request by an holy impatiency) desiring that she may be drawn unto him. We
have examples of either of these desires in the holy Scriptures, being a thing
most certain, that the ancient fathers from the beginning of the Church,
wished for nothing more then the coming of their deliverer, as Jesus Christ
witnesses, Mat. 13.17. and Saint Peter in his first chapter verse 11. and
David in many Psalms singing and rejoicing, as if he saw already this
sovereign king before his eyes, Ps 96 97. and in others following. Whereunto
belongs that also which the Lord himself says of Abraham, that seeing the
day of the Lord he rejoiced: Ioh. 8.56. But whereas the fathers saw him not
but afar off in the promises and shadows of the Law: Heb. 11.13. it is no
marvel if they desired some thing more (for which Simeon gives God thanks in
his song) seeing the Saints at this day, since his first coming, insteede of
being satisfied therewith, desire yet more fervently his return, as
witnesses that demand of ours every day in our prayer, That his kingdom
come: or else wishing to be dislodged quickly from below as the Apostle cries
out, Romans 7.24. and Phil. 1.23. which is nothing else but to be drawn unto
him, leaving here below, the old cast garment of this body, until it be
changed and taken again in incorruption, 2. Cor. 5.5. Now the spouse having
ended her former speech, by the which she was raised as it were above the
clouds, by the wings of faith and hope, she enters here now into another,
as having cast her eyes both upon her company and train, and upon her self
and others which beheld her. And this has Solomon here set down not without
great reason, as shall appear, by the handling of this matter. For it cannot
be but such considerations will often arise in the minds and thoughts of such
as are most perfect: for which cause it is more then necessary we provide
before hand that we be nothing shaken by them, as many in our days are. This
Queen therefore having bosted her self, that if she were drawn by the king
her beloved, she would come running unto him with a goodly and triumphant
company, and hereupon beginning to consider what this troop and train of
hers could be in comparison of them, whom she calls here, Daughters of
Jerusalem, and of those of whom she afterward complains, she becomes at
the first as it were ashamed. But afterward considering the quality and not
the quantity thereof, she pronounces cheerfully these words, The upright
love thee, as if she should have said, we are indeed a small company, but
fair and good: for I bring thee nothing which is not entire and upright, and
which bears thee not a true and sincere affection. And a little and good is
better then a great deal and naught.

2 This is the comfort and consolation which has been, and yet is most
necessary unto the church, according to these words of the Lord: Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to bestow on you a
kingdom. There are then no greater deceivers, to term them in most courteous
manner, then they, who to discern the true church (to the which we must of
necessity join our selves if we will be saved) from the false (from which we
must of necessity separat our selves if we will not perish) stand wholly upon a
multitude. For first of al, every one is constrained to confess, that even in
the affairs and dealings of this world, there are always to be found more
fools then wise men. How is it then when the point concerns supernatural
wisdom and goodness? If we will not believe that which the Lord himself has
said in express terms, speaking of the broad gate which leads to
destruction, and through which many do pass, and of the streit and narow gate
leading unto life, and which few do find, Mat. 7.13. let us at least believe
that perpetual experience which we have hereof. For what was I pray you the
number and multitude of the true children of God, when the deluge came upon the
world, in the which only eight persons were spared which perished not by the
waters? And afterward what was Abraham's house, in respect of the Cananits
only? Yea what was the whole people of Israel, to comprise therein the
hipocrites and false Israelites, in comparison of all the nations of the world,
shut out of the covenant of salvation? Ephesians. 2.12. Yea and then especially when
the Bridegroom came into the earth in person, to gather and to visit his
church, who rejected him but the builders? who cried away with him, away with
him, crucify him, crucify him, but the multitude? what multitude was that
first number of sixscore persons, by which the the Christian church began in
Jerusalem? To be short when our adversaries at this day, who oppose their
great number to our small company, shall have well counted, what are they all
together in comparion of the rest of the world which acknowledge not Jesus
Christ? The multitude therefore is so far from being a true mark of the
Church of God, that on the contrary side the greatest number ought rather to
be suspected of us.

3 Notwithstanding we say not that every small company ought always to be
followed: but it must be withal qualified with this name which is here given
unto it, to wit, the name of upright: which we ought well to weigh, to know
not only where the true church is, but also those which are the true members
thereof. The true church therefore is that where the upright and true verity
of God touching our salvation is purely taught, and they are indeed of the
church, who embrace it in their mind and heart, and by effect do declare the
same. And what is this vprightnes, but the will of our God witnessed in all
perfection by the writings of his prophets and Apostles? I mean in his law, in
respect of our applying our selves to perform it, according to the measure of
his grace, and in his gospel in respect of that our believing unto salvation.
Every assembly therefore, be it great or little, which holds not it self to
this vprightnes, cannot be the church of God, nor he a member of the true
church, who believes or does otherwise.

4 And we must note well that this true vprightnes and the love of God, are
things altogether joined each to other, and inseparable: whence it follows
that what doctrine soever withdraws us never so little from the love of God
(as all false religions have this in common, that they stay men either on
themselves, or upon other creatures in whole or in part) cannot be the true and
right way, whereof mention is here made: and likewise, that whosoever witnesses
not by his life, that he loves and fears god, is no true upright man nor a
Christian, though he have all the knowledge of truth in his head. And because
the love of God is declared by the love of our neighbor, whosoever loves not
his neighbor, is a liar, if he say that he loves God, Ioh. 13.35. and 1.
Ioh. 4.20.

5 There follow now after this, the words of the spouse turning her self to
the daughters of Jerusalem: which we must by name discern and distinguish as
well from those which she called the upright, to wit, the ladies of her train;
as from them of whom she complains afterward, and calls the sons of her
mother. Seeing then that we understand by this spouse the true Church of the
Lord, and by the Virgins which follow her, those which from day to day are
borne and bred up in her in the Lord, and by the sons of her mother the
domestical enemies of the Church, abusing their authority to the ruining and
destroying of her: it follows that in this place by the Daughters of
Jerusalem, we must understand the common sort, namely them which are in such
sort in the Church, that notwithstanding they care not greatly for it, and
referring themselves to the present estate of religion, such as it falls out
to be, follow the course and rate of the market, as we say, yea and willingly
adioyne themselves rather to the persecutors then otherwise.

6 The spouse therefore speaking unto these, and calling them Daughters of
Jerusalem, because that Jerusalem should be especially the City of God,
sets before them, first of all, the grace that God bestowed on them, if they
could use it well, and secondly vpbraideth them, and that worthily with their
carelessness, as if she should say: And you the rest which I see here about
me, and yet are not of my train, of whom is it long, that you are not, having
received this grace of God to be born not Philistines, nor Edomites, but
citizens of this city of God? I see what the matter is. You think me not
fair, because my hew is Sun-burned and black, in comparison of you who have
so fresh and so fair an hew. Now I confess that I am indeed black, but yet
notwithstanding, I have a fair and pleasant beuty, which you see not. For as,
if you behold me outwardly, I am as black and as tanned, as if I had been
brought up under the skins and Cabbins of these Moors and Arabians: so if
you consider of my beuty through this blacknes, there is no pauillion or tente
of Solomon that rich and mighty king so fair, and so glittering as my self.
Afterward she adds, that this tanned hew of hers is not natural, but that it
has happened unto her, as unto a young maiden driven by her naughty and wicked
brethren out of her fathers house, where she should have lived and continued
at her ease, driven I say, far and wide, and made to endure abroad the parching
of the Sun and other injuries of the weather. Now for the understanding of
this speech which is altogether allegorical, as also this whole Canticle or
Song, we must first of al note, that whereas ordinarily by the color of
black is understood every sad and unpleasant thing, as contrariwise by white
joy and pleasure is signified: notwithstanding by blacknes in this place, which
the spouse confesses to be in her, is not meant our natural foulnes and
blacknes, which is indeed more then filthy and detestable, in which this spouse
was found at the beginning as Ezechiel hereof speaks Ezech. 16. For, as
touching this uncleanness the Bridegroom had already washed this spouse of
his, with his most pure and clean waters Esaias. 1.55. namely by his blood,
and his spirit which makes that ever sithence, the Church, in as much as it is
cleansed by faith, and considered such as it is in her Bridegroom her beloved,
is without spot or blemish Ephesians. 1.4. and Colos. 1.22. and as touching her
person within, she is already so cleansed, that sin reigns no more in her,
but decreaseth by little and little, waiting still for that later day, in
which being clothed anew with incorruption, and made comformable to the
glorious body of her Bridegroom: Philip. 3.10. she shall be truly without
spotte or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.27. The spouse therefore speaks not in this
place of this natural infection, neither in whole nor in part, but means by
this word the poor and miserable estate, whereunto the Church is sometimes
brought in two sorts. The first in respect of her native beutie, which is
given her in proper: the second in regard of many and diverse calamities of
this life, by which her beloved does sometimes prove her, and sometimes
chastise her. Which thing requires a more large and ample declaration. I call
therefore the proper beuty of this spouse, and that whereby her Bridegroom
makes her indeed gracious and commendable, and causes her to be known unto
al those, which are not utterly blind, by her admirable shining beuty: first,
this inestimable brightness of the clearnes of truth, and of the favor and good
will of him, who has endued his spouse therewith: the which beuty is truly
within, as it is said in the 45. Psalm, verse. 13. and in the inward and
spiritual man. Secondly by the proper beutie of the Church, we must
understand that goodly order of the ministry, and outward service of God,
which was truly heretofore, such as might ravish the whole world in
admiration by the magnificencie and sumpteousnes, first of the Tabernacle,
afterward of the Temple of Solomon, and of all that which was therein done by
the ordinance and appointment of God. All this notwithstanding, as the Apostle
teaches us: Colos. 2.17. and the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, was nothing but
the figure and shadow, as well of the person of Jesus Christ, as also of the
excellency of the ministry of the Gospel, so much the more precious and
glorious to the eyes of such as see clearlie, the more simple and less earthly
it is. For even that outward Leuitical pomp, how glorious and excellent so
ever it were, had it not been referred unto this end, wherefore it was
ordained, would have been not only no fair or beutiful thing in the eyes of
the Lord: but contrariwise, as he declares by the mouth of al his prophets,
all of it whatsoever would have been unto him in this respect most stinking,
foul, and infected. Ye see then that the Church has a double ornament, and
that a most precious one, with which being clothed and decked, she shows
passing fair and goodly, as on the contrary side, being spoiled thereof, she
is in such sort disfigured and grows out of favor, that he must have very
good eyes which will know her.

8 But we are to note that of these two ornaments, the inward is never taken
from this spouse, being as it were a costly jewel which he never loses, and
without the which also she should be no more taken and acknowledged for the
spouse. But as for the outward decking, together with other marks which are
likewise visible, when it pleases God, his poor Church is for a time as it
were stripped out of it, either because the world is not worthy to have in the
midst of it such a beuty which it contemns, or happily because it is
expedient and necessary, that she be for some fault of hers, deprived of it
for a time, to wit, until the time of reconciliation, as Esaias hereof speaks:
54.6. and 7. For that time therefore she is in sorrow and heaviness, and
without her gloss and glittering, which may be perceived: fair still
notwithstanding and beutiful in the eyes of her beloved, who has always an
eye upon her, not to forsake her.

9 For example and proof hereof let us compare the time of the captivity of
Egypt, of the greatest part under the Judges, under Saul, under the ten tribes
after their revolt, under a great part of the kings of Judah, under the
captivity of Babylon (under which there was no apparent form of state, either
temporal or ecclesiastical) the time of the miseries and horrible disorders
and confusions which happened under the empire of the Greeks, and under the
Romans, until the total destruction of the Temple, and of the nation of the
Jews, let us, I say but compare these times with the outward estate of the
Church under Moses, Aaron, Joshua, David, Solomon, so long as he continued wise,
Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, Nehemias, and other like kings, and gouerners,
when there were any such, and we shall need no farther proof of this which I
have said. And therefore they are themselves deceived, and do deceive others,
which judge of the church according unto this outward and visible mark, as if
it were essential and perpetual, being most commonly spoiled thereof, and yet
not leaving therefore to be known by them, who have had good eyes to mark her
native, and essential inseparable beutie.

10 Now to come to the christian Church, this point is especially to be noted,
to wit, that whereas the ancient church for the obscurity of the promises,
which were as it were the contract of this marriage, waiting for the visible
coming of the Bridegroom, had need of these earthly and material Jewels, as
being pledges and witnesses of his coming: so the Bridegroom being come, as
this marriage also is spiritual and tends unto a spiritual life, has made
an end of all this: establishing the charges and callings of the officers of
his house, and of all his outward service, after a most simple manner and
fashion, far different from the former. Retaining therefore the soueraign and
eternal Priesthood unto himself, and likewise the regality in lieu of all the
Leuitical Priesthood and other charges and offices serving thereunto: he has
first of all set up his spiritual Temple throughout the world, which is the
Christian church, by his master builders, I mean, by his Apostles, Prophets,
and Evangelists: which being done, he has withal established for governors of
this building, unto the end and consummation of the world, Pastors and
Doctors for the administration of the word and of the Sacraments: likewise
Elders for the inspection and ouer-sight of manners and other Ecclesiastical
censures: and finally Deacons for the administering and dispensing of the
Church-almes, and other reliefes of the poor: and has also ordained but two
Sacraments, common unto the whole Church and perpetual, the most simplest,
that possibly might be, whether we consider the matter, or whether we respect
the form and administering of them: and all this, fearing least we should stay
our selves on earthly things, to seek after our salvation in them, or any
holiness besides. And therefore was the Christian Church then in her gloss and
beutifull hew, when this simplicity was diligently observed therein and
maintained, as it was in the time of the Apostles, under whom verily she
flourished in this native and ingenuous beuty, both inward and outward, which
Esaias describes unto us, 54 and 60. But alas, we may well say that this
glittering gloss of hirs, was but as a lightening which passes from East to
West, and is soon vanished away and gone, as the Lord himself foretold it
would be, Mat. 24.27. and Luke 17.24. For behold already even in the Apostles
time, they of the Circumcision could not abide the taking away of the
Judicial Ceremonies, which had bin sometime the decking and setting forth of
this spouse, but had an end at the coming of the bridegroom in person. Others
began then to mingle, under the shadow of devotion, their goodly frivolous and
altogether superstitious inventions: others, not considering that they went
about to be more wise then god himself, instead of contenting themselves with
this native and ingenuous beutie, added thereunto the painting of their own
goodly humane wisdom. And albeit the Apostle has so often and so diversely
cried out against all such inventions, and namely by a most singular divine and
clear distinct setting down of all these abuses, Coloss. 2.16. and the verses
following, yet could he not hinder that this should not come to pass. Hereupon
is entered into the Church the most part of Ceremonies manifestly and
notoriously taken from Iudaisme, as namely holy water, priestly vestments,
lights, decking of material temples, shining and glittering with gold and
silver and precious stones, without sparing of all manner costly apparel, and
bravery that might be. Afterward the simplicity of administering the
Sacraments seemed over light, and therefore there must be added to the
consecration of the water, chrisme, salt, spettle, chreme, etc. As for the
sacrament of the Supper, it was in the end clean taken away and abolished by
Transsubstantiation, and by a real and expiatory offering and oblation which
men have invented. Besides all this, this goodly humane wisdom has had that
credit a long time to model and pattern forth ecclesiastical charges after the
Roman policy, to the end to fulfill and accomplish that which was foretold by
Saint John, in the Apocalypse, of the Image of the beast. From hence insteede of
an Aristocraticall order of Bishops, that is to say Pastors, are come * the
dignities of Patriarcks and others, and last of all two Popes or Oecumenicall
Bishops, the one in the East, whose wings Mahomet has clipped, and the other
in the West: seated the one and the other upon the seven hills, and especially
he of the West, who does yet make drunk the Kings and Nations of the earth,
assisted with his breethren, officers of the latest and newest forge, called
Cardinals. I let pass so many superstitions, at which, a man may presuppose
that Satan himself laugheth. All this notwithstanding, if a man will believe
our adversaries, behold the beutie of the Christian Church: yea verily, if a
shameless thing, painted and diapred by her lovers, may be this chaste and
modest spouse of Jesus Christ, which has neither within her nor upon her any
thing save that which it has pleased her Bridegroom to give her, and which
co^tenteth hirselfe altogether with the garments, which the true and faithful
woorkmen of the Lord, I mean his Apostles, have cut forth and fitted for her.
The more then the Church is decked after the Apostolic fashion, the more
fair she is, whatsoever the minians and bawdes of the false painted Church
say to the contrary. And if the poor ancient Church brought in here by the
holy ghost, has had just occasion of complaining, that she was as it were
disfigured by them, either which plucked from her the outward ornaments she
received of her Bridegroom, or which loaded and disguised her with profane
trimmings and tifflings up of her, which darckened and obscured her shining
beuty, according as the Prophets in many places speak thereof: alas upon how
much more just occasion, may and ought the Christian Church to complain of
them, who under color that they would deck and trim her, and make her more
fair and beutifull then her spouse had made her, have arrayed her so ill? And
so has she indeed already made her complaint hereof unto her Bridegroom,
who has begun in our time to hear her, and has put it into the minds of
good Christian Princes and Magistrates to disburden her of those stinking and
defiled gawdes to restore her unto her native beuty* in which thing, God of his
goodness inspire them farther, and guide them with his favor more and more,
to the end that we may soon see the accomplishment of that which has been
hereof foretold, Apocal. 21. It remains we now speak of the second kind of
blackness, proceeding as has been said from the afflictions and incommodities
which concern the state of this present life. This blackness happens unto
the Church, according unto the providence of God for diverse reasons: namely,
sometimes for the chastening or rather awaking of her, when she is as it were
asleep, and sometimes for the proouing of her, and for the glorifieng of God
in the patience and constancy which he gives her: all this notwithstanding,
be it he chastise her, be it he exercise or prove her (as it is said
Psalm 44.) finally turning to an happy and good end for her. Romans 8.28.
But amongst all these afflictions, those which are understood by the name of
Cross in the Scripture, to wit, the sufferinges for the name of the
Bridegroom, and for righteousness, whether they proceed from within by
domestical enemies, or whether they come from without by the persecutions of
the open enemies of the Church, are marked forth unto us throughout the whole
Scripture as singular deckings up and excellent ornaments of the Church of
God, and the most glittering Jewels he gives his spouse together with faith,
according to that which is said by the Apostle: Philip. 1.14. in such sort as
this is the true rejoicing of the spouse: Romans 5.3. Matthew. 5.12. Galat. 6.14.
and elsewhere in infinite many places of the Scripture. And indeed the Church
was never more beutifull and shining then under the Cross, the saying of the
Apostle being verified by experience, That the power of the Lord is made
perfect in our infirmity and weakness: 2. Cor. 12.9.

11 But this lets not but* that sometimes the Church in respect of the
visible marks thereof, and the eyes of men, is as it were darckened, and that
so far, that it is not known to the most part of the woorlde for a time, as
if it were no more at all in the world: whether a man regard the apparent
beauty of it, which is the public exercise of preaching the word and of
administering the Sacraments: or whether a man consider this goodly order of
callinges, and of the discipline of the Church hindered and as it were broken
off for a time by the violence of persecutions, be it within by the sway of
heresies, or without by the open enemies of the Church, when both these kinds
of blackness of which we have spoken meet together. Such was the estate of
the Church, both by them within it, and by them without, under the horrible
persecution of Pharao, then when Moses was so ill known of his own: and
afterward under a great part of the Judges, and namely at the time of the war
against the tribe of Benjamin, when (as the Scripture says) there was no
governor nor king in Israel, but every man did what seemed him good in his
own eyes. Judge. 21.25. as also under Ely the word of God being a very precious
and dainty thing at that time: 1. Sam. 3.1. In the later time also of Saul, and
after his death, until the second election of David, a man might see a terrible
obscuring and darkening of the true visible marks of the Church: yea as it
were a total defacing of them in the kingdom of Israel under the persecution
of Iesabel, so far that Elias was entered into this opinion, that he was
left alone to serve God, 1. King. 19.10. And as for the kingdom of Judah, the
state of the Church was brought there to that point, that even Judah justified
Israel, as Ezechiel vpbraideth her therewith, Ezech. 16.51. And what could the
service and worship of God be under Achaz? 2. Chron. 28. and under Manasses:
2. King. 21. and 2. Chronic. 33. Finally during the seventy years of the
captivity of Babylon, whereunto was the name of the people of God brought? And
under the persecution of Antiochus, until the purging again of the Temple? And
as for the Christian Church, what was the desolation thereof in the most part
of the world, then when the Arrians for certain hundreds of years were a-flote
and bare sway? But especially and above the rest, that desolation is to be
marked, which happened after the Emperors Maurice and Phocas, both in the East,
where Mahomet and his successors have so disfigured this spouse, that yet to
this present day can she with much ado be known, and in the West, by the
Child of perdition, seated in the Temple of God, being by this means
verified and yet daily proved true, that which the Lord himself hereof has
foretold, Luke 18.8. and the Apostle after him. 2. Timot. 3.1. and 2. Thessal.
2.3. and yet more clearly Apoc. 12.14.

12 But notwithstanding it is to be noted, that as the Sun, being by the
interposition of the Moon ecclipsed and darckened, or rather hindered to cast
his clear beams upon the earth by some mistes of clouds for a time, in
respect of men, leaves not for all this to remain in his own nature full of
light, and of brightness: yea and it may be that some sharp and clear eyes
may acknowledge and perceive his beutie and brightness amidst these mists: even
so this spouse although such persecutions do darken, and as I may so say, do
utterly take away her native and ingenuous beauty, yea make her to look like
a Moore or Arabian, in respect of men, who by this means know her not: so is
it notwithstanding that thorough this blackenesse of hers remain certain
traces of beauty: naie farther, as white shows more white, being laid near
unto black: so afflictions, which are meant by this blackness, cause her to
show more bewtifull and fair, both to her Bridegroom, as we shall see it in
the verses following, and unto them which know her well, as Saint Paul, 2.
Cor. 11.30. and Galat. 6.14. and 17. And this is the reason which moved the
spouse to say, That she is black and yet very fair withal, and that on one
side, she is black as the Tabernacles of the Arabians, and on the other side,
that she is white and shining as the Tents and Pauillions of Solomon. Neither
is it without great cause, that she speaks in this place of Solomon opposed
and contrary matched with them of Kedar. For all the shining brightness of
this spouse, comes unto her from the true Solomon, which is that true king of
peace, on whom depends all her being and brightness, as the moon has no
light but of the sun. This beauty is also well set forth and described in the
45. Psalm. verse. 11. unto which the Kedarits are here opposed, I mean the
children of darckenesse, who appertain not at all to this King of light, nor
unto this Queen, amongst which also, David complains that he had dwelt and
been held captive too long: Psalm 120. verse. 5.

13 Now by these matters which we have above declared, and the times wherein
we are, the Lord makes us to see if we have any eyes, and causes us feel and
perceive if we be not more then bereaved of sense, how not only expedient, but
how altogether necessary it is that we be well instructed in the knowledge
of the true marks of the Church, being in so many places as yet wholly
defaced, and in other places so counterfeited, that it is hard for a man not to
be deceived among them, if he look not the nearer unto them, and examine all
by this touchstone, which is the word of the Lord enregistred by the Prophets
and Apostles, the sum whereof we have in our Christian Creed. Above all let
these temporizers, and irresolute, and politic fellows of our time, unto
whom properly this spouse here speaks, look unto themseues, and insteede
of being scandalized and offended with the poor estate of this spouse
according unto the world, provide for their own conscience upon pain of
everlasting death: seeing that without the church there is no salvation, and
hearing the reprehension which Elias makes against them which know not on
which side to turn themselves, 1. Kings. 18.21. let them take pity on
themselves, and join themselves unto this spouse, to the end all may come
together with her unto eternal and everlasting bliss and felicity, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

THE SEVENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the sixth verse.
6 Regard me not that I am brown, for the sun has looked upon me. The sons
of my mother were angry against me, they set me to keep the vineyard, but I
kept not my own vineyard.


1 A brief rehearsal of the Sermon going before.

2 The Church leaves not to be a Church for some defects of hers, be it in
manners or in doctrine. How we ought to bear our selves in such a case. The
difference betwixt a body which has some fauls and defect, and a body
utterly rotten in the most noble and chief parts.

3 The cross ought not to bring the Church out of knowledge, but is
contrariwise an express demonstration thereof.

4 The great desolations of the Church have happened by the principal of them
within it.

5 Wherefore the spouse speaks here of a vine.

6 In what sense the Church calls her persecutours the sons of her mother.

7 Whence the anger and despite of bastard brethren proceeds against their
innocent sister, even to put her sometimes out of the house.

8 The application of this Doctrine to the estate of the Church, from many
ages, unto this which is now.

WE have understood the words of the spouse turning her speech unto the
daughters of Jerusalem, that is to say, unto them who according to the
diversity of times which went before Solomon, and followed afterward, being
Israelites by name, made small reckoning notwithstanding of knowing either what
religion was (amidst the conflicts and strifes they had with the nations
bordering about them) or what this spouse meant, or else applied themselves to
the greatest and mightiest, despising the poor estate and condition of the
small number of the children of God, as appeared by the writings of the
Prophets, and as it happened unto Jesus Christ himself, Mat. 11. and Mar. 6.3.
Whereupon the spouse warned them, that for all this she leaves not to have
her true beuty, to be known thereby and followed. But now she adds a
singular exhortation, which consists in three points: the first, that it is
not the outward hew which men must stand upon to judge of her bewty: the
second, that men make her blacker then indeed she is: the third, that this
blackenesse of hers is not natural, and therefore by consequent will not
always continue to be such, adding withal, through whose fault it is that
she is in this case.

2 Now touching the first of these points, she warns and aduertiseth them,
not to stand so much upon considering of her in this hew, how sunburned soever
it be: a warning and aduertisment of al others most necessary, seeing there is
nothing so fair and perfect in nature, whereof a man grows not out of taste
and liking, if letting pass to consider the bewty and goodness thereof, he
settle his mind wholly to take a view of every defect and imperfection which
may be found in it: whereas rightly to judge of a thing, and to make our profit
thereby, we must equally consider of it, and uprightly balance every thing in
it. And as this measure is to be held in esteeming al other things, so is it
especially and above all to be observed in this matter, whereof we here speak.
They whom they called in ancient time Catharists, as also the Donatists, and of
our time a certain sort of Anabaptists make good proof hereof: who imagining a
perfect beuty of a church in this world, sever themselves from all others (as
if in their particular assemblies this perfection were to be found) wherein
they do greatly abuse and deceive themselves. First in this, that they stand
only upon the defects of the Church, thinking that therefore the Church is no
Church. Secondly in this, that they espy a mote in the eye of an other, and
will not see the beam which is in their own eyes. We are therefore to note,
that there is a diversity and difference of defectes and imperfections which
are found in the Church. The first are touching manners, which how wicked and
corrupt soever they be, either in the pastors and sheepheards, or in the
sheep, ought not to cast us into such a rage as therefore to think, that there
is no Church in those places where such corruptions are found. I say so long as
the truth is there taught, according to that which the Lord said speaking to
the Scribes and Pharisees, so long as they sat in the chair of Moses, that is
to say, so long as they taught the doctrine of Moses: do ye, says he, that
which they say, but do not that which they do: Mat. 23.2. Although this
hinder not, but that a man may well withdraw himself from the company of such
men, following the Apostles admonition, 1. Cor. 5.11. and as the Prophet
protests himself did, Psalm. 17.4. and warns us to do the like, Ps. 1.1.
nay lets not, but that a man may retire himself into purer and cleaner
flocks (if there be any such) and where he may be in less danger of being
corrupted by the contagion and infection of others. The other imperfection
consists in doctrine. In which again there are many circumstances to be
considered before we deprive any assembly, be it great or small, of the name of
the Church. And that this should be so, we see by the first epistle of Saint
Paul to the Corinthians, that in the church of Corinth, not only touching
manners, the discipline of the church was very loosly observed, and the manner
of teaching the word greatly profaned by a vain and affected kind of
babbling: but which more is that the pro and the con touching the article of the
resurrection of the dead was stoutly and stiffly disputed, an article
notwithstanding of such ground and foundation in the Church, that without it
the preaching of the gospel would become vain: 1. Cor. 15.17. And yet
notwithstanding it was so called and held of the Apostle for the true and holy
Church of God. Among the Galathians it was yet worse, being for the most part
of them turned aside, by the false Apostles, from the principal ground-plat and
foundation of the Christian Church, namely, from the free justification, by the
only satisfaction of one only Jesus Christ: and yet all this notwithstanding,
Saint Paul gives them the name of Church. The reason is, as touching the
Corinthians, because they showed not themselves incorrigible and past
amendment, and that, though there were some but badlie instructed in the
article of the resurrection of the dead, notwithstanding the body of the
Church did still retain and hold the truth. The Galathians also had not banded
themselves against the doctrine of the Apostle, but were only turned somewhat
aside by a light headdines, and yet not al of them, as is to be presupposed.

The like is also to be seen by that which the Apostle writes unto Timothy,
and likewise by the second of Saint Peter, and that of Saint Jude, that there
were already false teachers, and wicked Disciples even in the bosom of the
Churches, which notwithstanding for all these imperfections, left not to be
called true Churches: as a man leaves not to be a man, though he have some
were or some ulcers and biles in one part of his body. But the case is
otherwise of a body altogether rotten and corrupted in the noblest and
principallest parts: whereunto the Synagogues of the Jews may be compared,
after that they stubburnely resisted the preaching of the Apostle, from which,
for this cause, he utterly divided and disioyned the Church of Ephesus, Act.
19.9. and 28.28. and himself also has given us a rule hereof, Philip. 3.2.
Neither are we otherwise to believe or to do, touching such assemblies and
congregations (be they great or little) which notoriously and stubburnly oppose
themselves against the principal and fundamental articles of Christian
Religion, as that assembly does at this day which sits upon the seven
hills, and opposes it self directly against the kingdom of Jesus Christ,
whose name notwithstanding it falsely borrows, and therefore we have it
justly in execration and hold it accursed, following the doctrine of the
Apostle: Galat. 1.8. To come therefore to our purpose, we must take heed in
this case, how we stand in such sort upon the defectes and imperfections of one
Church or more as therefore not to take them for Churches: but we must use
those ordinary means which God has appointed, to bear with that which is to
be borne withal, to remedy that which may be remedied, and to take heed to
our selves we be not smutted, as they say, among colliers: applying all our
study and endeavor to mutual edification, as the Prophets and Apostles teach
us, both by their doctrine and by their example.

3 It is very true notwithstanding that the spouse speaks here of another
kind of blackness, to wit, of the outward overthrow and dissipation of the
Church by the vehemency of persecutions: which is the cause that many making
no difference between the glittering beuty of the kingdoms of this world, and
the spiritual beuty of that kingdom, which is not of this world: and
suffering themselves to be dazzled and blinded with that which has only a
certain outward gloss: either enter not at al into the Church, or if happily
they be entered, retire themselves afterward out of it, to return again to
their vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22. For fault of hearkening unto this warning and
advertisement, not to rely or stand upon this outward black and hideous
appearance of the cross; but contrariwise to weigh and consider well the true
and native beutie of the Church, in the midst of her greatest afflictions.
According hereunto the Lord having warned us that his kingdom comes not with
such observation, Luke 17.20. has said also, That he shall be happy which shall
not be offended at him, who notwithstanding is called a man of sorrows and
griefs, and so disfigured, Esaie 53.3. that he is compared unto a worm of
the earth: Psalm. 22.6. to whom notwithstanding the church must be made
conformable to be the true church, Romans 8.29. in such sort, that so far it is
that the cross makes the Church not to be known, that on the contrary it is
the true mark thereof being given to none but to the true believers, to suffer
for the name of God, the Apostle crying out, That this is it whereof he will
boast himself: Gal. 6.14. Mat. 5.10. Phil. 1.19. and elsewhere throughout the
Scripture. Hereunto is referred the second point which I have touched, being
contained in this, that the Church which called her self black, says that she
is Brown, as if she should say to these Daughters of Jerusalem, Comparing my
self with you, who are so fresh and so fair, it seems indeed that there is
nothing more black then I: but yet if your eyes be good, you shall find that
albeit I be brown and sunneburnt by the parching of the sun, yet am I not
for all my tanned hew, an Arabian or Ethiopian. For over and besides that which
has been said of the happy end and issue of the afflictions of the Church,
there is an exceeding difference, between the most miserable estate of those
who are blatched before God, by his just vengeances, or which are left
remaining in their natural blacknes: and between the confidences and
assurances of the children of god afflicted for righteousness, and for the glory
of the Lord, who bestows this great favor and grace upon them to be
glorified in them. Farther if we consider of the estate of the church in her
greatest afflictions, it is not so miserable as men think it is. For as the
Apostle teaches us, God is faithful, and never suffers such as are his to
be tried above that which they are able to bear, 1. Cor. 10.13. And therefore
very true it is that we are pressed in every sort, but not crased or broken,
being in want and penury we are not destitute and distressed, being
persecuted we are not forsaken, being beaten down we perish not, 2. Cor. 4.8.
In a word if we ought to judge of the nature of things, according to their
last effect and working, this brown or tanned color is the means to come
unto our true and perfect whitenes, the sufferings of this world being in no
point comparable unto the glory which wayteth for us, 2. Cor. 4.17. the way
unto which is the cross, or sufferings, I mean for righteousness and for Jesus
christ: Matt. 5.11. This is the comfort which we ought at this day to oppose
against these Daughters of the terrestrial and earthly Jerusalem, who think
us so poor and miserable, not knowing what our riches are, and how yet at this
day it is in Egypt that there is darcknes, and light in the land of Gosen
only. Let us give them leave therefore to judge of our color black or
brown, as they list; it suffices us that the spirit of God judges altogether
otherwise, to whose judgment we appeal, being assured we shall get and win our
cause.

4 The third point of this advertisement or lesson, namely, that which the
spouse adds, That this brown color of hers is happened her not from her
birth, but by the means of the sons of her Mother, who drove her out of
doors, and set her in the parching of the sun, being constrained to keep
her self among strange vineyards, whereas she ought to have kept her own
vineyard: this I say, contains also an excellent doctrine and instruction.
For the understanding whereof, we must first of all note, that by this natural
beutie and fairenes, with which this accident sunne-burning is contrary
matched, is not understood or meant the quality or condition of the children
of God in their first generation and birth, according to the which they are
borne in themselves the children of wrath as are others, Ephesians. 2.3. and
consequently are most foul, vile, and filthy: by reason whereof, the Church,
which is the assembly of the faithful, is compared, in respect of her first
estate, unto a foul and filthy maide^ child coming out of the womb of her
mother, Ezech. 16.6. but we must refer the original and beginning of this
beutie, unto her free vocation and calling or spiritual newe-birth, Ioh. 3.6.
and to that which follows in Ezech. 16.4. and the other verses following.
Hereunto accords that which is said of Abraham himself, Joshua 24.2. to that
beuty, that is to say, to that happy estate compared to the marriage of the
Lord and of his church, (of the fiansailes whereof the contract is already made
and passed in most excellent magnificencie in the mount of Sinai, then when the
tabernacle with all the service thereof was established, the body whereof is
our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 2.17. Heb. 9.) to that beauty, I say, and
brightness, which again showed it self yet greater, in the time of David and
Solomon, (so long as he continued wise) this sunne-burnt hew of hers, which is
here spoken of, is opposed: which may be understood after two sorts: namely,
referring it either to the great and horrible confusion, which happened more then
once after the death of Joshua, until the time of David (as is to be seen in
the history of the Judges) or else speaking of other most strange desolations,
which happened both in Judah, under the most part of the kings which were of the
race of David, as also especially in the kingdom of Israel, until the time
that the poor Church was exiled and banished among the barbarous and sauadge
nations, yea and after the return from out of the captivity of Babylon, as well
under the empire of the Greeks as also the Romans, even to the coming and
departure of Jesus Christ, which confusions and desolations of the church we
may say to have been in this place prophetically foretold by Solomon. And as
for that which might here be replied, that mention is here by name made of
that banishment and driving forth of hers which befell her, not by strangers,
but by such as were within, whom the spouse calls the sons of her mother: I
answer first, that the most notorious desolations of the church, are not
those which happened unto the church of the Jews, both by the people bordering
about the^, and sowed and scattered among them (whom they should have rooted
out and exterminated) and by those which were farther removed, I mean, the
Assyrians, Chaldaeans, Egyptians and others, of whom the holy and sacred
histories make mention: but those which happened by the negligence and wickedness
of the gouerners and rulers, as is in the history of the Judges expreslie to
be seen, and in the civil war, Chap. 12. yea under Sampson himself, whose life
does very well declare, the little regard which the Leuits then had of their
duty. But this is especially to be seen in the story of the civil war against
the Beniamites. As for the history of the wicked kings, this is yet more
notably to be seen as well in the kingdom of Israel, where the whole public
service of God was overthrown and ruined, and the Levites themselves driven
forth and expulsed, so far that the rest of the poor Prophets were constrained
to be hidden in holes and dens, and that by the singular bounty and goodness
of one man, there to be norished and sustained with bread and water: 1. King.
18.13. as also in the kingdom of Judah, in which the faithful servants of God
had no worse nor no crueller enemies then the Kings and the Priests, namely
under Achaz: 2. King. 16.12. and under Manasses: 2. King. 21.9. Secondly it is
to be noted that when the Lord exercised his just judgments upon his people
by strange nations near or far off, it was in manner always because of the
outrages and enormities committed within, both by the priests, and by other the
governors and officers, so that this poor desolate spouse does justly and by
good right impute all this mischief and misery which has so disfigured and
marred her favor, to the sons of her Mother, who drove her forth out of her
own vineyard, and set her forth to the open parching of the sun, that is to
all the injuries and contumelies which might happen to a poor vagabound
subjected and made a slave to strangers her enemies.

5 To go on, we are to observe that it is not in this place alone that the
heritage and possession assigned and allotted to the Church of the Jews (I
mean the land of Chanaan) is compared to a vineyard well planted, well
husbanded, environed and compassed about with good ditches for her defense and
safeguard, and blessed most plentifully with all manner of blessings: but also
Psalm. 80. by Asaph in the time of David and Solomon, and afterward by Esaias 5.1.
Ier. 2.21. Eze. 17. which was afterward most largely and amply expounded by the
Lord himself: Mat. 21.33. Neither is it without most great and weighty reason
that the holy Ghost uses this similitude as being marvelous apt and
convenient, seeing there is no kind of possession more profitable and
fruitful, or which requires more care and diligence to be husbanded and
trimmed. And because that as there is but one god, so there is but one faith
and one Church, as also at that time there was but one only land consecrated
and hallowed unto God, one only people comprised in the covenant, one only
place established and consecrated in Jerusalem for the outward ordinary
service of the Lord: therefore the spouse speaks here but of one vineyard in
the singular number, to the which the strange vineyards are contrary opposed
in the plural number, because false worshippes and religions, and false
Churches are without number.

6 She complains therefore that the sons of her mother, suffered her not
to be maintained in the possession of her own vineyard where she might have
been well brought up and preserved under covert, in her bewty. And if a man
demand the question wherefore she called not rather them of whom she
complains, sons of her father or her brethren, then sons of her mother;
I answer, that this was therefore, because she meant by this means so to
spare her mother and her half brethren, by a modesty very sitting and
beseeming the person under which the true Church is here represented unto us,
that notwithstanding she would not keep it silent, that her mother had
forgotten herself, I mean this very same Church considered as it were in an
other person, the mother of her, which here complains, to wit, in as much as
she ordered and ruled herself well at the beginning, but after that she had
brought forth this we here speak of unto the Lord, she was turned aside
afterward after strange gods in all manner of outrageous dissolution, as the
Prophets so often and in so many places vpbraide her. She confesses therefore
that those of who^ she complains, that is to say, the wicked governors and
false pastors, are indeed issued and descended from her mother, but not in
true and lawful wedlock, as is at large handled by Ezechiel in his 16.
Chapter above alleged, and under the names of two sisters representing the
two kingdoms of Israel and of Judah, Chapter 23. and by the other Prophets.
This is then as much, as if she called them in plain terms bastardes, as in
the Psalm 144.11. but that, as I said before, this manner of speaking is more
mild and modest, which David also in the person of Christ uses, Psalm 69.8.

7 And we must note well these words, That the sons of her mother were
angry against this spouse. The cause hereof is elsewhere declared to be,
because he which does evil hates the light, for that his works are by it
reproved, Ioh. 3.19. and because also the Church is not of the world, the
amity whereof is enmity with God, James 4.4. Behold then how the world uses
it self, which being in the midst of the church of God hates it without
cause; who is angry also, but after an other fashion. For the Church is not
angry with the persons, but with the sins of them who seek their own
destruction, whom she also seeks to draw thence by all means, requiting
them with good for their evil. Besides, it is well to be noted, that these
bastard brethren use not only mischievous counsel against their sister, but
when it so pleases God, dispossess her for a time, and enjoy the vineyarde
themselves until the Lord restore again the heritage to the right owner and
possessor, Psalm. 80. and Math. 20.

8 This place therefore contains a most excellent doctrine, and such, as is
of all other most necessary for us in these days, to be a warning unto them,
who in our time think it so strange a point of doctrine which we teach, and
which is most clear and evident, namely that the desolation of the christian
church is proceeded from those wicked vinekeepers, who have laid it so wast,
that scarcely there remained any appearance of the vineyarde within these
seventy years. This seems I say so strange a matter unto them, that this is
at this day the point, whereon many do especially stand, and will not
themselves acknowledge, or abide that others should confess the poor church
was ever so black burnt, which recouereth notwithstanding by little and little
her bewtifull hew, and desires to be repossessed in her vineyard (which is not
at this day one only region and country, or one only city, but the whole
universal world which ought to acknowledge his Lord and redeemer, the son
of God) of all which country she has been by little and little dispossessed,
by those two Sees opposed to that of Jesus Christ, the one in the East, the
other in the West. We see how the same happened so often in the church of the
Jews, that it may be said that amongst al those which ruled and governed it,
we shall hardly find a douzen which were not rather destroyers then builders
(as the sacred histories can witness) that being in the later times
accomplished, especially against the proper person of the Lord, which was
foretold Psalm. 118.22. Esaias. 28.6. Matthew. 23.33. the city of Jerusalem being
specially called the murdering city, Matthew. 23.37. They must therefore now
bring us forth some prophecy or pomise, by which the privilege may appear,
which they say is granted unto the city and See of Rome, to be not only the
mother city of the universal Church, as she was of the ancient Roman
empire, but also to have this prerogative, that she can never err. But so far
she is from being such, that contrariwise she is pointed out as it were by the
finger to be the Sea of Apostasy, both by Saint Paul, 2. These. 2.3. and by
Saint John in the Apocalypse, and by many ancient fathers both Greek and
Latin, although they in their time saw not that which was already before
their eyes. Neither is this come to pass only in this See which is the Image
of the beast, namely of the Roman Empire which it succeeded, but also in other
Churches of all the four corners and quarters of the world, being a thing
easy to be shown, that according to that which S. Paul foretold, Act. 20.30.
there is scant any heresy risen in the church, since the time of the Apostles,
which was not either first forged, or afterward set forward and colored, by
false Bishops, Priests, or Monckes. And yet in our time behold those which
hinder the work of the Lord, and will not suffer that the vineyarde, which they
have so unhappily and pitifully handeled, and as much as lay in them utterly
destroyed and laid wast, be restablished in the hands of faithful pastors,
which notwithstanding the Lord of the vineyarde will do in his good time,
having heard the sighs and lamentations of his poor desolate spouse, as it
has pleased him already to begin to do in some places of his great grace
and mercy. Amen.

According to this doctrine, etc.
THE EIGHTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the seventh verse.
7 O thou whom my soul loves, show me where thou feedest and causest (thy
flock) to rest at noone.


1 Whence the reformation of the church is to be drawn: and the faults which
have been, and yet are committed in this behalf.

2 This reformation proceeding from the sole and only grace of God, ought to
be sought after and desired with a singular and upright affection.

3 The Bridegroom compared to a shepherd, and the Bride or spouse to a flock.

4 The sheep which are scared must seek after the flock.

5 Where there is rest to be found amidst the most violent tempests.

6 A great fault of them who get them forth out of the place of rest, to cast
themselves into the sea.

7 This repose and rest is not found, but in the company which is fed by him,
who is the true shepherd in name and in deed.

8 The marcks of false sheepheards and flocks which a man must take heed of.

9 The Philosophers have in vain sought after repose and tranquillity in
their Philosophy.

10 There is a false Christianisme, and a false Jesus Christ.

11 Who is the true Jesus Christ, and how we find in him alone, true repose and
rest in our souls.

12 What the parching of noone is, which is here mentioned.

THE state and condition in which the Church is represented in the verse going
before, teaches us what that is she means here to say, turning her speech
unto her Bridegroom: which is this in sum, that being so driven from post
to pillar, so tired and tormented by her bastard and degenerat brethren, and
assuring her self of the dilection of her spouse, how black and sunburned
soever she be through this hard and il usage and entertainment she has had,
she now beseeches him to tell her, where she may find him, to be not only
reestablished in her former estate, but which is more, to come nearer unto him
then ever she was, to the end she may be the more adorned and beutified by him.
This is the sum of that which is taught us in this verse, containing a most
excellent and most necessary doctrine, especially for this time wherein we
now live, in which the question of the restablishme^t and reformation of this
poor spouse so miserably disfigured by her pastors, is of all others most
debated and handled. Now there is not a word in this place which has not in
it a marvelous weight. Let us therefore note, first of al, to whom she
speaks, and then with what a vehement affection she speaks, and thirdly
what she means when she says, O thou who^ my soul loves etc. She speaks
unto her Bridegroom, her beloved, our Lord Jesus Christ, she protests that
she speaks unfeignedly and without hypocrisy, even with the whole affection
of her heart: and to induce him to answer her, she makes mention of her entire
amity and love which she bears him. First of all therefore let us learn
here this lesson, that when the question is of returning and bringing back
again the Church of God after these desolations, to her true beuty and
brightness, we may not talk of seeking the manner and means to do this in our
own brain, but we must have an eye unto God, to whom alone it appertains,
to cloth and trim up his spouse after his own liking: and if we do
otherwise, we go about nothing else but to disguise and disfigure her,
sometime after one fashion, sometimes after another, as we see it has happened
heretofore in the Christian church, and is much to be feared least it also
happen and come to pass in our time. For from whence came this transformation
of the christian church, but from this, that the successors of the first
pastors established by the Apostles, in steed of keeping themselves to these
simple and native ornaments, which the true Apostles had cut out, and provided
and fitted this spouse withal, would needs set up a service of their own,
with such fashions and manners of doing, as are some of them manifestly
borrowed from Iudaisme, others taken from Paganism it self, others forged and
invented according to the lust and fancy of certain bishops: and as some
churches had authority and credit above others, so these ceremonies were
accordingly received either more or less, until at the last they became
catholic, that is to say, universal. I speak of nothing here which may not be
shown in particular, and that by evident testimonies, if the time would suffer
me. And how came these up? Under a shadow and color of devotion forsooth, and
of making the service of Christians more goodly and commendable. And what is
come of this? Mary this, that our crafty and subtle enemy serving himself by
little and little, even by them who thought to do the clean contrary, is at
length come unto that he always aimed and shot at, which is to transform and
change the pure and chaste spouse of the Lord into a painted and diapred harlot.
So fell it out in the church of the Israelites, when in lieu of considering
what Moses had said and taught them, and what himself had diligently and
exactly observed, Heb. 3.5. namely that he did all things according to the
model and pattern which he had seen in the mount, Exodus 25.40. with an express
commandment unto the Israelits, not to ad or diminish any thing from that,
which the Lord had expressly ordained by his word, Deuteronomy. 4.2. they presumed to
mingle with it their traditions and inventions, such as were not only vain and
frustratory, as the lord speaks of the^, Esaias. 29.13. but finally such as
were abominable and directly opposed against the commandment of God, Mat.
15.6. Behold how men turning themselves aside by little and little from the word
of god, do first build hay and stubble, holding notwithstanding the foundation,
as the Apostle foresawe and foretold, 1. Cor. 3.12. and from thence, proceed
to prescribe God himself a law, notwithstanding the admonitions and
aduertisements of the Apostle, 2. Tim. 3.1. and Coloss. 2.18. and the verses
following. The question therefore being at this day of reforming the church,
the day of the Lord being appeared as well to consume and destroy this stubble
and hay by that fiery flaming two edged sword, Apoc. 1.16, as also to destroy
by spiritual arms and weapons every high thing which lifts it self up
against god, 2. Cor. 10.4. We are taught in this place to have our recourse to
the only wisdom of God (which is so exactly set down and enregistred in his
word) doing nothing of our own head, for fear our selves offend in that which
we would amend. And would to god many had had more regard hereunto at the
beginning then they have had, whereas in many places some would needs moderate
that which they should utterly have rooted out, retaining in churches and holy
places made for devotion, images, crosses, albes, copes, with like trumpery,
calling al these things, things indifferent, not regarding the decision which
christ has to the contrary in this behalf, speaking of the washing of the
hands of the Pharisees, Mar. 7.2. although washing of the hands be a thing in
it self not only indifferent, but such as might well cover it self with the
cloak of honesty and cleanliness. Others in lieu of contenting themselves
with the vocations and callings ordained by the holy ghost for the government
and administration of the church of god, following herein those among the kings
of Judah, have so reformed the church, that notwithstanding they have left the
high places to stand up still: in such sort that in the end if God provide not
the better against it, they shall find they are fallen out of a cold ague into
an hot fever. The lord of his mercy remedy it according as this spouse here
teaches us, and the answer which is made her afterward by her bridegroom.

2 It pertains therefore to god alone to teach us the form of reforming his
building, which is for this cause called the building of God, 1 Cor. 3.9.
whereunto we are yet farther to add, that it is belonging to him alone, even
then when he has adorned her, to give us eyes to know her to be such as she
is, that so we may adioin our selves unto her. For otherwise, the ghospel,
which is the ornament of the church which beutifieth it, and discerns and
seuereth it from the world (the appearance and show whereof does deceive us) 1.
Cor. 7.31. will be unto us either an offense, or a mockery, 1. Cor. 1.23. He
must therefore give us eyes to see, Psalm. 146.8. ears unto our heart to hear,
Psalm. 40.8. in a word, we must be taught of him: Esaias 54.13. of him I say, who
leads us into al truth: Ioh. 16.13. which the spouse in this place desires,
in this desolation of hers, wherein we see her to be at this day. For if this
light is not then known of men, when it shines most clearly, 2. Cor. 4.4.
what might it be when God so long a time withdrew this light from the world? It
is therefore to God that we must say, show me where thou feedest thy flock. But
this is not yet enough to desire to learn this of him, but we must demand
with a true and ardent desire, not bringing any thing else but a true and
upright affection and desire of the aduauncing of the glory of God. And this
is it which this spouse testifies by these words, O thou whom my soul loves,
that is to say, O my Bridegroom and Savior, unto whom I have dedicated and
yielded up my whole affection. It is no marvel therefore, if we see at this
day the work of God, insteede of going forward to go backward; yea the
darkness redoubled in many places, in the which the sun of truth began to
shine very clearly: for experience has proved unto us that there are but
too many which have spoiled the harlot of her trinkets and jewels, not to do
with them as Moses did with the golden calfe, Exodus 32.20. or as Ezechias with
the brazen serpent, 2. King. 18.4. as neither is it requisite we should
always do the like, or that we may not turn that to good and holy uses
which was before applied unto superstition, but (dare I speak it? Yea) but make
their own state the mightier by that of another, leaving Jesus Christ as the
soldiers did which crucified him either stark naked, or at least but badly and
soryly cladded, the effects whereof we see already, giving them occasion which
are culpable of this evil to think upon it, and to the^ which have done better,
to thank god therefore, and to take heed of it. For so to do is not to love
God, but the goods of God, more then God and without God: whereas the true
spouse protests here that she loves and seeks after her Bridegroom, with
all the affection and desire she has. That she therefore makes protestation
of this love of hers toward God, it is not to allege her own merit or
deserving, as if God were therefore bound to grant her her request. For
contrariwise since the love which we bear unto our God is the free gift of
him, who loved us first, 1. Ioh. 4.10. then when we were his enemies, Romans
5.10. it follows that if we love him, we are therefore beholding unto him
and not he unto us; besides that our love imports him naught at all. It is
therefore an absurd thing and contrary to the grace of God, to think that
this dilection or love is meritorious: but this lets not but that we may
and ought to make mention unto him of his own gifts, to the end it would
please him to acknowledge us for his, and bless us for those marks wherewith
it has pleased him to mark us.

3 Let us come now unto that which the spouse desires to know of him, which is
in sum, that it would please him to tell her the place, where he feeds and
causes his flock to rest at noone: that is to say, in the heat of the day.
This is a thing very common and accustomable in the Scripture, to attribute
the name of Pastor or sheepeheard to our Lord Jesus Christ, and the name of
flock unto his church. Hence it follows that by the pasture or food, we
must understand the word of God, and by the pasturing places, those places
where this word is sincerely taught and administered. This needs no proof,
because the whole scripture both of the old and of the new testament is full of
proofs and testimonies hereof. Insteede therefore of standing upon the reasons
and grounds of this allegory, albeit they contain a goodly and excellent
doctrine, we will first of all answer and resolve a doubt which may be made
in this place. For if the church which is but one, is brought in, speaking in
this place, and herself is the flock of Christ, what is this flock which she
asks and seeks after? If hereupon some man reply and answer that it is
true indeed, there is but one Church of God, but that this church is parted
and divided as it were into two, namely, into that company which is already
gathered up on high, which we commonly call the triumphant Church, composed and
made of the spirits and souls of the just: whereof mention is made, Heb.
12.23. and that which is here below which we call the Church Militant, as
Saint Paul also divides this family into two, whereof the one part is in
heaven, and the other in the earth, Ephesians. 1.10. Coloss. 1.16. and 20. if a man
I say so answer this doubt, although it be indeed in heaven that our true
repose and rest lies, yet is this nothing to the matter. For there is no
parching of the noonday. Farther the verse going before, and the answer of
the Bridegroom contained in the verse following shows that the point in
question here is of the comforting and reestablishing of the Church desolated
and wasted by disorders and persecutions, as we have before at large handled.

4 Albeit therefore there is but one Church, notwithstanding this lets not
but that it may be considered in mo parts even in this world, whereof some
being disfigured by persecution seek after other which are in peace. So we see
by experience at this day that the Church of God being most cruelly persecuted
and deprived of the public and pure exercise of religion in some places of
the world, is relieved elsewhere and comforted, and inioyeth by an especial
grace and favor of God her liberty, who reserueth for his poor children some
place of refuge and refreshing.

5 But it seems that yet more properly to speak and more near to the point,
the church being as it were universally persecuted and woonderfully disfigured
demands here of her Bridegroom, how and by what means he is accustomed to
maintain and nourish his Church with this pasture, against all the afflictions,
storms and tempests of this world. And therefore is as much as if she should
say, that though she be brought into poor estate, yet has she not for all
that lost any whit of her courage, or changed her affection at al, as it is
said Psalm. 44.18. and Psalm. 89.39. but that amiddest them, amongst whom she
is, and in so troublesome a time she has as it were lost the footing of the
right way, as being brought into a desert and wilderness: which causes her
to desire her Bridegroom it may please him to direct her and to point her out
which way she shall take to find and to come unto her true repose and rest.
In a word to understand this place aright, let us set before us the state of
the church of the Lord, in which it was but threescore or fourscoure years ago:
when if a man had demanded what manner of book the Bible was or the new
Testament, he should hardly have found one among a thousand of them which named
themselves christians, which knew what it was, much less which understood what
was meant by the law and the Gospel. Neither do we doubt, but that such as it
pleased God to vouchsafe his grace to enquire after the right way, amidst such
deserts, and to find it, to teach it us and to bring us thither by their holy
labor and travel, did often make the same prayer unto God, which this spouse
being in the like estate makes here, without which prayer themselves and we
should have perished with others, with the rest of the world. And yet at this
day what do all the true faithful believers in those places and kingdoms
where they mourn and languish, but pray unto the Lord to teach them the right
way amidst those labyrinthes in which they are, and to guide them to those
places where God does feed his sheep in all abundance and in exceeding great
safety.

6 Behold I say what the true children of God, having great want of that which
we have in all abundance, desire of God every day with unspeakable sighinges
and tears, whilst we despise the bounty and liberality of the Lord, and
turn upon our heads into just judgment, the grace and mercy of the gospel, by
our wicked and dissolute living. And what shall we say of them, who enjoying
the places of such a rest, seek after Sodom and Gomorra, departing as Lot did
out of Abraham's house? Genesis 13.10. by reason whereof he found himself soon
after in il case. Genesis 14.12. yea with his whole family, Genesis 19. which was
finally cursed of God and shut out and excluded from his people. I know what
the replies of such men are, that the gospel is not enclosed and shut up within
the walls of one city, which is very true. But notwithstanding the spouse
demands in this place, where the place is that he feeds and reposeth or
rests his sheep. Neither serves the reply of such men to any purpose,
namely, that in what place soever they be they will serve God; and if they
cannot have the public exercise of the word of God, they will read the
Scripture, and will pray in their houses. I answer that Lot also when he was
in Sodom afflicted his soul, which they for the most keep themselves well from:
2. Pet. 2.8. and yet we see that neither he nor his Daughters learned any thing
there which was ought worth: Genesis 19.8.16.31.

7 The first point therefore of this demand is to know, whether we must retire
our selves, not to perish with the woorlde, but to be fed to eternal life. This
is meant by these words where thou feedest In which we are also to note that it
is not said where men feed, but where thou feedest: whereby it is showed us
that we must seek for this food elsewhere then in our selves, to wit, in him of
whom only it is said, that he has life in himself, Ioh. 5.26. and who is the
bread of life: Ioh. 6.35. and that we seek it no where else but there where he
feeds us, I mean, as Saint Peter testifies, there where his word is
announced and preached, when he says: Ioh. 6.68. to whom shall we go? Thou
have the words of eternal life, after that he had heard a little before of him,
the words which I speak unto you are spirit and life. For which cause also, 1.
Ioh. 1.1. he is called the word of life. This is then the only great pastor
and shepherd of our souls, who feeds his sheep, having spoken first of al
unto the fathers in diverse sorts and at sundry times, and last of all having
declared unto us in person all the will of his father, Ioh. 15.15. and
consequently having given and giving every day pastors and teachers: Ephesians.
4.11. of whom it is said As my father has sent me, so send I you: Ioh. 20.21.
not to ad notwithstanding or to diminish any thing from the doctrine already
preached by the master, but according to the tenor of their commission limited
to that which they have heard and received: Matthew. 28.20. and Act. 4.20.

8 From thence also flow 2. other points of most necessary doctrine. First that
the Church is not there where men do feed, that is to say, do teach their own
inventions, whether they forge a doctrine altogether new, Esaias 29.13. or
whether they add, change or diminish any thing from the word first preached
and afterward registered by the Prophets and Apostles, which the Lord calls
the leaven of the Pharisees: Mat. 16.11. and whereof the Apostle distinctly and
expressly speaks, Col. 2 from the 16. verse. unto the end of the Chapter.
Secondly that as little ought every assembly to be called the church, in the
which there is no feeding, but foding of the poor people with songs and right
masquerades and mummeries, and that in an unknown language: among whom, even
those which vsurp the names of pastors are dumb dogs, devouring the sheep as it
were bread, Psalm. 14.4. in steed of feeding them, Ioh. 10.10. and not only
ignorant, and utterly unable and unfit for their calling, but even unworthy of
the name of Christians, having never learned, nay not so much as once thought
upon indeed what christian religion means, who neither enter in themselves
into the kingdom of heaven, nor suffer others to enter thereinto, Luke 11.52.
that being truly fulfilled in them which was foretold by Esai, 28.9. and so
on. Now whether at this day and heretofore, the clergy of Rome, who attribute
unto themselves the name of the Catholic Church, be such or no, the very
children themselves can judge and perceive.

9 The spouse adds And where thou causest thy flock to rest at noone. Which
is added to declare by this effect, the difference which is between this
pasture and food, and al others besides. For if we shall consider in
particular of all that which men have ever invented and forged to have rest in
their mind and consciences, we shall find, that all is naught else but so
many dreams and doting fancies. For if we speak of them whom men call and
term Philosophers, they have indeed by common consent and accord said, that
man can find no true repose or quiet but in that which is his sovereign good
and happiness: wherein they say most true: but themselves never agreeing or
according hereupon, what this sovereign good or happiness and felicity was, how
could they show others the way to attain unto it? Some of them therefore
(worthy rather to be called hogs then men) have sought after this felicity,
in the pleasures of the body, others in the perfection of the soul, supposing
that it consisted in the knowledge, which man by himself might attain unto, of
divine and humane things, which they called wisdom: others making a more
exquisite anatomy of the parts of the soul, added hereunto many other
virtues concerning the usage of this life, delivering forth hereupo^ many
goodly sentences and sayings: but vanishing away in the end, both because they
were ignorant of the true virtues indeed, which are no where else taught but in
the school of the lord* as also because there was never yet found the man, in
whom these virtues might be found in such sort, as themselves have described
them. Others have gone yet farther, and babled something of eternal life and of
the conjunction of the soul of such as are virtuous with God. But what? Being
ignorant of the true god, and knowing as little the way to come unto him, and
farther, never so much as thinking upon the resurrection of the body, the same
is happened unto them which S. Paul declared and showed the^ in Athens Act,
17.22. and which he hereof writes, To. 1.21.

10 As much may be said of them, who bearing the name of christians, are much
abused, some not considering aright of that which is in man, I mean the
Pelagians, taking utterly away the force of the supernatural grace of god, as
do yet at this day the Demi-pelagians, who labor to agree fire and water
together, that is to say, grace with natural free will and merits. Others,
falsifieng Jesus Christ, either in that which concerns his person, or in that
which pertains unto his office of being our soueraign, perpetual, and alone
mediator: all which how faierly soever they bestirre themselves in seeking
after a true repose and contentment, shall notwithstanding never find it there.

11 We must therefore come to the true Jesus Christ and to the true
Christianisme, according to that of Jesus Christ, That this is eternal and
everlasting life, to know the father to be this true god, and him whom he has
sent Jesus christ himself, Ioh. 17.3. who therefore cries, Ma. 11.28.29. That
it is he in who^ we shall find rest, it is he which eases and refreshes us of
our travels and heavy burdens, for which cause he is called The Prince of
peace, Esaias 9.6. because our peace is upon him, Esaias. 53.5. which now remains
to be seen and declared more particularly. I say then that the conscience can
never be surely and safely appeazed, until first, all that which trobleth it be
put forth, and contrariwise all that which may assure and settle it, found to be
in it. All that which troubles it, is called in one word Sin, putting a
division and separation, between God and man, Esaias. 59.2. and what is sin?
Saint John answers, that it is all that which is contrary to the law or the
will of god declared in his word, 1. Ioh. 3.4. which may and must be referred
unto three points: the first comprehe^deth al our thoughts, words and actions
disagreeing never so little from the will of god, that is to say, which agree
not with the entire and perfect reverence and duty which we owe unto our God
and to our neighbors: the second point consists in the root from whence al
these stinking and infected fruits do proceed, I mean all that pollutio^ and
most stinking filthiness of man both within and without: by reason whereof it is
said, that we are by nature the children of wrath: Ephesians. 2.3. that we are
carrions dead in our sins: Ephesians. 2.1. and 5. that we cannot so much as think
of those things which are of God, 2. Cor. 3.5. that the wisdom of the flesh
is enmity against God, Romans 8.7. nothing being left unto us but that which
makes us altogether inexcusable, Romans 1.20. besides infinite more the like
sentences, scattered throughout the whole scripture, showing that man without
excepting any thing in him whatsoever, is altogether subject and enthrawled to
this corruption, which we call original sin: which though it has not
abolished in us the substance of the soul or of the body (farther then that
thereby the body is made subject to corruption to return to dust and powder for
a time) yet it has changed the light of the understanding into darcknesse,
the integrity and vprightnes thereof into al wicked qualities, and to speak in
a word, has blotted out the Image of God, which shined before in the first
creation of man. The third point lies in this, that being taken for
reasonable creatures, not only not to sin, but which is more, to conform our
whole life to the will of God, the rule of all righteousness, we find that
this third point is wanting in us with all the rest, to wit, the accomplishment
of this obedience. Now there is no one of these three points which binds us
not, without al manner of reply to the contrary, to eternal condemnation, God
the Creator being a revenger of all sin, the wages of which sin is death:
Romans 6.23. who cannot suffer any manner of pollution, be it never so little, 2.
Cor. 6.14. and who cannot, nor will not any way renounce his holiness and
righteousness. Now let men seek how many remedies they will for these
inevitable miseries of man, and they shall not find them in any other thing
whatsoever, save only in Christ alone. For the question being here necessarily
of bearing the burden of the wrath of God without being quelled and pressed
down therewith, this force and power can be attributed to no creature, without
it be made as strong, yea as I may so say, more strong then God, as was figured
in the wrestling of Jacob. And whereas the Angels themselves which remained in
their first estate, Ioh. 8.44. could not bear this burden without being ruined
and overwhelmed therewith, and that without any rising up again, Iud. 6. and 2.
Pet. 2.4. how could men, being but men, and borne detestable sinners, sustain
such a weight? For want of which force, eternal fire is prepared for ever for
the devil and the wicked, that is to say, for all them which are out of Jesus
Christ, being a thing utterly impossible for the^ to sound the depth of the
infinite malediction of God who is infinite. To whom then shall we have our
recourse? To him who causes such as be his to rest safely and surely at noone,
to him I say, who being the eternal son of god, has taken upon him the form
of a servant, to be wholly and fully our righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, conceived and borne of a virgin according unto the flesh without
sin or spot at all: to the end that by his natural and perfect integrity, our
original pollution and uncleanness should be covered, being made a worthy
priest without spot or blame, and an entire and perfect oblation and sacrifice
for us, bearing our sins upon the Cross in his own body, 1. Pet. 2.24. that is
to say, having suffered in his body and in his soul with all rigor and severity
all the pains due unto all the sins, of all the elect of God, from the
beginning of the world, until the end thereof. For which cause Esaias
witnesses that our chastisement was laid upon him, Esaias. 53.5. and 6. etc. yea
so far as to be made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. to the end that we might
be made blessed in him before God. There remains the remedy of the third
mischief, I mean for defaulte of the obedience which should be found in us,
not only to escape everlasting death by the means which we have before
said, but also instead thereof to obtain the crown of righteousness. This
is then again in Jesus Christ alone, that we find this full and perfect
obedience opposed to the imperfection even of them which are most just and
holy. It is he alone who has clothed himself with our nature subjected to the
Law to deliver those which are culpable from the transgression thereof, Gal.
4.4. being fully obedient unto God his father according to the first table of
the Law, unto death, even to the death of the Cross. And touching the second
table, he has also given himself to death for his enemies: Romans 5.8. yea
having loved us above the commandment of the law, namely, not as much as
himself, but more then himself: to the end that truly first of all we
should be exempted from al conde^natio^, being united and coupled with him,
Romans 8.1. and then, which more is, be found adorned and bewtified with his true
and perfect righteousness, Phil. 3.9. to have a part in the life eternal. And
all this of his mere gift and only grace and mercy, and not for any merit or any
worthiness found in us, neither before nor after the communication of the gift
of his grace with us: be it whether we consider what moved the father to give
us his son, or whether we respect what moved Jesus Christ to give himself for
us, or whether we regard the mean by which we are made partakers of Jesus
christ and of his graces, I mean our conversion by faith, which are all the
free gifts of god, Ie. 31.18. and 2. Tim. 2.25. Ioh. 6.44. Ephesians. 2.8. according
also unto that goodly and precious general sentence of S. Paul, What have thou,
which thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7.

12 It is not therefore but upon great reason that the spouse here protests,
that it is in her Bridegroom that we must seek after this true repose and rest,
and this true peace which the world cannot give, Ioh. 14.27. especially at
noone, that is, in the most grievous tentations and afflictions of all sorts,
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 5.3. that we glory our selves even in
oppressions, as being the pledges of our conformity with our head, Romans 8.17.
in such sort that he protests, proposing himself for an example unto us,
that he will not glory but in his sufferings for Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14. this
being also one of the greatest gifts of god, Phil. 1.29. This notwithstanding
belongs properly to the persecutions which happen unto us for righteousness
sake, according to the advertisement of Jesus Christ, that then we have
especial occasion of reioicing, Mat. 5.12. But what if by the just chastisement
of God we be set abroad without covert at noon? Even the^ also being in the
midst of this parching we shall find refreshing and rest in him, according to
the doctrine of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 6.9. and that which is taught us, Heb.
12.6. acknowledging thereby, that it is then that god presents himself unto
us, as a good father unto his own children seeing, that there is no good father
which sometimes punishes not his children, as it is written in the 23. Psalm.
According to this holy doctrine, etc.

THE NINTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the seventh verse.
For why should I be to the flocks of thy companions as one that should hide
herself?


1 The honor of the Bride touches the Bridegroom.

2 In what sense Christ may be said to have companions.

3 The Bridegroom can suffer no companion in the love which he bears his
bride, nor in the majesty of his kingdom.

4 Nor in his prophetical dignity.

5 Nor in his priesthood touching the redemption of his spouse.

6 An answer to the objections made against his kindgome.

7 Whether the Church may impose Laws to men's consciences.

WE have before understood the ardent and fervent prayer of the Church being
driven out of her vineyard, and requesting her bridegroom and pastor that she
may draw near him, to be restored again into her possession: whereunto she now
adds a reason, alleging what a marvelous inco^uenie^ce would happen to her,
if she should be denied her request, to wit, that by this means she should
remain as it were utterly forlorn and undone, which thing would be no less
dishonorable unto her Bridegroom, then if an husband should abondon and give
over his wife unto his companions.

2 Now for the better understanding of what weight this reason is, we must
know what these companions are with their flocks. For may it be said that
Jesus Christ has any companions? No: if we speak properly: which thing must
be particularly handled, that we fall not into most great and dangerous errors.
We have therefore to consider in our Lord Jesus Christ two principal points,
namely his person and his office of mediation. As touching his divinity there
is no comparison betwixt him and any creature: and we must hold this general
sentence without exception, that God will never give either in whole or in
part, his honor unto an other: which does fundamentally overthrow all kind of
Idolatries whatsoever. As touching his humanity being distinctly and by it
self considered, he is called indeed son of man, that is to say, true man in
all and through all, of like nature in substance of body and of soul with us,
being in this respect extracted and brought from Adam; as Luke witnesses in
his genealogy, Luke 3.38. but as touching the qualities of the same nature,
otherwise qualified altogether then they who are not regenerated by the
spirit, between whom and him there is no more agreeableness then between
light and darcknesse, 2. Cor. 6.14. And as touching the^ which are changed and
renewed by his spirit, there is truly a very great agreeableness and accord,
being guided and governed by the same spirit, enlightening their
understanding, Ephesians. 1.18. and creating in them both to will and to do, Phil.
2.13. to be followers of him, Ephesians. 5.1. walking as he has walked: 1. Ioh.
2.6. by reason of which conformity they are also called the children of God,
Ioh. 1.12. and light, Ephesians. 5.8. but the inequality is very great: first,
because he is the essential fountain and spring of all grace, in as much as he
is God. Secondly because he is as it were the channel and basin, touching his
humanity, into which all graces in all perfection have been powered* I mean,
out of his divinity and Godhead, into his humanity and manhood: to the end that
all of us might draw from thence every one his measure, Ioh. 1.16. and 1. Cor.
12.11. not that he has the less for all this, or that he has one part, and we
an other, but that his plenteousnesse and abundance ouerfloweth upon us,
without diminishing of any whit thereof in him.

3 It remains we speak of his office of mediatorshippe, whereupon we ought
generally to note, that the son of god being come in flesh, to purchase
this spouse by the blood of himself, he is so jealous of her, that he ca^
never be brought to quit any one point of this amity and love of his to an
other, nay he has often taken her again unto him, how lewdly soever she had
behaved her self, Ierem. 3.1. The better to understand this, and that in the
quality of his mediatorship, and of that which he has done for his spouse,
he has no companion, we will, as the author of the epistle to the Hebrews does*
refer the whole unto three points, namely to his dignity Royal, his state
Prophetical, and his Priesthood: in respect of which three points we may and
ought truly to say, that he has, to speak properly, no companion, albeit
he has as it were his officers and servants, with whom in certain points
and after a certain sort he serves himself. In which thing many very great
and pernicious abuses are committed, as we will by gods help afterward
declare. Jesus Christ therefore is only king, not only in that he is creator
and governor of the world in soueraign degree with God his father and with
the holy ghost: but specially King of a Kingdoome, which is not of this
woorlde, concerning the conscience, being spiritual and eternal, in such
sort, that unto him alone it appertains, to command and to forbid, Ioh.
13.13. to judge and to absolve, 1. Cor. 5.4. having the keys to open and to
shut, Apocalypse 3.7. So that neither has it been, nor is, nor may be
lawful at any time for any besides, no, not for the Angels themselves, to
make a Law to bind the conscience, nor to establish, in any point concerning
the substance thereof, the government of the Church. The reason hereof is most
just, and most evident. Most just, because since this government surpasses the
order it self and nature of this woorlde, there is none capable thereof but he
which is true God, and together also man endewed with a wisdom and power
surpassing even that of the Angels. Most evident also, because that if it be
forbidden to add to, or diminish any thing from the commandments of this
Lawe-giuer, Deutr. 4.2. and 12.32. much more is it inhibited to make new
ordinances. And therefore it is said by Esaias, Who required these things at
your hands? Esaias. 1.12. And all the commandments of man, in the matter of
this spiritual kingdom are once for all declared to be nullities, Esaias
29.13. Coloss. 2.8. and 22. and 1. Cor. 7.23. As touching this point therefore
let this stand for a sure ground and agreed upon, that Jesus Christ has no
companion in what sort soever in this kingdom, and that he alone in this
respect is King and Lord of the universal Church, even unto the ends of the
world and for ever. Psalm. 2.8. and 110. as it also behooved the writing set over
his head on the Cross should bear, Pilate not knowing what he did, how ever
the Jews were angry with it.

4 Let us come now to the 2. point which we called his state and office of
being a Prophet, taking this appellation not strictly as being given to
certain personages to prophecy and foretell such things as should come to
pass touching our Lord Jesus Christ, and the particular application of the
threats and promises of the law (such as were the 15. Prophets whose writings
we have, and many others mentioned in the holy scriptures) but taking this word
of prophet generally, for a declarer of the will of god touching our salvation,
in which sense Jesus Christ is called the Prophet whom we must hear under
pain of extermination, Deuteronomy. 18.15. as the same is expounded, Act. 3.22. Ioh.
1.18. I say then that as Jesus Christ alone is properly the foundation of the
Church, 1. Cor. 3.11. And by the Lord himself, Esaias. 28.16. as it is also in
him alone, in whom the church was elected before the foundation of the world,
Ephe, 1.4. so also it is he alone which has been ordained from everlasting by
the father to declare his will unto me^. And that this is so, behold S. Paul who
witnesses in express terms, that it was he which guided the people in the
desert, 1 Cor. 10.9. as also it was he whose glory Esaias saw, Ioh. 1.41. In a
word S. Peter speaking of the time it self of Noe, says that it was he that
came then in spirit and preached to the unbelievers of that time, 1. Pet. 3.19.
finally it is he which came in flesh, to manifest the will of the father, and
to make the world altogether inexcusable, Ioh. 15.22. and 18.37. yea so far as
to be called the minister of the circu^cisio^, Romans 15.8. that is to say of
the Jews.

5 Let us come unto the state of his priesthood, which consists in two
points, namely in the expiation of our sins, and in his intercession for us
toward God his father. As touching this expiation, we must first of al
consider that this word imports a full and entire payment of al which is due
unto god, to the end he be altogether appeased and satisfied. Secondly that,
that which is due is death according to the sentence given by God, Genesis 2.17.
Rom 5.12. and 6.23. understanding by this word Death, not only the separation
of the body and of the soul, whence there follows in us the putrefectio^ of
the body in the grave, Genesis 3.19. but also that which is called the second
death, which is the more then terrible and frightful fire and maledictio^ of
god, revenging with all perpetuity sin in the body and in the soul of the
sinner, the which horrible estate is eternal and everlasting in the Devil and
all the damned. Thirdly we must consider in this matter, that the question is
not of paying for one sinner, but for all sinners: nor for a certain number of
sins, but for all sins, none excepted; I mean of all the elect of God which
ever have been, or which are, or which shall be to the end and consummation of
the world. Fourthly we are expressly to note, that it was necessary that this
payment should be offered by one who in respect of himself was no way bound
to this malediction, but should be a pledge and suertie for all others, as our
Lord Jesus Christ is called, Heb. 7.22. The reason is, because that if he had
been culpable in his own person, he had been a sinner, and consequently
nothing could have proceeded from him, nor been received coming from him,
which had not been unclean and defiled, and therefore had not appeased, but
always augmented and sharpened the anger of God, which thing was figured in
the Law, by forbidding to offer any thing leauened unto God: Leuit. 2.11. as
the Apostle declares the same: 1. Cor. 5.8. as also by forbidding of them
which were unclean to enter into the house of God: Psalm. 26.6. And farther
because together with the payment due unto us by reason of our
unrighteousness, it behooved, to make us worthy of eternal life, according to
the agreement of God with us, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Mat. 19.17. that this reconciliator
and priest, should be man entirely pure, without spot or blot in him
whatsoever. Now all men are borne in sin, Psalm. 51.5. as witnesses the
effect of sin, which is death, whereunto we are all of us subject: Hebr.
9.27. yea without excepting the smallest infantes, which have notwithstanding
committed no manner of actual sin: Romans 5.14. There is none then but one
alone Jesus Christ man, to whom this right of eternal life, according to the
covenant of the Law, does properly appertain: seeing that in him alone among
the sons of men, there is found this perfect purity of the humane nature
which the Law both requires and presupposes, in commanding a perfect love of
God and our neighbor, being conceived and borne man of a virgin by the sole
and only operation of the holy Ghost, Luke 1.35. and not as al other men
without exception, of whom it is said that that which is borne of flesh is
flesh: Ioh. 3 6. but without sin, 2. Cor. 5.21. and which more is besides
this natural integrity in which there is not the least point of imperfection,
it is he alone which has accomplished the whole Law in all perfection, having
obeyed God his father, as touching the first commandment unto death, yea the
death of the cross: Phil. 2.8. and touching the love of neighbor, having
given his own life even for his enemies, which is more the^ to love his
neighbor as himself: Ioh. 10.11. and Romans 5.8. Whence it follows that
according unto the covenant of the Law promising life eternal unto him which
shall entirely observe it, cursing him which shall fail in one point thereof,
Gal. 3.10. Jesus Christ alone has merited for all such as believe, eternal
felicity, which Priest was altogether necessary for us, for the avoiding of
death and obtaining of life: Heb. 7.26. In this then more then in the rest,
whereof we before spoke, he has no companion. It remains to consider of
the second point of his priesthood, namely, his intercession toward God his
Father for us, which consists in two points. The first is the force and
virtue of the death of him coming between God and us: for if the expiation
and purging of our sins go not before, we cannot be but rejected of him, who
has no fellowship or communication with darcknesse. The second point
consists in this, that as all our prayers ought to be made in his name, that
is to say, desiring to be heard for the love of him, in whom alone the
father is well pleased, so does he appear as our elder brother before his
father, not after the manner of men, who fall on their knees when they desire
any thing of an earthly Prince, and bring their supplication in their hands:
but as it were representing of us in his own person, and sanctifying our
prayers, for which cause he is called our Advocate: 1. John. 2.1. and Hebr.
7.25. And we must take diligent heed in this matter, how we measure his
intercession such as it is now in the Heavens, having now after his victory a
name which is above every name: Philip. 2.9. with all power in Heaven and in
earth: Matthew. 28.18. with that which we read of his prayers in the days of
his infirmity. For then not only to show us an example, but also because to
overcome his enemies and ours, and not to yield under the burden of the pain
due unto our sins, which were imputed unto him, as unto our pleadge and
suertie, it behooued indeed that he should be borne up and sustained by
the divine virtue and power, which though he had in himself in as much as he
is God coeternal and coessential, he attributes notwithstanding and demands
it altogether of the person of the father, having respect unto the office of
his Mediatorship, so as he is suppliant and that with tears, yea as it were
altogether troubled and affrighted, both for himself: Ioh. 12.27. Mat. 26.39.
Heb. 5.7. and also for us, as it is in special showed us throughout the whole
Chapter, Ioh. 17. and elsewhere. But now that he has led captivity
captive: Ephesians. 4.8. being sat at the right hand of the father crowned with
glory and honor: Heb. 2.9. it is true indeed, that he yet suffers, as we
may so say, in his members: Act. 9.4. and Col. 1.24. as he will charge the
wicked therewith at the latter day: Mat. 25.45. It is very true also, that
he has yet compassion of those which are his: Heb. 4.15. But all this must be
understood of a celestial fashion and manner altogether unknown unto us,
without imagining an intercession by prayers agreeable unto the state of this
life* according unto which manner Jesus Christ himself says that being
received up into heaven, he will not pray unto the father. I mean so, as before
our reconciliation made and perfected, and before the glorification of our
mediator: not that the effect of his sacrifice once made does not always come
between god and us, and that the father should not be called upon in the name
of this mediator, in who^ alone our prayers are acceptable unto him. Now by all
this it appears that Jesus Christ touching his priesthood has no more a
companion, then in respect of his state roial, and state prophetical, whereof
the Apostle has given the resolution in express terms, saying that there is
but one mediator between god and man, the man Jesus christ, 1. Tim. 2.5.

6 Such the^ is the verity of god, neither is there any other foundation of our
hope. But better yet to understand this matter being so necessary, we must mark
2. certain points which seem to contrary it, to the end that this being
finally cleared and made plain, we may the better know and understand what
these companions are of whom the Church here complains, and who are the true
destroiers of it. First of al therefore unto all this above said may be opposed
that which is written touching this very matter, and by the self same
allegory, Psalm 45.7. where it is said that this king is perfumed above al his
fellow companions named by the self same name, which Solomon in this place
uses, as also in this very book, Chap. 8.13. Touching the first of these two
places, it is not in the worser part or sense, as in this place which we now
handle, it is, but in very good part, that mention is made of fellows and
companions of Jesus Christ, being very clearly and plainly declared unto us,
in what sense Jesus Christ has fellows and companions, Heb. 2.11.14. to
wit, in this respect, that having taken upon him our nature (howbeit without
sin) he has made us his brethren. But notwithstanding, says the Psalmist,
perfumed above his fellows, and not like to like. He calls us his brethren,
but he is the elder, Romans 8.29. and so consequently lord of the house, Genesis
27.39. he is the only natural son of God, in as much as the humanity
subsisteth in the person of the only son coeternal with God, and we are
sons in him by adoption, Ioh. 1.12. he is only in his degree the heir and
universal Lord of all these things: Heb. 1.2. and notwithstanding by grace
he will make us coheirs in this glory with himself, without clipping or
rebating any thing thereof in himself, Ioh. 17.22. and Romans 8.17. Now as
touching the second place drawn out of this book, Chap. 8.13. it is not there
spoken of men as companions of Jesus christ, but because all the faithful are
united and joined together by unity of faith and of hope, Ephesians. 4.4. and by
the bond of charity, Act. 4.32. as shall be spoken in his dew place. A man
might also allege that he called his Disciples frinds, and not, says he, his
servants. But this is in a certain respect namely, as himself expounds it,
because he would in familiar sort declare unto them the whole secrets of the
Gospel, Ioh 15.15. keeping notwithstanding unto himself the title of lord of
the house, as pertaining only unto himself, Ioh. 13.13. and Heb. 3.6. There
is greater difficulty touching the sovereign royalty which we attributed to
the sole person of Jesus Christ, whereas it is said that he has made us
kings, Apoc. 5.10. that we are a royal priesthood, 1. Pet. 2.9. or a priestly
kingdom, Exodus 9.6. that a crown is prepared for us in heaven: 2. Tim. 4.8.
and which is more then all this, whereas it is said, I appoint unto you a
kingdom as my father has appointed and disposed it unto me: Lu. 22.29. but
god forbid we should understand these things as if this monarchy of Christ's
were divided or parted for all this: for contrariwise, there is no other thing
meant by this royal dignity of ours, then first, the virtue and power of the
holy ghost in us to overcome the devil, the flesh, the world, and our selves:
and secondly the participation of eternal glory. And as touching the Apostles
of who^ it is said, that as the father has agreed with him of a kingdom, so
he disposes it and couenanteth it with the^, and that they shall sit upon
thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel: this is spoken in respect of
this, that they have a measure of spirit from him, and particular authority to
found the christian church, according to that which is written, Apoc. 21.14.
But S. Paul expounds in what sense this is to be taken and understood, 1.
Cor. 3.10. namely in as much as the Apostles were as it were the hand of God,
laying the foundation of the Church which is but one, to wit, Jesus Christ.
In respect of which doctrine, and not that this authority appertains to any
save unto Jesus Christ alone the only son of God adored by the Angels
themselves: Heb. 2.6. it is said of all the true faithful believers, that in the
latter day they shall judge the Angels, that is, the Devil and his Angels, 1.
Cor. 6.2. and shall sit on his right hand, Psalm. 45.9. and Ephesians. 2.6. A man
might also allege touching this power and authority of making Laws to bind
the conscience, and of the spiritual government, that it is said, that the Law
was given and delivered by the Angels: Gal. 3.19. and by Moses: Ioh. 1.17. and
Act. 7.38. But this difficulty or objection is easily answered both by that
formal text where it is said that Jesus Christ is the only Lawgiver: Iam.
4.12. as also by that which is written of the authority of the Angels, and that
which Moses and other faithful servant of the Lord have always done and
practiced. It is therefore said touching the Angels, that they are not masters,
but ministering spirits: Psalm. 103.21. Heb. 1.14. And as touching Moses it was
at the request of the people, that he was not a Lawgiver, but a messenger to
refer and report what was given him in commandment without adding to, or
diminishing of any thing from it, Exodus 20.19. and Deuteronomy. 4. As himself also
shows how careful he was in taking heed of doing any thing at al upon his
own head, in that himself would set down no Law concerning the punishment of
blasphemers, and touching those which brake and violated the sabbath, but made
his recourse for these causes unto the Lord, Leuit. 24.11. and Numb. 15.34.
although the question was but of a civil punishment: so far it is that Moses
or Aaron would take upon them to make any rules for the service of God, or
impose a Law on the consciences of the people, contrary to that commandment
which Moses had of doing and making all things according to the model and
pattern of that which he had seen in the mountain, Exodus 25.40. And
therefore under David also and Solomon the whole state of the Temple was set up
and perfected, not by the advice of man, but according unto prophetical
revelations, 2. Chron. 22.11. But yet a man might hereupon reply, that one of
the principallest rights of regalitie and royalty is to show mercy and to
pardon. Now the power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which consists
in binding and loosing, that is to say in condemning and absoluing of sin, was
in the person of Saint Peter and the other eleven Apostles given unto the
Church, Mat. 16.19. and Ioh. 20.23. But whereas it is said elsewhere, that it
pertains unto God alone to remit sins, Mar. 2.7. it is easy to be
understood, that there is a great difference first between making of Laws
and publishing or applying of them: and secondly between power to execute
absolutely, and a commission limited and bounded. Therefore I say touching the
spiritual kingdom concerning the conscience and salvation or damnation, that
this power pertains to one only God in the person of his son, whom he
has from all time established and ordained head of this Empire. And as
touching the execution of his Laws according to the exigence of cases, he
has set up and established his holy ministry in his Church, with a
commission limited, that is to say with a charge to judge according unto the
tenor of his Laws, and as it were representing the chief Lord, and Lawe-giuer,
and not otherwise under pain of nullity of their sentence: otherwise we must
say that Jesus Christ was justly condemned and excommunicated with his
Disciples, Ioh. 9.22. and 16.2. insteede of that which the Lord himself said
of them, let them alone, they are blind, leaders of the blind. And indeed
Saint Paul speaking in general of his whole preaching, calls it the
counsel of God, Act. 20.27. And to the end that no man should extend and
stretch this to any inward and internal revelation without the Scripture, that
which I ordain, says he, (speaking of the institution of the holy Supper)
that have I received of the Lord: and speaking of being unmarried he
protests that he will not tie and entangle their consciences: as also Saint
Peter admonishes al pastors to take heed how they usurp a lordlines over
their flocks, which he calls the portion or the heritage of the Lord, 1. Pet.
5.3. And therefore these words of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7.12. But to the rest I
speak and not the Lord, speaking of marriages contracted with an unbelieving
party, ought not so to be understood as if the Apostle took upon him to
command any thing of his own head and private authority, but he uses this
manner of speech to distinguish that, for which he had the express and
registered word of God, from that which was not in plain terms expressed, but
correspondent notwithstanding and agreeing with that which was written: being
a thing impossible that the Laws could contain every particular case which
might happily fall out, as we have at large declared and expounded the same in
handling of that Epistle.

7 Finally there are which allege the authority which the Church had in the
time of the Apostles to make ecclesiastical Laws and ordinances, and ring out
as loud as they can this word of Apostolical traditions, Act. 15.28. and 16.4.
1. Cor. 11.2. and. 34. whereof they produce diverse examples scattered and
sown here and there throughout Saint Paul's Epipistles, as of the veil of
weomen, of the order of speaking and uttering the word of God in the assembly,
of collections and gatherings for the poor, and of alms. This matter would
require whole sermons, as we have also often occasion to speak thereof. But for
this present, this may thus be answered in a word. It is then another thing
to make laws to tie men's consciences, to say, look ye, this is good and
pleasing unto God, this he commands you to do or believe: or contrariwise
to say, look ye, this has God forbidden, and this you may not do or
believe. And again, see, these be the vocations and charges by which the son
of God will have his Church to be ruled and governed: this I say is far
another thing, then to have a respect unto that which is requisite for the use
and practice as well of the doctrine as also of the discipline which God the
alone and only Lawgiver has ordained: requisite I say according unto the
time, persons, and place: which being subject to infinite varieties, yea
sometimes contrarieties, the Lord under the new covenant has not made, and as
I may so say, could not make certain special and perpetual ordinances,
seeing this policy is accidental, and not of the substance neither of
doctrine nor of discipline. And therefore in respect of this point, he was
content to give a general commandment, that whatsoever he ordained should be
executed orderly and modestly in his house which the church, 1. Cor. 14.40. Ye
see then the bounds which he is content to prescribe us. And that this is so,
we see how these ordinances themselves of the Apostles which we have above
specified vanished away by little and little, the times being changed, and
the causes why they were made ceasing to be: which would not have been if they
had concerned the substance of discipline and doctrine, which are perpetual and
inuiolablie to be observed unto the end and consummation of the world.
Contrariwise the Scribes and Pharisees not contenting themselves that they were
placed in Moses chair, that is to say to declare the doctrine and discipline
taught by the ministry of Moses (in which case the people were to do that
which they taught, and not to follow their wicked life) would needs meddle with
making of Laws to tie the consciences of men, and so to add somewhat of their
own unto the service of God established by his Law, where it is said that
the Lord had rather scandalize and offend them, then subject his Disciples
unto them, Mar. 7.6. showing that he held not or accounted the usage of such
traditions for a thing indifferent, but calls them the abolishing and taking
away of the commandments and ordinances of God, Mar. 7.13. and a leaven which
he commands us to take heed of, Mat. 16.12. Now I thought good expreslie to
specify in this matter the time of the new covenant, because that under the
old, the Church being enclosed within the limits of one people, of one
country, of one holy place, and for a time only, the Lord declared and set
down not only the doctrine which he would have to be taught, both of the
service and government of his house: but also specified and particularized
those ordinances according to the times, places, and persons, which he would
have to be inuiolablie observed, without changing, adding, or diminishing any
thing in the^ at al, Deu. 4.2. Esai. 1.12. and 29.13. But under the new
covenant which he contracted with all people and nations, and for so long time
as the world should endure, it was necessary, he should leave it in the
liberty of the Churches to appoint and establish whatsoever in special and
particular concerns the use and practice of the doctrine and discipline as
touching order and edification according to the variety and difference of
circumstances. And thus far of the soueraintie of of him which has written in
his thigh, The King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Apoc. 19.16. We will defer the
rest which remains farther to be spoken, unto our next sermon: in the mean
time let us pray unto the Lord that it will please him to give us the grace well
to understand this holy doctrine, so necessary for these times we now live in,
to discern his true Churches from those false maskes thereof which present
themselves to us on every side, to the end that having found it, we may
continue firm and constant in the true doctrine of salvation, until the
enjoying of the full conjunction of the members and the head together in the
kingdom everlasting. And because that on the contraryside we have been
hitherto and yet are so slothful in this behalf, and so unthankful, we will
humble our selves before the face of our good God and Father, to desire his
grace and mercy as follows.

Almighty God etc.
THE TENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the seventh verse.
7 For why should I be to the flocks of thy companions as one which should
hide herself?


1 A larger and ampler exposition, how Jesus christ alone has from al time had
the authority of declaring the will of god his father for the salvation of
such as are his.

2 Jesus Christ the only expiator and purger of our sins. An answer to the
objection of the promises made to them who observe and keep the moral Law.

3 An answer unto the objection, touching the promise made to the^ who shall
live godly, without respect had to the full accomplishment of the Law moral.

4 An answer touching the objection made upon the observation of the Law
ceremonial.

5 An answer touching the same point to them, who attribute to the sacraments,
and the Lords Supper, the virtue of expiation or purging of our sins.

6 An answer unto them which yield unto servants the power which is reserved
unto the Master, and unto imaginary merits of Martyrs.

7 That Jesus christ has no co^panio^ in his intercession for us, which yet
endures.

8 Who are the first false companions of whom the spouse in this place
complains, namely those which make Laws to tie men's consciences.

9 How by little and little Satan has forged his Antichrist by means of the
Popish Hierarchy, and first of the false degree Episcopal.

10 Of false ancients and elders.

11 Of false Deacons.

12 Of false Doctors.

13 A companion joined with Jesus Christ in his dominion royal, and so far
as to become master.

14 Usurpation upon the state Prophetical of Jesus Christ.

15 Usurpation upon the sacrificeshippe or Priesthood of expiation.

16 Usurpation upon the sacrificeshippe or Priesthood of intercession.

17 The conclusion of this complaint of the Bride or Spouse.

18 Of the poor and dangerous estate of the faithful mingled among the
unbelieving and unfaithful.

WE have spoken at large before of the regalitie of Jesus Christ, wherein we
have showed and declared that he has no companion. The like may be said of
his estate Prophetical, which appertains unto him, not only in respect of
the time that he spoke in person, but in all times since the creation of the
world. And this is it which Saint John writes Ioh. 1.18. namely, That none
has seen the father at any time, but the only son which is in the bosom of
the father has reueiled him. It is he therefore to whom properly from all
times this dignity appertains: and as for others which are called Prophets,
Apostles, Pastors and Doctors, this is attributed unto them in as much as the
son has served himself with their ministry, and yet does serve, and shall
use them even unto the end of the world for his heraultes and ambassadors:
not for any need he ever had of them, as those who have a charge among men,
cannot be every where, nor do or speak every thing in person: but to
accommodate and apply himself to the infirmity and weakness of men, by teaching
them by men limited notwithstanding with certain conditions. For first until
Moses time the Patriarchs could not teach or set down any thing, besides
that, which was revealed unto them by God, as we see it put in practice by
Abraham a Prophet in his own family, Genesis 18.19. and 20.7. Besides that the
doctrine received by the Patriarchs from God, was kept and continued, as
appears not only by the priesthood of Melchisedech, Genesis 14.18. and 25.22.
but also by this, that it was not yet utterly abolished among the Cananites
themselves, Genesis 20.3. Afterward when it pleased God to rule and govern his
people issued and descended from Abraham, Moses was chosen, not only to receive
from God after an extraordinary manner, the whole rule and order of the church,
but also to put it in writing, but in every point, according unto that which
the Lord appearing unto him first in the mount, and afterward in the
tabernacle, commanded him to say, to do and to write, without adding thereto,
or clipping therefrom, any thing at all, for which cause he was called A
faithful servant in the house of God, Heb. 3.5. or without being after lawful
to any man living To take away or add unto it any thing whatsoever, Deu.
12.32. In such wise did the true Prophets order and govern themselves unto the
time of John Baptist, having done nothing else but expound or apply the
blessings or judgments of God, according to those special revelations they
received from God in that behalf. After this time came this great son of
God, who as chief master and Lord in his fathers house, brought an end unto
all those shadows of which himself was the body and substance. Coloss. 2.17.
and as of full and plenarie authority, Math. 7.29. has fully taught the will of
God his father touching the salvation of mankind first in his own person, Heb.
1.1. Ioh. 15.15. afterward by his Apostles whom he appointed founders and
builders of his house, as well in doctrine as in the establishment and order of
the same, but according to that which they learned of their master, as their
commission was limited: Mat. 28.20. being fully instructed by an extraordinary
measure of the holy Ghost: which they also most diligently observed, Act.
20.27. and 1. Cor. 11.23. not being lawful to the Angels themselves, to teach
or ordain any thing above and besides the doctrine of the gospel anou^ced and
preached by the Apostles, Gal. 1.8. Finally after the Apostles, succeeded
pastors and doctors not to found any thing anew, but to build good and solid
instructions, exhortations, consolations, reprehensions upon the foundation of
the Apostles. 1. Cor. 3.10. and Ephesians. 4.11. and 2. Tim. 3.16. Secondly we are
to note that al workmen as well before as after the coming of the master
woorkman, had only charge of the work, touching that which might be outwardly
done, causing the word which was committed unto the^, to sound in the ears of
the hearers, and prese^ting and applying outwardly the visible signs which we
call Sacraments, together with the ceremonies instituted and ordained of the
Lord in the administering of them. But as for the rest, the Lord reserved
entirely unto himself the power of woorking inwardely and within, in preparing
the hearts and minds to receive this precious seed, and to make it bud
forth, increase and fructify by his holy spirit, 1. Cor. 3.7. as it
appears also throughout the whole scripture, which teaches us that our
salvation is neither in whole nor in part of the willer or of the runner, that
is to say, not of our will or of our endeavor, but of the sole and only mercy of
God, Romans 9.16. creating in us both to will and to do by his only grace, Phil.
2.13. which we have above more at large proved treating upon the fourth verse
of this Canticle. It is therefore in this sense and not otherwise that the
faithful ministers of the word of God are called by the Apostle Ioynt-woorkers
with God, 1. Cor. 3.9. as the ordinary and usual preface also of the Prophets
witnesses, when they say, Thus says the Lord. Whereas Jesus Christ, as Lord
and master in the house of his father, Heb. 3.6. (and by the spirit and
commission of whom the Prophets spoke 1. Pet. 1.11. and 2. Pet. 1.21.) speaks
with all auctori^y saying ordinarily, In truth in truth, I say unto you, Math.
5.18.

2 It remains now that we speak of the Priesthood of Jesus christ which
consists first in the expiation and satisfaction once for all made by him, and
in the intercession which yet indureth: whereupon we have at large declared
before by most peremptory reasons, and taken out of the holy scripture, that
it is impossible in reason, to atribute the least part in the world of these
two points to any other, save unto Jesus Christ alone. Whereunto if any man
oppose the promises of salvation made unto them which observe the law, I
answer that because they presuppose a perfect accomplishment and fulfilling of
the law, which is not found, nor shall ever be found, save in Jesus christ
alone, seeing it is he only who is without sin: it follows that they were
never proposed unto us to justify us or to make our reconcilement unto God by
our selves: but contrariwise to condemn us in our selves, to the end to bring
and lead us unto him in whom alone all the said promises are ratified and
performed, having himself alone most fully and most perfectly accomplished the
Law for us, which embrace and take hold of him by faith, Romans 3.30. Gal.
3.21.22. and 4.5.

3 Likewise if any man allege the promises both of the present life and of the
life to come, made unto them which live godly, 1. Tim. 4.8. although their
works be full of defects and imperfections, I deny not but God has promised
and gives also life everlasting to the repentant, and such as live in his
fear (for to deny this were to deny the whole Scripture) but I say that
there is a great difference betwixt these two questions, to wit, to whom
eternal life and other Gods blessings are given, and for what cause these are
given unto him, on whom they are bestowed. Eternal life therefore is indeed
prepared and given unto them who testify their repentance by the true fruits
thereof, which are sometimes put off and differred unto the last moment of a
man's life, whereof we have a singular example in that poor thief crucified
with Jesus Christ, Luke 23.43. some being also called, at the eleventh hour,
Matthew. 20.9. but I add that this is not that by their works they have
satisfied for their sins either in whole or in part, or that they deserve by
the value of desert of them in any sort or manner whatsoever any blessing
temporal or spiritual: but only because that good works being the
testimony and effects inseparably following of faith, and that faith
witnessing before God according unto the covenant of the Gospel, That whosoever
shall believe in the Son shall be saved, That the true repentaunt have a
part in the merit of Jesus Christ and his righteousness, it pleases God of his
great grace and only mercy to accept of them and to crown them in Jesus
Christ his Son, the only satisfier for our sins, and sole sacrifice
expiatorie, as the whole Scriptures and all the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles do most plainly witness.

4 As little can we help our selves with the promises of remission and
expiation of our sins which are added unto the legal ceremonies, and namely
unto the sacrifices. For as the Apostle teaches us, the blood of Goats and
of Bulls could never appease the anger and wrath of God: but the only blood
of Jesus Christ sacramentallie represented for a time by earthly things.
Coloss. 2.17. Heb. 10.4. And therefore the promises of expiating or purging our
sins were not added to the Leuitical service, to attribute thereunto that
which is proper to Jesus Christ alone, but to distinguish these sacramental
ceremonies from common things, and such as had not any spiritual use.

5 I say the like of the Sacraments of the new covenant: as when the washing
away of our sins is attributed unto the Sacrament of Baptism, and our
incorporation in Jesus Christ and union with him, from whence all those
benefits and blessings proceed which we receive from him is attributed unto
the holy Supper of the Lord. For the outward visible water of Baptism does no
more wash away our sins now, then did heretofore the water of purification,
or blood of beasts. But hereby is showed us the difference between the water
of Baptism and common water, not in respect of the substance or effect of the
water considered in his own nature: but in this that common water does nothing
concern eternal life, and the water of Baptism is used and applied, to
signify unto us effectually, if it be not long of our selves, that which the
spirit does within us, defacing and putting forth our sins, and purging our
natural corruption by the death and passion of Christ our Lord, being no other
thing in the water but a power of signifieng unto the believer that which faith
is to apprehend, and which is applied by the force and power of the holy ghost
working within, according unto the distinction of these two Baptismes spoken of
in Mat. 3.11. and 1. Pet. 3.21. The like must be understood touching the other
sacrament of Christian religion, namely the Lords Supper, wherein we ought to
take diligent heed we attribute not unto the bread or wine, or unto the
corporal receiving of them, that which is proper unto Jesus Christ, and unto
the spiritual apprehension and application of him by faith.

6 Of as little force is that objection of them who allege these words of
the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4.16. In doing this thou shall save both thy self and
those which hear thee. For there is but one Jesus Christ, that is to say, one
Savior, Act. 4.12. who has alone satisfied for our sins, Ioh. 1.29. and by
whose obedience we are made just, Romans 5.19. The Apostle therefore means not
in the person of Timothy to set the Pastors in the place and room of
Christ: God forbid; seeing himself declares that he is not therefore justified
before God, though he know nothing by himself, but has performed his charge
irreprehensible, 1. Cor. 4.4. but he speaks so in respect of the office and
duty of pastors which is to preach and announce the secrets of God: 1. Cor.
4.1. that is to say the word of reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.19. and 20. which is
the Gospel, for the salvation of al them which believe, Romans 1.16. But they
are of all others marvelous impudent, who to maintain their Idolatry or
rather impiety, allege that which the Apostle says of himself, Coloss.
1.24. namely, that he fulfilleth the surplussage of the afflictions of Christ
in his flesh, for his body which is the Church, as though he were not alone
omnisufficient to blot and put forth our sins, (a blasphemy most execrable)
whereas the Apostle by these words meant to say no other thing, but that in
the afflictions and sufferinges of the Saints, Jesus Christ, as a man would
say, suffers in their persons, because he accounts himself as it were
wounded in them, according unto that which he said unto the same Apostle,
wherefore persecutest thou me, Act. 9.4. which thing returns unto the great
comfort and edifieng of the whole Church greatly edified by the happy end and
issue of them, Phil. 1.12. and 2. Cor. 1.4. and 2. Tim. 2.10.

7 Now follows the point of intercession, in which we have said that Jesus
Christ has no more a companion, then in the redemption. Against this some
oppose the mutual prayers of the Saints, praying unto God daily one for an
other, yea for their very enemies. The answer is easy, that notwithstanding
the faithful for all this are not therefore intercessors in any superior
degree betwixt God and them, for whom they pray: but join equally together
their mutual prayers, which are al of them referred unto this only
intercessour between God and men, on whose alone intercession in all and
through all depends the whole virtue of their prayers, whether they pray for
an other or for themselves.

8 These things being well considered and wayed as they deserve to be, show
us most evidently and to the eye, who they are whom the spouse in this place
calls her husbands companions, whose company, and that worthily she likes
not, namely those who attribute unto themselves, that which is properly
belonging unto the Bridegroom, as if some invited by the Bridegroom to bear
him company at the time of his fiances or espousails, in steed of contenting
themselves to bear him company and do him courtesy As friends to rejoice with
him, Ioh. 3 29. should play him so lewd a pranke as to go about to be master of
the spouse, and to challenge her unto themselves, as Samsons companions served
him, Iud. 15.2. And who are those? Mary first of al those who take upon them to
make new commandments for the church to bind the consciences of me^ contrary
to that which S. Peter expressly forbids, 1. Pet. 5.3. against the express
commission delivered unto the Apostles, Mat, 28.20. against the express
example of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 7.35. and therefore worthy in lieu of being obeyed
to be held accursed and had in execration, by the ordinance of God, Deuteronomy.
18.20. and Gal. 1.8. though they should be the Angels of heaven themselves.

9 As much is to be said of them who have been so bold and presumptuous as to
forge new vocations and charges in the church of God, which they afterward
transfigured and changed into dignities, and finally into a tyranny truly
Satanicall, that is to say adverse, contrary and opposite directly unto the
royalty and regality of Jesus Christ, altogether following that which was
expressly foretold by Saint John in the Apocalypse of the Image drawn and
mouled on the pattern of the beast, which was the Roman empire, which was
finally ruined and dissipated, as it is at this day, according unto the
prophecy of Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. wherein Satan has used a marvelous
slight in serving his own turn by abusing many good and holy personages, and
those very learned otherwise, but not sufficient attentive to mark and
consider how men abused the names of vocations established by the son of God,
to turn them notwithstanding and to overthrow them: in such wise that by little
and little he attained unto the end he desired, having set up instead of that
goodly estate of the Church established in his perfection by the ministry of
the Apostles this fall hierarchy, as they call it. Such are the reverend
names of Bishop, Pastor, Elder or Ancient, Doctor and Deacon, * which they
afterward by little and little divided into many other degrees, * to hatch at
the length an Oecumenicall Bishop, that is to say, a Bishop of the universal
world, to which for a full measure of all this disorder have been added the
most reverent Seigneurs the Cardinals.

10 As for the ancients and Elders they are become * Penitentiaries, * Proctors
in the court ecclesiastical, Dataries, Bullists, Copistes, etc.* and to make
up and perfect this ruin, ordinary Creators and Sacrificers of a Jesus Christ
of dowe, and all for what will you give me, and for ready money.

11 As for Deacons, receivers and governors of the church-almes and goods
according to the order and practice of the Apostles, to speak in a word, this
is the state and calling of all this whole Hierarchy, if to be a Deacon, and
Church-robber as Judas, be all one. But the name only being left to serve for
a part of the Masquerada of an high mass, it was requisite that Subdeacons
should be added, to mock the poor seely sheep coming to offering.

12 As for Doctors, it may be said in a word, that the Lord of his great
mercy has not permitted, that that which is as it were the nurcerie of the
Church, I mean schools of good learning, should in such wise be utterly
abolished and taken away, as the other parts of that which God would have
established in his Church. But contrariwise it has pleased him to stir up in
sundry ages, Emperors and Kings, who have had a care of founding and erecting
of them through a worthy and laudable instinct and purpose, and which a man may
say to have been and yet to be the mean that God has used to preserve and
maintain the society of man, for the study and knowledge of liberal arts
and sciences. But touching the principal part of this so great a benefit, which
is the school of divinity, this is there where Satan has served his turn
with sugar to turn it into most bitter and deadly poison: having banished out
of the school of divinity that which was the only subject thereof, I mean the
reading and expounding of the text of holy Scripture, to thrust thereinto an
abominable confusion of dreaming sophistications, some as vain as curious,
others absurd, others full of impiety: in such sort, that to be a Doctor in
such a thing, is no more but to be farther off from pure and sound doctrine,
as the Apostle so diligently warns us, 1. Tim. 1.4. and 4.7. while Satan
goes forward in the utter overthrow of all their Clergy having transformed
them into shoppes and brothels of Sodomitry and instruments unto al sacrilege
and simony.

13 Finally to end and perfect the mystery of iniquity, the great Bishop has
parted the spoil with Kings and Princes, whom he has enchanted and bewitched
in abolishing utterly the Lawful order of ecclesiastical elections and
vocations. And thus ye see unto what good pass the Church of the Lord has bin
brought by them, who of servants have made themselves traiterous companions,
called no better then thieves by the Lord, Mat. 21.13. If any man say that
the Bridegroom, of whom mention is here made, spoke not of the^ which came so
long after: I answer that the spirit of prophecy in this place does not only
lead us farther then unto the time of Solomon, but that a long time ago, after
the time of Joshua, as the history of the Judges does plainly witness,
horrible corruptions were already entered in among the people of god, which
drove as it were this spouse out of her vineyard and possession. As for the
rest, this word of Companion seems over gentle in this matter, the question
being here not in this which we before said of taking unto a man's self some
part of that which is properly belonging unto the Bridegroom, an outrageous
crime notwithstanding of treason, but (that which is much worse and the capital
point of this crime) is the taking to a man's self the person of this
Bridegroom, and to put him forth to possess and occupy his place, and in
the place of this chaste spouse, to substitute this abominable strumpet, which
does yet to this day seduce and bewitch the kings and princes of the earth by
the cup of her abominations: and that with extreme impudency and
shamelessness, in indeuoring to make men to believe that by such inventions he
is honored, from whom they hale and pull with all the maine and might they have
both the sceptor and the crown.

14 In such sort deal they with the Prophetical dignity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, calling their own dreams and inventions, inspirations of the holy
ghost: as if that which has bin declared by the Prophets and Apostles,
touching our salvation, were not sufficient, or might happily be in some point
corrected and amenced. In a word when they are come so far as to say, write
and maintain, that they, calling themselves the Church, cannot erie in
doctrine, that their Pope cannot be deceived, and that no man living may say
unto the Pope though he should lead whole troops of souls unto hell, sir what
do you? and when hereupon they cut and clip the doctrine of God as pleases
them, is not this to ouerturne from the top to the bottom the Prophetical
authority of the son of God, as much as in them lies?

15 As little have they left the Priesthood of Jesus Christ whole and
untouched, having added and annexed unto his expiation and satisfaction for our
sins whatsoever came into their own brainsicke fancy, as holy water chrisme,
oil, wax, spettle, beads, pilgrimages, and other such bables they could
think upon or devise. Briefly having gone so far as to forge a real and
substantial oblation of Jesus Christ by the hands of their Priests, for a
satisfaction for the sins of the quick, and the dead, adding thereto
notwithstanding the merits both of the living who are yet in the way, and of
the dead comprised in their Letanies and Processions, unto whom they have
attributed such store of merits, that there yet remain an infinite number of
them to be sold and distributed for ready money to all such as have need of
them: things so strange and abominable that it is marvelous how there is yet
found any so very a beast as to give credit unto them, and any so shameless
impudent, that he will maintain and defend such abomination.

16 Now what shall we say of the Intercession of Jesus Christ, unto whom they
have added thousands of companions, though they place them in somewhat a lower
and inferior degree? For they forge every day new patrones and Intercessours,
giving to every one of them his state and charge of this or that. Nay they have
done this dishonor unto the most blessed and holy Virgin Mary, as insteede
that her self calls her self the Handmaiden of the Lord, to call her and
cause her to be worshipped as Queen of heaven, our hope, our merciful
Advocate, yea so far as to bid her to command her son by the right and
authority of a mother: and all this with such unbridled boldness and
desperate presumption, that they term this honoring of God in his Saints: not
perceiving that every prayer made unto them who are out of this world places
them in the room of God in attributing unto them of necessity that which is
proper unto God, to wit the knowledge of our hearts and whatsoever we say or
do here below, which to do is intolerable impiety: besides that not
contenting themselves with Jesus Christ alone for their intercessour, it must
needs be that either they doubt of his power or of his will toward us, which
incredulity being directly opposed unto faith (without which nothing can
please God, naie whatsoever is without faith is sin, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23.)
cannot but make all such prayers unprofitable, though there were no other fault
in the^, Iam. 1.6. In a word whosoever shall compare the ancient customs of
Paynims with these devotions of the Church which calls it self at this day
Catholic, shall find from point to point no other difference between these
two, save only the names, only that these who have so abused the seely world
and so nusled it in their superstitions, calling darcknesse light: in
falsifieng the light of the Scripture, are a great deal more inexcusable then
the poor Paynims, having abused nothing but the remnant of their natural
light, as the Apostle speaks of them, Act. 14 16. and Romans 1.21.

17 And thus you see who these companions are of whom this poor spouse in this
place so bitterly complains, desiring to be drawn out from among them and to
be brought unto the true flock, distinguished herein, from them which she
calls flocks in the plural number, because that indeed there is but one true
Church and universal, whereas these traitorous companions have as many flocks
as they have sects, according unto the saying of the Lord, That he which
gathers not with him, does nothing else but scatter, Mat. 12.30.

18 And as touching these words As she which covers or hides her self,
they are expounded in diverse sorts. For there are some which refer it to the
fashion which Thamar used to deceive Judah her father in Law, Genesis 38.15.
gathering from thence that the manner of harlots was to cover themselves:
according unto which exposition this should be taken, as if the spouse did
say, that keeping company with such kind of people, she should be thought to
be never a whit better then they, as it commonly comes to pass and does still
fall out, agreeable with the history of the Daughters of Lot. For it fares
with them who over familiarly and over long time haunt the company of the
wicked and perverse, as with them who dwell among colliers and come too near
them, according unto the lesson which the Apostle teaches us, 1. Cor. 15.33.
And this is the cause why the Lord under the Law was so careful to sever his
people in every respect, yea as touching their very attire and apparel, from
al other profane nations. We hear also the mones which David makes during his
flight, Psalm. 42. and 120. and elsewhere: as also the Apostle exhorts us to
take heed with whom we company, 1. Cor. 5.11. And I would to God that many
had thought better upon this point the^ they have done, who are at this day in
a most wretched and miserable estate, having thrown themselves wittingly and
willingly into the paws of the ravening and devouring lion. This is then a
most wholesome and necessary doctrine, but notwithstanding such as has no
very sure ground and foundation touching this manner and form of speech, being
a thing unlikely that they who prostitute their bodies, and consequently seek
nothing else but to allure men to their destruction by their beutie, as such
weomen are described by this same Solomon, Proverb. 6.25. and 7.10. should hide
their faces: besides that if they should so do, it were an hard thing to
discern an honest married wife vayled, from an harlot. Neither meant Moses in
the history of Thamar to say, that she was therefore accounted an harlot,
because she had covered her face, but that therefore Judah knew her not to be
his daughter in law, because she was attired like a widow, and had covered
her face: whom notwithstanding he thought to be an harlot, seeing her set out
in that sort and sitting alone in the high way. There are others therefore
which expound this word As one which wandreth out of the way, because it is
sometimes taken in this sense, in the tongue which Solomon uses: as if the
spouse said that being among such lewd company, she must needs be as a
poor wanderer and vagabond. But it is better to take it simply in this sense,
that she cannot be among such wicked company, but to her great sorrow and
grief, seeking for corners where to hide her head that she have no fellowship
with them, or else being constrained to hide and cover her face, not to see such
detestable things and to consent unto them so much as with her countenance, as
David protests that he will not have so much as in his mouth the names of
strange Gods, Psalm. 16.4. The Apostle also warning us to take heed not only
of evil, but also of every thing that has so much as the appearance of evil,
1 Thessalonians. 5.22. as also Saint Peter witnesses that Just Lot (who
notwithstanding had done better if he had never departed from Abraham, or
returned again unto him) vexed and afflicted from day to day his innocent
soul, hearing and seeing the wicked acts and deeds of them of Sodom. God
give us grace to make our profit of this holy doctrine necessary for all
times, but especially amidst these clouds and obscure darkness with which we
see that Satan, with such efficacy of error, indeuoreth to obscure the clear
light which God has sent us as it were from heaven: to the end that they
whose eyes he has already opened, suffer not themselves to be blinded
again, and that they who are yet in darkness and in the shadow of death may
receive the gift of this light, and that contrariwise every tongue yield the
Lord God his honor and glory in his true Church, by our only mediator our
Lord Jesus Christ: and because we have bin hitherto so loose in this behalf,
so unthankful and so forgetful, we will demand mercy as follows.

Almighty God etc.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the eighth verse.
8 If thou know it not, O thou the fairest among women, get thee forth, and
go and follow the trace of the flock, and feed thy kiddes by the tents or
cabbins of the sheepheards.


1 That Satan has always disguized the marks of the Church.

2 The true Church leaves not therefore to be always fair and precious in
the sight of God.

3 Wherefore the Church, though she be in such estate, leaves not for all
that to be the Church, against the opinion of the Catharistes and Donatistes.

4 The West Babylon is nothing less then the Church, but how God has drawn
and yet draws forth his always thence, by awakening them with his singular
mildnes and clemency.

5 We must come forth out of Babylon if we will not perish with it, and how we
must do it.

6 The examples of Joseph and of David and of Moses different and diverse in
this respect, applied unto our time.

7 Changing of place is not going forth of Babylon.

8 To become a Monk is nothing less then to go out of the world.

9 An answer unto them who at this day seek to find an agreement between
Babylon and the Church.

10 It is another thing to make a new way, and to return unto the ancient
and true way, and what this old and ancient way is.

11 There are two sorts of ancient fathers, and many turninges on the right
hand and on the left.

12 The succession of Bishops in the west Babylon is of no sure ground.

13 What the true Cabbins and Tents are, unto which this spouse is sent.

14 Wherefore Solomon makes mention of Cabbins and Sheepheardes.

15 Touching the excess committed in buildings and other pompes, which have
altogether transformed the Church into a shop of most abominable ambition and
covetousness.

16 The Cabbins or Tents of the Church are portatiue, and the mean not to be
deceived in them.

17 A great fault to stand upon mere personal succession.

18 A conclusion of the whole matter going before.

THE knowledge of the truth being in all things the ready direction to follow
the right way, and nothing being more precious then salvation which leads us
farther then this life, there is nothing more pernicious and pestilent then the
obscuring and darkning of the truth touching our salvation, and by consequent,
then the disguizing of the true marks of the church of God, without the which
there is neither truth nor salvation. This is it which the false Pastors would
gladly make men to believe can never come to pass, to the end to draw men
unto themselves, when it pleases God so to chasten and punish the contempt of
his truth. Now that the marks of the Church be not always bright-shining and
clear, it is apparent and manifest not only by the menaces and threats which
the Lord has made in this behalf, both by the Prophets in infinite many
places, as Psalm. 44. and 79, and 80. throughout, and Psalm. 89.39. Esaias 28.14.
and elsewhere, as also under the new covenant the Lord foretold the same
expressly, Mat. 24.24. and after him the Apostle, Act. 20.29. and 2. Tim. 3.12.
and 2 Thessalonians. 2.6. and 1. Ioh. 2.18. as it has also been confirmed by many
and sundry experiences in all times as before we have declared. This is then the
state in which the poor Church is proposed unto us to be in the verse going
before, not knowing in a manner on which side to turn it self in such an utter
confusion.

2 And therefore our duty is well and narrowly to consider the answer made
unto the spouse by him himself, who alone, to speak properly, speaks in
verity and truth, seeing it is he who is truth it self, and who never
forsakes those who are his in their need. After a preface therefore first
made, to encourage and to comfort her, calling her the fairest among women, he
answers his spouse in this sense, It is true indeed that thou art a poor
wandering stray, and therefore black and sunne-burnt, but yet thou leauest not
for all that to be fair and beutifull in mine eye, yea adorned with such a
beuty as none besides thy self can vaunt and boast of. This is the very style
which the Lord himself uses by his Prophets, adding always a consolation and
comfort after his threats and judgments, as is expreslie spoken and in the
same sense by the Prophet Esaie saying, Come my people, enter into thy
chambers, and shut the doors after thee, and hide thy self a little while
until my anger be passed over. Esaias 26.20. the Church having said before unto
him in the eight verse, o Eternal we wait for thee in the way of thy
judgments. Now the foundation of this comfort and consolation consists in
two points: both of them grounded upon the singular mercy of God. The first
is, that the Lord never suffers the ground Articles and points of true
religion to be abolished in his Church, though they be in diverse sorts both
within and without disguised and bastardized: and that sometimes this truth
remain but among a few, as we see it came to pass in Israel in the time of
Elias, in Judah in the time of the captivity of Babylon, in Jerusalem it self
then when the Lord came in person. The other point is, that the Lord
considers not his Church simply according unto his graces and blessings which
shine in her, which are sometimes most dark and obscure in the eyes of men,
but respects her always in the truth of his covenant, and in him in whom
she is indeed not only without spot or wrinckle, Coloss. 1.22. but which is
more, clothed with the perfect righteousness of the reconciler, Phil. 3.9.

3 Let us therefore know that the church leaves not to be a church, though the
true doctrine touching certain articles be therein debated, yea though it be
touching the principal articles by some, as the weakness of some, and the
wickedness of others is great, whereof the church of Corinth may be a witness
in which the article of the resurrection was called by some into controversy,
and the church of the Galathians so shaken, that in respect of the greatest
part of the members thereof, it was utterly revolted, as the Apostle himself
witnesses, Gal. 1.6. who notwithstanding leaves not to call them churches of
Jesus Christ which he also reformed and restored, according unto that lesson
which he taught others, Romans 14.1. And therefore these fantastical Catharistes
and Donatistes of old, and those of our time of the sect of the Anabaptists,
who seek after such a church in this world as should have no fault nor any
thing amiss in it, are utterly to be rejected.

4 But it is far an other thing to dispute and make a question of that which a
man knows not, with a will and desire to learn and know it: and stubburnly
to oppose a man's self against the truth, and finally to maintain and
authorize a doctrine directly contrary unto the articles of our faith. And
thus is it at length come to pass in the Romish church at this day, which for
this cause does no more deserve the name of a church then the kingdom of the
ten tribes reuolting with Jeroboam the son of Nabath deserved the name of the
people of God: albeit there were for a long time some of Gods elect among those
reuolters, whom the Lord according unto his good pleasure did miraculously
preserve, until the day of the utter dissipation of them, which shall befall
this West Babylon in his time. And therefore we protest that in the times of
our fathers there was a Church, that is to say, a number of the children of God
as it were secret and shut up, as may be proved by writings from age to age,
that there were always some who opposed themselves against those superstitions
and idolatries which by little and little got the upper hand in this Babylon,
called three hundred years ago by one of their own Poets a Temple of
heresy, in the which the Lord for this suffered not that Baptism should be
utterly taken away and abolished, but not that this Sea or any affected
thereunto being directly opposed unto the Church of God, was at any time the
Church. We protest and confess farther, that even in our time, in which it
has pleased God to display the banner of his truth, there do still remain
some of the elect, buried as it were in the midst of this Babylon, who in
respect of the eternal purpose and counsel of God appertain at this present
unto the true church: but by little and little as it pleases God to draw them
out of this gulf, are actually made the members of this true Church, of which
thing you to whom we speak, and our selves who are by Gods mercy come forth
thereof, are good witnesses. This is then the comfort and consolation whereof
mention is made in this place, and that which we must learn to answer them,
who so impudently and shamelessly begin our churches, from those great
personages the faithful servants of God, raised up of his great mercy and grace
about seventy years ago, not to build a new Church, as they falsely call it,
but to gather together the poor seely sheep which were strayed among the
wolves, which the spouse calls here false companions of Jesus Christ, as we
have above expounded the same: the Bridegroom therefore passing farther,
adds If thou know it not, as if he said, is it possible my spouse that
thou have utterly forgotten that which thou ask of me, namely where my
pasturing place is, and where I cause my sheep to rest in the heat of the noon
day? Which he speaks not so much unto the spouse in way of reproach or to
grieve her or make her sad, as to awaken her and to make her bethink her
self better: as if to warn him who seems to have little courage, we
should give him to understand, that if he think well on himself, he is
stronger then he takes himself to be. We see here therefore the inestimable
and admirable goodness of God toward his Church, teaching us, that we must
take heed of two contrary extremes, namely that we presume not too much of our
own forces as Saint Peter did who after found himself in very bad case
thereby, and on the other side also that we consider well of the gifts we have
received of God, that we make them profitable to our selves and others by our
courageous usage of them, as the Apostle most diligently warns his Disciple
Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.14. whereas it falls out often, that for want of courage,
which we think is not so, we suffer that to fall away which we have received,
making our selves in the end utterly unworthy thereof.

5 After this preface the Bridegroom warns his spouse first to go forth, as
it was said at the beginning unto Abraham, get thee forth out of thy country
and out of the land where thou were borne, and out of thy fathers house, Genesis
12.1. and afterward by the mouth of the Prophets, get you out of Babylon, fly
out of Chaldaea, Ier. 51.6. and afterward by the Angel, go ye out of her my
people, Apoc. 18.4. And indeed the means to find the right way after that a
man is gone astraie, is not to tarry in the path in which he wandered, but a
man must withdraw himself from it and return into the right as soon as he
can. Now if hereupon a man demand, whether this retreat imports always a
cha^ging of place, I answer that no. For the principal retire as touching
doctrine lies herein, to turn from falsehoode to return into the way of
truth, and as touching manners to withdraw our selves from al kind of iniquity
to give our selves unto pureness of living, Psalm 119.9. and.2. Tim. 2.19.
which is meant in the Scripture by the word of conversion.

6 But touching this the examples in Scriptures are not all of one sort. For we
see, that Joseph left not Egypt, neither did Daniel or his companions, as far
as we read, depart out of Chaldea or Persia. Contrariwise look we upon
Moses, and we shall see that he forsook Pharaoes court; and as for the retchles
and careless Jews, who foreslowed their departure out of the captivity, the
gate being thrice set open unto them, we know how dearly they bought it.
What shall we then say hereupon? This doubt is easily resolved by them, who
have a regard, without flattering of themselves any whit at all, as well unto the
glory of God as unto their own duty to discharge it well, as also to their own
ability and means which they have to serve God aright. The scope therefore and
ground of such a deliberation as this is, is, that what ever comes, we must
serve God in such sort as he has appointed us to serve him, without looking
either backward, or on the right hand or on the left. Thus much is
presupposed, if a man live in such a place where he may hear the word of God
syncerely preached, and may use the Sacraments ordained by God for an help and
remedy of our wretched weakness. Yet for all that a man must according to
the advertisement of Christ accounting his cost and taking a reckoning of his
ability before he build or wage battle: Luke 14.28. consider farther; first
whether he feel himself strong enough by the aid and assistance of god both
to sustain the hot assaults which by all likelihood shall be given him, in making
a pure and upright confession of the true religion among profane and
superstitious livers, and also not to suffer himself to be seduced by such
wicked examples, as shall be every hour and every moment presented him in those
places. If any man therefore find himself in such condition, I see not why
he should lightly change the place he lives in, but ought rather there to
discharge his duty, and to shine as a clear flaming torch in the midst of
the kingdom of darcknesse, Phil. 2.15. although it be not forbidden that he
which finds himself well enough touching the state of his conscience, in any
place, may not seek still to be yet better if may be. And farther they who
have any charge and vocation of God, especially an ecclesiastical charge in any
place, ought to take heed how they take into their minds such an impression
of dangers, as therefore to leave their charge, which ought to be more
precious unto them then their own life, according unto the practice of all the
faithful servants of God, examples whereof we have in Joseph, and in Daniel.
Now they are said to quit their charge who depart for the fear of men, or for
their own particular respect; not considering that an assured vocation is the
voice of god, which who so willingly obeieth not, either to tarry, or to
depart, is worthy to be discharged, or rather punished by his Captain.
Abraham having received a commandment of the Lord, left forthwith his
Country and his fathers house. Briefly a lawful calling, and such a one as we
are necessarily tied unto, is the voice of the Lord, whether it be to cause us
to stay where we are, or to depart. We read not that Moses had any
commandment by vision from God, as had Abraham, to depart out of Pharaoes
court, Heb. 11.24. but besides that he had no estate or calling which tied him
to stay, but contrariwise was brought up after the Egyptian fashion: his
intent and purpose approved by that which followed, shows that he was guided
and conducted by a singular motion and instinct of the holy ghost, as S.
Stephen likewise declares the same. Act. 7.22. As we need not also to doubt,
but that Daniell, if he were not surprised by death in his old age, held
himself in Persia by reason of his public vocation, in which he did god and
his whole nation faithful service: as Esdras also and Nehemias stayed there a
while after the edict, through the singular providence of God, who would have
them left for a rere ward unto the people who drew themselves back by little
and little, as on the contrariside those who tarried and shrouded themselves in
filthiness and uncleanness of that profane people are by no means to be
excused. In sum who so rightly and syncerely seeks after the glory of God
and the quiet of his conscience, shall soon know how to make in such a case
an holy and a good resolution. Neither is this to tie the grace of God unto any
one Province, or the walls of any one City, whereas God must be served in
every place with lifting up of pure hands: 1. Tim. 2.8. but this is to teach
men to set all things whatsoever without exception, after the dewty which they
owe unto the Lord: whose promise is most liberal and bountiful unto them,
who forsake for his sake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands and possessions, how ever the world take and
account them for fools and frantic.

7 Neither serves this lesson to teach us only that it is enough to depart
out of those places where superstition or some what worse then that is. For it
is to little purpose to change our place, if we change not our old skin:
and if being come to another place to serve God better and with more freedom
then before, we show it not indeed and effect when we are come thither. Which
falls not so truly out in all, as I must say it to my great grief, being but
too too many found who in steed of changing themselves and their manners or
profiting themselves better when they are come hither amongst us, become worse
then before, so that being nothing else but an offense and stumbling block unto
others, it were better both for us and them they had either never come here, or
had returned strait way thither again from whence they came.

8 And as this doctrine serves not to this purpose, so neither tends it to
the favoring of these hypocritical Moonkes who boast and brag they have
forsaken the woorlde, because they would feign be reckned among the number of
them who have left and forsaken al things for Christ's sake: which thing I shall
then confess to be true, when they shall have proved Jesus Christ to be the
patron and founder of their order, and that to enter into a monastery, there
to live at the cost and charges of another, and some of them to be changed
into wild asses, others to get them fat paunches, others to grow up to miters
and cardinals hattes, others to be the props and arch-pillers of falshoode and
error, such as these of the latter crew are, who call themselves Capuchins and
Jesuits, false usurpers of the name of Jesus, others to be saviors and
meriters for themselves and for others who hire them for their imaginary
works, in such sort as to hear them speak, it should seem that God owes
them somewhat upon a reckning when they have past a clear account with him:
when I say they shall have showed that this doctrine is Prophetical and
Apostolical, I will then confess their saying to be true and not before: no
displeasure to one of the ancient fathers (a man otherwise endued with most
excellent gifts, and who never heard of such, not monks, but monkeis as they
afterward became to be) but so bewitched notwithstanding with the opinion of a
monastical and solitary life, as that he sticked not to give one this counsel
to run over the very belly of his own father, to enter into a monastery:
so blind was the world even in those days.

9 In a word therefore, the first point of returning unto the Church of God, is
a resolution of quitting and forsaking the false Church, without any either
chaffering and merchandising or looking behind us, as we are warned, Luke
9.62. and Phil. 3.13. as this spouse also is expressly warned to forget her own
people and her fathers house, before the King can take pleasure in her beauty,
Psalm. 45.11. And this is a point which they above all others ought well to
think upon, who at this day, when this point is handled and debated among us,
mince out their way on both sides, thinking to agree fire and water together:
calling them transformers of the Church, who would reform it exactly according
unto the pattern of the word of God: men a great deal more dangerous then
those who declare themselves utter enemies of the truth.

10 But because to go out of a bad way to enter into an other as bad or else
worse, does little better the case of him who is wandered: therefore the spouse
is here warned in going out of the ill way to follow the tracke of the flock,
that is to say, of this true flock of sheep with whom they are to join
themselves. For the understanding and practice of which lesson we are to note,
that there is a difference between the opening of a new way, and the
acknowledging of a way made long since, but for lack of using and frequenting
grown wast and desolate. The question being therefore in this place, not of
taking or making a new way, as if the Church had then took her beginning, but
of finding again the true way laid in some sort wast and desert: for this
cause the spouse is sent back as it were to find the trackes and footings of
the old way. And this is it which the Prophets themselves have preached amidst
the desolations of the Church in their times, sending back such as are
wandered and gone astray unto the Law and unto the testimony, Esai. 8.20. and
elsewhere as Abraham also speaks Luke 16.29. They have, says he, Moses and
the Prophets, let them hear them: whereunto agrees that of Saint Peter, 2.
Pet. 1.20. not forgetting the words of his master, who directed those which
were blind and knew him not, unto the Scriptures. Sound ye, says he, and
search the Scriptures, for they are they which speak of me, Ioh. 5.39. yea
although then when the Lord spoke thus, the track and footing of the true
sheep of the former time was so clean put forth, amongst those who called
themselves the people of God, that there needed miracles and other
extraordinary means to make it known unto the seely wandering sheep, Mat.
9.36.

11 Therefore when our adversaries would serve their turn with this place to
teach us that without al distinction or exception we must keep us unto the way
of the fathers: we must put them in mind of this word of Flock namely of the
true flock of the true sheep. For there are two sorts of fathers. The one
seducers and seduced, of whom the lord complaining in Jeremy, they have
forsaken, says he, my law, which I set before the^, and have not hearkened
unto my voice, neither walked thereafter, but have followed their own hearts
lust, and the Baalims which their fathers taught them, Ier. 9.13. and 14 and in
Ezechiel 20.24 their eyes are gone after the moulten gods of their fathers.
Such are the fathers from which we must turn, that we perish not with them,
not deserving the name of auncetors, that is to say, of such sheep as hear
and follow the voice of their shepherd, Ioh. 10.27. But as for true fathers,
that is to say true auncetours, those are they indeed whose track and footing
we must know, that we turn not therefrom neither to the right hand nor to the
left. As for example. There are in our time a great number of false sects and
religions which al say they are the true Church* Behold on one side the Jews,
on another side the Turks who vaunt themselves, that they have the true
religion. As for the Turks their Alcoran being newly forged, it cannot be the
track of this flock. The Jews now and since the destruction of their Temple
and policy have some fayrer show, but it is on a false title they vaunt
themselves to have on their side the God which Moses and the Prophets taught,
seeing they acknowledge not but blaspheme him whom the Law and the Prophets lead
us unto.

12 We see on the other side how they of the Romish Church do at this day
vaunt themselves and make great crakes of their antiquity and succession of
Bishops, and of the Scriptures themselves, the book of the one and the other
covenant. Unto whom we answer that the foundation of their hierarchy being
in part forged upon an humane invention which finally degenerated into an open
tyranny: and their doctrine being directly and diametrally repugnant unto the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, this cannot be the way trodden out by
the ancient Church Apostolic, what continuance of years soever and names of
successors they allege. As Much is to be said concerning the Anabaptists and
Libertines, placing in steed of the Scripture their revelations and dreams,
as also all both old and new or renewed heretics have this in common, that they
hold not themselves within the limits and bounds of the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets perfectly comprised in the holy and canonical
Scriptures, which ought to serve for the text and commentary of his will.

13 And this is the cause why the Bridegroom adds that the spouse to find
the tracke of the true sheep after which she is sent, must seek after the
cabbins or tents of the sheepheards: meaning by these words, the true
Pastors of the Church whom we must discern from the false, by their words
and writings, and by their cabbins and tents, that is to say, the retyring and
resting place of this true flock. For indeed there is but one
catholickeflocke, that is, universally considered, be it great or little. But
there are so many cabbins for the retyring unto, and pasturing of it, as there
are places in the which the voice of these true sheepheards, Prophets and
Apostles, do resound, and shall resound unto the end of the woorlde, by the
mouths of their faithful successors, to gather together and to conduct unto
the only Pastor and shepherd which is this Bridegroom, the whole number and
multitude of the sheep.

14 And it may also be that Solomon had a particular respect to Abraham,
Isaacke, and Jacob, who were indeed sheepheards, as the most part of the
ancient Patriarckes, yea Moses himself among the Madianites, and David, Psalm.
77.20. and 78.72. to the doctrine and family of whom the spouse in this place
is sent back, being a thing without all doubt that they were indeed true
Pastors and sheepheards, their doctrine the true doctrine, and their house
(excepting such as behaved themselves unworthily, and which were rather in the
house then of the house, as Ismael and Esaw) the true Church of God. And we may
not forget that here is express mention made of cabbins of sheepheards,
according unto the purport of the history it self, namely that these
Patriarckes did indeed dwell in tents, as wayfarers in this world, Heb. 11.9.
We are therefore given to understand by this word that we may not seek after
the Church in the outward shining of Towers and Steepls, nor other pomps and
braueries of the world: the Church of God being rather composed of the small
and contemptible things of the world, Luke 14.21. and 1. Cor 1.26. as the head
also thereof would be borne in a stable, and live poorly and slenderly. If on
the contrary side any man object the rich ornaments of the tabernacle, the
magnificence of the temple of Solomon, and the riches both of it as also of the
people during his kingdom, in whose reign it is said, that men made no more
reckoning of silver then of stones in Jerusalem, 2. Chron. 9.27. I answer, as
touching the ornaments of the Leuiticall Priesthood and the riches of the
Temple, that all this was a figure of the spiritual riches of the true Temple of
God, namely of our lord Jesus Christ under the paedagogie and A. B. C. of the
Law, which is now ceased together with all that which depended thereon: and as
for the other riches, I deny not but that the Lord honored his people when it
so pleased him, with the blessings and commodities of this life, Godliness
having the promises both of the present life and of the life to come, 1. Tim.
4.8. I deny not also but that God has called unto his Church, both rich and
poor, such and so many as it pleases him, as the example of Abraham who was
rich, in whose Bosom poor Lazarus was, may declare and witness, Luke 16.23.
but I say that in all times the hall where the banquet is kept, whereof mention
is made in Luke 14.13. has always been filled rather with impotent folcke,
lame, and blind taken out of the midst of the street, then with the rich and
pompous which are in kings houses, Mat. 11.8. I say farther that albeit
neither riches nor poverty are proper and essential marks of the Church, yet so
is it notwithstanding that smalnes and baseness of condition according unto
the woorld, yea the cross it self, (not the cross of gold or silver
transformed into a most detestable Idol,) but the cross which burdeneth the
shoulders, and which is an enemy unto the flesh, is the ordinary companion
thereof. But I say also that the rich which were in the church, were not of
the church in the quality of men rich with worldly corruptible riches, but in
the quality of poor, in as much as they used their goods so as if they used
them not at al, according unto the saying of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.31. and 1.
Tim. 6.17. and became lean and thin to pass thorough the eye of the needle,
Mat. 19.24. laying up their treasure in heaven, Mat. 6.20. according unto the
example of David that good and truly rich king Psalm. 16.5. Finally I say that
the buildinges and vessels of the Church ought to be agreeable with the
doctrine taught in the true Christian Church, which condemns all superfluity
and worldly pompes, and applies the goods of the Church to the living stones
thereof, as the practice was in the Apostles times, Act. 4.35. and in those
times when the Pastors were of gold, and the Churches and the vessels thereof
were of wood.

15 This then has been and yet is an enormous fault committed by the ancient
fathers since the time of Constantine to suffer, and much greater to exhort
Kings and Princes to found and build Churches with such excessive cost,
serving for no other thing but to condemn both the doners and demaunders,
poynting out as it were with the finger, the ambition of the one, and the
covetousness of the other: whereupon has entered this notorious transformation
of the spiritual beutie of the Christian Church into a vanity and pomp not
simply carnal and worldly, but truly Epicurian, how ever it be hid and
covered under the cloak of devotion. Hereby appears the more then desperate
impudency and shamelesnes of them who by their goodly legends so false and
sottish, as nothing can be more, in lieu of keeping themselves unto the
history and doctrine contained in the second book of Saint Luke called the
Acts of the Apostles expreslie uttered to the pen by the holy Ghost, have not
shamed to change and transform the holy Apostles of the Lord, into builders
of Churches, deuisers of crosses, forgers of holy water sprinckles etc. And
what shall say of that most gross and enormous an impudent boldness of forging
of Saint Peter's patrimony? Of that monster crowned with three crowns, carried
and adored upon men's shoulders? Of such store of glittering pomps shining in
every place, which are so many spoils of such Kings and Princes, as have
been bewitched, and sacrilegious robberies of such goods as were vowed to the
spiritual mainteinance of the Church of the Lord? As it was so long ago
foretold, yea painted out by the holy Ghost in the Apocalypse, so far as to
name the place and the name of such a confusion. And who has so expounded it?
The ancient Greeks and Latins, whom the Pope himself likes of and allows.
What shall we say of the infinity of these goodly votaries of poverty, these
honest wallet brethren, these good fathers besotted with the very stones and
sumptuosities of their palaces wherein they dwell? What shall we say of these
new locustes, and west Indie Popiniayes already borne and to be bred, and
specially of these lees and dregs of the filth and mud of the bottomless pit,
open profaners of the name of Jesus, disnesting the other ravening birds and
cormorantes to lay their eggs where they had builded, and having within the
compass of these few years gotten to themselves more goods, and built more
goodly palaces, then the rest have done in five hundred years before. Which
thing calls to my remembrance that which the Philosophers say, That the
Serpents become Dragons by eating of other little Serpents. As for us,
contenting our selves with our smalnesse, let us oppose unto all this stately
Masqu^ra^a, with which the world ^ee^eth itself the lodgings and cabbins of
the ancient true Pastors, there to se^ke after and to find the true church,
and not in this glittering and profane riches, in which the prince of this
world reigns Mat. 11.8. borrowing the name of the Church: preferring on the
contrariside with Moses the afflictions of the people of God, and the reproach
of Jesus Christ before all the treasures of Egypt, Heb 11.25. let us I say
keep our selves unto him who is our king, and so crowned with glory on high,
that yet in his poor members he is crowned with thorns* Col. 1.24* and not
unto them who part with others the spoil of Jesus Christ.

16 Moreover although this word which we have turned Cabbins or Lodges, be
taken sometimes in general for every place of dwelling or abiding,
notwithstanding this word of Sheepheards which is added, having, as I said, a
respect unto the manner of living of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also of
Moses and Aaron in the wilderness, as it is spoken Psalm. 77.20. shows that
we must so take it, as we have said. And hereupon we ought also to be
warned, that as the sheepheards abid not still in one place, but had their
portatiue tents and cabbines, as we see how the ancient Patriarchs dwelt with
their flocks here and there, the Church of God changing his place by this
means together with them: so we must also take heed how we tie the name of the
church so to any place, as to think that it never stirs from any nation,
people, city or town. But we must bear in mind the advertisement of Christ,
who warns us, that if a man tell us hear is Christ or there is Christ, we
believe him not. And where is he then? there where, says he the body is yea
the carcass of the dead body, in which is life, there are the eagles, Matthew.
24.23 and 28. that is to say, there where Jesus Christ and no other is
preached, I mean the true Jesus christ, in whose only death we find life, and
of whom the Apostle said* that he thought no other thing worthy of kno^ledge,
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2. and purely preached. There
must the eagles gather themselves together, that is to say, seeking to be
fed with no other then with him crucified. For there and no where else is the
Church. And where shall this true Jesus Christ be found? In the cabbins and
lodges of the sheepeheardes, which are the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, upon which for this cause, and for that they lay this only foundation
which is Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 3.11, it is said, that this Church is founded,
Ephesians. 2.20. Apoc. 2.14. Yea but (reply our adversaries) if the question be of
the interpretation of a place of the Scripture drawn to a contrary sense, to
whom shall we have recourse, to discern the true sense from the false? Certes
again to the cabbins of the sheepeheards and pastors, the Church having none
other true and certain light, then this written word, whereunto we are sent
back, not only by the express commandment of the Lord, as we have before
said, but also by his own example who thus refuted and beat back again the
allegation of Satan, Mat. 4.7. as the weapons of the Apostles also were such,
and that against them, who sat in the Sea of Jerusalem, Act. 4.7. so far were
they from aiding and defending themselves with any unwritten tradition, or with
any authority attributed unto the Sea of Jerusalem, seeing that was
transformed into a den of thieves, Mat. 21.13. The like did the Jews of
Beroea, and found themselves in good case thereby, Act. 17.11. the consent
notwithstanding and testimony of the true Church being not to be rejected but
greatly to be esteemed of and regarded, which again ought to be discerned
from the false, by the consent of their testimony with the Scriptures. And this
is it which all the ancient fathers and lights of the old Church, have
declared and protested must necessarily be done in the reading of their
writings.

17 This then has been a very strange slight and treachery of Satan to tie
the spirit of truth to the persons of Pastors and sheepheards without the
examination of their doctrine by the scriptures: nay which more is, to subject
the scripture to their opinions and decrees, as if the mason should order his
plummet and rule by the wall, and not frame the building to the rightnesse of
his line and leuel. We ought therefore to consider that the principal and
chief stone Jesus Christ and his doctrine, have been from al times in part
not known, in part most wickedly rejected by the principal and chief
builders, such I mean in name, but not indeed and effect, Psalm. 118.22. Which
was first verified by the experience the Prophets had thereof, Math. 23.37. And
then in the person of Jesus Christ himself, Act. 4.11. and foretold should
come to pass expressly in the Christian church, Act. 20.29. as the event has
since plainly showed unto the eye, and still to this day proves the same. And
yet notwithstanding there was appearance and probability of holding our selves,
as well in general unto that which was commonly received of this people, whom
God had only chosen from out of all the nations of the world, as also in
special of standing unto the advice and judgment of the Priests, appointed by
God ordinary and sovereign judges, Deuteronomy. 17.9. Besides there is no man which
knows not the authority of the Sea of Jerusalem which was called the city of
God. And yet notwithstanding of whom is it I pray you that the Lord says, Let
them alone, they are blind leaders of the blind, Matthew. 15.14. and who
excommunicated Jesus Christ and his disciples? Ioh. 9.22. who constrained
Pilate to crucify him? Mat. 27.20. who are those uncircumcised of heart, who
were the first which imbrewed their hands with the blood of the servants of
God? Act. 7.52. There was then as I have said before, great appearaunce why we
should follow without exception the most part of the people of the Jews, and
the Doctors of the law, sitting in Moses chair, that is to say, the
successors of Moses by the ordinance and appointment of God, and yet
notwithstanding these were they who fell into the pit together with those who
followed them, Mat. 15.14. But in what place of the Scripture is it said that
Rome shall be the Sea of the catholic church? That the Bishop of Rome may be
judged of no man, but is the head and chief of al? That he has the power to
open heaven and hell, nay to do whatsoever him lists without controlme^t, and
other such vile and filthy blasphemies and impieties? Jesus Christ has indeed
said that he will be with us unto the end of the world, but it is not said that
he will keep at Rome. Nay contrariwise he has forewarned us by Saint John
his welb^^^u^^ disciple, that it should be there where the great whor^ should
sit, which should make drunk the Ki^gs and Princes of the world. And we see
the same at this day, yea which is a thing most strange to consider of, their
ama(...) only of spirit herein, the ancient fathers, who ^^^y saw and wrote
these things of this See, could not take heed notwithstanding o^ being deceived
thereby, and causing others to be deceived.

18 For conclusion therefore of this matter, the Lord has his sheepheards and
cabbins, which are the true testimonies of the truth unto which we must keep
our selves, I mean the Prophets and Apostles, whose doctrine is the touchstone
to discern the true successors of them from the false, and by consequent the
true spouse of Jesus Christ by whom the young Kids must keep themselves to be
well fed, from the wicked harlot, from whom they must fly that they perish
not together with her.

According therefore unto this holy doctrine let us beseech our Lord God, to
look in mercy upon his poor Church troubled in such sort and laid so wast in
so many places, that there appears neither way nor path thereof: that it
will please him to defend her and guide her unto the true cabbins and lodges of
the Pastors thwart so many cruel and hideous deserts, since it has pleased
him in our time to raise and lift up the banner of his holy Ministry, that he
will oppose himself therefore against this Babylon, and overthrow the
Apostolical See thereof by the wind of his mouth, giving unto his elect eyes to
see the light of his holy gospel, a^ deares to hear the voice of that true and
certain Pastor of Pastors the chief sheepeheard Jesus Christ, and setting
up again his cabbins in the which his poor famished young Kids may be fed
and pastured to his honor and glory. And because we for our own part have
done our duty so little in seeking after and digesting this holy food and
pasture, let us cry him mercy and crave of him grace and mercy as follows.

Almighty God etc.
THE ELEVENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the ninth verse.
9 My Love, I compare thee unto my couple of horses of one of the coches of
Pharao.


1 The happy estate of the Church reestablished, opposed to her desolation,
for which reestablishment every one ought to labor.

2 In whom the fault lies that the Church is not reformed.

3 The mask of false general councels discovered.

4 The duty of true Pastors and christian princes touching these delays:
with an answer unto the slanders raised against those who have sought to
discharge their duty in this behalf.

5 A summarie recital of the great defects committed in our time in this point
of reformation.

6 The ground of this similitude, taken from a couple of horses of one of the
coches of Pharao.

7 How dear and precious this word of Love ought to be unto the spouse.

8 In what sense this spouse is compared to a couple of goodly great horses in
a coch.

9 The cross is properly the triumphal chariot, which is here spoken of.

10 The Gospel is then despised when men enioie it with greatest freedom.

11 An exhortation to do the contrary.

12 Why the spouse is not compared to one horse, but to a couple.

13 The false ioynt-couple opposed to this of the spouse.

14 A reprehension of wild and dissolute livers, who cannot endure the chek
being coupled and yoked under the yoke of the Lord.

WE have learned before a good lesson by the answer of the Bridegroom,
namely, touching the certain and infallible marks of the true Church, to
which we must order and keep our selves, for to obtain salvation: and
consequently the true and only means of reforming the church, being for a time
by the negligence of some of the Pastors, and by the wickedness of false
Doctors and teachers brought into very badde estate. After which reformation
well and thoroughly practiced, the goodly and triumphant condition of the Church
set on foot again, is here in most excellent sort painted out unto us,
which we are diligently and earnestly to consider of. This is then a point
which men still at this day debate and dispute, and not without great reason,
if we do but look on the extreme desolation whereunto the greatest part of
Christendom is brought at this day.

2 But what? Men dispute thereof, not to find any remedy for it, but clean
contrary to hinder such as endeavor a reformation. For the false Pastors
cannot abide that any man should touch this point, because of their particular
interest: others have no great care of it, others indeed set their hands unto
it, but insteede of following after the tracke and footing of the true sheep,
and the tents and tabernacles of the true Pastors well authorized, follow their
own inventions, to make a medly of religions and disciplines after their own
lust.

3 As for the first, seeing they resemble the Pharisees and Scribes, naie are
more out of the way then they, it is no marvel if they cannot abide to have
their profanenes discovered: wherein they do their master faithful service, who
by their means defends his hold and fortress, with all the might he may,
Luke 11.22. True it is they are constrained to avouch that there are many very
great corruptions and abuses in their Church, and of this the preface unto
their councels always ringeth, yea sometimes their sermons also, and thereupon
also ye shall have them make some statutes and ordinances of reformation. But
what? First there is no speech to be made touching their doctrine, with which
they ought to begin, but all the speech is of square caps, of shauing of
beards, of their hair, it may be some points shall be farther added, touching
the plurality of benefices and residencie of prelates, yea forsooth, as if they
should take order that every Church-robber should have his part, and every
these raunge in person in the walk of his forest. Many will say these words
are very rough, and too injurious. But they who like them not, must reform
the Lords speech, Matt. 21.13. Ye have made, says he, of my fathers house a
den of thieves. And albeit their rules of reformation were the best that might
be in the world, yet who sees not that it is but a mere mockery to make
them, to the end their bulls and dispensations may have as many clauses
derogatorie against them? For example hereof look we to the pragmatical
sanction of Basel, taken away by Pope Leo, and parted between him and kings
more impudently a great deal, then the soldiers who executed Pilates
judicial sentence against Christ, parted his garments amongst them. And this
goodly council of Trent, such as it is, has it hitherto in our days framed
any bill of encitement against the authors themselves and founders thereof,
culpable in points of their own reformation?

4 And what shall the true pastors and christian magistrates do hereupon? They
must wait, say these hick scorners, until such time, as the Pope and prelates
the Apostles successors forsooth remedy the matter, that is to say, until
the whores reform the stews. As it is an usual thing thoroughout the
Scripture to compare spiritual fornication and whoredom unto corporal
whoredom. But Jesus Christ gives us a contrary lesson, Let them alone, says
he, they are blind leaders of the blind, Mat 15.14. naie which is more, he
took a whip in his hand, and ouerturning the tables and money of the
chaungers, drove them forth t(...)ise out of the temple, Ioh. 2.15. and Luke
19.45. So about three hundred years since, God has chastised and scourged the
East and the South, and some part also of the North with a terrible whip of his
anger and wrath, I mean by the Turks, successors of the Sarracens, and has
in our memory given the City of Rome a shrewd lash with the whip.
Contrariwise it is on us that he has reached forth his great mercy, having
raised up those chief servants of God, who took into their hands the true
arms of Christians, 2. Cor. 10.4. I mean the spirit of the mouth of the Lord,
2 Thessalonians. 2.8. otherwise called the two edged sword of the word, Psalm 149.6.
and Heb. 4.12. by which they cleansed the house of the Lord where we are now.
It is replied hereupon that some have also res^sted by way of arms. They which
have been brought to this extremity, are sufficient to answer for
themselves: and behold their answer which all the world might understand. We
vouch say they the fact, yea and that Satan has thrust and shoued in some of
his thieves and robbers among us we confess, as David himself during the time
of his persecution found himself much encombred with those which joined
themselves unto him. But notwithstanding for all this, considering when and why
and by whose means the matter came to handie-blowes, it shall be found, that
they who complain, are no more to be approved in their complaint, then they
should be, who should complain they happened to meet in a forest, where they
lay in ambush, certain passengers, who armed by the authority of the Laws,
hindered in some part their wicked purpose.

5 Ye see then how it has pleased god in our time to exercise his poor
children, and yet withal to take pity on them in some countries. But I must
speak it to my great regrete, that his grace appearing unto the woorld, men
have been far from receiving of it and making their profit thereby, in such
sort as they ought to have done. For some have yet left the high places
standing, others have set up Gedeons Ephod, Judge. 8.27. others have ordered the
rules of Ecclesiastical government, not according unto the true pattern of the
ancient sheep, and cabbins of the Pastors, in which we have heard how the
Spouse is in this place commanded to feed her young kiddes, but according unto
their own opinion or rather fancy: so that if God of his goodness remedy it
not, it cannot be, but that by little and little the later state will come to be
worse then the first, as is said, Matthew. 12.45. and as is already come to
pass in too many Churches and countries.

6 God grant the^ who have the charge hereof his grace, to think better on it
and to provide for it, that this spouse may be restored unto her perfect
bewty, whereof the Bridegroom in this place speaks, saying, that he
compares her unto the mounture of horses of one of the coches of Pharao. Which
similitude and comparison may seem very strange and yet notwithstanding is very
significant and proper, if we consider the sense whereunto it is to be
referred, without wresting or drawing it any farther. So is it said by a
similitude (to show that the true Church keeps herself to her head, in what
place soever he be) that where a dead body is, there do the eagles gather
themselves together. And yet this would be thought a thing very absurd, if a man
therefore consequently would liken the children of God unto foul ravening
birds, and Jesus Christ, who is the holy of holies, unto a carrion. Semblably
if a man would make Jesus Christ like unto a thief, under this color, that it
is said, that he shall come as a thief, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. or unto a Judge fearing
neither God nor men, Luke 18.2. So likewise in this place the spirit means
not to compare his church unto an horse or a mare. But because one of the
principal bewties of a woman is this tall and straight feature of body, with a
comely countenance, as it is also specified, Psalm. 144.12. where the daughters
are compared to high and straight pillars of great Palaces: the holy ghost
meaning to represent unto us by these corporal things, the excellency of the
church of the Lord when she keeps herself to her true Pastors, has chosen
this similitude, in opposing it unto the former desolation, in the which the
spouse went as it were hanging down her head. For as touching the mentioning
of Pharao in this place, there is no farther reason or allegory to be sought
thereof, but this, that among all the horses of those times they of Egypt were
accounted the brauest and the best, as in many places of the Scripture it is
witnessed unto us, and especially in the history of Solomon, 1. King. 10.28.
as at this day men account of the horses of Spain and of Turkey.

7 But above all other things this is especially to be noted, that the
Bridegroom calling his spouse with his own mouth his love, testifies unto us,
that which the understanding of man is not able to conceive, I mean the
unspeakable love and dilection which he bears unto his Church, to the end
we should learn, the most necessary point of our salvation, namely, that
whatsoever she has, proceeds from the mere liberality and bounty of her
Bridegroom, and that there is nothing in the whole world, either so fair, or
so good, to speak properly, as are those jewels wherewith he adorneth his
Church, waiting for the day of the full and perfect consummation of this
marriage: a doctrine so ill known as nothing worse, whereby it is impossible
that the judgment of God should be far off from us. For the greatest
unthankfulness that can be found amongst men is this, to be persuaded that the
friend to whom we owe both our selves and whatsoever we have, has found I
know not what in us, which has moved him to choose us, or happily having found
us so so, has prevented us by his grace, to the end, that how ever it be, some
thing might be found in us which meriteth and deserves his grace and favor.
To this we must oppose this word so often reiterated and repeated in this
book, to wit, My well-beloved, or as we say in our common speech My love:
which was after declared in his time by the Bridegroom himself coming in
person to stipulate and covenant this marriage in more nearer manner: I call you
not, says he, my servants, but I call you my frindes, (namely the frinds of
this Bridegroom, as is spoken, Ioh. 3.29. and 15.15) And wherefore frinds and
beloved? Because, says he, I have loved you first, 1. Ioh. 4.10. and what shall
we say? O Lord who are thus thy beloved? They are thy natural enemies, yea
enemies by race and kind, and from father unto son. And wherefore then have
thou loved them? To cause mercy to abound above the excessiuenes of sin.
Romans 5.20. finding the cause thereof no where else but in thy mere and only
goodness and bounty. And how far have thou loved them? Even so far as to lay
down thy life for them, 1. Ioh. 3.16. Behold then a marvelous precious word
and which discovers unto us such a secret as none can sufficiently comprehend
the length, the breadth, the depth thereof, Ephesians. 3.18. and 19. Let this word
therefore my brethren, of well-beloved, be indeed so precious unto us, that the
love of this woorld which is enmity with God, Iam. 4.4. bewitch us not, that
the love of deciueable and perishing riches possess not our hearts, that the
false opinion and self-love of our selves, make us not to lose this goodly
treasure, that we deprive not our selves of our blessing for a soupe as did
Esau, Heb. 12.16. but that this precious sur-name of wel-beloued ring always
in our ears and in our hearts by the holy Ghost who sounds the very depths
of God, 1. Cor. 2.10. namely the things which are given us of God: to the end
that our whole life be a reciprocal and interchaungeable love toward him who
has loved us so much.

8 But let us speak now of the port and comely tall feature of this so goodly
and fair a spouse. When the vigor and force of the soul lights on a body
well disposed and ordered in all his members, without any either obstruction or
other defect which hinders the faculties and powers thereof from passing and
spredding themselves throughout the whole body, then truly the effects thereof
show themselves most evidently, from the very head unto the feet. Even so
fares it with this spouse, quickened, nourished and sustained by the spirit of
her Bridegroom, and therefore shows she herself most excellent and gallant
through out: lifting up her head unto the heavens, treading under her feet
Satan, the world, and sin, yea defiing death it self and hell, Ose. 13.14.
and 1. Cor. 15.55. And therefore is she compared elsewhere unto goodly great
and tall trees planted along the waters, from whom no stormy time or season
takes away either greennes or fruit, Psalm. 1.3. and 92.12. and 13. True it is
notwithstanding that this vineyard is sometimes broused and marred by the
vineyarders fault and negligence (as is at large declared, Psalm. 80.) nay
beaten with hayle and tempest from above, as if the bridegroom had laid it as
low as he had raised it high, and al by the spouses own fault. But therefore
he beats her down to raise and lift her up again and to show her how
dearly he loves her, and is jealous in chastising of her, Esai. 49.21. making
always a great difference between the destruction of Sodom, and the
visitation of Sion, Esai. 1.9. And though he correct us sometimes in his
great wrath, yet does he limit his displeasure, Psalm.. 125.3. In a word the
spouse is sometimes divorced for a time, as she was, scarce seventy years ago,
but is afterward received again, Ierem. 3.1. We are pressed on eueryside, but
not crazed and broke: in need, but not distressed: persecuted, but not
forsaken: beaten down, but we perish not, 2. Cor. 4.8.

9 But when was this spouse in this port and state? Certainly she was never
more triumphant and glittering then in the time of the Apostles, the doctrine
of salvation being never better taught, never better harkened unto, never
better practiced. But, will some man say, the Church was never more miserable
then it was then as the Apostle writes, 1. Cor. 4.10. and the whole history of
the Apostles in the Acts declares. True; and this is the same which I meant to
say, namely that the cross, is the chariot of triumph in which the Church the
spouse triumphs and reioiceth in the Lord, Gal. 6.14. and 2. Cor. 4.10. And
indeed when can we say for our own time that the word of God had his forth and
course and showed his powerful force, but during the great fires? For then
death it self was bidden defiance, men went an hundred miles to have a little
crumme of this heavenly bread: the world and life it self were made no account
of, men pressed and thronged to snatch the kingdom of heaven by violence.

10 And now what? Edicts and Laws being establ^shed to this purpose, and some
liberty and freedom offered and presented, men contemn that which is every
day at their door. If we should be sent into the suburbs or fields after it,
that were too far; if some money must be made for the relieuing of the poor
woorke-men, this costs too dear: in a word the Manna which was at the first so
sweet in our mouths, has now no relish: the Lord of his mercy remedy it,
and give us a better mind. We desire peace and quietness, but it is for
nothing else, but to be at our ease: and that is the cause that this benefit
flies from us, and God knows also that if we had it we would abuse it.

11 Let us therefore rely our selves on him who gives us and our poor
brethren peace, after so long and so rough storms, let us take heed we be not
like horses fatted on the litter, and will afterward abide neither bridle nor
saddle, but fling out with all four, and specially against their master:
Deutr. 32.15. If on the contrariside he chastise us with any scourge it shall
please him, let us show, that his power is made perfect by our weakness, 2.
Cor 12.9. and rejoice that it is given us to be made conformable unto our head,
Romans 8.29. and Phil. 1.29. and Acts. 5.41. In a word let those combats which
are given us, whet and sharpen the power which is given us from above. The
world in the mean while will laugh us to scorn and will call us fools and
frantic monarkes, but it shall weep in his time, and we shall laugh in the
Lord in that our season, when that which is given us already to be, shall be
revealed, 1. Ioh. 3.2.

12 Moreover let us note that this spouse is compared unto a goodly horse, and
to couples linked together, which is spoken by a most proper and fine
similitude. For the church represented by this name of spouse (in as much as
according unto the lords petition and request we are al of us one in him, Ioh.
17.11. and all members composing one and the same body, 1. Cor. 12.12.) what
thing is it else but a company coupled and yoked, as a man would say, two by
two under the yoke, saying one to the other, as well by words as also by
example, Come let us ascend up unto the mount of the Lord, Esaias. 2.3. and with
David, Psalm. 22.2. I reioiced when they said unto me, we will go into the house
of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1. Briefly the whole Scripture is full of such
exhortations, that we should al jointly together tend unto the same mark, yea
and that not only in going but in running, as I told you on the 4. verse, the
stronger supporting the weaker which is coupled with him, Gal. 6.2. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. And this is the cause why it was ordained in the law, that a man
should not couple an Horse and an Ass to labor together, for fear the one
should not draw the other under his feet, Deutr. 22.10. And thus you see what
this holy assembly is whereof we have here a singular pattern, whereunto the
holy ghost had respect in numbering of the Apostles by six couples, Mat. 10.2.
and in sending them forth two and two, Mark. 6.7. not at auentures, but as it
is likely, according as they were wont to follow their master by order and not
by any degree, the one had above the other, as after it happened they disputed
thereof more then once.

13 But in lieu of holding themselves to the decision their master and ours
has made in this behalf, they who call themselves the Apostles successors (as
a wicked man may well succeed a good man in what title soever) have changed
this order into superiorities and prelateships, nay which more is, are gotten
themselves up into the chariot, instead of drawing coupled in it, in which the
chief conductour of this chariot being sitten, vaunteth himself and says,
that though he should drive it full of souls unto hell, yet is it not for any
living creature to say unto him, Why do thou so? These are the very words
of one of these goodly successors of the Apostles in one of his Canons and
Decrees. And do we marvel then if this chariot have gone so aside, nay if it
has been turned vpside down, and not kept in the right pathway? As little
are meant by these coupled horses, these wallet breethren, going by two and two
or rather by troops, like locustes and caterpillars, browsing and devouring
the wretched world.

14 As little appertain these wild and dissolute livers to this joint
coupling, who leave not to run wild over the fallowes, until they have their
necks broken: and who in lieu of subiecting them to this so sweet and so
gracious a yoke of the Lord, Matthew. 11.29. say they must cast away these
bonds, Psalm 2.3. not considering that to serve the Lord is truly to reign,
whereas themselves become more then miserable, being bondslaues of sin, Ioh.
8.34. and drawn under the Captivity of the enemy of our salvation as
pleases him, 2. Timoth. 2.26. Let us on the contrary side hearken unto the
Lord, warning us if we will be his true Disciples to bear his Cross after
him, Matthew 16.24. having always our hammes supple and ready Heb. 12.12. to
follow on the course of our vocation unto the end.

Almighty God etc.
THE THIRTEENTH SERMON Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 10. and 11.
verses.
10 Thy cheeks are comely with borders of stones, and thy neck with chains.

11 We will make thee borders of gold, with buttons of silver.


1 The friendly caresses and loving intertainement of the bridegroom
receiving his spouse, that is to say his Church, which was for a time in some
sort straied from him.

2 We must make a distinction between the fiansailes, the spowsailes, and full
consummation of this spiritual marriage.

3 The borders of jewels and chains of this spouse serve little for defense
and patronage of weomens excess and dissolution in apparel, defiling thereby
the christian church, with answer to the contrary objections.

4 The rule and measure which ought to be observed in the cost and bravery of
apparel.

5 Application of this doctrine to the Church of Geneua and others, as well to
men as to weomen.

6 What the borders of stones and other jewels are, which are given to this
spouse, by her Bridegroom.

7 A complaint both touching the defect as also the abuse of these nuptial
ornaments which God has at this day bestowed upon his Church.

8 In what sense expres mention is made of the cheeks and of the neck of the
spouse.

9 The spouse does yet look for more precious jewels in the day of the full
consummation of this marriage.

10 Wherefore the Bridegroom speaks of himself in the plural number.

THAT which we have to expound as also a great part of this Canticle is framed
in manner of mutual caresses and lovely entertainment of the Bridegroom and
the spouse reunited and joined again with her husband: under the allegory and
figure of which is declared this infinite dilection and love wherewith Jesus
Christ loves and chearisheth his Church, adorning and enriching it with most
precious gifts: and on the other side also the reciprocal love of the spouse
toward her Bridegroom, whose excellency and perfection she cannot
sufficiently praise and commend, seeking in him alone her whole hearts desire
and contentment.

2 But for the understanding of all these things we must consider three
degrees in this holy marriage, namely the fiansailes made by words of the
future time under the ancient covenant: the espousailes by words of the
present, which we must refer unto the coming of Jesus Christ in person, and
preaching of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 11.2. and the full consummation of this
marriage which we look for, whereof mention is made in the parable of the
virgins, Matthew. 25. I say the full consummation, for we must always
understand, that during the time of these fiansailes, and since, the spiritual
virtue of Jesus Christ is effectually powered into this spouse, to engender in
her the fruits of righteousness, whereunto we ought to refer that which is
said, Ezech. 16.8. and Romans 7.4. and Ephesians. 5.30. but God is not yet all in all,
nor shall be until the second coming, 1. Cor. 15.28. This therefore which is
here said, is to be referred unto the time of the fiansailes, as the
Bridegroom also declares the same in express terms in the place of Ezechiel
above alleged.

3 But to go on, if any one allege this place for the mainteinance of women's
excess and dissolution in their apparel and other their superfluities: the
answer thereunto is ready, that the holy Ghost speaks far otherwise, 1.
Pet. 3.4. and by Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 2.9. And if hereupon any man reply that
then the Lord has not always given one and the same rule, it is easily
answered that we shall find the clean contrary, if we consider of things
aright, namely that the holy Ghost is never contrary unto himself. Gold and
silver are the good creatures of God, and we find by most certain examples
of the holy fathers, that of a long time the use thereof has been not only
in buying and selling, but also in some sorts of ornaments and jewels. But
first of al let us not think that curious woorkemanship and superfluities in
this point were therefore rife and common among the holy fathers. Secondly the
histories themselves testify unto us the simplicity they used in such
ornaments, whereof among others the history written in Genesis 24.22. may be a
sufficient witness where it is said, that Abraham's servant gave Rebecca jewels
of gold, but of very little value: and to show us how far Rebecca was
(notwithstanding she were a maiden of a very great and noble house, although
after the manner of those times kings were sheepheards, as we say in common
proverb) from being nicely and daintily brought up, it is said, that she
went to fetch water at the well with her pitcher upon her shoulder. And when
mention is made of the Daughters of that mighty and exceeding rich king David,
it is said only that they were clad with garments of diverse colors 2. Sam.
13.18. it may be like unto the Almaine Maidens in these days. And what
bravery think we was there in either gold or silver in Salomons time, when men
made no more reckoning thereof, because of the plenty of it, then they did of
lead or of stone, 2. Chron. 9.27. Thirdly and lastly as the Lord has lifted
up kings and other lords in authority, so no doubt but he would have persons
and estates made the more honorable by some such marks, as we see it in the
description of the magnificencie of Solomon. Which thing notwithstanding
proves not an acception of persons with God.

4 On the contrary we must call them, as they are indeed, fantastical men, who
would have all the world appareled after one manner and fashion, as also those
who would bound and limit the use of such external things by necessity alone,
as if it were not apparent and notorious that God himself has bestowed upon
men a thousand things more then necessity requires. But hereby to think to
excuse the intolerable daintiness and pomp of small and great, were nothing
else but vilanouslie to abuse the word of God, to cloak and cover that which
no man can sufficiently cry out upon and condemn. And indeed we see what
vengeance God has taken upon the Daughters of Sion for this cause, as is
particularly described, Esai. 3.16. And thus you see what we are to think of
gold and silver and other things of like nature. But who can excuse this
broydered and frizled hair, this painting and sliking of faces, with other
such filth? And therefore we need not marvel that the Apostles made the like
reckoning of gold and silver and broydered hair, sorting them al in one
rank. For in truth albeit the distinction which I have set down have his
place, notwithstanding it is a marvelous hard thing to keep a measure. In
so much that even among them, for whom these things are not unlawful, they are
wiser which use them little, and they are most wise of all, who to cause others
of meaner quality to be ashamed to use them, and to give an example unto
others to fly such vaninities, abstain from the use of them altogether: making
themselves by this means more honorable in their persons and states, then
those who witness to the woorld by that which is without them, what is within
them.

5 But above al, is not this a more then vile shame (although we see not these
things in such excess as to see upon the head these golden cauls and such
other superfluities, which our poverty rather keeps us from, then any fear of
God) that a man must notwithstanding in this place not only necessarily make
such warnings, but which is worse, make them and make the^ again, and all in
vain. For what are we, I pray you, whether we respect them of this place, or
whether we consider of them who are come from other places and countries? It is
true the Lord has honored this estate and commonweal with a sovereign
liberty of jurisdiction. But are we therefore a kingdom, or a duchy, or a
county, or any great thing above others? Naie on the contrary side, is not
that verified of us which Saint Paul said of those boasters of Corinth, 1. Cor.
1.26. My brethren ye set your vocation, ye are not many wise according unto
the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many noble. And as for us that have been
received into this city, and who in steed of saying that we are come hither to
make a pure profession of the Gospel, bring hither the filthy fashions and
manners of the places whence we came, what are we according unto the world?
Poor banished men, or at the least fugitives, and when al is said, a small
handful of poor people. And yet we cannot hold our selves in our own skins;
our admonitions prevail nothing; the laws are openly violated and broken, as
every one sees save they who ought to be the first that should see and foresee
it to remedy it. Dearth and famine, plague and pestilence, which are at our
gates, war with his sword unsheathed, the misery and extremity whereunto so
many Churches are brought, all these things which should cause us to mourn
in sackcloth and ashes, seem to whet and sharpen our appetites and lusts to
do much the worse. If there be any villainous and outrageous fashion in all
France, this filth must be brought hither by and by to poison and infect this
place, as these monstrous ruffes, these great villainous long bellies, these
more then villainous fashions of women's gowns, the only name whereof shows
in what detestation they ought to be had of all honest women. And what shall I
say of these vile and stinking Androgynes, that is to say, these men-weomen
with their curled locks, their crisped and frizeled hair? Fie, fie, and fie
again upon these stinking and filthy fashions, which savor of nothing less
then of true christianity. It may please the Lord our god to take an order for
it, seeing men make no account or reckoning of it: and truly I am certainly
assured he will.

6 To return unto our text: mention being made here of the church as of a
queen in the most noblest and highest estate a man can imagine, there is speech
of her costly and rich borders and chains, as she is in like manner painted
out unto us, Psalm. 45.10.14. and 15. and at large in Ezechiel the 16. being
meant hereby inward and spirituaall gifts whereof S. Peter and Saint Paul in
the places which I have alleged, do speak. And what are these gifts? to say
it al in a word, it is the bridegroom himself, and all that he has. Now he
has in himself the holy spirit and all the graces of him, not only because he
is God coeternall and coessentiall with the father and the holy Ghost, but also
in as much as he is man he received them not in part, 1. Cor. 12.8. but without
number or measure, Ioh. 3.34. The divinity therefore of Christ is as it were
the very wellspring of all grace, Iam. 1.17. And the humanity of Jesus Christ
is as it were the basin or vessel receiving all this abundance of grace
powered into it, Ioh. 1.14. Which thing was represented by the descending of the
Dove at his Baptism, Ioh. 1.32. as is declared, Esai. 11.2. And this not to
the end that this should stay in his only person, but to the end that so
much as it pleases him to bestow upon us for his glory might run down upon
us, baptising and bedewing us therewith within, as the same is represented unto
us by outward baptism, Ioh. 1.33. For which cause the Angels announcing his
birth unto the sheepheardes said not only A child is borne, but a child is
borne unto you, Luke 2.11. Now these gifts are not al of one sort and quality.
For some of them are generally and universally bestowed on every christian,
which are reduced unto four points by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.30. when he
says that Jesus Christ is made unto us of the father, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. For all our knowledge touching
the things we believe and our salvation, all our righteousness and integrity by
virtue whereof we presume to call upon God, and to come before his throne in
all holy boldness, all our change and newnes of life also, whereby we begin to
displease our selves in doing of evil, and to take pleasure in well doing, and
consequently this whole deliverance of ours, the perfect accomplishment
whereof we wait for, proceed al from him, in whom are resiant all the treasures
of knowledge and understanding, Col. 2, 3. in whom there is no sin, 2. Cor.
5.21. who has borne our sins upon the Cross, 1. Pet. 2.24. by whose
obedience we are declared righteous, Romans 5.19. who creates in us both to will
and to do. Phil. 2.13. in a word he who alone is our Jesus, that is to say,
Savior and Redeemer, Mat. 1.21. and no other whatsoever, Act. 4.12. Besides
these gifts, without the which no man can be of the church* there are an
infinite number of other special graces which God bestows on such as are his*
in such sort and so far as pleases him, according unto the diverse vocations in
which he will be served by them, whereof he is liberal sometimes toward them,
who are never a whit the better by them, as we it see in Absalon, Achitophel,
Saul, Judas and others of whom it is spoken, Matthew. 17.22. and therefore it is
unto the former gifts we must keep our selves. These are the jewels of
inestimable value, which the spouse has received of the liberality of her
Bridegroom. For what have we which we have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7. and
together with him al things are given us, Romans 8.32. And these are the saphirs,
and emerauds, and other precious stones and pearls with which that city is
builded, Esaias 54.11. Apoc. 21.18. which was figured under the Law by the
stones which were called Vrim and Thumimm, that is to say glittering in
perfection in the brestplate of the high priest, Exodus 28.17*

7 But alas are we this Church composed wholly of children of the light, and as
it were shining lamps in the woorld, Phil. 2.15. Certainly on the Lords part
we may say, we I say: that he has set up and lighted in the midst of us
this flaming light of his most pure and sincere truth, Psalm. 19.8. and 119.104.
in such sort that the whole woorlde has an eye upon us. But whereto serves
the Sun to such as be blind? What avails it to speak to such as are and will
be deaf? To what purpose is the true light arisen and come unto them, who
have loved darkness better then light? Ioh. 3.19. Alas then what shall I say
hereupon, but that we are of al other the most wicked and unthankful in the
whole world if we think not better on our selves? For what work of the
flesh reigns in the woorlde, wherewith we are not yet infected? So many
warninges as have been made us by the pure word of God, so many good Laws
and orders which the Lord has established in this place against fornicatours
and adulterers, so many executions of men and weomen for this vice, have they
bin able to restrain and bridle our filthy lusts in this place? Alas no. Nay
contrariwise there are too many who endeavor, if not utterly at once to take
away, yet by little and little to destroy and abolish these good laws. Ye
covetous mizers, ye extortioners, ye usurers, ye crafty espiers of the
necessity of your poor brethren, to make your gain of their pain, your
commodity of their calamity, worse then thieves and robbers, forgers of
artificial famines and dearths, deuourers of men's quick and live flesh, how
long will you presume to appear in the church of God as if you were of it? Ye
tavern haunters, ye dronkardes and gluttons, will you never have other god
then your belly? Ye engrossers and regraters, ye sellers with false waights
and with false measures, adorers of your God Man mon, and worse then Idolaters,
will ye never learn to content your selves with honest and lawful gain? Ye
sowers of mutinies, ye quarellers and wrong doers, ye envious and deadly
malicious, ye impleaders and action-threatners, how long shall the Lord
suffer you in his house, in which dwells nothing but peace and charity? Ye
bellows of hellfire which live by setting others a pleading, and lengthen the
parchment as much as you may, will you always profane and defile this holy and
sacred name of Justice? Ye dissolute, ye idle and do-nothings, coming to
sermon for a show and countenance only, or to sleep when you are there, when
will you learn why you came into the world before you go out of it? Ye
gamesters and wasters both of your own and others, will you forget the sermon
which some of your companions made on the scaffold not long ago? Briefly ye
men will you always be men? children of that first Adam? Flesh of flesh?
Insteede of being regenerate of the second Adam author of everlasting life?
What shall I say more? God give you grace and mercy, God give you grace to cast
far from you these filthy rags, to be adorned with his ieweles and chains
received of him and before his face.

8 But let us note also that albeit as we shall afterward see there be no part
in this spouse from the head unto the feet which is not of a singular beauty,
notwithstanding the spouse speaks expressly in this place of the cheeks and
of the neck, that is of the most sightly and apparent part in every person, and
which indeed might grace and beautify the ilfauorednes of the rest. And this is
to teach us this lesson, that albeit the graces which are here spoken off have
their seat in the bottom of the heart, according unto the saying of the
Apostle, Coloss. 3.16. and of the Lord himself, Ioh. 14.17. As it is also
expressly said of this spouse, Psalm. 45.13. Yet notwithstanding as the visage
and the face is naturally as it were the looking-glass of the heart: so must
the soul of a Christian testify his simplicity and chastity within, and
whatsoever God has set in his heart; that he show himself to be such as he is
(reformed I m^ane to the Image of God) by his look, by his countenance, by
his port, briefly that nothing be seen or show it self in a Christian which
edifieth not his neighbor, and which may hold in an amase and reprove the
infidel and unbelieving which looks on him: whereas in men of our age and
time nothing but vanity and all other kind of wickedness and dishonestie
shows it self from the crown of the head unto the sole of the feet.

6 But what? Can the Bridegroom bestow more on the spouse then himself and
all that he has? no truly. But we are not able to receive all at once which
he will give us; and if we received al at one time, we would not know from
whence it comes, nor esteem so much of it as it is worth. It is given us to
know him, but yet but in part so long as we are here below, 1. Cor. 13.12. It
is given us to believe. Ephesians. 2.8. But distrust does still fight against faith,
Mar. 9.94. It is given us to will and to do. But the Apostle himself cries
out, The good which I would do that do I not, and the evil which I would not
do that do I. Romans 7.19. We may not therefore content our selves with that we
have already received, much less be proud thereof, but forgetting that which
is past and behind us, we must always endeavor and draw on farther, Phil.
3.13. yea we must run without ceasing, increasing more and more in the
knowledge of God, Col. 2.19. Such are the exhortations which are made us
thorough out the Scripture, which would be vain and of no effect, if this
promise were not made us, namely that although the Lord has already bound us
unto him so many ways, he promises notwithstanding to give us still more
gifts, and to water and increase the former every day, being rich and
abounding with that treasure which can never be sounded and drawn dry. Behold
what is promised unto all true believers. But this being referred unto the body
of the whole Church, considered as it was under the pedagogy and schooling of
the Law, this verse in which he promises other goodlier and richer jewels,
contains the promise of him whom the fathers saw not but a far off, and
through the shadows of the law, Gal. 3.24. Col. 2.17. and Heb. 11.13. For
which reason Simeon calls him the light of the Gentiles and the glory of
Israel, Luke 2.32. This is therefore in sum the promise of that more excellent
covenant promised unto the fathers, and ratified by the son himself in
person, Heb. 1.2. and. 8.6. Whereby we see that the condition of the Christian
Church, has a special advantage and privilege above that of the fathers,
before the coming of the Lord: albeit that both they and we do still wait for
the full consummation of this marriage.

10 But seeing there is but one only Bridegroom, wherefore faith he we will
make thee in the plural number? A man might answer that kings and great
princes are wont to speak thus. But all being well considered, we shall find
the secret mystery of the three persons in one sole divinity, and the actions
of them distinguished without any either multiplication or division of
essence, in the work of our salvation, and all the graces which serve thereunto,
to be here laid open and discovered. So the^ as the father has given us his
son, so the son also taking on him our flesh has given himself, and the
holy Ghost also does give him us by applying him unto us by the gift of the
enlightening of faith. So also it is the father, who sends woork-men into his
harvest, Matthew. 9.38. It is the son which faith, As the father sent me, so I
send you, Ioh. 20.21. and who gives to his Church Pastors and Doctors, Ephesians.
4.11. It is also the holy Ghost which establishes and directs them, Act.
13.2. and 20.28. Who then gives us these graces and increases them? The
father, having elected and called us in his well-beloved Son: the Son of
whose fullness all this is drawn, the holy Ghost leading us into this truth,
and distributing his gifts to whom and how he will, 1. Corint. 12.11.
Whereunto also the form of our Baptism leads us, in which we are baptized
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, every one of them
being this one God, who give us grace thoroughlie to understand and meditate
this most dear and precious doctrine to his honor and glory, and to our own
salvation, as we will therefore beseech him saying.

Almighty God etc.
THE FOVRTEENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 12.13. and 14.
verses.
12 The King being sat at his round table, my Spikenard gives his smell.

13 My well-beloved is unto me as a bundle of Myrrh, he is lodged in my bosom.

14 My well-beloved is like a cluster of Copher in the vineyards of Engaddy.


1 The happy estate of the spouse reunited again unto her Bridegroom declared
by the similitude of a feast or banquet, figured by the Leuiticall sacrifices
both in the tabernacle, and after in the temple of Solomon.

2 The round table declares that this feast is referred unto the Bridegroomes
coming in person with whom the people of all the round woorld shall sit
down, although the full celebration of this banquet be reserved unto the later
day.

3 In what place of the woorld this banquet is kept.

4 With what meat it is furnished, by whom, and how.

5 The excellency of the Evangelical banquet above the Leuiticall.

6 Whence the allegory of the odor of the spouses spike-nard is taken.

7 It is not enough to enter into the banquet or to sit down, but we must cause
our odor to smell thereat.

8 Why there is no mention made here of eating or drinking in this banquet.

9 What the odor or smell of this spike-nard is.

10 Application of this allegory to the present time.

11 Satan's assaulting us in this point on the left hand.

12 His assaulting of us on the right hand against merit-mongers.

13 What this true spike-nard is, and his true smell.

14 The Mirrhe and the Copher of the Bridegroom makes the spike-nard of the
spouse to smell sweet.

15 Whence this blessing comes, and to whom it appertains.

WE have understood before the kind caresses and loving entertainment of the
Bridegroom at the meeting and taking again of his spouse: who now rejoicing
in her self and being withal very desirous that every one should
understand, what a benefit she has received, declares how she was invited
unto the banquet of her Bridegroom, and how she behaved her self sitting by
him, enjoying his presence with infinite contentment. This matter truly is most
excellent being well understood and practiced. For this is most certain, that
there is no joy nor pleasure in the woorld to be compared in any sort with
that repose and quiet, which every faithful soul feels, and by consequent,
the whole Church, sauouring and smelling the sweetes of the Lord who comfort
her within: which thing is painted out unto us in a great part of the Psalms,
and represented especially in that most excellent song of rejoicing of the
virgin Mary. And this is it which is usually declared to us in the holy
Scripture under the similitude of a banquet, not only because frindship and
familiarity is testified by eating and drinking together, and that men are
willingly disposed unto mirth at their repast and refection: but especially in
respect of the banquets of the sacrifices which were made in the presence of
the Lord, as if himself had had a room at the uppermost end, to wit at his
altar, and there contenting himself with one part burnt on his altar, should
distribute the rest of the sacrificed host unto the priests, and to the rest
of them which brought the offering, whereof we have a goodly description in the
history of Samuels mother, 1. Sa. 1.4. al of it representing this heavenly
repast and true nourishment of our souls, as Jesus Christ handles this matter
at large, Ioh 6. and the Prophets in many places speaking of spiritual
blessings make mention of wine, of milk, of honey, of living water, which
Christ followed and expounded speaking with the Samaritane woman, Ioh. 4.14.
But besides all this Solomon has in this place a special regard, to the
restablishment or rather beutifieng of the service of God, when in steed of
the tabernacle, after so many changes and interruptions which happened after the
death of Joshua, and after under Saul, and during David's wars, that goodly
temple should at the length be built, and the whole Ecclesiastical ministry
erected and set up with an admirable magnificencie, according unto the
ordinance of the Lord declared by the Prophets of that time.

2 Neither may we lightly pass over the word which Solomon uses, which we
have translated, to be as it were at a round table, according as the custom
of the ancient fathers was. For this kind of ba^queting at a round table
seems more friendly and familiar, then if the king should have his table
apart, the upper end of the round table being known rather by the dignity of
some one person, then by any place, by reason of the roundnes: besides that
there is great likelyhoode that Solomon by a Prophetical spirit (as all the
legal service and ceremonies had) had respect unto Jesus Christ, To whom the
nations of the four quarters of the woorld were promised, as it is foretold,
Psalm. 2.8. Math. 8.11. This is therefore the banquet whereof the spouse
hearespeaketh, glorying that she was brought in thereunto, And placed by her
Bridegroomes side, Psalm. 45.10. What was then all that costly furniture and
provision of the temple how rich and sumpteous so ever it were* in respect of
the real and visible manifestation of this Bridegroom? In regard of the
accomplishment and consummation of all that which was figured by the Leuiticall
Priesthood? In comparison of the full declaration of the gospel which is
called The power of God unto salvation unto all them which believe, be he
Jew or Grecian* Romans 1.16. It is then the Christian Church, that is to say,
the Church considered since the coming of Christ, which can truly say that
she has been brought in unto this goodly banquet of the bridegroom, as
himself declares it, Matthew. 22. and Luke the 14.16. which place may serve in
steed of a commentary for the clearer opening of this place. But we must
still understand that this banquet is but a preparatiue unto that which we
look for, and which is prepared for us in heaven, of which mention is made
Matthew. 7.22. and 25.1. At which banquet we are not yet sat, but by hope, Ephesians.
2.6.

3 Now then this banquet whereof mention is here made is kept in earth. And
know you where? whersoeuer, says the Lord, there shall be two or three gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. Without
seeking therefore of the place any farther, I say that it is here, it is here I
say in this place that this banquet is kept, here is this holy table set,
here the Bridegroom entertaineth his spouse, in the presence of all his
Angels, as also in all other places and assemblies of the whole world, where
his truth is purely preached, and his name, as it ought to be, called upon.

4 And with what messes of meat are we here served? I dare tell you boldly, with
him himself, who is the true bread of life which descended from heaven, and
that true flesh, and that true blood whence we must draw everlasting life,
Ioh. 6.50. a meat which is not eaten with bodily teeth, but with the mouth of
faith: a meat not swallowed down so to be corrupted, but received to make us
incorruptible: a meat provided once for all, and sacrificed on the cross and
not by the hands or ministry of men, though we be dispensers of the holy
mysteries and stewards as it were in this banquet: a meat served not in dishes
of gold or silver, but in vessels spiritually appointed to this effect, namely
first in the preaching of the word of god, which for this cause is often called
by the name it self of spiritual food, not that it is so to speak properly,
but because the true food Jesus christ is therein comprised and contained:
secondly in the administration of the 2. sacraments, namely of Baptism called
for the same cause as above the washing of new birth, and of the holy Supper,
in which by the same form of speech, the name of the body of Jesus Christ is
sacramentally given unto the bread, and the name of blood unto the wine.

5 To understand therefore the better the excellency of the Evangelical
banquet, above the Leuitical, I mean of the banquet under the gospel above
the banquet under the law (whereunto this place is first of all referred) we
may say that albeit the fathers, as they had one and the same faith with us, so
consequently they did eat of the same meat, and drunk of the same drink with
us, to wit of Jesus Christ, without whom there is no life eternal, 1. Cor.
10.3. Yet notwithstanding considering the manner of banqueting, we may say
that in the Leuiticall banquet the spouse sat not so near her bridegroom:
but in the Euangelical banquet the Bridegroom looks nearer on his spouse,
and the spouse on her Bridegroom, insinuating themselves one in the other
spiritually, that is to say, in a more power-full efficacy, by the most mighty
working of the holy spirit and unto a spiritual end, Gal. 2.2. The spouse
being more nearer bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh, a secret truly most
great and wonderful, Ephesians. 5.30. but most true, as the effect does afterward
declare it in all them who are fed therewith.

6 But let us note that the spouse adds, that being placed so near the
Bridegroom in this banquet, her spike-narde gave his smell. The herb which we
call spike-nard was had in singular recommendation in former time among the
people of the east in the matter of their perfumes and ointmentes which
specially they used in their banquets, as is expressly to be seen in the history
of the gospel, Luke 7.37. Ioh. 12.3. Where truly and visibly the church in the
person of the Apostles and of Marie banqueted with her Bridegroom and perfumed
or anointed him in such sort, that it might some way seem that Solomon spoke
in this place thereof by way of Prophecy.

7 But this being more subtle the^ sure, we must understand this after an other
sort to make our profit thereby. Let us therefore learn hence, that it is not
enough to be called to this banquet, but we must enter in and sit down,
otherwise this inuiting serves not but to our condemnation: as alas at this
day more the^ ever, we see me^ so bewitched with the cares and vanities of this
world, that there are very few which will think on this ba^quet, though they be
bidden and invited every day. As neither shall it be for them, but it shall fare
with them as it is spoken, Mat. 22.7, 8. Again it suffices not to enter in and
sit down, but our perfume also must give his smell.

8 Yea but will some man say, we should rather eat and drink to be
satisfied; and here is no mention of meat or drink. Let us therefore note
that in this banquet there is no speech of refreshing and filling the belly
which requires meat and drink, but the question is here of spiritual life:
and therefore mention is of the odor and smell of the spike-nard of the spouse,
of Mirrhe and clusters of Copher, namely because there is no sensible or
material thing more fit or proper to signify unto us a spiritual thing, then
the smell of sweet things, which is received into the brain after so subtle a
manner as nothing more. And this exposition is neither far set or less
certain: for this is the very style of the Scripture as we will anon declare.
But by this reckoning the spouse should seem rather to have given the
Bridegroom somewhat then to have received ought of him, obiecting her smell of
spike-nard. The answer is that it is clean contrary: for the spouse having
declared at the beginning that she desired to be kissed and not vaunting of
kissing of him, and demanding to be drawn of him to come unto him, with her
companions, and to enjoy the odor of his perfumes, shows sufficiently that
she confesses she brings nothing to her Bridegroom which smells sweet
unto him, but that which she has received of him to present him withal. And
yet it is not to be said, that in the ancient sacrifices we spoke of before,
there was neither bread, nor wine, nor flesh offered, or that men did not
really and corporally eat or drink, as yet at this day we are really washed
and sprinkled with water in Baptism, in the supper we do truly eat bread and
drink wine which are there made sacraments, that is dedicated and Consecrated
unto an holy and sacred use. But we must understand that in the ancient
sacrifices, that which appeased Gods wrath was not the flesh and the blood of
goats and bulls which men brent. Heb. 10.4. but he which was sacramentallie
represented by the beast which was sacrificed I mean Jesus Christ, who should
in his time deliver up himself for us in oblation and sacrifice unto God his
father, in an odor of a sweet smell, and that which the faithful sacrificer
received unto salvation was not that which he ate with the teeth of his mouth,
wherewith the body was nourished, but the remission of his sins by the
blood of him who blotteth them out, Romans 3.24. and 1. Pet. 1.19. as the lord
also looked not properly unto the beast which was sacrificed, or unto other
spiritual oblations, but to the right intent and affection of the heart of the
sacrificer, as it is said, Psalm. 50.8. and 14. and 51. and. 19. which is the
spike-nard whereof the spouse here speaks. Likewise in the sacraments of
the christian Church the corporal and visible water is not that which washes
our consciences: but does indeed signify and represent unto our outward
senses that which washes away our sins and which sanctifies us being
apprehended and received by faith, I mean the spiritual and invisible
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 1.2. and 3.21. So likewise in
the Supper of the lord, that which we see, touch, eat, and drink, is not that
which feeds and nourishes us unto eternal life, but that verily which is
sacramentallie represented unto our spirit and unto our faith by the bread and
wine, namely the body which was delivered for us, and the blood which was
shed for us: briefly Jesus christ whole and entire, true God and true man, from
whom being spiritually applied unto our soul by the virtue of the holy
Ghost, by means of our faith, we draw remission of our sins, increase of our
sanctification; and finally the juice of eternal life, both for our soul and
also for our body. And therefore when in the old ^estament the appeasing of
the wrath of God is attributed unto the sacrifices, as also in the writings of
the Apostles, these words of washing, and of communicating of the body and of
the blood of the Lord, and of putting on of Jesus Christ are attributed and
given unto the visible and corporal signs* this is not to yield unto the
signs that which is incommunicably proper and belonging unto the thing
signified (for we know that water washes not the soul, and that the soul
neither eats nor drinks) but this is to show the difference between these
things considered in the common usage of this life, and the self same things
considered as sacraments, that is to say, as visible signs of that which the
Lord there gives us, and which he works inuisibly in our soul: if the
fault be not in our selves, that is to say, if in steed of receiving by faith
we reject them not by our incredulity.

9 What is then the spike-nard whereof the spouse speaks in this place, and
the smell whereof is most liking and acceptable unto the Bridegroom? It is
first an humble and contrite heart, Psalm. 51.17. It is faith and an holy
assurance in the grace and mercy of God by Jesus Christ alone, without which
it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. It is true charity which we use
toward our neighbors, Phil. 4.18. It is the sacrifice of giving of thanks,
Col. 3.16. Genesis 8.21. In a word, it is truly the whole life of a christian,
in which we seek according unto the measure of the spirit to please him in
all things, Col. 1.10. consecrating unto him both our bodies and minds in all
our actions, Romans 12.1. and as a sweet smelling savor unto the Lord, every
one following his vocation, 2. Cor. 2.15. Lo this is, this is the odor and
perfume which we must bring unto this banquet, which is also signified by the
marriage garment, Mat. 22.11. on pain of being cast, hands and feet bound,
into vtward darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

10 These things being well considered, what may I say or hope for of the^ who
appear at this holy banquet at the sound of the bell, and in the mean time
come and depart, alas not with this spike-nard, but contrariwise with all manner
of stinkingnesse and infection, who are the cause that in steed that the world
should be drawn to glorify God, seeing the fruits of his spirit in them as
they be described by the Apostle, Gal. 5.22. men become stinking before God
and man, being the cause that his holy name which is called upon of us is
blasphemed among the unbelieving, Romans 2.24. I pray you who would not be put
out of all patience, that having called any one unto his table, the person so
invited should present himself before him with some vile sluttish filthiness in
a dish, or in his hands? And what other thing do they before God, who in steed
of a contrite and humble heart crying with David, Create in me a new heart,
Psalm. 51.10. and with the poor Publicane, Luke 18.10. God be appeased toward
me poor sinner, bring him an heart full of adultery, fornication, pride, an
heart committing Idolatry with the goods of this world, empoisoning the
beholders with wanton looks, and all manner of wicked examples, full of
enmity, debate, wrath, anger, despite, quarelling, division and partiality, of
envy, drunkenness, and gluttony, and other infamous and shameful filthiness,
which is yet too too rife in the midst of them, for whom god prepares this
banquet? Now therefore in the name of God, we say unto you, we cry unto you,
we pray you, we exhort you, be ye reconciled unto God, amend your lives,
mortify your members upon the earth, think not to deceive God, bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance, for the axe is already laid unto the root of
the tree, and every dry and rotten tree shall be hewed down and cast into the
fire.

11 But let us take heed of Satan, my brethren, as well on the right hand as on
the left, being armed on the one side and on the other, 2. Cor. 6.7. for the
breach is made on both sides: and if it be not ramperd up, we cannot but be
surprised and destroyed. Being assaulted on the left hand, by our natural
lusts and concupiscences, that if we give ground, the fire can no sooner take
the powder of the Canon, but al will down without resistance. For as the water
goes naturally downward without any driving, so fares it with us, by reason
of our corruption, in such sort that the most regenerat can hardly resist the
least assaults. This thing requires no proof. For those who are best disposed
do know by every days experience, that they need a wrench and pully to draw
them to think well, much more to do well. Thus you see the mighty assault of
Satan which we must withstand, by which he labors to induce us not to care
for being garnished and provided of the spikenard, as if we had the mercy of
God in our sleeue, and as if everlasting life were prepared for mockers and
heart hardened miscreants who say, Let us sin that mercy may abound, Romans 6.1.
under pretense of the great mercy and favor which God has showed unto whom it
pleased him.

12 The other assault is no less easy unto our adversary ayding himself
with our own disposition, by which we are naturally given to an opinion and
ouer-weening of ourselves, especially when it is made against them who have
received some special graces of God, either within or without his church. So
we see the best wits to come to nothing, or to become the most hurtful of
all others, as al histories as well sacred as profane, contain most heavy
examples thereof, and we yet see it come to pass in our time. But above all the
rest, from whence is proceeded this most false, most wicked, and most devilish
doctrine of merits and satisfactions, but from this cursed opinion, that our
nature, such as it is at this day, is something worth before god? Hence it is
the Pelagians are come, setting on foot again the sect of the Pharisees,
called of Saint Paul, not without great cause, enemies of the Cross of Jesus
Christ, nothing being more contrary unto the grace of God, then the opinion of
being able to do any thing which by the valewe thereof meriteth and deserves
any thing at Gods hands. A thing so absurd, as nothing more. For besides that
our conscience argues and reproves the holiest and best, that is to say, the
least wickedst works we do of negligence, ignorance and great defect, witness
that great and holy personage Saint Paul, who cries with a loud and shrill
voice saying, Alas the good which I would do, I do not: but that evil which
I would not do, that do I, what madness is it to think (were we as holy as
the Angels themselves) that any thing can part from us which of his own valewe
can merit that God love us, and do somewhat for us? Now then this opinon of
the heretics called Pelagians, denying original corruption in man since the
fall of Adam being most egerly condemned, Satan has not left for all that or
quitted his assault, but is only turned a toe-side, giving us to understand
that indeed our natural light is darkened, and our will inclined to falsehood
and wickedness, and that therefore our soul has need of grace, first to aid
our weakness, and correct our defect, and consequently which may make a supply
to our good works, that they be not too nearly examined and sifted, the Lord
contenting himself, and taking in payment of recompense and satisfaction, that
which we present him of our endeavors, according as his grace has prevented
and accompanied us. Behold a goodly fair cloak of cosinage. For if this be
true, what shall become of Jesus Christ, he shall give us only the mean to
become saviors of our selves, if not in whole, yet in part, his bloodshed
mingled with our works shall make them auailable unto salvation, being
himself alone no more sufficient, then our works by themselves without him.
And which worse is, this point being once won and gained by satan; then began
he to show his horns openly. For thereupon men began to forge meritorious
works at their pleasure, then they began to yield so much to the merits of them
whom they pleased to thrust and crowd into paradise, and afterward into their
Letany, that yet to this day the shop is full fraught with it for any man that
has a penny and will buy any merits. Finally to leave nothing to Jesus christ
but a phantasme and shadow of merit and satisfaction, purgatory was devised and
set up to warrant and quit the dead from their sins, by certain merits and
deserts of the living. And what ca^ be more stinking and infectious the^ this?
And yet behold the ince^se and meritorious odor of very smoke wherewith so many
at this day do feed and please themselves. Hereu^to let us oppose this pure,
native, and sincere truth. Not unto us o Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name
be the honor and glory, Psalm. 115.1. Enter not into an account with thy
servants, for before thee no man living shall be found righteous, Psalm. 143.2.
If Abraham were justified by his works, he has whereof to boast, but not
before God, Romans 4.2. What have we then to boast of? Let the only cross
therefore of Jesus Christ be the whole and entire satisfaction for our sins,
his only sufferances our merits, his only death and victory our life.

13. In the mean time our spike-nard, I mean the virtue of the spirit of God,
working in us freely as it is freely given and continued unto us, shall give his
sweet and fragrant smell indeed. For they and no others are the children of
God which are regenerat and borne a new by the spirit of God. Romans 8.14. and we
are freed from sin by the son as well as justified, Ioh. 8.36. But there is
a great difference between these two questions. How and by whom we are made
the children of God, and whereby a man knows whether we are the children of
God or no. The first of these two questions enquireth after the cause, and the
second speaks of the effects. The only mere grace and favor of God
therefore has elected us, called us to salvation, and is the cause of our
salvation, from the beginning unto the ending. For, that faith created in us by
grace, apprehends and takes hold of Jesus Christ, and of life in him, it is
because it has pleased God so to ordain and appoint the causes, by the which
he executes his eternal counsel touching our election and salvation. But
hereby a man knows the faithful and by consequent the elect to be
glorified, that being by the free grace of God changed into newnes of life,
they depart from iniquity to follow after righteousness, according as it
pleases God to woork in them sooner or latter and in diverse measure. The
faithful therefore are those who are known by their good works, and God
crowns them both in this world and in the other. But how? Of his mere
gratuity and sole mercy, and not that there is in them any value which
meriteth, or that they are accepted for satisfaction (seeing the only oblation
of Jesus Christ once made is more then sufficient in this behalf) or for that
they are correspondent and aunswering unto the righteousness required by the
Law, and which only meriteth and deserves, according unto the tenor of the
covenant, life everlasting; agreeable to this resolution, Do all these things
and thou shall live, and cursed is he which accompl^sheth not al these things.
In sum therefore it is in Jesus Christ alone who has perfectly accomplished
and fulfilled al righteousness, that the promises of the Law are available
unto us. Farther albeit we be neither stones nor blocks in well doing,
notwithstanding seeing that to will well or to do well are not any way of our
own nature, but created in us by grace only, the good works we do are
rather his then ours, and therefore to speak properly indeed, he crowns his
works in us his unprofitable servants rather then ours, as if they proceeded
from us. In a word that he accepts of and crowns the best works of the
holiest as rightly good, and smells unto the odor of our spike-nard as
savoring him and smelling well, proceeds not of any sufficient quality of them
which they have in themselves, but of this, that of his mere mercy he
considers them not rigorously, such as they are in themselves, but regards
and esteems them in him in whom it has pleased him to elect us, and in whom
it pleases him so to look on us as to like both of us, and whatsoever is
presented him by us. For examining in rigor of the Law the greatest godliness
and charity which can be found in any of his Saints, it shall be found
that in all of this there is so much soil and filth intermingled with that
which is clean and neat, and so much bad among the good, such as it is, that
not only it is without al value to be able to move the Lord to crown us with
his glory, but contrariewise being nothing else but a polluting and defiling
of his graces, deserves nothing but condemnation if he judge of it according
unto the merit thereof.

14 And this is the cause why the spouse rests not on her own spike-nard, but
on her Bridegroom whom she compares unto two sweet plants or young trees
(for these names are not very welknown unto us) bearing a gum of most excellent
sweet odor, namely to the Myrrh, and unto that which is called Copher,
bearing a certain fruit or a flower in form of a cluster, whereof was great
abundance in the vineplattes of Engaddi, a place renowned in sacred history
by reason of his plenty and fertility. Let us therefore note in this place
first the manner of speech, which shows that the spouse and her spike-nard
are two distinct things. But the Bridegroom is himself this Myrrh and this
Copher. For touching the graces which we have and concerning the fruits of
them, which are good works, all these are qualities not borne in us nor with
us, but are come on us of the liberality of him, who creates and forms in us
both to will and to do: so that to speak properly, it is not we that smell
sweet, but the gifts and graces of God wherewith he has endued us, cause us
to smell sweet. But it is the Bridegroom which has al of himself, in as much
as he is God, and gives al unto himself, in as much as he is man. In a word it
is he that is all perfection: and that has it in him without mean or
measure: but to impart and communicate it how and to whom it pleases him, as
the fragrant flower keeps not his sweet smell to it self, but pours it
forth and causes it to be sauored and smelt of them which approach and come
near it. And this is the cause why it is said elsewhere not only that this
Bridegroom has life in him: but that he is the life it self and the
resurrection, and that he has life in himself, yea says he the spirit
takes of mine, Ioh. 16.14. as elsewhere he says, that he has power to lay
down his soul, and to take it to himself again, Ioh. 10.18.

15 And this is the reason also why he is not compared simply to one grain
but to an handful or bundell of Myrrh, nor to one grain alone of Copher, but
to a cluster of Copher, because that indeed he gives of his spirit by
measure, but he has al in himself without measure. But alas it is not upon
the woorld that he has powered this odor. For neither does this smell well unto
it, nether does it smell well unto the Bridegroom. Who is then quickened with this
odor of life? 2. Cor 2.16. It is she who has this bundel of Myrrh and
cluster of Copher in her bosom, namely they who according unto the example of
the blessed virgin Marie lay up and keep the words of eternal life, Ioh.
6.68. in their heart, Luke 2.15. Who hear this word of the Lord and keep
it, Luke 11.28. and meditate therein day and night, Psalm. 1.2. in whose hearts
this word dwells plentifully, Col. 3.16. and by consequent Jesus Christ
together with his father, Ioh. 14.23. as also the holy Ghost, Gal. 4.6. to the
end that our bodies also be his Temple, 1. Cor. 6.19. Let us therefore learn
to discern the painted show of the world from the true beuty and bounty, and
let us pray our good God it may please him to change us thoroughly, driving out
of our understanding al filthiness of falsehoode and ignorance and al
infection of our affections, in lieu whereof having perfumed us within and
without with the odor and sweet smell of his integrity and obedience, it will
please him to reform us also in all pureness and holiness, to be unto him a
sweet smelling savor by his holy grace and singular mercy. And because that
hitherto we have abused these his graces, notwithstanding his so great
patience, we will demand and crave mercy at his hands as follows.

Almighty God etc.
THE FIFTEENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the first Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 15.16. and 17.
verses.
15 My Love, behold, thou art fair, behold thou art fair, thy eyes are like
Pigions eyes.

16 My welbeeloued, beeholde, thou art goodly and pleasant, our bed is of
green leaves.

17 The beams of our houses are of Cedars, and the galeries of Cypers.


1 By the discourse at this banquet between the Bridegroom and the spouse we
may understand and gather the unspeakable joy and pleasure which the
faithful soul receives, hearing that which Jesus Christ testifies unto it.

2 The exceeding beuty of the church, and wherein it consists.

3 What is meant by the eyes of a Pigeon.

4 What conueniencie and what inequality there is between the dilection and
love of this Bridegroom toward his spouse, and that of this spouse toward
her Bridegroom.

5 This spouse finds her self no otherwise beutifull then by the beams of
her Bridegroomes beuty, contrary unto her, who pleases her self in her self.

6 This spouse neither seeks after, nor finds any repose and rest but in
the bed of her Bridegroom.

7 What this bed is which is always green, and what the pillars thereof
are, which are of perpetual continuance, opposed unto those which are of rotten
wood.

WE have hitherto as it were accompanied the Bridegroom and the spouse unto the
feast and banquet of the fiansailes, now their holy discoursing and talking
together, full of unspeakable comfort and consolation is here set down and
declared. For who is he that can comprehend either the love which the
bridegroom by inward effects testifies unto his spouse, yea to every faithful
and believing soul, or the joy and contentment, which the spouse thereby
receives, considering aright and esteeming the price and valewe of that she
receives, and the excellency of him who voutchsafeth her so great honor. Now
seeing the consideration of so great a benefit constrains such as are most
ignorant to wish and desire it, and such as are most wicked to condemn
themselves for despising and contemning of it, we must be so much the more
diligent and attentive in heedful marking of these discourses of theirs, that
so we may have our part therein.

2 The Bridegroom therefore having called this spouse, his love, or
well-beloved, testifies unto her twice together, that she is fair, that she
is fair. Let us therefore first consider the excellency of him who speaks in
this place. It is the everlasting son of God who is not deceived, to take that
for fair which is foul, being abused with the form and fashion of this
world, 1. Cor. 7 31. and who speaks fainedly or dissemblingly, Mat. 22.16.
Therefore we cannot any way doubt but that the church is truly and indeed fair
(seeing he affirms the same twice) and therefore liking and pleasing unto
God: which we gather, because that not only himself being bewty and bounty it
self, loves also that which has any trace and mark thereof, as it is said
in the story of the creation of the world, and Proverb. 8.30. but also
because he expressly gives unto this spouse the name of love, or well-beloved.
But how can this be? For, he is light, and we are darckenesse, 2. Cor. 6.14.
let us take heed of this tentation. We are indeed darckenesse by nature, and
therefore children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. but ye were so, faith the Apostle,
but now ye are washed, 1. Cor. 6.11. But let us understand this soundly and
soberly, that we please not or flatter our selves, as also that we despair
not. Seeing therefore the Bridegroom is the fairest among men, perfumed above
his companions, Psalm. 45.7. crowned with honor and glory, Heb. 9. having a
name above every name, Phil. 2.19. yea being the well-beloved son in whom the
father has been welpleased, Matthew. 3.17. (for although in the time of
Solomon, this was not accomplished in this Bridegroom according unto the
flesh, yet was it accounted to be accomplished in respect of the virtue and
efficacy of this mystery, Heb. 11.1.) how should not this spouse be fair and
more then fair, being spiritually united with him, so far, as to become
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30? This Bridegroom
therefore being made unto us of the father, our wisdom, our righteousness,
our sanctification and redemption, how should not this Queen be bewtifull and
fair, yea every faithful soul? 1. Cor. 1.30. But besides that we are in him,
and that he is the true and sovereign beauty of them who are by faith united
with him: according unto the request which he made unto God his father, Ioh.
17.21. we have this spiritual new birth, by which we are one spirit with
him, Ephesians. 4.4. and not only washed from our sins past, but also made new
creatures, to bring forth fruits of righteousness according unto the measure
of his grace. The spouse therefore is altogether fair in him, and by him is
adorned and bewtified in herself from day to day. And therefore let us advise
our selves to think thoroughly and in good earnest of his grace, making it
available and profitable unto us in detesting the filth and pollution of this
world, to be altogether dedicated and consecrated unto him, who calls us out
of such filthy and foul darcknesse, and guides us more and more into this
most clear and admirable light, 1. Pet. 2.9. And if no man can like to be
smutted and blatched in his face, let us learn much more to detest the spots
and blots of the soul. And if men do so greatly esteem the favor of kings and
princes, let us much more esteem of the love of this great son of God, who
calls us his well-beloved, and who has loved us so far as to bestow on us
the proper glory of his kingdom, Math. 25.34. Luke 22.29. Romans 8.17.

3 It follows which the Bridegroom says, namely That the eyes of his spouse
are like Pigions eyes. It is not without exceeding great reason that the
Bridegroom marking forth unto us the beutie of his spouse speaks specially
of her eyes. For as the face and countenance of a man is the part whereby he
is best known and judged of, in such sort that a fair face covers all the
imperfections of the rest of the body, and contrariwise nothing seems fair
if the face be foul and ill favored: so there is no part of the face more
spartling and enticing then the eye; and especially in matter of love the eyes
are the ordinary windows by which this affection enters unto the bottom of
the heart whether it be chaste, (example whereof is that which happened unto Jacob
touching Rachel) or whether it be unchaste, as it happened unto David, 2. Sam.
11.2. and as Jesus Christ thereof speaks, Mat. 5.28. but we must understand
all this soundly. We know that the Pigion among al other birds is gentle and
fearful, which appears specially in his eyes: in such sort that to show us
the gentleness and mildness of our Lord Jesus Christ the holy Ghost
descended on him in the form of a Dove, Mat. 3.16. To show therefore the
correspondencie and aunswerablenesse which is between this Bridegroom and his
spouse, as she which is guided by the same spirit, Romans 8.14. he sends us
unto the simplicity of the Dove, Matthew. 10.16. which is opposed unto this
doubling, dissembling and corrupt nature of ours until the holy Ghost make us
true Israelites, Ioh. 1.47. as also the description of a true faithful man
imports, Psa. 15. To this virtue also is manifestly opposed the pride which
appears in the eyes of them, who are hauty and high-minded, as it is said by
David, Psalm. 101.5. and 131.1. yea directly opposed unto christian meekness,
which teaches us to contain our selves within the limits of our vocation, 1.
Cor. 7.20. that we desire to know no more then we ought to know. Romans 12.3. to
be lowly and meek in heart according unto the example of the Bridegroom
himself, Mat 11.29. compared not without cause unto a Lamb, Esaias. 53.7. We
know also that an unclean heart is shown and betrayed by flyring and wanton
eyes, whereof mention is made, 1. Ioh. 2.16. and 2. Pet. 2.14. envy also
appears in a thwart look, Mat. 20.15. vices utterly repugnant unto pureness,
modesty, meeknes, and love, virtues required in all Christians, which thing is
observed in these kind of birds, by those who have written of the nature of
beasts. And therefore let every one here accuse himself, considering how far
such are from having Pigions eyes, who are given to craft and cosinage, to
pride and contempt of God and men, adulterers, dissolute in behavior, apparel
and countenance, both men and weomen, envious, quarelsome, devouring one
another in pleas and actions. And where is this filthiness found? Eue^ in the
midst of us who call our selves the reformed Church. Alas on what title, if a
man look upon the life of a great part among us, which doubtless the Lord will
do and not respect our false and vain show and appearance?

4 But let us consequently hearken unto the answer of the spouse. My
well-beloved, says she. Behold, it seems here is a great familiarity used
toward so great a Lord of heaven and of earth. It is true. But the mouth must
speak of the abundance of the heart. I believed, says David, and therefore I
have spoken, Psalm. 116.10. This love therefore is mutual and reciprocal: and
seeing that such speech cannot proceed but from faith, 1. Cor. 12.3. it cannot
be but acceptable unto God, who takes pleasure to be loved and honored of
his. But notwithstanding there is great difference between the love of the
Bridegroom toward his spouse, and that of the spouse toward the Bridegroom.
The one is of mere gratuity, having no other fountain but the infinite goodness
and compassion of God, so far to love this poor and miserable creature, Ioh.
3.16. and Romans 5.8. The other is upon an infinite obligation, not only of the
creature toward the creator, but which is more, of her which was so dearly
raunsomed from sin, death, and hell, toward her most bountiful and liberal
Savior. The one goes before and presents it self first, the other
follows. The first proceeding from himself engenders the other in us of
mere grace. For our well-doing reaches not unto god, Psalm. 16.2. to whom
nothing can be added, and from whom nothing can be taken. But all the good and
profit which can proceed from the love that a faithful soul bears unto his
Savior, returns to it self, because it pleases God to honor them who
honor him, Genesis 22.26. 1. Sam. 2.30. Psalm. 91.14. And who will not cry out with
the Prophet, saying; What is man that thou vouchsafest to know him, and the
sons of men that thou will have care of them? Psalm. 8.5. and. 144.3. And
again, What shall I render unto the lord? Al his benefits surmount mine
understanding, I will take the cup of acknowledgement of saluations, and I will
praise his name, Psalm. 116.12.

5 The spouse adds, Behold thou art goodly and pleasant. A most true speech.
For what is there in respect of this great savior so goodly or so pleasant? Of
whom the Prophet speaking (who notwithstanding saw him not but a far off,
Heb. 11.13. and through the shadows of the Law) I shall says he, be satisfied
when thy glory shall appear, Psalm. 17.15. But besides this, we must note that
she which speaks here, is she only, who knowing what this beuty is,
albeit her self were truly fair, and heard her beauty commended by her
Bridegroom, staieth not her self notwithstanding thereon, but seems she
would say, that as for her self, all her beauty is nothing unto her, but that
it is her Bridegroom who is indeed goodly and worthy to be looked on, as also
hereon it is that she altogether rests her self. The poor Paynims and not
our wise Solomon only, Prou. 27.2. could tell well enough how to blame and
dislike of them, who gaze on their own feathers, and praise themselves. And
how may we call the assembly of them, the spouse of the Lord, that is to say,
the true Church, who allege their virtues and merits, though they had an
hundred times more then they attribute unto themselves? This say they,
thinking thus to excuse the matter, proceeds not only from our selves, but
from grace also, with the which if we were not prevented and accompanied, we
could merit nothing at all. As much said the proud Pharisee, Luke 8.11. as if
that grace were therefore given us to save our selves by the value of works
mingled with the merit of Jesus Christ. To let pass the other error of theirs
altogether inexcuseable, that they reckon their most manifest and notorious
superstitions for merits also. On the contrariside what is the language of the
true church of the Lord? Not unto us o lord, not unto us, but unto thy name
give the glory for thy truth and bounties sake, Psalm. 115.1. What am I, said
David that great servant of god, and what is my fathers house, that thou
bring me so far? 2. Sam. 7.18. And what says the Apostle of Abraham the
father of the believing? Truly, says he, if Abraham were justified by works,
he has whereof to boast, but not before God, Rom 4.2. And the children of God
what answer do they return the Lord giving them testimony of their good
life in the later day? lord, when saw we thee hungry and thirsty etc? Mat.
25.37. Let us therefore apply our selves unto the study of good works, which
are the beutie given unto the Church of God, and know we that God will begin
them in us, as it is he who does them in us, bestowing on us freely both the
willing and the doing, Phil. 2.13. but by his only grace, freely bestowed in
him in whom alone he accepts of us, Ephesians. 1.6. and not for any value or
merit of them. For not only we have nothing but of free gift, 1. Cor 4.7. but
also when we have done al, we shall be nothing but unprofitable servants to
that master who has nothing to do neither with us nor with our woorks, Luke
17.10. as also the Apostle speaking of those who are most righteous says, that
everlasting life is the gift of God by Jesus Christ, Romans 7.23.

6 Finally the spouse says: Our bed is green, the beams of our houses are of
Cedar, and our galleries of Cypers. As touching the bed, this may be mea^t not
of a couch to sleep on, but of the manner they used of old in taking their
repast, not sitting but half lying on cushins, as the proper signification of
the word imports which the spouse above used, Verse. 12. This may be also
very well referred unto that which is said of the greenes, namely, as if it
were made of green grass. Notwithstanding there is nothing lets why it may
not be taken also for a couch or bed, whereon men repose and rest themselves.
Now in what sort soever it be taken, the spouse does rightly say that this
bed is green, to show how pleasant that peace is which the world cannot give,
Ioh. 14.27. neither yet take away, Ioh. 16.22. which repose is not found but
in Jesus Christ alone, Mat. 11.29. seeing there is no condemnation in them
which are in him, Romans 8.1. And this is the reason wherefore this spouse, yea
every of the faithful is compared unto a goodly tree always green and
bearing fruit, Psalm. 1.3. and 92.15. And Saint Peter says that our crown is
incorruptible. That which is added, of beams of Cedar, and galeries of Cpyers
or other such wood, having respect unto the buildings and palaces of kings
covered flat with battlements and galeries on the top, tends unto the same
end, namely, to show us by the similitude of these two sorts of odoriferous
and not putrifiyng trees, that the joining and coupling of this Bridegroom with
this spouse withdraws us from the stench and corruption of the woorld, making
of our souls and bodies so many Temples, distinctly considered, dedicated unto
God, 2. Cor. 6.16. and Ioh. 14.23. as being joined together they are called
living stones for the building of this one and spiritual Temple, namely of the
church truly Catholic and universal, 1. Pet. 2.5.

7 Neither must we forget that she makes distinct mention first of the beams,
and then of the galeries: naming the principal proppes and stays of this
building, I mean the Prophets and Apostles, who yet to this day quicken and
give life unto the Church of God, by their holy writings preached and expounded
therein, Ephesians. 2.20. Such therefore is this house of the Lord and the habitation
of the true Church, and not this lakes built upon men's traditions with moldy
and rotten wood which has some fair show at the first blush, but being tried
in the day of the Lord it is incontinently consumed like hay and stubble, 1.
Cor. 3.13. before that consuming fire which is spoken of, Psalm. 50.3. But to
conclude, seeing the Cedar and the Cypers wood is such, as no continuance of
time ca^ assault with rottenness or corruption, what mean they to do, who
have taken upon them to pull down these beams and galeries? What is this but
to think to ruinate and overthrow that which is built upon the most highest,
and whose kingdom is without end, as the Angel Gabriell witnesses unto the
blessed virgin Mary, Luke 1.33. Now seeing it is in this house of Cedar, and of
Cypers that he reigns, namely in the true Sion which shall never be shaken or
removed, the word of the Lord enduring for ever, 1. Pet. 1.25. God give us
grace to be well seated for ever in this holy house, and pray we, it may please
him to bewtifie us with his holy spirit more and more, that we may be unto
him a sweet smell in our true Bridegroom, and finally may reign with him for
ever: which thing we will crave at his hands, with a true confession and
detestation of our faults, desiring him pardon and forgiveness as follows.

Almighty God, etc.
THE END OF THE SERMONS UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER.
SERMONS ON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE CANTICLE OF CANTICLES. THE SIXTEENTH
SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as follows in the
second Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, verse. 1. and 2.
1 I am the rose of Saron, and the lilly of the valleis.

2 As the Lilly among the thorns, such is my love among the daughters.


1 The most happy estate and condition of the spouse consists herein, that
she knows what the excellency of her Bridegroom is, who mutuallie declares
unto her, the good that he will do and has done her.

2 In what sort it is lawful to be a witness to ones self in his own praise,
and that our salvation begins from that which God has revealed us to know
him by.

3 The first testimony which God has given us of himself by natural things.

4 The second manifestatio^ of gods good will toward men by the preaching of
the gospel promised and figured unto the fathers, and finally reallie exhibited.

5 Wherefore the Bridegroom made choice of the similitude of flowers.

6 The allegory of the whiteness of the Lilly, and the coulor of the rose is
most fitting and agreeable to represent unto us the qualities of this
Bridegroom.

7 Wherefore the spouse is compared unto a Lilly as well as the Bridegroom.

8 The church here below is always environed and intermingled with thorns.

9 That they deceive themselves and others who think to agree light and darkness
together. And how we must behave our selves among these thorns.

THE wise man having showed us by his own experience in the book going before
this, that there is nothing of this world in this woorld, whereon we ought to
rest our selves, therein to seek a contentme^t and assured felicity, but that
we must mount a degree higher namely unto the creator of the world which is
one only God, has proposed us the practice hereof in the chapter going before
of this Canticle in her who is called the fianced or spouse of the Bridegroom,
I mean the church spiritually linked and knit with our Lord Jesus Christ her
head, in whom she seeks and finds whatsoever she can desire, though she yet
in effect enioieth but a small portion of those benefits and blessings which
are obtained her by this bond, the full consummatio^ wherefore she expects and
looks after with a marvelous ardent longing and affection. And hitherto is
it that this also tends which we are now to expound, as also all the rest of
this Canticle or Song, in which under the figure of a marriage feast and
banquet, and of mutual kind entertainment of the Bridegroom and the spouse
each toward other, using in their discoursinges diverse singular similitudes,
is represented unto us both the perfect excellency of this Bridegroom, as also
the most happy estate and condition of this spouse, to form and breed in us a
desire of preferring Jesus christ and his kingdom before al things, being
thoroughly incorporated into this church, which is the company of the faithful
figured out and represe^ted by this Queen. The Bridegroom therefore speaking
here first of himself, compares himself unto two most goodly and most
odoriferous and sweet smelling flowers above al other, which are the Rose and
the Lilly, applying afterward unto his spouse the same similitude of the Rose.
Which the spouse hearing compares him first unto A goodly apple tree full of
most pleasant and exceeding sweet fruit.

2 Now for the first we may not think it strange that the Bridegroom
commends himself, contrary unto the lesson which Solomon himself has given
and set down, Prou. 72.2. As indeed we see how the Apostle being
constrained to speak more magnificently of himself to establish his authority
Apostolical, is fain to use a preface in that behalf, and complains that he
is forced to do, as foolish men are wont to do, who preach their own praises.
But it is another thing in God then in men. For men are naturally ambitious and
can hardly praise and commend themselves, but they are straightway tickled
with some opinion of themselves, attributing the whole or at least some part of
the whole unto themselves, as if it waxed in their own garden, whereas they
have nothing but of free gift, 1. Cor. 4.7. besides that they know not how to
keep therein either rule or measure. And this is the cause why such as are wise
are so far from praising and commending of themselves, that they cannot hear
themselves praised in their own presence, but they must blush: and if it be so
that they must needs speak of those graces which rhey have received of God,
they do it always in such sort that they ever attribute the whole unto the
giver, as Saint Paul is wont to do in most express terms, 1. Cor. 15.10.
keeping therein a good measure, 1. Cor. 4.4. As likewise if they must commend
another they fail not to add, that the praise thereof pertains unto God, a
witness whereof may be the ordinary beginning the same Apostle uses in his
Epistles, Romans 1.8. 1. Cor. 1.4. Ephesians. 1.3. Phil. 1.3. Col. 1.3. 1. These. 1.2.
and 2. These. 1.3. But when the lord commends himself, besides that he
cannot say so much of himself but that there is still a great deal more
remaining, which makes his testimony of himself most certain and sure, Ioh.
8.14. he cannot also do it upon ambition. For all honor and glory is due to
him alone, and nothing can be added unto or taken from him. Neither does he
this but to move us thereby and to draw us out of the world.

3 But this he does in two sorts opening his holy mouth to teach us. First to
make us to understand the language of his visible and sensible creatures, which
ought to be understood of every one, and is notwithstanding unknown unto the
most part of men. For when he calls himself Almighty and eternal Creator,
most patient, and yet notwithstanding most just and righteous, he does as a
master painter, who should paint certain figures in a table, not to stay his
scholars in the outward view and contemplation of that which the painting does
outwardly figure and represent, but to make them thereby to know things greater
and invisible by those visible representations and Images. For example, the
picture whereof the world made afterward a detestable Idol, called Saint
Christopher, was never the picture or pourtrait of any man of that name: but
was first invented to represent the condition and state of every christian
called Christophorus, that is to say, bearing in effect the name of Jesus
Christ, namely the burden of his Cross, and passing as a mighty giant through
the gulf of this woorlde, with the rest and proppe of faith, serving him as it
were for a staff, being guided always by the means of the light of the
word unto the haven. And thence it came to pass that because the Christians
could never abide any Image or portraite to be brought into the assembly and
congregation of Christians, these Saint Christophers are yet remaining in the
church porches: as also the figure of that, for which they have made their
Saint George. But the devil found afterward the mean to bring into the
Church both these pictures, and a million of swarms of other Idols, even to
put God and his truth out of doors. To return unto my matter, the frame of
this world (as, besides that which the blind Paynims themselves have in this
behalf observed, the whole Scripture teaches us, Psalm. 19. and 145. and
elsewhere almost throughout, and namely the Apostle, Romans 1. and Acts. 17. in
that excellent Sermon of his which he made at Athens) is a plain and excellent
preaching, of the eternal wisdom, power, and bounty of God. But when god
speaking either unto his servants, or by his servants, declares us the same,
he is then as it were a verbal expositor of that which many (were it not for
this) would never observe in the contemplation of the heavens, or of the earth,
or of other the creatures of God. And hereunto we must refer a great number
of places of the holy Scripture, which are as it were a gloss and commentary
of that which the good and goodly creatures of God do testify unto us without
speakeing.

4 Secondly because this whole manifestation of Gods so great and magnificent
majesty, could not but astonish us, nay condemn us, and make us altogether
inexcuseable, Romans 1.20. Therefore has God revealed and manifested from heaven
an other more notable and excellent mystery, I mean the gospel, announcing
and preaching unto us the free reconciliation of God with us, together with all
the virtue of the spirit of God, to enlighten and to change our hearts:
wherein God again uses the means of visible things, but yet after a manner
and fashion somewhat diverse and different from the former. For as concerning
the first point which we have touched, the lord makes himself as it were the
expounder of the book of nature. But in this second point he uses his
creatures to a more excellent end, and such as passes and goes beyond the end
of their creation, that is to wit, to aid and help us to conceive this high
and supernatural secret of our salvation and of the author thereof the son
of god, and of that which depends thereon, in as much as he takes and draws
from these corporal and visible things, similitudes, ayding and helping greatly
for the conceiving of things spiritual. This appears by infinite similitudes
and parables or comparisons found in the holy Scriptures, and especially in
the history of the gospel, which if we have well rooted and planted in our
memory, there is nothing can present and offer it self unto our eyes which
induces us not to think on God to dedicate our whole life unto him.

5 In this place therefore according unto this customable manner of doing, the
Bridegroom which is Jesus Christ, proposes unto our understanding his beutie
and excellency, comparing himself unto two flowers the Rose and the Lilly,
yea to a Rose of the fairest which were in all the country, being most likely
that such were they of the champion of Sa^on, whereof mention is made, Esai.
33.9 and 1. Chron. 27.29. and Act. 9.35. as if we being in France should say,
a Rose of Province. Neither is it without cause that this comparison was chosen
in this place by the holy Ghost. For if we consider well and narrowly of all
sorts of flowers, we shall find that among all the creatures we see here below
with our eyes, there is none more admirable, or which seems rather sent from
heaven, then to come out of the earth, then a flower, how small so ever he be,
whether we regard the pure and subtle matter it is composed of, or whether we
consider the workmanship more then admirable which appears in them: or
whether we respect the colors wherewith they are checked and diapred: or
whether we stand on the sweet savor and smell which proceeds from them, or
finally whether we look unto the fruits and seeds which spring from them
according unto their infinite diverse kinds. So that there needs but the
least flower that is to convict all the Atheists and mockers of the woorlde of
the infinite power and wisdom of God. And therefore it is not without cause
that the Lord Luke 12.27. says, that all the glory and glittering of Salomo^
is not comparable to one blewed Lilly of the field. True it is that flowers
are of little continuance, for the which cause the Scripture does often times
represent and compare our poor and frail condition unto a flower, which is
soon faded and withered, as, Esaie. 40.7. and Job. 14.2. and 1. Pet. 1.24. but
we must apply similitudes no farther then unto the end they are referred.

6 I say therefore that this similitude taken from these two most fair and
exceeding sweet flowers above al other, is maruailous fit and proper to
represent this Bridegroom unto us, as it were in a glass of the most fair
and beutifulst. There is nothing more white and neat then the whiteness of a
Lilly, otherwise called the Lilly of the valleies, because it grows
especially in such places. And who is he that comes near unto the purity
and righteousness of him in whom there was never found any spot neither
without, nor within, who is the holy of holies, the only righteousness and
innocence of whom was able to appease the wrath of God? As Much may be said of
the white Rose. But if we list rather to compare this Bridegroom unto the
damask or scarlet Rose, he shall be yet better represented unto us, not
according unto that divine nature, invisible and incomprehensible, distinctly
considered and by it self; but in as much as he is the son manifested (that
is to say made visible and true man) in our bodily nature. For among all the
colors of the woorld, as the die of the scarlet Rose is the most excellent
that may be found, so there is none which does more lively and naturally
represent the color of man's flesh quick and temperately colored. What is
then this scarlet or damask flesh color Rose? It is the great secret of our
religion, namely the true son of God, manifested in flesh, justified in
spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
and received up into glory, 1. Tim. 3.16. this is that elder brother, Romans
8.29. the fairest of al me^ Psalm. 45.3. this is our sovereign high priest,
holy, without spot of sin, separated from sinners, exalted above the heavens,
Heb. 7.26. crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2.9. who has a name above al
names, Phil. 2.9. But how is he ascended unto his degree? By the suffering of
his death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. Behold then a gain a Rose
not only in part died, but all red with that blood by the which our sins
are washed. Such was he when Pilate having scourged him brought him forth unto
the people and said, behold the man. Such was he when he was al bathed with
his own blood on the cross beaten for our sins, wounded for our
iniquities, torn and disfigured for our transgressions, Esaie. 53.5. And what
was then the beuty of this Rose? Truly obscured, nay put out for a little time
and defaced, Heb. 2.9. so far as that this Bridegroom became to be more vile
then a worm of the earth, Psalm. 22.6. But seeing obedience is always more
fair and pleasant unto God then sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15.22. and there was never
obedience like unto that of the cross, Phil. 2.8. it follows that this Rose
was even then before God in his perfectest gloss and beuty, albeit it was so
died with blood, not which staineth and blotteth, but which does away the
stains and blots of the woorlde. Which thing may seem to have been figured
and represented (clean contrary to the meaning of Pilate and Herod) both by
the purple robe wherewith Pilate clad him being altogether bloody, Ioh. 19.5.
which is correspondent and answering to this scarlet Rose: as by the white robe
which Herod put upon him to mock him withal, Luke 23.7. which is and may be
referred unto the similitude of the Lilly. Naie which more is, at this day,
yea and before the act of this real and indeed bloody oblation, and in the
act it self, and since unto the end and consummation of the woorld, yea unto
all eternity, if this Rose had not appeared before God the father, and did not
still appear, and should hereafter, to be seen and smelt of him; there had
never been, nor should not now have been, or at any time hereafter any
spouse of this Bridegroom, that is to say, neither Church nor eternal and
everlasting happiness and felicity. For in whom is it (that is to say, in
respect of whom is it) the father has chosen his Church from everlasting? In
Jesus Christ who was to be that which he was made, and to do that which he
has done for his elect in his determinated and appointed time, Ephesians. 2.4. and
Gal. 4.4. in whom was he appeased from the beginning? In the Lamb, who in
respect of the effect, was slain since the wound and sore was made, Apoc.
3.12. to whom had the Law respect? To this Bridegroom who should accomplish
it and has accomplished and fulfilled it in his time, Gal. 3.23. and who is
the body and substance of the figures and shadows of the law ceremonial?
Col. 2.17. In a word, although the act of this bloody sacrifice, and of this
only oblation once for all made, Heb. 10, 14. be passed already, and that
Jesus christ lives and reigns as a victorious Lord over death, Romans 6.9.
having led his enemies captive in triumph, Ephesians. 6.8. yet notwithstanding
before the father, unto whom there is no difference of time past, present, or
to come, the wounds of this Bridegroom, wherewith this Rose is bathed, do as
I may so say, always bleed fresh and shall bleed for ever, holding still
and appeasing the wrath and anger of God the father. And what do we every
day, whether it be in hearing and receiving this word and giving him thanks,
or whether it be specially in the celebration of the holy supper, but renew and
refresh the memory of his death and passion, not to offer him up again in
sacrifice (for this were to deny his real oblation once for all made, and for
ever) but as it were to present him, being yet, as I may so say, every day
sacrificed, and as it were still bloody, in as much as we set his death and
passion between god and us, as the only foundation both of our faith as also of
our hope. And therefore let us know that without we present unto the father
this Rose throughout red, and this Lilly altogether white and pure, neither we
nor our prayers can be acceptable unto him: of the which flowers, if the
coulor, which is a witness of the obedience and satisfaction and innocence of
this Bridegroom, be pleasing and acceptable unto god, the odor of them
figured by the perfumes of the Law, as we have in our sermons going before at
large declared, is much more sweet and pleasant unto him. And this is it which
we have to consider in this Bridegroom to be thereby stirred up and moved to
join our selves every day nearer and nearer with him.

7 Let us hear now what he says of his spouse, to the end to make us the
more desirous to enjoy her company. Like as the Lilly, says he, among the
thorns, so is my love among the daughters. We have already spoken of this
most excellent name and indeed precious of Love or Welbe-loued, under which is
comprised al manner of blessing, and the fountain and spring from whence it
flows, which is the meerelie free love of God toward them, who are by nature
his enemies, Ioh. 3.16. and Romans 6.10. and therefore without farther standing
hereon, we will only consider the causes wherefore the spouse is here
compared unto a Lilly, and wherefore these words among the thorns are added.
The faithful, (the assembly and company of whom in one mystical body of Jesus
Christ is called the Church) are compared sometimes to goodly trees bearing
fruit at al times, Ps. 1. sometimes unto palm trees and Cedars of Libanus, Ps.
92.13. sometimes unto a fruitful vine, Psalm. 80.9. in this place she is
compared by her Bridegroom unto a Lilly, as himself was also called a lilly in
the verse going next before, to show us the agreeableness and conuenience
between these two. Behold therefore two Lilly plants, both of them most
fair and most sweet. But the first is a Lilly of himself and in himself,
yea so perfect a one, as has no fault or blemish in it. But this second being
of it self a dead plant and infected, is made a Lilly, by drawing of the
nature and juice of the true Lilly whereunto it is incorporated: clean
contrary unto that which falls out in graffes of men's planting, in which the
graffe remaining still in his own nature, the wild stock on which he was
grafted, is altered and changed. Such are the faithful called goodly fruitful
trees, but it is by virtue of the water, which is always at the foot of their
root, Psalm. 1.3. who are called Palms and Cedars, but it is because they are
planted in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 9.13. who are a fruitful vine, but
transported and brought out of Egypt, and planted and husbanded by the hand of
God, Psalm. 80 9. whose field and husbandry it is called, 1. Cor. 3.9. Neither
may we marvel that the name of Lilly is given and communicated unto the
Church, seeing she is sometimes called by the name of Christ her husband, 1.
Cor. 12.12. in as much as she is made one with him. And indeed why should she
not be called a Lilly, as well as her husband, seeing she is holy and righteous
with the proper holiness and righteousness of him? 1. Cor. 1.30. and
consequently of a most sweet savor in him? 2. Cor. 2.15. Such then is the
true Church, through the only grace of god, in him who (being made true man
in all and through al, sin only excepted) makes her conformable unto
himself, and by consequent every of the faithful, changing the flesh into
spirit, that they may be al made one spirit in him, 1. Cor. 6.17. this is I
say this true Lilly, and therefore it follows that we must hold her for a
false and bastard plant, which sauoreth not but of her wild and stinking
nature: or happily thinks to musk and perfume her self with that which she
falsely calls her merits, or the merits of Saints, Phil. 3.9. much less
are they this Church who by their wicked and detestable life, are abominable
before God and men, 1. Cor. 6.10. unto whom the Gospel is turned into the
savor of death, 2. Cor. 2.16.

8 But that which is after said, namely that this Lilly is among thorns,
gives us to understand, what the condition of the Church here below is, to wit
a lamp shining amidst the darkness of this world, Phil. 2.15. or as a sheep
among the wolves, Mat. 10.16. in a word, as a flourishing plant in the deserts
full of millions of crooked briars and thorns: being notwithstanding of a most
sweet smell, amongst al stinking and venomous plants Neither are these thorns
only round about this fair Lilly, but thrust themselves into her, and seek
to choke the Lilly and her flowers. Naie which more is these thorns shall not
be rooted up until the latter day, as is declared by the parable of the
tares, Matt. 13.24. yea besides this, every one carries in his heart the
remnant of these thorns, as incredulity, which seeks to chooke faith,
distrust sighting against hope, in a word, the flesh resisting the spirit: in
which combat we feel many great and grievous pricks, Matt. 13.22. Gal. 5 17.
Romans 8.23. Such therefore is the condition of the Church and of every member
thereof, as continual experience witnesses, whereof it was necessary we
should be put in mind and warned, to the end we should not think that we
can be the Lilly which is liking and smells sweet unto the men of this
world: but contrariwise that we should make our account betimes, that the more
we be changed into true Lillies by the grace of God, the more we shall
displease the hogs and dogs of this woorlde, to whom nothing is sweet but that
which is filthy and unclean, the enmity of God and the world being perpetual.

9 Hereon ought amongst all others those sages and politic wise especially to
think, who imagine they can find a means to agree light and darkness together.
No, no, a man cannot faithfully serve two contrary masters. If thou will be
this sweet Lilly, thou must be assaulted with thorns, and never agreed and
become one with them, except thou will be burned together with them. But what?
The mistes cannot hinder the sun from rising to make a distinction between
day and night. Darkness cannot let the moon and the stars to continue such as
they are, although sometimes the vapors be so thick and so gross, that they
who are below are deprived of the sight of their clearnes and brightness, even
so must we be children of the light in the midst of the darkness of this
woorld, as the land of Gosen enjoyed the light of the day, when the greatest
part of Egypt was covered with thick and palpable darkness, Exodus 10.13. We
must be children of the light to force the most wicked to acknowledge in us
the father of light, Mat. 5.16. and to convict the froward and wicked woorld,
Phil. 2.15. Let the world therefore continue and remain as long as it will a
cursed ground, for which Christ prays not, Ioh. 17.9. full of briars and
thorns, whereof we must take good heed that we be not pricked. But
contrariwise though we are in the midst of it, let us not stand to communicate
with his unfruitful works 1. Cor. 5.9. and Ephesians. 5.11. but let us be and
continue fruitful trees strong Palms, fragrant Cedars, smelling sweet and
pleasing the Lord, increasing and flourishing from day to day unto the glory
of God. Let us pray our good God and father of his great grace and mercy to
perfect in us his holy work he has begun, to the end we may seek for
and find in him our whole repose and contentment, without being deceived and
seduced by the vain show and appearance of this world, but that rather
following the example of Moses the faithful servant of God, the reproach it
self of Christ be more precious unto us, then all the riches and treasures of
Egypt, Heb. 11.24. that in the midst of this stinking and contagious world
we may bring forth fruits of a good and sweet smell unto him who has
transplanted us out of the world in his holy house. And because that hitherto
contrary unto our duty we have been and yet are, negligent, forgetful and
unthankful in this behalf, let us crave at his hands mercy and forgiveness
as follows.

Almighty God etc.
THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the second Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 3. and 4.
verses.
3 As is the Apple tree among the trees of the forest, so is my Welbe-loued
among the young men. I have earnestly desired his shade, I sat down, and his
fruit was sweet unto my mouth.

4 He brought me into the place of the banquet, and his banner over me was
Dilection or Love.


1 Wherefore the Bridegroom is likewise compared unto a tree which bears
fruit.

2 What the forest of this woorlde is since the Sin of man, and what
difference there is between this tree and others.

3 Whence the appetite we have of eating of the fruit of this tree, opposed to
that tree whose fruit our first father was forbidden to eat, proceeds.

4 It is not enough to look on this tree and to account him fair: but we must
also sit under the shadow of him.

5 We must also eat of the fruit thereof, and this fruit is very sweet.

6 The Bridegroom leads his spouse farther having eaten and rellished this
fruit into the hall where the banquet is, that all of us together be there
fully fed and satisfied; which thing is at this day especially represented
unto us in the banquet of the holy Supper.

7 Where this banqueting hall is, and how we ought to behave our selves
therein being brought into it.

8 A comparison of this banqueting hall, with the haunts of the false Church.

9 A large and ample description of the banner of Dilection, under which the
spouse rests and reposeth.

10 An exhortation to come unto this banquet.

WE have understood in the two verse. going before what testimony the
Bridegroom, who knows himself and his spouse best, has given of that
perfection which is in himself, and of that which it pleases him to like and
accept of in his spouse. Follows now what the spouse testifies she has
found and received of the excellency of her Bridegroom, whom she compares
unto an apple tree full of most pleasant fruit and growing in the midst of a
forest of wild trees and such as are utterly different in nature from this
apple tree: wherein are showed us great and high mysteries. For first of al it
is true that in respect of the spiritual norishment and life, the simple savor
and smell of a Rose or some other flower does best represent it unto us, and
after a more spiritual manner then gross and material meat, as a Pear or
other like fruit: but to assure us of that which we ought to seek after for the
sustenance of the true life, the infirmity of our faith requires that we
should be taught according unto our rudeness and weakness. And this is the
cause why, for that men live not by the odor and smell of flowers, but must
eat and drink to be sustained: the holy ghost compares and likeneth in this
place this Bridegroom, whom he had before compared unto a Rose and a Lilly,
unto an apple tree and other like fruitful tree. For the word which Solomon
here uses, as also that of the latins which signifies an apple,
comprehends in general every fruitful tree me^ eat of, be it of apple, or
nut. So we see that under the ancient covenant the Lord represented this
Bridegroom and the life which we receive of him, by the sacrifices and
oblations of creatures more corporal then this: and under the new covenant he
would have water and bread and wine to be unto us sacramental signs of that
which himself does in us unto the end and consummation of the world.

2 The Bridegroom therefore is compared by the spouse unto a fruitful tree,
but planted in the midst of a forest, and amongst other trees which are
nothing like unto him. Wherein we see what a correspondence there is between
the Church, which is as a Rose among the thorns, and her Bridegroom being a
fruitful tree planted among other wild trees. Before the sin and
transgression of man it was not so, when there was nothing neither among the
fruits of the earth, nor otherwise in all this whole world, which agreed not
with God the Creator, and which was not answering unto the desire of man, whom
God appointed to be ruler and gouerner of al these inferior creatures. But the
sin of man having brought forth thorns and briars, Genesis 3.18. it is no
marvel if this change and alteration be found: but this is rather to be
woondred at, that it pleases the Lord of his infinite goodness to grub up in
some part of the world these brambles and briars, and to plant himself there
as a fruitful tree, to the end that some number, whom it has pleased him to
elect before the foundation of the world, might feed and be sustained under
his shadow. We read in the prophecy of Daniel, Dan. 4.20. how that great
monarck Nebuchadnetzer is compared unto a goodly great tree under which the
greatest part of the woorld had a covert. But this implies nothing but a
temporal power, and such as continues but a small time. And therefore all
such trees are subject to be cut down, yea rooted up and consumed in their
time, as it is written in that prophecy. But here mention is made of an
apple tree which represents him whose kingdom is everlasting, as the father
who planted it promised it should be: whereas contrariwise al wild plants
shall one day be rooted up and cast into everlasting fire. This is then the imp
which is sprouted out of the stock of Isaie, under whom all the nations of the
earth should be gathered there to rest themselves, Esai. 11.1.10. and this
goodly tree of life figured by that in the garden of paradise, Genesis 2.9. Apoc.
2.7. of whom whosoever eats he can never die. But let us note well that which
the spouse adds. For whereunto would this tree serve us if we applied him
not to his right use? Happy is that womb which bare thee, said that woman of
whom it is spoken, Luke 11.27. and happy are the pops which gave thee suck.
But the Lord answered that they were more happy who hear the word of the lord
and keep it. Which is no other then this which the spouse here says, namely,
that she sat down under the shadow of this Apple Tree, and has eaten of the
fruit which she found most sweet and pleasant unto her taste. But let us set
down and examine all the words which she here uses.

3 I have, says she, earnestly desired to be under thy shadow. We must
therefore first of al have this hungry appetite, which we say in common
speech, is a good sauce for all kind of meat. But alas have we it of our
selves? No. Experience shows us we have it not. For the world is so far
from seeking after this food, that contrariwise, albeit the Bridegroom has so
long a time cried by his Prophet, Come, come ye which are thirsty, come ye to
the waters, and ye that have no silver, come take and eat, come I say take
wine and milk without silver and without money. Wherefore lay you out your
substance for food which is naught worth, and why emploie you the travel for
a thing which satisfies you not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that
which is good, and let your soul be merry with this fatnes. Incline your ear
and come unto me, and harken unto me that your soulmate live, and that I may
make an everlasting covenant with you, and may ratify my free and sure
promises made unto David, Esa. 55.1. and cried yet again in person and that
with a loud and shril voice standing in the temple, saying: If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink. He that believes in me, as says the
Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life, Ioh. 7.37.38.
And in another place, Come, come ye unto me all that travel and are heavy
laden, and I will refresh you, Mat. 11.28. although I say the Bridegroom
cries out in this sort, yet is there scarce one man to be found among a
thousand, who has notwithstanding ears to ^ear, feet to go after, hands to
reach after and to receive this heavenly food and norishment. Nay which is
more, some being invited and called to the banquet refuse to come, others spit
out again the food they there did eat, which they should have kept within the^
and digested, a thing verily most lamentable and pitiful to consider. Knowing
therefore that we are so clean out of taste of this meat, that we have no
appetite at all of our own nature to any thing save that which is hurtful and
deadly, let us be careful and diligent to pray unto our good God, to form
in us a contrary desire, to know and consider of the beuty and goodness of
this fruit. We read how Eve our first mother, poisoned with the venom of that
old serpent, had an appetite to the eating of that fruit which she was
forbidden, because she saw it fair to see, and good to eat. In that she thought
it to be fair and goodly to see, therein she deceives her self nothing at
all, but (had not her understanding been utterly corrupted she would never
have thought that that could be good to eat, the eating whereof she was
forbidden by the mouth of her Creator himself. In such sort does Satan deal
with us every day, by the means of our concupiscences set on fire and
entised by the outward show and appearance of things, to bring us unto sin
and transgression: and yet we do much worse and are more deceived a great
deal then ever Eve was. For the tree which she took to be fair, was indeed
fair and pleasant to behold, though it was not good to be eaten of. But as for
us, besides that we abuse the beuty and goodness of the creatures of God as
she did, we are so blind, that that which is most foul seems unto us most
fair, and that most sweet which is indeed most bitter, until such time as
it pleases God of his mercy to change our senses, and to enable them
thoroughly to discern between that which is good and that which is evil, Heb.
5.14. In a word this tree whereof the spouse here speaks, is that of which if
we eat not, we can have no life in us, contrary to that tree, of which our
first Parents were forbidden under pain of death to eat.

4 And seeing the deadly taste of that forbidden tree has caused us to lose all
lust and appetite of eating and liking the fruit of the second, which is the
only remedy we have against death, we are continually to pray unto God, that
it will please him to make us to know the beuty and goodness of this fruit, to
have a through appetite thereunto, to desire first to sit us under the shadow
of it: which thing we are diligently to consider of. For among other
commodities which trees have, in places of heat and of parching, their fresh
and wholesome shade is not the least. And what heat or burning is greater then
that of this world, seeing we bear besides within our selves, as it were the
suburbs of hell, where that fire is which is never quenched? True it is that
according unto the example of the rich man* of whom mention is made, Luke 15.
the men of this world instead of perceiving this wretched and miserable estate,
find therein a certain cool refreshing, and cannot abide the^ who would bring
the^ thence unto this true refreshing shade, but in the end they feel it to
their great and remediles sorrow; when they are fallen, as we say, out of a
could fever into an hot ague, from whence they can never get out again. This
shade therefore is the true repose and rest of a man's conscience, which is no
where else to be found but under this tree, which we ought above all things to
covet after, as himself also signifies by that lesson which he teaches us,
Mat. 11.29. Let us add hereunto that which the spouse says, namely, that she
is sitten under this shade. For to what purpose were it to enter into a place
of refreshing, and afterward to go out of it? And this is it which serves as
it were for an inditeme^t against so many flying and giddy minds and spirits,
who happily begin well, but end most il: some of the^ wavering now on oneside,
and sometimes on an other, without resolving them selves any way, as Elias
reproched them of his time, 1. King. 18.24. others whirling about like fanes
and wethercockes with every wind, Ephesians. 4.14. Iam. 1.6. others turning
themselves the clean contrary way, as an infinite number of lewd and wicked
Apostataes and reuolters do at this day, for whom it would have been better
they had never bin borne. To all this sort of dealing is opposed that which the
Spouse says in this place, that she is sitten under the shade of this tree.
Which serves not only to the reproof and condemnation of those whom we have
already spoken of, but also of a sort of curious companions who come near the
tree, only to gaze on it and to look on them who sit under it; as also of
those, who albeit they depart not from under the shade of this tree, but
pretend to stay under it, notwithstanding are always gadding so after this and
that, that they feel not the one half of this comfortable refreshing of this
shade. Which thing is represented unto us in the person of Martha, preferring
the desire she had of providing of corruptible food for her guest, the true
and incorruptible life, so far as to take it il that her sister Mary all that
time sat still at Jesus feet hearkening unto his word. But what did the Lord
answer her? Martha, Martha, thou art careful and encombrest thy self after
many things, but one thing is necessary, Mary has chosen the better part,
which shall never be taken from her. And would to God all of us had well and
thoroughly learned this lesson. Which if we had, we should see no longer others
walking up and down and telling of news, others sitting at their tables a
making of good cheer, others in their shoppes marchandising and traffiking,
others out of town to get in their debts, or rather their revenues, while the
Lord inuiteth us to be at his feet and under the cool shade of that
incomparable sweet refreshing of his. We have a long time warned every one
hereof, and we cry out for it in vain, but wisdom cannot be justified but by
her children.

5 The spouse therefore witnesses unto us the contrary, that she is sitten
under the shade, and which is more, she adds that she was not idle neither.
For she employed her time to feed herself with the fruit of this tree, whose
excellent sweetness she highly commends. The house of god, which is the
enclosure of this tree, and the harbor and dwelling place of the church, is
not the enclosure of some precious and stately building, whereinto a man
enters to see the goodly woorkemanship of vaultes or of pillars, the
glittering of gold, and of silver, and of precious stones, nor a place into
which a man goes to hear the Quire or the Organes which fill the ears: but it
is a place where the pure word of God is sincerely preached in the hearing and
sight of every man, with exhortations, consolations, warnings and necessary
reprehensions unto salvation, not to return thence but being fed with the true
and solid food of inestimable sweetness to the souls of them who taste and
savor it indeed. For this is indeed the food which caused Saint Peter and
his companions to stay with Jesus Christ their master, when others departed
from him, at what time the same Saint Peter said unto his master, Lord, to whom
shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6.68. as it is
elsewhere said, that the doctrine of the eternal and everliving is the
restority of the soul, that the testimony of the everliving is true, giving
wisdom unto the ignorant, the commandments of the everliving are right,
rejoicing the soul, and the doctrine of the everliving pure, enlightening the
eyes, more to be desired then gold, yea then the finest gold, and more sweet
then any honey, yea the honey comb. Psalm. 19.8. etc.

6 Now the spouse to show us that this Bridegroom of hers nourishes her not
by halfes, but provides her of drink as well as of meat, adds that the
Bridegroom has led her from under this tree, into a place appointed for the
drinking of his wine, if we had not rather understand by these words which
Solomon here uses the banqueting hall: wherein we are first to note that she
says not, that she went, but that the Bridegroom led her thither: to the end
we always remember, that as grace begins in us our salvation, creating in
us to will, so must the same grace guide and direct forward the same will
which it gave us. For without this insteede of making forward one pace, we shall
fall flat to the ground. But as it is he which leads us, so we must follow
him: and so by consequent it is not enough to have eaten of this fruit in our
own home, but we must go in unto the banquet. We must I say join our
selves unto our brethren, and make a good confession of our faith altogether
even before men also* as for this end, namely for this common banquet, the
seventh day has been from the beginning of the world separated from the
other, and the three solemn feasts established under the Law. Such also were
at the beginning of the Christian Church those common feasts of the
Christians, whereof mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles, and 1. Cor.
11.20. and Jude 12. joined with the celebration of the holy Supper. Where are
then the false Nicodemites of our days? Where are they who for fear of men
keep themselves close, bearing themselves in hand that they need not to come
in unto the banquet? No, no, the Lord will have indeed every man to meditate
and pray by himself too sitting under the shade of this tree, but he will
have also every one to enter in into this banqueting hall, and there to feast
together, for which cause also christian assemblies have a special promise,
Matthew. 18.20. and 24.18. as there is a special warning also given us that we
take heed how we despise such assemblies, Heb. 10.15. for which cause we
see many horrible judgments fallen upon many. Let us also learn that grace
is added unto grace unto him, unto whom it is given to use it well, as is
showed in the parable of the talentes, Matthew. 25. which is here declared us by
that which the spouse says, namely, that being before as it were in the
field, sat under this tree, and eating of the fruit thereof with a good
stomach, she was afterward led in farther into the hall of this great feast,
where she was yet more abundantly fed, and that in such sort as that she
confesses that she fell into a sound, not being able to receive and conceive
of such exceeding intertainement. Let us note in the third place which I have
touched in one word, namely, that Jesus Christ provides us not only of meat,
but also of drink too, that is to say, that in him alone we must wholly and
entirely seek after and find our whole sustenance and spiritual norishment.
Which he would also show us visiblie and sensibly in the bread of the holy
Supper, which is a certain and sure testimony of the partaking of the body
which was given for us: and in the wine which is the sacrament of the precious
blood shed for us, not to be set before our visible eye (seeing it cannot now
be seen but by the eyes of faith) but to be truly communicated after a
spiritual fashion unto a spiritual and eternal life. The like is to be
understood of the ordinary preaching and administration of the word, in which
also Jesus Christ presents himself wholly unto us, to be received as it were
by the hand of faith.

7 And therefore let us remember, my brethren, that this place, this place I
say, wherein we are, as also all other assemblies of the faithful, were there
but two or three gathered together, are this wine-seller or banqueting hal of
that great King of whom mention is made, Luke 14.17. And who is he who being
admitted into the house of some great Lord, to sit with him at his table, would
willingly and wittingly bring thither with him any filthiness or villainy?
Therefore always and as often as we hear the trumpet of the Lord to sound,
calling us into his house, I mean so often as we hear the bell ringing unto a
sermon, we ought not to go* but to run, nay to fly thither: and yet not so at
randon, but that we first prepare our selves, through a true co^trition, and
consideration both of the death of him who inuiteth us unto this banquet,
preventing us by his great mercy, as also of the excellency of that treasure
which he will there distribute unto us, that we bring thither a mind apt and
ready to be taught, an heart full of appetite of this heavenly food: in a
word, a most ardent desire of receiving, eating, liking and digesting so
precious a meat, to show afterward the fruits and effects thereof, within
and without our house, at home and abroad, far and near, by all our actions
as well of the body as also of the mind. But what? It is no marvel though we
have no taste and feeling of such a liberality of our God, seeing the most part
contemn it, others eat of this food but for a fashion, and very few there be
who digest it, to be sustained by it, a miserable and lamentable case, and for
which we shall pay one day sweetly, if we think not betimes better upon it.

8 But I pray you wherein do those pestilent harbors of Idols, which they call
the books of the ignorant, resemble the hall of this banquet? Where insteede
of administering this precious liquor, men's ears are filled with howlings, and
their hearts impoisoned with errors, where under shadow of devotion and bearing
men in hand that they are fed by an attorney, they devour widows houses,
yea Kings Crowns and scepters: where in lieu of the true Jesus Christ, they
feed the woorlde with a Jesus Christ of past, and for a full measure of all
manner of sacrilege, they have utterly rakt away one of the two sacraments of
the holy supper. But if these be to be condemned, as sure they are, what shall
become of the^ who come unto this banquet, otherwise well provided and
administered, to their judgment and condemnation?

9 Moreover we may not lightly pass over that which the spouse adds, namely
that the banner or standarde, or ensign of her bridegroom which is upon her,
that is to say, under which she marches, is called dilection or good will. For
as in an army, the ensign is it, which distinguishes every band and company
under which every soldier is to march, so the love and good-wil which Jesus
Christ bears us is that, which assembleth us together to compose this body
which is called the Church: which linketh and keeps us one to an other, which
helps and aideth us in all the assaults and combats which we are to
sustain. For what induced and persuaded this great God to make the world for
man? Nothing but his good pleasure to make a creature, in which he would
declare by effect his singular love and affection, that is to say, because he
would make one creature whom he would indeed entirely love, so far as to make
it governor and ruler of all the creatures else below, as if he had reserved
for himself the place above, to commit unto him that below, Psalm. 115.16. And
now certainly this is exceeding much, nay so great, as no man is able to
comprehend the infinitnes of such bounty toward the creature which was not
yet in being: but what is this in comparison of that which is showed in the
woork of the redemption of this unthankful and traitorous creature? And that
before the foundation of the world he provided for this, that man being thus
justly condemned unto death, should not only not perish, but be exalted by
means of his exceeding love into a degree above the Angels themselves? Ephesians.
1.2. In such sort, as that a man may and ought to say, not praising the
evil, but praising him who draws light out of darkness: O ha^pie fall which
has brought us higher: o most happy darkness without which this truly great
light, had never appeared unto us. For man had he not falled, had continued a
creature fashioned for his excellent qualities, to be as it were a visible
pourtrait of the invisible creator: but the fall of his which made him like
unto the brute beasts, served for an occasion unto the creator, not to be
ashamed of him, but to ioyn and unite man so near unto himself, that he and
the eternal Son of God are but one person, Man-God, and God-man. And what
moved God to do this admirable work? Certainly nothing but his infinite
goodness and love, as the Prophet writes, Psalm. 8.5. and 144.3. And who can say
the contrary? This counsel of his being once determined, what induced this
great God to execute and perform it by so rare, so strange, so admirable a
means, that the Angels themselves (according as it was figured in those two
Cherubins having their face turned over the covering of the Arc of the
covenant) do yet desire to comprehend it more and more, Exodus 25.10. and 1.
Pet. 1.12. Certainly this cannot have proceeded but from the same fountain
of his unspeakable dilection and love, through which he had accepted of us in
his son, Ephesians. 1.6. and Ioh. 3.16. And what moved this Bridegroom, the
eternal of God, to choose unto himself this polluted maiden to make her his
spouse? To bear with her for so many her adulteries? Ier. 3.1. What more? To
make himself subject unto the curse of the father, Gal. 3.13. to give his life
for her, Ephesians. 5.25. to carry her sins even upon the tree of his cross, 1.
Pet. 2.24. Phi. 2.8. Certainly this love and goodwill of his, the depth
whereof no man is able to sound, or measure the height, breadth, or length
thereof, Ephesians. 3.18 And what is the ground and foundation of our faith, but this
assurance, that we are loved with an unvariable and unchangeable Dilection?
Romans 8.38. And how could we hope in him, and how call upon him without the
testimony of the holy Ghost, which teaches us and seals it us in our
hearts that he loves us? Romans 8.15. Ga. 4.6. 1. Cor. 2.12. Iam. 1.6. This is
it therefore in a word which the spouse would say in this place, that nothing
else inuiteth her to retire her self unto God, and to have her refuge unto
him, nothing assures and ascertaineth her, nothing else distinguishes and
makes her different from the world, but the love which her Bridegroom bears
her, whereunto as unto her ensign she keeps her self, to be covered
therewith and as it it were wrapped in it. Neither may we think it strange that
the name of Dilection or Love is given unto this standard, seeing that yet more
significantlie the name of Love or Dilection is attributed unto God himself,
because that he is the fountain thereof from whence it flows upon us, being
his nature to love man* yea, such as he has chosen, whom he justifies and
sanctifies, and will finally glorify. And this Love engenders, back again
another love in us, being given us to love him, who has loved us so much as is
to be seen by this whole Canticle. And this is the cause why the spouse adds
that she sounds with mutual Dilection which she bears unto her
well-beloved. The exposition whereof we will defer unto another time.

10 Let us now take all heedefull care to make our profit of this so excellent
and precious a doctrine, suffering God to lead us into this great and goodly
hall of the banquet, whereunto we are invited every day, let us forget
whatsoever is without, to keep us unto this precious banquet, let us forget, I
say, the love of this world and of our selves, as if there were therein any
commodity or happiness, whereas all this is nothing else but vanity of
vanities: let us cheer our selves in this feast with this true wine, quickening
our spirits and eating of this sweet fruit of eternal life: and let our whole
heart be on high, where he looks for us and reaches out his arms there to
receive us, and to make us his coheirs and companions with him of the kingdom
of heaven, with him, I say, who has loved us so much and shall love us unto
the end. And because that contrary unto our duty in this behalf, we have
been, and yet are so slothful and so given unto the world, and unto our
selves, naie so rebellious toward him and unthankful, we will crave mercy at
his hands as follows.

Almighty God etc.
THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the second Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 5.6. and 7.
verses.
5 Cause my spirits to come unto me with those flagons: make me a bed with
those Apples: for I faint (or sound) with love.

6 Let his left hand be under my head, and let his right hand embrace me.

7 Daughters of Jerusalem, I charge you by the Roes and by the Hindes, that ye
stir not up, nor waken my love, until she please.


1 The most perfect are not capable of the sweetenes of the meats of this
banquet, but we may not have less appetite for all this.

2 A complaint against the contempt of this sweet and wholesome nourishment.

3 The difference between that wine which is drawn out of the true vessels,
and that which is sower, mustie, poisoned, as well old as new, and from what
tree the true apples, which fetch our spirits again unto us, are gathered.

4 The virtue and force which makes our eating and drinking in this feast
profitable unto us consists and rests in God alone; and the great abuse
committed both in this point as also in doctrine, and the sacraments.

5 Wherefore the spouse is not contented to be held up with one of her
Bridegroomes hands only.

6 We must by particular meditation digest the spiritual nourishment we
receive in this banquet.

7 Satan and his accomplices busy themselves in nothing more, then to hinder
this digestion, but the Bridegroom holds them and brideleth them so far as
pleases him.

8 It is especially needeful that God repress those who trouble the repose and
quiet of his spouse within.

9 God wants no executioners of his just judgments, especial against the
perturbers and troublers of his spouses repose and peace.

10 After meditation we must awake, and proceed to the practice of a christian
life: and touching great abuse committed in this behalf.

11 A conclusion touching the sum of that which is contained in this and in
the sermon before.

WE have left the spouse in the banqueting hall in the most wished estate she
could desire, and now to hear her speak, it seems the clean contrary,
seeing she speaks as if she were quite out of heart, having lost al
strength, and being brought as a man would say unto an utter extremity. We
must therefore note that our infirmity and weakness is such and so great, that
cannot in truth suffer either joy or sorrow, if the one, or the other surpass
our capacity. In such sort that as a man may die by having his heart
ouerstraitned and locked up with anguish and sorrow: so may the like also
happen unto him, if his heart be overmuch opened and enlarged with a sudden
and over great joy. The like we see to come to pass in many places of the holy
and sacred history, that holy personages become for a time no better then dead
men, if the Lord appear unto them in any vnaccustomable majesty As the
Apostle witnesses and says, that when it pleased God to make him to see
things that cannot be told, he knew not whether it were himself, his spirit
remaining within the body, or were otherwise ravished out of himself, 1. Cor.
12.2. Act. 22.17. And that the like happened also unto the prophets being filled
with the spirit of God, appears by that we read, 1. Sam. 19.24. The spouse
therefore in this place, being present at this banquet, says that the
apprehension and conceit of so great a favor, and as well the sweetness of the
fruit of this Apple Tree, as also the savor of that drink she drank in this
ba^quet, makes her to sound, as being at the first not capable thereof. Not
that therefore she had lost all appetite (for contrariwise she calls for
that wine and for those Apples) but as if she desired that she might have them
in such sort, as that thereby she might be brought unto herself again,
whereas she was not able to bear them in over great abundance. Cause
therefore, says she, my spirit to come again unto me, by giving me of that
wine, and making me as it were a bed of those Apples: by the odor whereof my
spirits may be recreated as men are wont to do unto them who begin to faint
at heart, to whom they give not any great quantity to eat or drink, but a
drop or two of wine, or some other sweet thing to smell unto, to cause their
spirits to come unto them.

2 And what shall I say touching this point, but that it seems in a manner,
that there is no longer any Church in the world? For even in our time, in which
it has pleased God not only to set up the hall of this banquet, but also to
lead us in thither and to offer us this very same meat, and this very same
drink, after the most requisite sort of provision that possibly may be made:
where are those, who insteede of apprehending so exceeding a bounty as to be
therewith ravished, voutsafe so much as to sit down at table? Or being sitten
down, to eat and relish and to digest this meat with an eager stomach and
hungry appetite? Nay rather on the contrary side, do we not as did the
children of Israel, who fell some to loathing the Manna, which they could not
at the first sufficiently praise and commend? The Lord therefore of his mercy
sharpen our appetite, and correct our taste, and make us this true spouse, of
whom it is here spoken.

3 Let us note farther that it is not spoken here of all wine, but of the wine
of those vessels says the spouse. For there is a mingled wine, such as the
Pharisees gave the people to drink. There is also a vineger-wine, a dead and
turned-wine, yea a poisoned wine, as is that with which the great whore of Rome
has poisoned the kings and nations, Apoc. 17.2. to make them to rave and to
rage, as Jeremy also speaks of that other Babylon, Ier. 51.17. And therefore
we must take diligent heed we be not herein deceived, the world being over
full, and now more then ever, of such brewers and minglers of this wine, that is
to say, of this word of God which ought to be sincerely and purely administered,
as the Apostle warns us, proposing himself for an example, 2. Cor. 2.17.
warning elsewhere all the faithful, to prove all things and approve the good:
1 Thessalonians. 5.21. We must therefore follow the example of them of Beroea, who,
as it is written, Act. 17.11. before they would drink the wine which was
presented them by the hand of the Apostle himself, a faithful servant of God,
would first see and know whether it agreed with the wine of the old vessels or
barrels, namely that which the Prophets gaged and drew: which when they had
found, then they received it and drank thereof: as it is also said by the Lord,
Mat. 13.52. that every scribe and doctor which is well taught in the kingdom
of heaven, is like unto an house-holder which brings forth of his treasure
things new and old. And here we must again take diligent heed of satan's and
his ministers subtilty, who would bear us in hand that al old wine is good,
and must be received: which is most false. For there is as well old wine
mingled and poisoned, as new wine, which we must warily take heed of. The
receipt therefore to preserve us therefrom, or if happily we have drunk of
it, to vomit it up again, is first, to consider well whether it be drawn out
of the true vessels of the Lords s^ller, which are the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, otherwise called, the old and the new Testament, and so
consequently reject and refuse without all exception whatsoever wine is drawn
elsewhere. Again seeing the craft and subtilty of these lewd tauerners and
poisoners is such, that they infect and corrupt eue^ the pure wine drawn out of
the true vessels: we must in the second place consider of well, not only the
color, which they can well tell how to counterfeit, but especially the savor and
the taste, before we swallowe down one drop of it. As Much is meant by that
which the spouse says afterward, not simply that they should make her a bed
of apples, but of those apples, to wit, of those which are gathered from the
true apple tree, which is the tree of life: of which whosoever eareth, he
shall never see death, Ioh. 6.51.

4 But yet this spouse is not so contented, if the Bridegroom hold not up her
head with one hand and her body with the other, and that for two reasons. The
first because the force and vigor of that wine, and of those apples, that is to
say, of the preaching of the word of God which quicken our heart and cause our
spirits to come again unto us, depends wholly and entirely upon the inward
power and working of God, without which the word preached is no other thing
then a sound which enters in at the one ear, and goes forth at the other:
and the sacraments are nothing else but vain shows and representations of
things terrestrial and common: save that the contempt, either of this word
or of these sacraments condemns the contemner and despiser of them before
God. For it is for sorcerers, charmers, and inchaunters, to attribute a power
of woorking unto the bare and simple pronuntiation of words, be they
understood and liked of, or not: as also to attribute any kind of holiness or
virtue of working in our soul unto the sign of the Sacrament, is not only
superstition, but execrable and damnable Idolatry. For this is a thing denied
unto the Angels themselves, this virtue being incommunicably proper and
belonging unto God, signifieng only by his word and by his sacraments, that
which he does truly work and effect within and in the heart and soul of
every faithful by his only powerful woorking: which I will declare and make
plain unto you by a familiar similitude, that we iut not any more and run
a-shelfe on such Idolatry and very manifest sorcery. The question therefore
being of corporal nourishment, because God has so ordained it from the
beginning, that the creatures should be sustained in their earthly and sensual
life, as Saint Paul calls it, by that which the earth brings forth and
produces, Genesis 1.29.30. It is certain that God has withal given and as it
were enclosed in the bread, that which the Prophet calls the staff of bread,
Ezech. 4.16. that is to say, a natural virtue and power to maintain the
strength of body in him who eats thereof and can digest it. Likewise he has
given unto the wine a natural and inward virtue and property to sustain and
to cheer the heart of man which drinks thereof competently and measurablie:
Psalm. 104.15. The like is of other creatures created for the use of this
corporal life with giving of thanks, 1. Tim. 4.3. as it comes also to pass
in many other creatures ordained for remedies of sicknesses and diseases,
against which, we see that god has inserted in them a certain proper and
natural force and virtue, reserving still notwithstanding unto himself the
right and power of making this virtue of theirs auailable, or not auailable in
his creatures, according unto his good will and pleasure: so that it is on just
cause, that we crave of him our daily bread, as confessing, that as he alone
has made the bread, so he has compassed and limited the virtue and force
thereof: in which respect we must avouch and confess, that himself is the
first and true cause of our being and nourishment: but as for the life
spiritual and eternal, that is in such sort resiant and abiding in the only
person of Jesus Christ, the true and only bread of life, that there never was,
nor is, nor shall be any creature whatsoever in heaven, or in earth, or below
the earth, which has in it any one dram, be it never so little, of this force
and virtue, which truly quickneth and lives unto eternal life. For even as
himself alone has done all things which were requisite for our salvation:
so the force and virtue both of disposing the soul of man to receive and
apprehend that which he has done for us, as also of applying this salvation,
is no where else but in the sole person of Jesus Christ, whence it must flow
and be powered upon us by the virtue and power of the holy ghost, which is also
the essential power of the father and the son: of whom for this cause Jesus
Christ has said, he shall take of mine and shall show it unto you, Ioh.
16.14.15. What do the Angels then touching our salvation? They are ordained of
God to oppose and set themselves against all adverse and contrary powers (as we
see it verified in Daniel) being camped about the faithful, Genesis 32.2. Psalm.
34.8. In a word, they are his messengers unto the saints, Act. 10.3. Heb.
1.14. but not that they have any virtue or power, either in whole or in any
part whatsoever, to draw us unto God: to change our hearts of stone into
hearts of flesh: to give us ears to hear: to open our heart, much less to
justify and to sanctify us. For all this is properly appertaining unto God
our father, by his holy spirit, in his son Jesus Christ. And what is the
power of men chosen and sent unto this purpose? To be the ambassadors of God,
to announce and declare his will, to sow, to plant, to water the field into
which they are sent, in as much as they preach the word and administer the
sacramental signs: but who is it that disposes and fitteth the land, which
of it self is barraine and stony, to receive the seed? Who makes it to grow,
to bud forth, to flourish, to bear fruit? The only son of righteousness,
the only appointed Prince and Savior to give repentance and remission of
sins unto his Israel, Act. 5.31. What is then the use of the word? To
signify unto the soul of man by the ears, that wherefore the words are in
every language and tongue ordained, and nothing else: in such wise, that in
respect of them who have not the understanding of the tongue in which a man
speaks, and of them which well understand the tongue, but have not received of
God the capacity of understanding, to discern and like of that which sounds
in their ears, this word has no more efficacy of working unto salvation,
then if one should speak unto a dead man. And the sacraments what virtue
have they? To represent unto the eyes that which the sacramental promise says
unto the ears, and nothing else. What does then the water of Baptism do in
the administration thereof? It testifies unto the eyes and other the senses of
him which is Baptized being come unto age, that as the common water washes
away the filth and uncleanness of the body, so Jesus Christ has by his death
and passion washed away and done forth al our sins, and purified and cleansed
us from our corruption to glorify us one day in life eternal. This is it I
say which it testifies and witnesses unto us, and not that it ca^ cause any
thing to be performed in us unto farther sanctification, or produce any thing
in us in that behalf, as being therefore called sacred and holy, not that it
has any more purity or holiness in it self then common water: but only
because it is appointed and dedicated unto this holy use, to be an holy,
heavenly and spiritual testimony of our sanctification, by the ordinance of
God. The like is to be said of the sacramental signs of the holy Supper of
the Lord, to wit, that the bread and the wine are holy and sacred testimonies
ordained of God to witness unto our eyes things invisible, and such as are
effectuated and wrought in us by the only working and power of the holy
Ghost, namely, that as receiving bread and wine corporally for the norishment
of the body and mainteinance of this corporal life: so embracing by faith our
Lord Jesus Christ, true God and true man, he is made ours and we are made his
most nearely and straightly by a spiritual communication which we have with him,
and by the true juice of spiritual and eternal life and nourishment which we
draw from him: to the end to live eternally in body and soul with him, when
this blessed and happy day shall come. I say therefore again, that, to
attribute any inward virtue and power unto the words, though the words be
such as are ordained by God and pronounced in his name: semblaby to attribute
any virtue unto the administratours of the word or of the sacraments: yea
farther to attribute any spiritual force of woorking unto the sacramental
signs, is a most open and detestable, not only superstition, but also
Idolatry.

5 To come now unto the speech of our spouse, knowing this, she desires both
hands, that is to say the power and virtue of her Bridegroom to make that wine
and those Apples profitable to her, and by this means to cause her spirits to
come again unto her. Secondly she therefore desires this, because she
knows that if the second grace accompany not the first, and the third the
second, and so on unto the end, nothing would be perfected and effected in us,
and we would incontinently vomit up again the meat and drink we received,
with how good an appetite so ever we first sauoured and ate it: and so our
latter estate and condition should be worse then the first, and from sounding
we should fall into an utter fainting and giving up the ghost. And therefore
if we will be this true Church, there is no thinking of our selves proper and
able men straight way, when we have received a little, and so content our
selves with that measure of faith we have, though we had an hundred thousand
times more then we have: but we must have a perpetual appetite, desiring that
which we have already, to the end it may be still continued and increased in
us: craving of God new strength, and that it would please him not to lead us
into tentation: but continue to sustain and hold up with one hand our weak
and heavy head, and embracing with the other hand our heart and our will
altogether fainting and languishing, naie for the most part of time, rebelling
against him: to the end that being fortified in all the faculties and actions
of the body and soul, and so strengthened thoroughly in body and soul, we
may end our course happily and receive the crown which he has prepared for
us.

6 It follows now to see how the spouse being by means of that wine, and
those apples come unto herself, is in this place proposed unto us as it were
in a deep rest, not of a sleep, which would bereave her of al manner of
feeling of that good, which she receives in this feast, as we see how that
natural sleep is no other unto us the^ the Image of death, hindering the
actions of al our senses, albeit that God has ordained it for the refreshing
and strengthening of our poor body, which has need of this comfort, and
would not otherwise be able to endure and continue in his daily travel. But we
must understand by this sleep of the spouse, that happy repose and
contentment, which every faithful soul enioieth, being sequestered from all
earthly cogitations and thoughts to be occupied only in the good digesting of
that which it has eaten in this feast, to be thereby nourished, that is to
say, of that which she has learned and received in the Church of the Lord,
hearing his word and receiving his sacraments: even as after corporal
repast, a man quitting and laying aside all his corporal actions, sets
himself to sleep, to digest that which he has eaten and dronken, thereby to
be preserved and sustained. This repose the^ is nothing else but that meditation
whereof it is spoken, Psalm. 1.2. and Psalm. 16.17. And elsewhere in many other
places, and whereof we have excellent examples, in the Canticles or songs of
Samuels mother, 1. Sam. 2.1. and of David, 2. Sam. 7.18. of Zachary, of the
virgin Mary, of Simeon, Luke 1. and 2. For so far is it that this sleep
causes the saints to loose their speech, that contrariwise it is it which
opens their mouth, not to talk as in a dream, but to speak as being
ravished into heaven. This is it which we see happened unto Saint Peter, in the
history of the transfiguration of the Lord, having his eyes dazeled with the
appearaunce of his glory, Mar. 9.6.

7 Now as it is not in the power of men to give unto us this repose and rest,
Ioh. 14.27. so neither can they take it from us. True it is that Satan
troubles it, and cutteth it off so much as he can, and wants no helps, yea
of our own selves in this behalf and to this purpose. But yet notwithstanding
it is not in the power of any to trouble us, except when and how far it
pleases God they shall do it. This is it which we are here to learn
touching the express charge, the Bridegroom in this place gives unto the
daughters of Jerusalem, that they trouble not this rest of his spouse, but
suffer her to sleep quietly so long as she will. Wherein we have first to
marcke diligently, this continual and perpetual providence of him, of whom it
is said, that he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm.
121.4. And therefore it is unto him we must make our only repair and refuge
saying with the same David: I will lay me down to sleep and will not wake,
for the eternal will defend me. Which he does not only then, when in despite of
the Devil and al his accomplices we have some rest, as we may say, that for
these fifty years or thereabout, it has pleased God to continue it unto us in
this place, and as it is said, Psalm. 23. to feed us in all abundance with his
heavenly food, in the sight and view of all the enemies of his truth: but
also principally in the most rough tempests of trials: that we might say with
David: he has hid me in his tabernacle in the time of adversity according
unto those words with which the Lord comforts his church, Esaias. 26.20. Arise
my people, enter into thy secret chambers and shut the door unto thee, and hide
thy self for a little time, until the indignation be ouerpassed. It is the
Lord then who gives this true repose and rest unto his Church, and who
defends it so far as seems expedient unto his blessed will.

8 But what are these daughters of Jerusalem which are thus adjured in this
place? Some take them to be the damsels of the spouses train, as if a man
should say unto the waiting gentlewemen of a Queen, take heed you awake not
your Lady and Mistress. But it were needless to use so solemn a charge
toward such persons: and it seems rather that this is spoken unto them who
would not fail to trouble this repose and rest if so be they were not hindered.
The Bridegroom therefore in this place calls them daughters of Jerusalem, whom
the spouse before, Chap. 1.6. calls not Her sisters, but Children of her
mother: namely those, which are in the Church but not of the Church, as S. Paul
puts a great difference, between the circumcised without, and the
circumcised within, Romans 2.18. saying, that al are not the children of Abraham,
which are of the posterity of Abraham, Romans 9.7. These are therefore they unto
who^ the Bridegroom gives this charge, as unto those, who are the nearest, and
therefore the most dangerous enemies of the Churches rest, as experience has
daily showed, and yet every day still shows the^ to be. For who are they who
at this day do most hinder the advancement of the kingdom of God, and that
the Church ioyeth not in this rest? They are neither Jews nor Turks which so
much do it, in comparison of them, who call themselves the Catholic Church,
naie the chief pillars thereof: together with certain cursed Apostates and
heretics gone forth from us, because they were not indeed of us, 1. Ioh.
2.9. but what? God brideleth them notwithstanding then, and so far as is
behooueful and expedient, as it is said in this place.

9 As for the Roes and Hindes which are here taken to witness of this charge,
besides that this manner of speech is agreeable to the whole tenor of this
Canticle, in which this mutual discourse is represented to be had between those
which are in the fields: it is no new thing that the Lord and his servants,
take to witness against men al sorts of creatures: as the heavens and earth,
Deuteronomy. 32.1. the oxen and the stars, Esai. 1.2. the cranes, the storcks, and the
swallows, Ier. 8.7. yea the mountains and the foundations of the earth, Mich.
6.1. As in deed there is no creature high, middle, nor low which demands
not vengeance of God, against such as are rebellious and disobedient unto his
commandementes, Romans 8.21: Yea when it pleases God, he makes them
executioners of his judgments, as appears by the sauadge and cruel
beasts, of which it is spoken, 1. King. 13.25. and 2. King. 17.25. even the
very frogs and flies, as appears by the plagues of Egypt: so that it is
verily a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living god. And with
this are they especially threatened, who are the perturbers and troublers of the
church, otherwise called the anointed of the Lord, Psalm, 105.15. and which
are here named the Bridegroomes love, a word most sweet, pleasant and
amiable. O wretched and wretched again is he who refuses to have his part
therein, especially now when the son has revealed unto us all the secrets of
our salvation, as unto his frindes, and not as unto his servants, Ioh. 15.15.
yea, has confirmed and ratified unto us this infinite Love and Dilection of
his, by giving his life for us.

10 But what mean these words which follow, until she will be awaked? For can
the faithful soul be full of this sleep, and desire to be awaked out of it?
Certainly Saint Peter had no such meaning in the history of the
transfiguration, but rather desired, he might stay continually in the mountain.
I confess therefore that such a meditation and as it were such a retired
contemplation of every faithful soul, is a thing altogether incomparable in
respect of any thing in this woorlde besides: whereof David may be a witness
Psalm. 63.6.7. But notwithstanding seeing the members of the Church ought not
only to receive this nourishment to be thereby sustained and nourished, but
also to imploie themselves to the use and service of the whole body, there is
no talk of being always and continuing in this contemplation: but we must
come also unto action and travail day and night, every man according unto his
vocation. And therefore these good fathers, who so sequester themselves from
the world, that in the end they have neither served to their own and others
profit, have greatly abused themselves. So we read that Jesus Christ, the
true and perfect pattern of Christian life, withdrewe himself aside at
evening into some secret place: but he employed all the day in going up and
down, in teaching and doing of miracles, yea busying himself so far as that
he forgate his meat, Mark. 3.20. Saint Paul also knows not which of the two
he should choose, namely, either to be dislodged out of this body, which he
especially desired, or to remain in it, Phil. 3.23. and that to travel night
and day, both publicly and in private houses, Act. 20.20. And this is the
cause why the Bridegroom would have his spouse to take her rest and that
soundly, and so far as to be satisfied therewith, and no man to trouble her
repose, except the Bridegroom would so have it and appoint it. For it is for
him alone to wake her, as he says afterward, and her self also desires no
more rest then it pleases her Bridegroom to grant her.

11 And thus you see in sum what we are to learn out of this most excellent
place of Scripture full of singular Doctrine, namely that it is in God alone in
whom we must seek after our true felicity, hearing and meditating day and
night his holy word, and depending on his providence and protection, until we
be gathered together in his everlasting kingdom, where this holy and perpetual
marriage shall be consummated and ended. Let us now with heart and mouth pray unto
him for his grace, saying as follows.

Almighty God, etc.
THE NINETEENTH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the second Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 8.9. and 10.
verses.
8 This is the voice of my well-beloved, behold he comes leaping over the
mountains and skipping over the hills.

9 My well-beloved is like a Roe, and like an Hind-calfe. Behold he is behind our
wall, looking through the window, and showing himself through the lattise.

10 My well-beloved has spoken unto me and said, Up arise my love, my fair
one, and come thy way.


1 Three great abuses committed in contemplative life falsely called religion.

2 It is from the voice of the Bridegroom that this desire proceeds of
putting our selves into the way and going forward in our vocation.

3 Application of this doctrine unto the Church of Geneua.

4 The more then marvelous diligence and carfulness of this Bridegroom, to
run unto his spouse.

5 A comparison of this diligence with our sluggishnes.

6 The first high mountains* which satan and his accomplices have reared to keep
the spouse from her Bridegroom, which the Bridegroom mounteth readily over,
without staying a moment.

7 Other exceeding rough and craggie mountains of our sins and iniquities,
trauersed also over by the Bridegroom.

8 The Bridegroom has also taken upon himself the bottomless gulf of the
curse of God his father, to run unto our delivery with this burden on his
shoulders.

9 The difference between the new and the old covenant, represented by the
similitude of a wall, and of a grate or lattise.

10 This Bridegroom has never been dumb, and the abuse committed in this
behalf in the false Church.

11 The word of the Bridegroom serves to no purpose, if men harken not unto
it, and if they awake not themselves in deed.

12 Wherefore this spouse is called the fair one, opposed unto her which is
nothing but painted.

13 The true spouse is neither called nor goes else whither, then unto her
bridegroom only.

14 The Bridegroom must come unto us to cause us to come unto him.

15 The Bridegroom never came unto his spouse, or at this day presents
himself unto her to stay her here below: but ever called and yet calls her
to heaven: and the great abuse of them which look for him at this day
corporally in the earth.

16 These words come thy way ought to serve us for a sum and abridgement of
the whole doctrine of salvation, and to teach us the end of the whole life of a
Christian.

WE have left the spouse in the repose and rest of her meditation ravished as
it were altogether in an ecstasie, out of which her repose, she is now awaked
by the Bridegroom, notwithstanding not to trouble her, but to lead her as it
were out of one pleasure into an other. The like comes to pass after
natural sleep, which being taken in sufficient measure refreshes a man, and
raises, as a man would say, new forces in him: as contrariwise the same, if it
pass and exceed a mean, breeds first in a man a lazines and sluggishnesse,
and finally draws a man into a bad and naughty custom. So is it in this
spiritual rest, which the soul being withdrawn aside by it self to meditate
on the graces of God, and to be occupied in prayer in his secret chamber, Mat.
6.6. enioieth: be it by day or by night, according unto the example of David
in many of his Psalms. But if of this meditation a man will make a contemplative
life, faslly called Angelical, he commits therein two notable faults, which
by little and little come at the length to a third, which is utter perdition and
destruction of himself. For first a man departs and withdraws himself
from the principal duty of a Christian, which is to serve his neighbor
according unto his vocation: which cannot be done if a man sequester himself
from men and employ not his mind in any other actions then such, as are
specially and particularly belonging unto himself, whereas we ought to apply
all the knowledge we have in humane or divine things unto the mutual profit
and advancement of one an other. Secondly by such a kind of continual
contemplation, it is impossible but a man will become at the last sottish and
fantastical, especially if unto it be added an austerity of life without
mean and good measure: and at last after that a man has besotted himself
with such a dreaming and fantastical kind of life, he begins to persuade
himself by little and little, not only in that false and damnable opinion of
merit, but also finally, that he is arrived to the greatest perfection that
may be, nay gone beyond Paradise it self. I let pass to speak of the notable
hypocrisy, and other most stinking filthiness which is hidden under the
cloak and color of this kind of life, which falsely appropriateth to it self
the name of Religion. For proof of this let us look no farther, then first
unto the doting dreams which are found as well in the legendes of these holy
fathers, as also in the writings of certain contemplative doctors: and after
that, unto the abuses with which this kind of vermin has filled the whole
world, and poisoned especially al Christendom: in such sort that the Popes
themselves have been forced and constrained to decree that there should be no
more new orders of monks set up, as that decree made expreslie to this purpose
in that great Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the third, An. 1215. may
witness. And yet for all that, behold yet a new swarm of locusts, the order of
the Capuchins, and of those shameless companions which attribute unto
themselves the name of the company of Jesus, which are within these forty
years crauled out of the bottomless pit, to happer and swarm throughout the
world, which indeed deserves nothing else but to be broused and bitten with
such caterpillars.

2 But let us go out of this sinck, and return unto this spouse, who is now
awaked by her Bridegroom, and invited and called unto the other part of
Christian life, that is to say, the other kind of conuersing with her
Bridegroom, namely unto the practice of that which she has learned and
meditated. For what is this else, to rise and to take her way to come unto
him, but to order and direct the course of her life according unto her
vocation, conformably unto the commandments of God? Thy word, says the
Prophet, Psalm. 119. v. 105. is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my
going. And this is the reason why we are warned to walk in his ways, and
wherefore Jesus Christ said Walk while you have the light. But how shall they
march forward and walk, who have no legs? Truly this must be by him and by
no other, who gives eyes unto the blind, and straightneth them whose limbs
are crooked, Psalm. 146.8. unto whom the Prophet said, Teach me thy right ways.
And this is the very cause also why the spouse in this place confesses that
she was awakened by the voice of her Bridegroom, and not of her self. For if
we cannot of our selves pray as we ought, Romans 8.26. how can it proceed of
our selves either to wi^ or to do? Phil. 2.13. But this voice must also be
heard and received by his grace, who opens the heart to hear well, Act. 16.14.
as this spouse in this place witnesses, showing that she is the true Church,
according unto the saying of Jesus Christ, that his sheep hear his voice, and
not the voice of a stranger, Ioh. 10.3.5. In a word therefore, we would never
come unto him, naie never so much as think to go unto him, if he came not
first unto us, to warn us thereof, naie to form in us the desire of going
unto him: and which more is, if he accompanied not this grace of going unto
him, with a second grace of blessing and effecting in us this desire of going
unto him to the end that that might be accomplished in us which he says by
his Prophet, I have made my self to be found of them who sought not after me,
Esai. 65.1.

3 And need we go any farther then unto our selves, who are here to verify
this doctrine? Behold us a multitude assembled partly of originary inhabitants
borne in this place; and partly also, and that too for the most part, gathered
together out of many nations of the East, West, South, and North. Dare the
borne-dwellers of this City say, that themselves did first seek after this
bridegroom? Or not contrariwise, that he came and sought them? Nay must they
not confess that the Bridegroom has espoused them by plain miracle,
bringing them an happy freedom both temporal and spiritual: wherein he still
maintains them to the wonder and admiration of the whole world? And as for
us who are here gathered together from out of all the quarters and corners of
the world, if we consider every of us out of what bottomless gulf and dungeon
he has drawn us, and when, and how: must we not say unto him: Lord unto
thee be glory, and not unto us? But alas what shall become of them who having
heard his voice, and having given their word also they would go into the
vineyard, nay have gone into it, have there become deaffe, and wicked workers?
Shall he not say unto them: Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you
not?

4 Now though this be a benefit altogether inestimable, that it pleases the
bridegroom to awaken his spouse, to the end himself might teach her, and make
her a better hus-wife in the house of her Bridegroom* yet what is this in
respect of the extreme carfulness and diligence which he uses in this
behalf? He mounteth, says the spouse, over the mountains, and skippeth over
the hills like a Roe or an Hind calfe. And what understanding of man is able to
comprehend so great a love and good will? His sheep are wandered and straied of
themselves: and behold the sheepeheard who runs after them, and there is
neither rock, nor torrent, mountain, nor valley, which can stay him from
passing over until he find them, to bring them back again unto the fold. And
what manner of sheep I pray you? Mary such as are stubborn and rebellious,
and seek themselves after the wolf, so little account make they of the
sheepeheard. And of what sheepeheard? Of such a one as has no need at al of
the sheep, and who neither feeds himself with the flesh, nor clotheth
himself with the woll of them, and which of themselves can bring no other
thing unto their shepherd then al manner of filthiness and uncleanness, and
yet are sought after of him notwithstanding over hill and dale, of him I say,
who neither has any need of them, neither can ever receive any commodity by
them. For there is nothing lets, but that this which is here spoken of this
agility of the Bridegroom in hastening to waken his spouse being asleep, may
not be understood of an other sleep then that, whereof we spoke before. In a
word if the Lord made not have to provide for us, who doubts but that we
should have perished a thousand times before we could have said unto him with
the Prophet, O Lord think upon mine aid, o Lord make have to succor me, Psalm.
70.2. And therefore it is not without great reason that he vpbraideth us with
this slothfulness and retchlesnesse of ours by his Prophet, saying, I have
spoken continually unto you from the morning unto the evening, and you have not
hearkened unto me: I have cried unto you, but you have not heard me, Ier. 7.13.
and 11.7.

5 Alas, my brethren, it is of us that this complaint is made, unto whom the
Lord for these eight and forty years has not ceased to cry: but how many
are there who insteede of awaking, according unto the exhortation of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.8. sleep not on still in their sins and vices, yea so far as
that they have left no place more neither for the judgments of God, neither
for the faithful and continual admonitions of his servants? And yet if we will
be this true spouse of Christ, we shoud do that which is here said, I mean we
should as soon as the Bridegroom has spoken, say, behold the voice of the
Bridegroom, we should go, naie we should run to meet him, with our lamps
in our hands, to enter in unto the marriage feast, as it is spoken in the
parable of the virgins, Mat. 25. before he swear that we shall not enter into
his rest, Psalm. 95.11.

6 Now to make us the more ashamed of our slownes and sluggishnes, we must
consider of this similitude of the Roe or hind-calfe, unto which the Bridegroom
is in this place compared, as unto beasts of great agilitie and nimblenes:
especially if we take the word which Solomon here uses, not for a Roe, but for
a chamoise or gemps, which is a beast more swift then the other without
comparison, and of an incredible venterousnes and dexterity together to leap
from cliffe to cliffe, as if it were a beast that rather flies, as a man might
say, then leapeth. Behold then why it is said that this Bridegroom running
unto his spouse, quitteth the Mountains and the hills. And what are these
mountains else, but that which puts a mid-wall, as it were, between God
and us, to hinder him if it might be, from coming unto us, and joining
himself with us? Now there are two sorts of these mid-mountaines. For first
of all Satan and his accomplices do what lies in them to hinder that this
bridegroom and this spouse should never see each the other, leaving no kind of
cruelty unpracticed, nor any kind of subtle and crafty sly means
unattempted to work this division and divorce: the which thing is verified
throughout the whole sacred history. But to go no farther for proof hereof,
what has been done in this behalf in our time by Kings and Emperors
enchaunted and bewitched by that whore of Rome, and by her slaves? And what
does the world still every day? Read we over all the histories of the
ancient persecutions, no one excepted, shall we find the like unto that which
has been practiced in our time? For there is neither fire, nor water, nor
air, nor earth, which have not al of them been employed to suck the life of
our poor brethren: there is no kind of cruel death through which they have not
passed, neither have the hands of the hangmen only been wearied with their
slaughter, but the people also have been employed to embrue themselves with the
blood of the poor, meek and innocent, without distinction of age* or
difference of sex, or any privilege of nature whatsoever: and this
licenciousnesse has been permitted, to any that would die his hands red
with innocent blood, not in time of war and hostility, but in the greatest
appearance and confidence that might be of peace and frindship. As for all
manner of sleightes and wiles, has there bin any one vnforgotten? But what?
Could these impedimentes stay the Bridegroom, and shut him as it were up in
heaven? No But he has leaped over all this, and though he seemed to have
abandoned and forsaken those who are his, yet was there never any tempest
wherein he reached them not forth his hand, and whereof the end and issue both
in respect of them whom he has miraculouslie preserved and plucked forth out
of the bloody hands of their enemies, as also in regard of them whom he has
vouchsafed this honor of finding their life before him, in leesing of it before
men) has not finally turned unto the confusion of the persecutors themselves:
some of them being presently punished, others being set as a spectacle of
Gods horrible judgments, not outwardly, which is a false mark and note, but
inwardly, dying as wickedlie as they lived* others living still to this day
for no other end, but to be witnesses of gods infinite patience; who give them
grace to acknowledge and amend their so great wickedness. Yea but will some of
these mockers and scorners, of which the world is full fraught at this day,
say; It is now too late. I answer, and that without all sophistication,
taking the words as we ought to take them, that to come late is not to bestow
a long time in coming, but more time then should be bestowed. The sun
comes not unto his point and period but after twelve months: shall we say
that he is too late therefore in ruling the seasons of the year? Yea verily, if
we will be wiser herein then God: but men of understanding and reason, and such
as know that the Lord has ordered and ruled the motions of the heavens with
a wisdom in no point impeachable and such as preaches the glory of God unto
all the world, as it is declared in the 19. Psalm. and elsewhere, judge otherwise.
And who may then be suffered to say, that the Lord who has made the times and
seasons for the good and the bad, according as it is said, Genes. 8.22. has
not also bounded the government of his house and dwelling place, which is the
Church? The Prophet is not of this opinion, Psalm. 145.10. Let us therefore
know and hold this for an irrefragable point and undeniable, and altogether
resolved upon, according unto that which Saint Peter teaches us, 2. Pet. 3.9.
that the Lord is never late or slack in coming, that is to say fails not
to come at the point, yea and that leaping over all that which might seem to
slack and stay his coming: but it is he which has made the time, and who
measures it in such sort as it best appertains, which measuring of his a man
can no more reasonably find fault withal, then if he should blame the sun
for not rising at night or at noone.

7 But all this which we have said touching these mountains and hills is not the
principal, as being a thing easy to be understood, that there is neither force
nor subtilty which ca^ hinder or withhold the almighty so much as a moment of
time. But know you what these great and terrible mountains are which stand so
high between god and us? They are our sins, they are our iniquities, they are
our wickednesses which indeed separate and divide us from God: Esaie. 59.2. And
herein we must take heed how we flatter or sooth our selves. For truly
these sins of ours, these transgressions of ours, these wicked impieties of
ours, are grown and heaped up from time to time into huge and great mountains
before the face of the everliving. And what has the Lord always done? Has he
not trauersed these mountains to take pity upon his chosen and elect? What
huge mountain was the sin of Adam? what mighty rock raised between God and
the woorlde, was that confusion which brought the deluge upon the woorld? If
we pass farther in considering of the time under and after the law, what
else shall we find, then that which Daniel in that most excellent prayer of
his acknowledges and confesses? Dan. 9.4. In the mean time what has the
Bridegroom done? Adam and Eve, in whom this spouse which was and shall be
until the number of the elect be accomplished, was then wholly as it were
comprised, had no sooner cast away and undone themselves, but this bridegroom
hasted over the mountain to remedy the matter. The very night that the four
hundred years were expired and ended he brought his people out of Egypt,
shaking the heavens and the earth at their departure, Exodus 3.8. and 12.41. The
like did he p^^cisely at the end of seventy years, and stayed not a moment
beyond to deliver his people out of the captivity of Babylon. For the Lord is
true in his promises, not in part, but in all and through al. Are we assaulted
of any enemy? He is straight way by us with arms in hand to defend us, Psalm.
35. Have we provoked him to displeasure, and has he taken the rod in hand to
chastise and correct us? He knows whereof we be made, and is for the most
part contented to have pulled us only by the ear: Psalm. 103.9. If he be very
angry, and will strike in earnest, yet behold how he preuenteth his, healing
them as it were, before he have hurt them. Go to, arise my people, enter into
thy secret chambers (that is the captivity of Babylon) and shut the door upon
thee, and hide thy self as it were for a small moment, until the indignation
pass, Esaias. 26.20. and 1. Pet. 2.24. nay which more is, where sin abounds,
there does his grace in the fullness of times ouerflowe and superabound. And in
our time, and in respect of us, what has he done, and what does he yet every
day, every hour, every moment, but have and run unto us, notwitstanding al
these mighty rocks and mountains?

8 And because that in the way he was to meet with that great and more then
fearful bottomless pit of Gods most just curse and malediction upon us, how
has he wrought therein? O bounty of his, O love, O charity infinite and
incomprehensible! He has charged upon his back this mountain also of our
sins and carried it even unto his cross, he has entered and waded through
the gulf of the malediction of that Judge, so far as to cry: My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Being dead, he has pursued death eve^ unto his own
home, which is the grave, and finally passing as a victorious conqueror through
all this: he is come running unto this poor desolate spouse, and has drawn
her out of darckenesse into his most admirable light, 1. Pet. 2.9. and has
raised her from the bottom of hell to the highest top of the heavens. Ye see
then how most true it is which the spouse here speaks preaching unto us the
unspeakable speed and readiness the Bridegroom uses to awaken her, to
guide and help her at her need.

9 But that which the spouse adds, That the Bridegroom kept himself behind
the wall, and caused himself to be seen only through the grate or lattise,
ought well to be considered as putting a difference between the old and the
new covenant. For it is true that there was never no other mediator between
God and men, but this only Bridegroom of this only spouse, which is the
Church. It is also most true, that in respect of the effect of his death, he
has suffered from the beginning of the world, Apoc. 13.8. and that
consequently the faith of the ancient fathers and ours is al one faith, Heb.
11. But in respect of the manner and measure of the manifestation of this
knowledge, there have been two covenants: the one new, the other old which
has an end, being ordained no longer then unto the real coming of the Savior
and full exhibiting and declaration of the doctrine of salvation, which is the
gospel. Under the ancient covenant therefore the Lord has spoken many times
and in diverse sorts, not of another doctrine, but after another fashion, both
unto the Patriarchs before the Law, and afterward after another manner under
the Law by the shadows and figures thereof: whereof Jesus Christ was the body
and substance, Heb. 1.1. and. 10.1. and Coloss. 2.17 and. 1. Cor. 10.4.11. and
Gal. 4.24. but in the fulness of times God spoke by the mouth of his own son,
who became our brother, and exhibited and accomplished reallie that which was
before represented as it were a far off, through the shadows of the Law
ceremonial, Heb. 11.13. The Bridegroom therefore came then unto the spouse,
but not so near as to kiss her with the kisses of his own mouth, for the last
pledge as it were of the consummation of this marriage: but kept himself
aloof behind the wall, to say as it were unto his spouse, Lo behold me who
forget you not, but will assuredly keep my promise with you in his time,
without failing a jot with you, how many difficulties and hindrances so ever
present themselves between us. Which thing is verified throughout the whole
sacred history of the time which went before the coming of Jesus Christ in
flesh. By this wall therefore we must understand, first of al whatsoever was
wanting in the ancient covenant being compared with the new, and this again in
a double respect. For besides that the effect and end of the faith of the
ancient fathers depe^ded on that which was to be executed and performed, and
which was really executed for our salvation by Jesus christ come in the flesh,
to the end that as it is said, Heb. 11.40. they should not be saved without us:
this secret and mystery was shadowed forth unto the^ by diverse and sundry
legal figures, which is compared unto a wall, which was first to be sallied
over, before he and his spouse could see each other and be joined more nearer
together. Moreover, as the same is most diuinelie handled by the Apostle in the
Ep. to the Galathians, the acco^plishment of all righteousness and the
satisfaction for our sins being not yet actuallie come, although by faith the
same were present before God and unto the eyes of the believing: yet was there
still as it were a very thick wall between this Bridegroom and this spouse.
Secondly the Lord having chosen unto himself that only people of the Jews,
separated al other people of the world from the^ in every kind of sort, whether
we consider the principal point which was the covenant of salvation, or whether
we have a regard unto all that which concerned the policy of Israel, Ephesians.
2.12. the which separation endured until the mid-wal was broken down, and the
testament of Jacob was accomplished, who calls the Messiah (that is to say
this Bridegroom) the expectation of the Gentiles in general as Simeon in his
song expounded the same, Genesis 49.10. Luke 2.32. conformablie unto the whole
Scripture. It is no marvel therefore if this spouse having regard unto her
condition, such as then it was and should remain until the coming of this
Bridegroom in flesh, makes mention of this wall. Now she adds this word of
grates or lattise to show hereby that this wall is not of any thick or
earthly matter, so that the Bridegroom might not be perceived through it any
whit at al being on the other side: nor like unto those walls which separate the
wicked from God. But such a wall as has open windows in it, or as if it were
pierced with grates and lattise. For such was the ancient covenant made with
Abraham and afterward renewed under Moses with a thousand ceremonies, albeit
obscure, yet such notwithstanding as that through them the ancient fathers
beheld with Abraham the day of the Lord and reioiced thereat, Ioh. 8.56.
Neither may we doubt but that Solomon, who was the builder of the temple, used
these manner of speeches, in respect of those walls, vails and bars, by which not
only the common people were kept forth out of the court of the priests, but
the inner court also of the Priests distinguished from the sanctuary, all
which partitions were first broken down from the bottom unto the top at the
death of the Lord, Mat. 27.31. to the end that all that, which declared that
the promises were not yet reallie executed, being removed, the people of God
should look for a better condition, Heb. 7.19. and that that which separated
the people of Israel from other nations of the earth being beaten down, all
people should be blessed being made the sons of Abraham, unto whom the
promise was made, that he should be the father of blessing, to all the
nations of the earth, as the Apostle declares the same most amply and at large
in the Epistles unto the Galathians and the Ephesians.

10 It is said therefore that this beloved caused himself to be seen through
the grates or lattise, but it is also added by and by that he spoke too. For
the true Jesus Christ is not a dumb Idol, nor a crucifixe of stone or of wood,
he is not this goodly breadden god closed in the Pixe, which cannot show
himself, without he be carried about, and is dumb and can make no complaint
though the mites or the mise eat him. But this is the true God which spoke
then in the Temple by the figures of the law, and by the mouth of the Priests
doing their duty, Mal. 2.7. and in the Synagoges by the Leuits and doctors of
the law every sabbath Mat. 23.2. Act. 13.27. and 15.21. and in all places and
every where by the Prophets, as well by mouth as also by writing, Esaias. 40.6.
Zach. 1.14. Ierem. 36.2. and 1. Pet. 1.11. In a word, wisdom did then cry in
the streets, even by the mouth also of the penne-man of this Canticle, as all
the rest of his writings do also witness, Prouer. 1.20. but never by Images
or Idols, which were afterward called the books of the ignorant people indeed
books to teach them al manner of falsehood, as the Prophets pronounce of them,
and such as transform the worshippers also of them into Idols, Psalm. 115.8.
and 135.18. as indeed is come to pass, and is to be seen with the eye in
every false Church of Idols. The true and only Church therefore is she, which
alone may say, My well-beloved has spoken unto me, which she could not say
neither, if as the Bridegroom spoke, so she also did not hearken unto him,
and retained that which she heard of him without blending any thing with it, or
without adding ought thereto, or diminishing any thing from it. For the false
Church vaunteth also that the Bridegroom has spoken unto her too: but if a
man demand what it is he said, then appears her shamelessness and forgerie.
For as for the common sort, whom they call the laity, it is heresy for them to
read this word in the common and vulgar language: and as for those to whom they
are to refer themselves, shall a man find one man among an hundred, who ever
thought upon the holy Scriptures, nay has seen so much as the cover of the
books? Indeed certain wallet-brethren there are, of whom some be chattering
until their chappes be made up with the pray they sought after: others of
them recommend their covent to the charity of devout people, and all of them
together bestirre themselves well in their business. But where is in the mean
time the word of this Bridegroom? It either sleeps, or is yelled and howled
out, censed, adored, clouted and patched up in a strange language, and upon
some solemn days sophisticated and quintessenced in a limbecke, to serve for
a correctiue in the poisoned drench of the whore. O most poor and miserable
condition! But the world is worthy of such Prophets.

11 I have said, that it is not enough that the Bridegroom speak, but we
must hearken unto, know and practice that which he speaks. That is not the
true Church then which staieth herself still here below, and consequently
goes no farther then herself, either in whole or in part, mingling her own
merits with grace, according unto the example of the proud Pharisie, Luke
18.11. and that much less, which either boroweth or buieth the false merits of
an other, which were never any: but she which seeks after her whole
righteousness and life, in the only free love and dilection of Jesus Christ.

12 He calls her also his fair one, and that by great reason and on just
cause. For the true Church is adorned and decked with the whole beutie of her
Bridegroom, and therefore it is not that harlot painted with the painters pot
of those inventions whereof mention is made, Coloss. 2.22. as neither are those
hipocrites the Church of God, who are like unto painted sepulchers, fair
without, and full of al stench and rottennes within, Matthew. 23.27. Neither those
who are the reformed in name but more then deformed indeed, who have put off
the Pope with his superstition, but yet have not put on Jesus Christ and true
godliness: have abolished and removed the visible Idols of wood and stone, but
harbor still within themselves the invisible Idols, the more dangerous, whom
they serve and honor day and night, I mean covetousness, gluttony and such
other good goddesses.

13 The Bride adds and come thy way, namely unto me, and to no other
neither in heaven nor in earth, yea and that without ioining with him any
companion or fellow collateral, as they do who worship and adore a strange
Queen of heaven: much less making any his superior, as do those
sacrilegious worshippers and adorers of the virgin Marie, who are so
impudentlie presumpteous as to cry out in their dens of Idolatry, Roga
patrem, iube natum: that is, pray the father, command the son: and Iure
matris impera, that is, command in the authority of a mother. For this
Bridegroom is the only mediator between God and men, not only of
Redemption, but also of Intercession, though the Saints which live do pray
in common both for themselves and for their brethren. And this was the practice
of the whole Church from the beginning of the world, until the time of the
general revolt, when it came in by little and little under color of devotion.

14 But some man will happily demand, in what sort this is to be understood,
that he which comes himself to awake the spouse, inuiteth her to come unto
him? The answer is, that we would never come unto Jesus Christ, either to
hear him, or to practice his doctrine, if as he has loved us first, so he
came not also to summon and warn us first, to follow him. For if he came unto
us to stay and abide here below with us, then were his kingdom of this
woorlde: but now he cease not to cry after us to draw us from hence on high
unto him, Coloss. 3.1.

15 What did this Bridegroom then say by all the ancient prophecies and
shadows of the Law, but this, Come unto me, and rest not your selves on that
which you here see with your eye, but hold your selves unto him, who is to
come in person? Which thing being not well considered by the hypocrites and
ignorant, seeking after their salvation in the altars and sacrifices, we see
how sharply and bitterly they are for that cause reprehended thoroughout the
whole Scripture. Which more is, this Bridegroom being arrived in person, and
making himself visible and palpable in flesh (which the Apostle justly
calls the great secret or mystery Ephesians. 5.32.) would not notwithstanding have
us to stay our selves on that corporal presence of his, but contrariwise it is
expedient, says he, that I go my ways, Ioh. 16.7. For, says he, my father is
greater then I. That is to say, so long as you shall see me in this
humiliation and baseness of corporal presence in such an estate as you men are,
you will never learn and know what the authority and power is which I have, and
the possession whereof I shall then receive when I shall be entered into
celestial glory with my father. And in another place, I go my way, says he,
to prepare a place, and lodging for you, Ioh. 14.2. yea in my fathers house:
and where is this house, seeing god is every where? It is true indeed that he
is every where, because he is infinite. But he dwells not but in his Saints,
and so consequently in his Church, being said to no other then unto his
people, I will dwell among them. Yea so far is it that this Bridegroom dwells
in the world: that contrariwise the Apostle desires to be dislodged to be
with him, Phil. 1.23. witnessing elsewhere that we are wayfarers and pilgrims
here below, 2. Cor. 5.1. and therefore we sigh after his return, not to
soiurne here, but to be caught up in the clouds with him, and to reign with
him for ever in that habitation, whereunto he is first ascended, and whence he
will one day come to carry us up above all the heavens, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. not to
seek or enquire farther after this glory which surpasses the reach of our
understanding. Therefore when it is said, that he is with us unto the end and
consummation of the world, this neither may nor ought to be understood of
the presence or situation of his body here below, seeing he is truly ascended
up into heaven and there shall remain until his returning again at the latter
day, Act. 1.11. and 3.21. but in as much as he dwells in our hearts by his
spirit, and that by his divine power he governs and and pre^erueth his
Church waiting her full victory. Otherwise if he were here by a real presence
of his body, it should not be said that he is departed and gone, no^ that he
will return hither again: and we should say with Saint Peter dazeled with the
glory he saw, and not then knowing what he said, It is good for us to tarry
here still, let us make us tabernacles here, Luke 9.33. And this is a
wonderful thing that themselves yet maintaining, and holding others in this
false and blockish opinion, by which the foundations of our salvation, I mean
the articles of the true incarnation, ascension and returning of Jesus Christ
are notoriously ouerthrown: consider not what themselves cry in their mass,
to wit, sursum corda, that is, lift up your hearts, which were very absurd to
say, if we must look after him here below in the hands of him whom we see
with our eyes.

16 In sum, these few words, Come thy way, ought to serve us for a summary
abridgeme^t of the whole doctrine of salvation, consisting in these two
points, that during this life, we should continually aspire on high, unto a
far better life; and that to come thereunto, turning our selves from all the
enticements and allurements which stay us here below, and using this world so,
as if we were not at al in it, 1. Cor. 7.31. and Gal. 6.14. every of us take
our way right unto God according unto his vocation, practicing and putting in
ure his commanudements: and not, when he says Come thy way, seeking after
excuses such as are mentioned, Luke 14.18. for unto such it shall not be said,
Come ye my well-beloved, but go ye cursed: the Lord grant us to hear that
so happy a word, and preserve us from this other so fearful and so horrible.
Amen.

Almighty God etc.
THE TWENTIETH SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the second Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 11.12. and
13. verses.
11 For behold the winter is passed, the rain is changed, it is gone away.

12 The flowers appear in the earth, the time of singing (of the Birds) is
come, the voice of the Turtle has been heard in our country.

13 The fig tree has brought forth his young figs, and the vines with their
grapes have cast forth their savor.


1 How the harmony of the heavens and the elements, was put out of tune in the
elementarie part of the woorld, by the sin of man.

2 The spiritual world, which is the Church, has her four seasons also,
according as the sun draws near, or is farther off, but conducted by a
secret direction of a special providence of God.

3 Example of these seasons.

4 After what sort the bridegroom having driven away the parching of the
summer, and the rigor and sharpness of the winter, inuiteth and leads his
spouse unto the springtime.

5 A description of this springtime.

6 What the fair flowers of the church are in their season.

7 The Lord planteth with these flowers the ground-plat of his Church, by his
holy gardiners.

8 A comparison of these goodly flowers with the false gloss of the false
Church.

9 A complaint touching the sterilitie and scarcity of these flowers in all
estates of Christians in our days.

10 The sonnets and songs which ring in the true Church opposed to worldly
poems, and unchaste and filthy ballades.

11 The song of the Bridegroom inuiting his spouse.

12 The song of the spouse aunswering her Bridegroom.

13 Together with the flowers are found likewise most pleasant fruits in the
garden of the true spouse.

14 A difference between the fruit of this garden, husbanded and trimmed by
the bridegroom, and those virtues which men call moral.

15 The garden of the Church is not replanted a new after the winter is past,
but has been and does remain planted from the beginning: and how greatly
they are abused who take that which is old for new, and that which is new for
old.

16 The young figs, must become perfect figs: and the young sower grapes,
must ripen and become good raisins.

17 An exhortation upon all that which went before, grounded upon the fig tree
which was cursed by the bridegroom.

IF our first Parent had not gone beyond and transgrested the commandment of
his Creator and maker, the temperature and mutual harmony of the heavens and
the elements had remained and continued in such compass and measure, that in
this life, which the Apostle Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.45. makes to consist of a
living soul, man had received, neither hurt, nor change, but had been
maintained and continued therein so long as it had pleased God. But man having
so wretchedlie and carelessly offended God, did most justly enthrall and make
himself subject unto death, Romans 5.12. and thereupon have entered all the
disorders and confusions, by which death has been caused, as well within men,
as without: among the which we are to account among the principal causes, the
changing of the seasons through which there happen these coldes and heates,
moistures and droughs, which are as it were so many preachers of the sins of
man, and so many executioners of the just condemnation of him. This
notwithstanding, it is a marvelous, naie an infinite grace and favor that the
Lord has so ruled this unruliness, and so ordered this disorder, signified by
Moses, where he says, that God being provoked by the sin of man, cursed
the earth, Genesis 3.17. that for all this, the woorld is maintained and continued
by a reciprocal and enterchangeable succession of four seasons: which is
reckoned up for a special favor unto mankind after the deluge Genesis 8.22. the
sharpnes of the winter, being bounded with the sweet and gracious springtime,
as if death were chased away by life: and the parching heat deaded by the
te^perature of the autumn-time, according as the sun accompanied with light
and with heat, comes near, or goes farther from us, a work of God
marvelously, nay infinitely admirable.

2 Now if this visible woorlde and which tends unto his end and term, be
subject to such varieties of years, seasons, months and days, the other
world which is spiritual, albeit it tend unto immortality, is yet more
turning and wheeling, not on two stars, which the Astronomers call Poles, but
upon the wheel of Gods providence conducting this other woorld by the springs
of a motion altogether secret and unknown unto us, except it be so far as it
please God to make us more particularly to know and perceive them. I
understand by this other world him, whose sins are taken away by the Lamb,
Ioh. 1.29. him, for whom the father gave his son, Ioh. 3.16. and who is
opposed unto him, for whom Jesus Christ says that he prays not, Ioh. 17.9.
and, from whom also we are severed, Ioh. 17.16. In a word it is the Church
that is here spoken of, and which has, so long as it continues here below,
her springtime, and her summer, her autumn and her winter, not ruled by the
course of the stars, but, as I have said, by a special motion of him, who
has made the heavens and the earth, to begin and end, where, and how far,
and in what sort it pleases God. Neither is it therefore to be said that the
Church, being composed of men, passes not through the cold and heat of this
lower and elementarie world, and by the effects which follow thereof, as are
barrennes, famines, plagues, and other inconveniences, nay that sometimes it
suffers not in these things more then others, as this argument is handled at
large, Ps. 73. yet notwithstanding, this natural disposition of seasons is not
it whereby we must judge the seasons of the Church, because her spring time is
often in the greatest and sharpest winter of others: and contrariwise that
which is the springtime to others, is unto her the most rough and tempestuous
winter. For she has her sun by her self, the approaching whereof with a
mild and quickening heat, not parching or scorching, brings her always a
most pleasant springtime for her better sowing, budding, and flourishing: and
afterward a te^perat su^mer for the bringing forth of her fruit: after that a
goodly autumn to gather it in his ripeness: and finally a good winter for the
enjoying thereof, and preparing of another seed. Contrariwise when this sun
withdraws it self, or distributeth not the influence of his light and heat,
as the necessities require, there are no good times of sowing, or of harvest,
or of vintage, but a general barrainnes and mortal famine; in a word, a
perpetual winter, that a man cannot see so much as one green leaf, though all
the woorlde besides be in great good health and tranquillity, with plenty
and abundance of al dainties and delicacies. This sun is this Bridegroom:
that sun of righteousness, who carries health upon his wings, Malac. 4.2.
that branch of light or daiespring from on high, Zach. 3.8. Luke. 1.78.
lightenning them whom he found in the shadow of death, Esai. 9.2. and shining
on his Jerusalem, Esaie. 60.1.2. And because that this is by the order which he
has established, that this world of his is governed, I mean by the sincere
preaching of his word and the administration of his sacraments, accompanied
with the efficacy of his holy spirit, according as the sun drawing near
or going farther off, appears unto the world, we must necessarily conclude,
that according as this holy ministry has his force, or is deprived of it
(whether it be for a time eclypsed, or whether it cast forth his beams
mightily, but me^ love darkness still more then this light, in such sort that
little effect thereof appears) it is upon this diversity and difference we
must judge of the good and fair weather, or of the il and hard time of the
Church, and not according unto the outward either prosperity, or adversity of
this world below. Notwithstanding when it so pleases God, the sun of the
Church, and the sun of this world meet, to cherish it in all kind of sorts:
as sometimes on the contrary, both of them are withdrawn together, to bring
on it a marvelous rough and as it were a deadly winter.

3 Examples hereof are sown throughout the sacred histories, and appear yet
most clearly in our time: but I will content my self with the allegation of a
few notable examples, unto the which Solomon himself might seem to have had an
especial regard. I say then, that if ever the Church enjoyed a goodly and
fair time of weather, it was under Joshua and the governors of that time, the
people being planted together with the service of God, most triumphantly in
the land of promise, as appears by that which is written in Iosu. 24.35.
Afterward, for all the time of the Judges until Samuel, if it had one fair
day, it had an whole year of stormy weather and tempests. And what a witnter
was that time, in the which the Arc of the covenant was taken captive, Silo
ruined, briefly all brought into an utter confusion? God drove away afterward
this storm of foul weather, by his Samuel, who also reformed the schools of
the Prophets. But this sunshine was scarcely appeared, when horrible
darckenesse was brought in by Saul, the Priests themselves being massacred,
sorcerers and southsaiers set up and restored, and the people exposed to
ignominy among their enemies, being as a body without an head, until that
David, not without grievous rough storms, being made king by the Lord, the
goodly clear fair wether indeed began to arise, which continued as it were unto
his full noone, under Solomon, who furnished the house of the Lord both within
and without, with a most triumphant magnificencie, at which time God granted
so long a peace unto his Church with abundance and plenty of all temporal
blessings: and it may be that the Bridegroom sets before the eyes of his
spouse, that happy change of the time, inuiting and bidding her to awake to
have the fruition thereof. As much may we and ought we to say, to have come to
pass in the time begun, about these threescore years since, the lord having
of his infinite bounty and mercy driven away out of a great part of
Christendom, the horrible and deadly darckenesse of that Idolatry brought in
by the false whore with such an efficacy of the spirit of error, that the
greatest part of them who attribute unto themselves the name of great
Catholics and Christians, are yet therewith unto this day enchanted and
bewitched. This springtime therefore was sent by the Lord from heaven, who
raised up in our time these great and famous personages in the holy ministry
of his word, and on the other side placed in the seats of magistrates, his
Ezechiasses and Iosiasses, who mightily destroyed the new Baalimes and
Astarothes.

4 And what did they else but call and inuit this spouse, being awaked, to come
unto her Bridegroom, and to accompany him into those goodly gardens of true
delights whereof the Prophet makes mention, Psalm. 22.36? And we which are
succeeded after them, what other thing do we but cry in your ears, in the
name of this Bridegroom, Arise, come, the winter is past, the goodly weather
is come, the acceptable time, the day of Salvation, 2. Cor. 6.2. But alas, what
shall I say? Every one plays the deaf man, every one is asleep, every one is
shrouded and nestled, in I know not what retchles security: against the which
though we have long cried, yet we cry still in vain, so that the end is, we
are likely to be shortly awaked, by other manner of messengers. In the mean
time let us take a view of the excellent description of this goodly season,
whereof mention is made by David, Psalm. 118.24. to the end that they who have
ears may hear what the Bridegroom here says, and rejoice in this merry good
morrow of his.

5 The winter, says the Bridegroom, is past, the rain is past, it is gone
away. We know that the winter is nothing else but the death as it were of the
woorld, besides that the stormy cold and the obscurity and darkness of the
air covered throughout with thick clouds, deprive men of the use both of the
heat as also of the light of the sun. The Church on the contrary side is the
kingdom of light, Ioh. 5.6. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. And because that Jesus Christ
is the life, Ioh. 11.25. nay has life in himself, Ioh 5.26. it follows that
the church only is in life, as the world is in death: and therefore is she
also compared unto a forest of trees not dead, and such as are ready to be cut
down, and cast into the fire, Mat. 3.10. but always green, flourishing, and
laden with fruit, Psalm. 1.3. yea and that when they are extreme old, Psalm.
92.14. The reason is added in that place, because they are planted by the
rivers of running waters; and of what waters? Certainly of those which flow
forth unto eternal life, Ioh. 4.14. not of that which is in ditches and wells,
rising from out of the bowels of the earth, but of the water, says this
Bridegroom, which I give, which issues from above, not which this sun draws
up from the earth, but sends down into the earth, as flowing and proceeding
from him, as it is said, Psalm. 110.3. that the Church is borne of the dew of
this morning: and Matthew. 5.45. being borne anew by the water which is from
above, which is the spirit of God, Ioh. 3.15. much less that water, which is
drawn out of some standing poole, or cestern: but that which is most pure, and
most clean Ier. 2.13. namely, not the water which men have dug in the
earth, but which himself sends from heaven, and whereunto he calls and
inuiteth all those who are his, Esaias. 55.1. These things being well considered,
teach us to know the true Church, from the false, I mean the living Church
from the dead, Apoc. 5.1. the true word of God, powered from heaven upon the
Prophets and Apostles, to carry abroad and disperse it through the whole
woorld, Esaias. 2.20. Apoc. 22.2. from the false proceeding from the earth, and
out of men's brains, Esaias. 29.13. and Coloss. 2.22. and consequently the true
christian, from the superstitious and from the hypocrite.

6 That which the Bridegroom adds of flowers with which the earth is
tapistred, is referred unto the same that that before, being meant hereby the
efficacy and working of the holy ghost in the Church, when it pleases God to
bless the labor of his ministers and servants, in such sort that the whole
ground of the Lord is throughout platted with flowers, which cast a sweet smell
even unto heaven, being most pleasing unto the Lord, I mean, in Jesus Christ,
says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2.15. and not in themselves, that men forge not unto
themselves merits out of the qualities of the fairest and sweetest flowers,
which our garden can bring, though it be blessed from above: so far is it that
that ground, on which the pestilent and contagious winds which come forth of
the holownes of the earth do blow, can produce these flowers which are here
mentioned: how ever they smell sweet unto men, who bear themselves in hand,
that the filth of their inventions, savor of musk before Lord. These flowers
then are such as God sows in his ground, 1. Cor. 3.9. namely by the
ministry of such as he has ordained to plant and to water, 1. Cor. 3.16.
for which cause the Apostle calls the Philippians his joy and crown,
Philip. 4.1.

7 For who else sows these flowers but the Lord, who sends them from an
high, by his most precious word, dispensed and administered by the order which
he has established? Esai. 5.2. namely under the Law, in that magnificent
temple together with all his furniture and provision, and by that so well
ordered army of the Priests and Levites, in that magnificencie, which is
particularly painted out unto us, in the first of the Kings and the first of
the Chronicles, whereunto we must adioine the wisdom of Salomo^, which gave his
shining brightness unto the ends of the world, accompanied with all other
blessings of God, by which his people became admirable and wonderful to all the
nations of the earth. But yet were al these flowers nothing in comparison of
the ministry of the gospel, committed first unto the Apostles and Evangelists
his most excellent and diligent planters and sowers, 1. Cor. 3.9. by whom the
garden-plat as it were of this woorlde being turned up a new, and transformed
into a new terrestrial paradise was afterward in his time not only simply
checked and enameled with flowers, but also enriched with the most precious
treasures of that which is above the heavens, powered down first in all
abundance and perfection upon the head of this Bridegroom, who afterward made
an admirable and infinite larges thereof on the day of Pentecost, as the
Apostle makes that goodly reckoning of them, 1. Cor. 2. and especially Ephesians.
4.11. speaking of the vocations truly ecclesiastical, which are the true
beutie and ornament of the Church, not accompanied with such temporal
blessings, as was the Temple and kingdom of Solomon, but altogether spiritual
and incomprehensible, and has the cross it self for her garland, and as it
were an especial mark that she is not of this world, but hated and persecuted
of the woorlde, as was her head, Ioh. 17.14.16. unto whom we must by this means
be made conforma^le in death, to be also one day in life and in glory, Romans
8.28. and 2. Tim. 2.1.

8 The marks therefore of the true Christian Church are neither steeples, nor
towers, nor other sumpteous and costly buildings, nether crosses, nor miters of
gold or of silver, nor clothes of gold, or precious stones, which had their
place in the ancient temple to serve for the rudiments and principles of the
world, and to be the figure of that whereof Jesus Christ is the body, Col.
2.8.17. and Heb. 10.1. So that now all this pelf and trash is the ornament and
decking of the whore, Apoc. 17.4. but the Churches true ornament and setting
forth is, in respect of the Lord, the order of his holy ministry and service
set up and established: and in respect of herself, the certainty of
understanding and assured knowledge she has of the secret of our salvation,
Col. 2.2. and the fruits of the spirit, recited by the Apostle, Gal. 5.22.
flowers truly pleasant and liking the Lord through his grace.

9 But alas, as we have great occasion to magnify our good God and father for
that which proceeds from him: so what exceeding cause have we to humble and
condemn our selves before his face? For where shall these flowers be found
among us? And if there be any, as the word of the Lord, is never without some
effect, Esa. 55.11. shall we yet be able to find so many as may suffice to make
a nosegay, to present our Bridegroom withal? I dare not say it standing here
in the chair of truth, shall we find any of these flowers in the marchantes
shoppes? No, for there is nothing smells sweet unto them but gain. What? In
the courts and tribunals of justice dispersed here and there through
Christendom as it is called? Alas, not to speak of the negligence there
committed, which displeases God so highly, and the acception of persons, a
thing so stinking before him, is it possible to find any sweet smelling violet
in the desert of extortion, of falsehood, of consciences set to sale, of desire
of revenge, of making a trade and living in setting all the woorld a pleading?
Go we to men of occupation, and what shall we find? Deceit and coosinage in
some, idleness in others, yea in such as live by their days journey, and
especially in the best woorkmen. I report me to the places hereaboutes so much
used and haunted with their playing at keils both within and without the
city. I report me to the tauerners accounts, who live by the idleness of such
people: to the tears and moning^ of wives, who carry the marks of their idle
and dronken husbands: and to their little children pining and languishing away,
and ready to die with hunger. But peradventure you shall find some sweet flower
among these great ones who live by their ^ent. Nothing less. But, what will
will you give me is the first entrance unto your suit. I am content you have
it keapes aloof. Wade you farther in it, you find nothing but double dealing
and insatiable covetousness: If you mean to renew your lease, speak to my
dame, for she rules the house. And yet you must say grand-mercy, I thank you
sir to the butcher that has cut the purse, though the poor sheep can bleed
no longer. It may be the women who make so much of garlandes and nosegaies,
will furnish us with some of these flowers. Not a whit: for they are well agreed
in this point, and Madam is as good as Mounsieur, and Mounsieur as Madam,
master as mistres, and mistres as master: nay here it is and among these you
shall find all stinking vanities and superfluities from the head to the feet,
what ever laws the magistrates make to the contrary, what warnings so ever we
make them in the name of God, what visitation so ever the Lord lay upon them.
For what can all this do or profit?

10 The Bridegroom adds, that the time of the music of the birds is come,
and that the turtle has been heard. But what music is this? And what are
these songs? Not these unchaste and filthy poemes which men bring us even
hither, so stinking that never came greater infection out of the dungeons of
the most infamous brothel-houses that ever were: not such soundes as are cast
into the air in a tongue unknown, both to the fingers themselves, and to such
as hear them sing. 1. Cor. 14.15. Not these infamous hymns or proses full of
Idolatry, which the Idolaters houle forth unto their dumb Idols, 1. King.
18.16. Not these cantels and morsels of scriptures warbled, quauered and,
crochetted to give pleasure unto the ears: not these vain and sottish songs
and ballades which the fildes ring of al harvest and vintage time: but those,
those songs, I say, which God teaches unto the heart, and puts in the mouth
of those who are his, Psalm. 40.4. Of which sort we have a great number made and
uttered by the holy ghost. With this harmony therefore the Bridegroom tuneth
his song, and inuiteth his spouse to keep therein like time and accord with
him.

11 And what is this voice of the spouse but his holy word which has tongue in
the world, and has in most divine sort charmed his Church, first of all by his
prophets, afterward in his time by himself in person, then by his Apostles,
and yet in our days by his faithful Pastors and Doctors? I am thy God, and
the God of thy posterity, sang he to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. and in thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 26.4. which day of the
Lord he saw and rejoiced therein, Ioh. 8.56. Up, arise, has he said to
Jerusalem by Esaias, be bright, for thy light is come, and the glory of the
everliving is risen upon thee, Esaias. 60.1. we bring you tidings of great joy,
which shall be unto al people, said the Angels unto the sheepeheardes, Luke 2.10.
filling and replenishing the air afterward with this divine Canticle and
song, Glory be unto God in the highest heavens, and peace in earth toward
men, Luke 2.14. and his song or charge what is it? Come unto me all ye that
are heavy laden and oppressed, and I will ease you, Math. 11.28. And what is
that of the Apostle? Rejoice always, says he, and again I say unto you
rejoice, Philip. 4.4. And to the end we should not think, that the cross which
is an inseparable companion of the gospel, hinders any whit at all this joy,
In as much, says he by the mouth of Saint Peter, as you are partakers of
Christ's sufferinges rejoice ye, 1. Pet. 4.13. which lesson himself had
learned of his master, Math. 5.12.

12 Behold then the time whereof the Bridegroom here speaks, behold the
songs of this turtle which calls her mate unto her, which fails not to
answer her with the like, as we see the examples thereof in the songs and
Canticles of the Saints: whereunto the young birds also inuit us, knowing the
time of their chaste mating and coupling: for which cause we are to our great
reproach and that justly sent back unto them by the Prophet, to learn our duty,
Ierem. 8.7. And let us note that when we speak of songs which ought to ring
in the Church, the question is not so much of the voice, albeit the mouth must
confess that which the heart believes, Romans 10.10. but the heart within and
the mouth without must accord, that we be not touched with that reproach, This
people honoreth me with their lyps, but their heart is far from me. Esaias.
29.13. And in an other place, what have thou to do to recite my ordinances,
and to make mention of my Law within thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16. And therefore the
Prophet says not only that we must praise God, but that his praises are
sitting unto them who walk uprightly, Psalm. 33.1. Secondly the true faithful
man is composed altogether of mouths and of tongues, neither thinking, nor
saying, nor doing any thing, nor in a word having ought in himself, but that
which declares and testifies the glory of him, whose new creature he is,
created for his glory, Ephe. 1.12. and 1. Cor. 10 13. otherwise we know not
what this springtime means. For how ever it be, the land of the Lord is of
songs and thankesgiuings, Psalm. 118.15.

13 And this is cause why the spouse adds for other marks of the springtime,
that the fig tree has yielded forth her young figs, and that the vines are
shooting out their young grapes, to show us that in the Church of God grace is
given us, not only to will which is as it were the flower, but also to do,
which is the fruit, to wit, the effect of our will, Philip. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.2.

14 And let us note that he speaks of two kinds of fruit, the most delicate
that be, to show us the difference, which is between the appearaunces of
virtues, ordinarily called Moral virtues, (such as they are) which a man may
meet withal in them who are not regenerat, in whom god does in some sort
repress that natural wickedness which is in all, whose works
notwithstanding, are without either taste or savor, (according unto that which
is said, that whatsoever is without faith is sin, Romans 14.23. and that
without Jesus Christ there is nothing which can please God unto salvation) and
the works of the children of God governed by the spirit of regeneration Romans
8.9. For which cause it is also said that faith which is without works is but
a dead thing. James. 2.26.

15 Farther let us note that he speaks in this place of the Church, not as of
a ground planted altogether new, but as an ancient possession and heritage,
which being for a time laid wast or fallow, has been husbanded anew and
manured. For as for the true Church of God, she shall be always found to be
more old and ancient, then the false, seeing that truth is before lying, and
that which is sound and entire before that which is false and corrupted. So was
Adam created after the Image of God, before he was deformed by sin: and after
sin was entered, Adam and Eve believing the promise of salvation (for
otherwise there should have been no Church in the world) the Church which is
the city of God, had her beginning before the city of Satan, which began from
Caine and his. But seeing that men have, time without mind, accustomed to set
forth and commend themselves under the name of Antiquity, especially unto
them who are ignorant, whose ignorance they abuse who live by this abuse:
behold how it comes to pass that they which will not suffer themselves to be
better taught, take often times that which is new for old, and that which is
old for new. Such are they of whom Saint Peter speaks, who said of that
time, when a man spoke unto them of the second coming of the son of God to
judge the world, which we yet wait for, that al things were, as they are now,
since the first fathers: which thing is false says he. For they should know
that the world was not created in such sort in the beginning as now it is, and
that God has already executed an horrible judgment on the corruption thereof.
In this sort after the captivity they reproched Jeremy, that he had marred
all, and that then and before he mealed with preaching unto them, they and
their fathers found themselves in good case by calling upon the Queen of
heaven and burning incense unto her, Ierem 44.17. nay which more is, when they
heard Jesus Christ himself to speak, they said, What kind of new doctrine
is this? Mar. 1.27. But Jesus Christ answered them, Search the scriptures for
they speak of me, Ioh. 5.39. Now this Queen of heaven was the sun, as the
phrase of the Hebrew tongue does import, and in my time what other difference
has there been but this, that by the Queen of heaven, is meant not the sun
but the Virgin Mary, as if there were a Queen mother in heaven? For it is
certain that there is a Queen, the spouse of this Bridegroom which is already
partly in heaven, and partly yet languishing here on earth, to wit, the Church
being coheire with Jesus Christ, as she is also called by this name of Queen.
Psalm. 45.10. but this is not because she should be adored. Not the whole
church, I say, so far is that the blessed virgin ever required, or yet
requires that which is properly belonging unto her son, or that she allowed
of (to admit that she could understand them) these titles full of most
horrible and most execrable blasphemy, to be called a Mediatrix, mother of
mercy, our life, our hope, having power to command her son. And yet to find
fault with all this, were a point of greater impiety in the opinion of them, who
call themselves chief Christians, then if a man had denied God, an hundred
thousand times. For behold, say they, there was never yet any since Christ's
time, that called not upon this Queen of heaven, and all the Saints, yea who
gave not credit to al these things, which you call miserable abuses: as never
yet the time that there was not Mass said, and a Pope to be gods vicar in
earth. And what new gospel the^ I pray you is this of yours? Where was this
new Church of yours I pray you fifty years ago? Behold their common
language. But we will send them back unto this text, and will tell them with
this Bridegroom, that this is that only vine which he transported out of
Egypt, which has been a long time in the hands of wicked, not vineyarders
but destroiers, from whom it is now taken, to be restored and husbanded. The
wild beasts have broused it, but God has made up the hedge thereof again, and
set up his wine press in it, Psalm. 80.15. and Mat. 21.33. they are the same
fig trees which were before, but being become barraine for want of careful
trimming and looking too, they now bear little figs, as the vine begins to
shoot forth her tender grapes. Such was the condition of the Church after the
storms which fell in Saules time, which David by all means sought to remedy, but
was not able notwithstanding entirely to perfect the service ceremonial, nor
the temple, which Solomon afterward having compassed, he compares this new
restablishment and reformation unto a plat of ground where the fig trees are
laden with young figs, and the vine begins to yield forth her small grapes,
giving great hope of a goodly vintage.

16 But what? These young figs, and these small grapes may not remain at one
stay, but the young figs must become fair and good figs, and the small grapes
must prove fair and goodly raisins. As the young child hangs not always at
the mothers breast to suck still, but lives and is nourished with solid meat,
after his sucking time is past, 1. Cor. 3.2. In a word we are regenerat and
borne a new in Jesus Christ, to increase in him by little and little, unto we
be come until his full stature in us, Ephesians. 4.12. and we are entered the list,
not to stand still in the midst of our race, but to run still on, until we
sease upon the crown of eternal life, 1. Tim. 6.12.

15 Behold, I say, what our duty is, that we be not that unhappy fig tree
which represented the miserable nation of the Jews, whose cutting off was near
at hand, and whereof mention is made, Mat. 21.19. where it is said that the
Lord finding on it nothing but leaves, cursed it, though the season did not
serve for figgs. And why so? To show the Jews that the time of judgment was
come, because they had let the time of grace and mercy to pass, as he before
declared unto them, Luke 13.6. and therefore, said he unto his Disciples, As
you know that the summer is near when the fig tree shoots forth his leaves:
so when you see the signs of my coming, know you that I am hard at the door.
And what shall we say hereupon, touching the time that we are in? Truly happy
if we knew how to know the visitation from on high, Luke 1.68.78, but more
then thrice unhappy, through the hardness of heart, and rebellion of the world,
Esai. 5.24. For is it not in our time that the lord has begun to raise up
this vine which was laid wast, and to dig up the earth round about this
fig tree to mould it better? Is it not in our time that the fig trees have
brought forth their young figs, and the vine her small grapes? Yea (I dare say
it, and God be praised for it) there have been fair and good figs grown,
goodly and pleasant grapes yielded. But alas, besides that the winds which
have fell and the storms of hail, which we have brought upon us by our sins,
have shaken the trees and the vine plants, and constrained the Lord of the
vineyard to hasten his vintage, in what state is this ground and heritage at
this day? Naie how many fig trees and vine plants see we plucked up by the
roots? How many young figs and small grapes are fallen down? And what hope
do the youth of our time yield us? Alas very little, the time being rather come
whereof mention is made Esa. 5.2. the Lord complaining and saying, I looked for
fruit of my vineyard, but it has brought me nothing but wild grapes. What
remains us then but that the withered branches of the vine, and the dead
bows of the tree be cut off and cast into the fire? Mat. 3.3.10. Ioh. 15.6.
And indeed are we so blind as not to see that this is come to pass in the
East, West, North, and South: and so to continue more and more? Are we so deaf
as not to hear the great blows of the hatchet and axe hewing down the goodly
carved seelings of the house of the Lord? Psalm. 74.5. Do we not hear the Lion
roar, and the waves of the Sea to make a noise? Esai. 5.29. And if the Lord
have not spared the natural branches, will he spare the small abortiue
suckers? Romans 11.21. Let us therefore crave of our good God ears to hear, and
pray him that he will give us the spirit of repentance and conversion, and
preserve and bless the residue of this his vineyard, which he expects in
great patience, that we should bring forth fruits of righteousness and of
charity, which may be pleasing and acceptable unto him, unto his honor and
glory, and unto our souls health and salvation.

Almighty God etc.
THE XXI SERMON. Our help be in the name of God, etc. It is written as
follows in the second Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 13. and 14.
verses.
13 Arise my Love, my fair one, and come away.

14 My Dove which keep thy self in the clefts of the rock, in the secret
places of the ascent thereof, show me thy face, let me hear thy voice: for thy
voice is sweet, and thy face is comely.


1 The Bridegroomes calling to awaken his spouse, so often reiterated,
declares what natural heaviness and drowsiness is in the best sort, which can
be corrected by no other means, then by the voice of the Bridegroom only,
who makes himself to be heard.

2 The spouse is sometimes made so wild and so hared, that she is forced to
give place unto her persecutors: but yet remains a Dove still in her holy
purity.

3 Examples of this under the old covenant.

4 Examples of the same under the new covenant, beginning from Jesus Christ
himself.

5 The Romish puttock has skared the Dove out of the plain: but the
Bridegroom has begun in our time to reclaim her.

6 The spouse, the Dove thus skared, instead of stooping, skirreth aloft, where
she finds her sure rock to foot on.

7 The spouse being brought down from the rock, where for a time she was hid
and remained dumb, must make her self to be clearlie seen and heard of her
Bridegroom.

8 An exhortation to put this doctrine thoroughly in practice.

9 A reprehension of the negligence of some, and the unthankfulness of others
in this behalf.

THE residue of this thirteenth verse which we have read unto you has been
before expounded, in the tenth verse. But it is not without cause here
reiterated. For besides that by this recital again of the same thing, we are
advertised, more nearly to consider of, and more often to wey the contents
and meaning thereof, for the excellency of the comfort and consolation therein
comprised: ordinary and daily experience might be able to teach us, how by
nature, yea and that after our regeneration, we are heavy and sleepy, and
always drowsy and lazy, some of us standing stock still in the way we
began to take, others trayling the wing, insteede of flying on, others turning
tail and going backward. And therefore it is more then necessary that we be
daily warned and pricked forward, the Lord, by whose only voice and mercy we
are awakened, showing herein as in all the rest, his more then admirable
patience in this, that he cease not to cry continually in our ears, to
draw us unto himself, as it is said, not without great reproach unto them, that
he bare forty years with the manners and conditions of his people, Act. 13.18.
and Psalm. 95.10. as the Lord also complains in Ezechiel 22.30. and is
declared unto us at large under the similitude of the vineyard, Mat. 21.33. And
what shall we need to go far for examples? What has the Lord done for the
space of these threescore years since he began as it were a new to open his
mouth among us? And what does he still every day, but cry, up arise, up arise,
up arise, Ephesians. 5.14. but who is he that gives ear unto him? Who is he that
awaketh? Where is he that puts himself in the way? Nay contrariwise see
we not that the most part make a mockery of it? Some to say, hold thy peace,
others to seek by all means of cruelty and subtle treachery to stop the
Lords mouth? See we not what swarms of Covetous men, Ambitious, Adulterers,
Gluttons, Dissolute? In a word, who is he that answers not, let me alone, I
have somewhat else to do? Give me leave to take a reckoning of my money, to
seek after my gain, ease, and preferment, to be merry and pass away the time,
as others do: briefly to say, let me be damned, what need you to care, you
shall not answer for me? And if any man happily answer, Lord I go my ways
thither, is it not for the most part to do as he did, of whom it is spoken,
Mat. 21.30. And what will follow of this in the end? Mary even that which is
said in the same Psalm 95.11. I have sworn in my anger, if they shall ever
enter into my rest, and that which is said, Sopho. 1.12. At that time I will
search every corner in Jerusalem with candels, and will visit those men which
are frozen in their dregs and say, the eternal does neither good nor harm. O
wretched case, O miserable estate! And therefore for the honor of God, my
brethren, let us be more careful for our salvation. Let us content us with
that which is past, 1. Pet. 4.3. and let us not heap upon our heads the anger
of God, against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. but seeing he says again, up
arise, let us do as our father Abraham did, who rose and departed out of his
own land as soon as the Lord had said unto him. Get thee out of thy country,
Heb. 11.8. and Gen 12.1. and as Matthew the publican, who being at the receipt
of custom, so soon as the Lord had said unto him, follow me, stayed not to
make up his books and to tell his money, but left al and followed him, Mat.
9.9. Moreover the only excellency, nay more then excellency of this speech
of the Bridegroomes, should it not suffice to make the drousiest of us al to
awake, to speak, to run? For what a thing is it, to be called the love or
beloved of this great son of God, who has loved us more then himself, by
giving his own life for us to ransom and redeem us from death, Ioh. 10.15. and
1. Pet. 1.19. yea to make us coheirs with him, Romans 8.17. and what beuty is
comparable unto this glory which waits for us, 2. Cor. 4.17. and 1. Cor.
2.9. of which we have already the pledges, 2. Cor. 5.15. namely the knowledge
of the deep things of God, 1. Cor. 2.10. and the work of sanctification which
he has begun in us, and which he will continue in us unto the end by his
holy grace, 1. Ioh. 3.10. Fie therefore on the world, from out of which we are
separated: fie on this soup of Esau for which he quitted and gave over the
blessing, which he could never recover afterward, Genesis 26.32. and. Heb.
12.15. Fie upon this vain appearance which passes away as a dream, and
coosineth us so easily as this same Solomon has at large taught us in his
book of the Preacher, and as the Apostle shows us, 1. Cor. 7.31. And whither
will he that we should go? Unto him, unto him, that is to say, unto this light
of glory, 1. Pet. 2.9. unto this incorruptible inheritance, 1. Pet. 1.4. unto
this kingdom which he has prepared for us since the foundation of the world,
Mat. 25.34. And who is then so wretched and unhappy as to desire to be still
creeping here below, and who will not rather say with David, O how long and how
tedious is this my abode unto me, with these inhabitants of Kedar and of
Mesech? Psalm. 120.5. and with Saint Paul, I desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ, Philip. 1.23. and, O miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.24. Neither ought we to excuse
our selves hereupon that we are deaffe by nature, and cannot hear. For as he
calls us, so he presents us ears to hear: and bidding us to come unto
him he offers us feet, and commanding us to look on him, he gives us
eyes, Psalm. 40.7. and 146.8. And this is the cause why he begins here,
with so gracious and sweet words, my well-beloved, to show us that all,
namely to will and to do, proceeds from him, and whatsoever else he
demands of us comes from his mere and free good will toward us, who were
his enemies. But as our first Parent then, when as yet he was not corrupted
but most sound and entire in that nature, which he received from his Creator,
did voluntarily deprive and spoil himself of that light he had of
understanding and vprightnes of will, so his posterity for the most part,
through natural wickedness which is now in them, refuses, both the Physician
who offers himself and the physic.

2 But let us hearken unto the residue of the Bridegroomes speech, seeking
after this spouse: My dove, says he, which keep thy self in the cleftes of
the rock, and in the secret places of the ascent thereof. And what are the
great secrets which are comprised in these words? Let us pray unto God he will
vouchsafe to teach them us thoroughly. We have said before, that the spouse, the
Church, is brought in in this place and represented unto us, assisted by her
Bridegroom in such sort, that sometimes she languisheth after him, sometimes
she obtains as it were the fiansailes, sometimes she seems to be as it were
a far off, sometimes as it were somewhat nearer, sometimes she is seeking as it
were after him, sometimes she seems to be sought after: which thing we are
necessarily to understand and diligently to consider, that we take heed the
better of the mask of the false Church, which many paint forth and shape out
unto themselves in their own brain, persuading themselves, that the
Catholic Church continues always in her apparent gloss and bewty: contrary
unto that which is delivered throughout the whole sacred history, and the
experience we have since had, and have until this day, thereof: wherein these
so wretchedly abused resemble the Butterfly which flies into the candle and
burns himself, and those simple seely birds which fly into the fire
thinking they are in the warm sun. This is then a false opinion in which many
do gladly please themselves, because they would have a gospel of ease and a
Church all of velvet: whereas, it is in the cross, that the Bridegroom
triumphs, and he was crowned with a crown of thorns, and there is no
reason the spouse be put in a better livery then her Bridegroom. We have
therefore heard above in the 11. verse, how the Bridegroom made mention of the
winter, bringing tidinges unto his spouse of the sweet and pleasant
springtime. He speaks therefore now unto her, as if she were frighted and
skared as sometimes Pigeons are and driven from the dove house, and therefore
flowen to hide herself in some chinckes and creuises of a rock, to have there
some place of retire and rest. Where we are to note that it is properly in
these and such like occurrences, that the faithful show themselves like
Doves, not countermining deceit by deceit, but withstanding and fighting
against the sleights and crafts of the world by their meeknes and simplicity,
Luke 16.18. and leave not, for all the hot assaults that are given them, to
keep their conscience pure still and undefiled, as David so often both in word
and deed professes, which is the cause also why the Lord spares them, when
the rod of the wicked is upon them. Psalm. 125.3. and 1. Cor. 10.13. but
yielding unto the fury of their persecutors so much as they may, their only
refuge they have is, to endure in silence, and patience, Luke 21.19. It is this
spouse therefore who being forced to shroud and to hide herself in the clefts
and holes of the rocks, is now invited by her Bridegroom to come down again
into the plain, the foul weather being ouerpassed and gone.

3 Such was the state and condition of the Church many times under the Judges,
and especially in Helies time, as when the arcke was taken, there followed an
horrible confusion. In the time of Samuel it had as it were some small
refreshing under the beginning of Saules reign. But by and by after, and
especially during the time of the persecution raised against David, the
massacring of the Priests, the discomfiting of Saul, the civil war between
David, and Iphiboseth, whither shall we say the small number of the true
faithful were brought, so long as god exercised his just judgments upon the
whole country? In what estate was then this doue-house, that is to say, the
tabernacle and the whole service of God, Silo being destroyed, and the Arcke
placed in a private man's house, to wit, Abinadabs, 1. Sa. 6.22. separated from
the tabernacle which was in Nob, 1. Sam. 21.1. and from thence was brought unto
Gibeon, 2. Chro. 1.3. And this separation of the Arc from the tabernacle dured
until the time of Solomon, who (being a figure of this bridegroom) set up
that goodly temple as it were a doue-house, whither he inuiteth this dove in
this place: whereunto it is no doubt, but this text ought to be referred,
especially the same being twice specified in the history, 1. Sam. 7.1. and. 2.
Sam. 6.3. namely that the house of Abinadab from whence the Ark was brought by
David unto Jerusalem, was seated within an hill: which it may be Solomon
meant expressly to note unto us, making mention of the cleftes of the rock,
whither this spouse retired herself during this tempest. But there is nothing
lets but that we may extend this yet farther. For during the kingdom of
Solomon himself, was she not in part as it were driven from her doue-house by
the Idols which Solomon set up? And what was she afterward? So that the
condition of the Church is here represented unto us, not as it is once, or
five, or six, or more times, but as being an ordinary and customary thing unto
this spouse, whom notwithstanding her Bridegroom in his good time calls
down again into the plain. So then after Solomon, by the division of the ten
tribes, how many doue-houses, I mean synagogues, were ruined and plucked
down, to lodge Ieroboams calfes in? Whither was then the resort and repair of
Leui, flying as it were in flocks with as many as feared the Lord into the
rock of the temple of Jerusalem? 2. Chron. 11.14. But alas what was this
nest, under the greatest part of the kings of Judah, from Roboam unto Zedechias?
A nest profaned vilanously polluted with the doung of Idols, as the story
witnesses, and is especially most amply declared in Ezech. 16. What could the^
the poor children of God do but sigh and mourn like unto poor pigeons in
their small holes? Such was the flight of the prophets into wast and desert
places of Israel under Elias and Elizeus, 2. Kings 4.38. And yet was this poor
culuer-house sorer shaken, and as it were utterly ouerturned by Iesabel,
insomuch that an hundred of the Prophets were hidden by a good man in two
caves, and fed with bread and water, 1. King. 18.13. Behold also Elias
himself brought unto that extremity, that he was feign to be fed in an
hideous desert by two ravens, 1. King. 17.16, and by the ministry of an Angel,
1. King. 19.5.6. And during the captivity this poor dove being driven thrice
away by that horrible northern wind which razed at length the doue-house and
the City, did she not nest, and as it were hide her head in secret holes? For
so is it said, Esaias. 26.20. and under the horrible persecution of Antiochus,
whither retired she herself with Mattathias? 1. Macab. 2.17.

4 But what? Beginning with Jesus Christ himself the Bridgroom which is here
spoken of, was he not himself from the time of his nativity driven as it were
out of the world? For in what place was he born in? In a stable, the lodging of
beasts, for there was no other room for his mother, Luke 2.17. from thence
must he not fly into the deserts of Egypt? Math. 2.14. Where was he brought up
and nourished? In a poor Carpenters house, Mar. 6.3. in the city of Nazareth
built also upon a rock, Luke 4.29. a city of so small reckoning and account,
that it is demanded whether any good thing can come from thence, Ioh. 1.4.
driven thence whither must he retire himself? Unto the rock of Capernaum,
Luke 4.31. and 10.15. not having a place where to rest his head, Luke 9.58.
finally whither was he carried to be crucified? Unto the mount of sculs,
otherwise called Caluarie. And where was he laid after his death? In a cave
hewn out of a rock, Luke 23.53. Thus you see how the Bridegroom himself,
during the time of his life here below did nothing else, but fly as a man would
say from rock to rock, until he were flowne again into heaven. This is also
the way which all the Apostles have walked, and the whole Church truly
Apostolic, being in this world as wayfarers and wanderers hither and thither,
2. Cor. 6.5. and Heb. 11.38. the same being foretold, even unto the last time,
Apoc. 12.14.

5 Such was the condition of the ancient Church, and namely of that of Rome,
until the time of Syluester under Constantine the Great, since which time this
dove, which kept herself before until this time in holes and corners, finding
afterward the spring of the meddowe, so pleasant and sweet, and so falling
there asleep, the ravening and unclean birds are come and nestled in her
place, and disguising themselves at first into Doves and pigeons, have so
flattered and enchaunted the Roman Eagle, that finally the great puttocke of
Rome has seized on the Eagles crown, and charged himself with three, decking
himself with the Eagles feathers, and namely with the capital city of the
Empire, so that at this day the rest must do homage unto this beast. And this
is the reason why this Image of the Roman Empire (which is the whore sitting
upon the seven hills of Rome) succeeding this beast whose Image she is called,
being of the same nature, tends unto the same end: using still the same trade
of ruining the doue-houses and driving away the poor fearful doves of the
Lord with fire and sword, yea thrusting the fire into their small culuer holes,
as she has always done, and yet does unto this day. But what? The Lord has
limited the seasons of the winter, as we see he has done, by continual
experience, yea breaks off suddenly the course of the storms and tempests
as it is said, Psalm. 65.8. and as he practiced the same sensibly, Matthew.
8.26. I speak this especially for us in this place, which a man may truly
call a small nest placed in these cragges and mountains, which has served and
yet serves for an harbor of poor fugitive doves, which has been by a
singular and more then admirable goodness and mercy of God preserved, and that
by evident and apparent miracles, against all the enterprises which satan and
his accomplices could hitherto devise: for which so great a benefit of his, God
give us grace to be thankful, both in word and deed.

6 But to go on let us note that this Bridegroom says not that this Dove is
retired into the holes of the rocks, but of the rock, as of a certain rock
and no other. For it is for them of this woorld to retire themselves here and
there at every iut they have in time of adversity, keeping neither way, nor
foot-path, as we see how the superstitious have every one his saint, and every
one his devotion apart: but the children of God have but one rock and refuge,
to which they wholly betake themselves, according unto the style which David
customarily uses in his Psalms, and therefore fail not at any time to be
in safety. Contrary the unfaithful ones and enemies of God find themselves
deceived of their imagined helps, when the judgment of God falls on them and
pursues them, and therefore cry in the day of wrath unto the hills and say,
Fall upon us, and hide us from the face of him which sits upon the throne,
Apocal. 6.15. So did the five kings of Canaa^ hide themselves in a cave, but it
was to have their reward which they deserved, Joshua. 10.16. the Lord therefore
who is on high in the heavens is the refuge and hiding place of his: and this
spouse even here below on earth where she is yet a pilgrim and wanderer,
finds always some place of retire and harbor in the hardest times, in the
assembly of saints whersoeuer they keep, though they be but two or three, Mat.
18.20. Luke 17. and 37. and how ever men seek to bring her low, yet she
always lifts up her head on high, not of pride, as did the Pharisee, Luke
18.14 but of an assurance which is given her, by the means of that grace
which is showed her, whereby she takes courage and defieth all her
adversaries, and whatsoever incomberaunces are laid before her, Romans 8.30. and
Heb 4 16. naie which is more, she takes occasion by those assaults which are
given her, to raise her self up unto God and to make her profit by them, Romans
5.3. which the Bridegroomes words do also show us, when he says, that his
Dove keeps her self in the corners, not of the descent, but of the ascent
and stairs of the rock, although that in diverse respects the side of a
mountain has his pitchings mounting and descending.

7 But let us hear what the Bridegroom does farther demand. Show me here,
says he, thy face, and let me hear thy voice, that is to say, let me hear
thee and see thee. And what means this? The Lord who sees all things, and
knows the very thoughts and that before they are conceived, and who hears
the words before they be pronounced, Psalm. 139.4. the only searcher of the
heart, Ier. 10. and whose eyes are specially upon this Dove, Psalm. 34.6 is he
absent from her? No, in no wise: but the Lord does as a good woorkeman, who
having made some goodly and curious piece of work, although he that made it
has no need to enquire of what, or how it is made, takes a pleasure
notwithstanding to view and contemplat, yea to praise and admire it. And
therefore it is also said in the history of the creation of the woorld, that
the Creator took a view of his work, and finding it to be good, blessed it.
Now is there a more goodly piece of work here below (after him who has
received the spirit without measure, and who is the head of his spouse) then
is the Church regenerated and reformed, and as it were fashioned anew upon the
pattern it self the son of God, into which she is incorporated to be
altogether spiritual in him: not to be a piece of work without sense or
motion, but Jesus Christ putting into her heart that which she ought to
believe, and in her mouth that which she ought to speak, Phil. 1.19. Psalm.
40.4. Esai. 57.19. and Psalm. 51.17. as this high mystery is most amply
declared unto us by the Apostle in his Epistles, and namely, Romans 6. and 7. and
8. Ephesians. 5.30. Col. 3. and elsewhere.

8 Every faithful soul therefore in the person of the spouse (by whom is
understood all the company of the faithful,) being yet here below, having
received the power to will and to do, is here invited to show himself, and to
speak unto his Bridegroom, that is to say, to make the effects of his grace,
which he has received of his regenerator, to appear both within and without.
This is that which was figured under the Law, by that commandment of God,
that every male child should present himself before the Lord thrice a year at
the least in the tabernacle, and afterward in the temple; as if God, who is
every where and sees all, had said unto them, you are dispersed here and
there throughout the country and in your synagogues, and therefore are as it
were absent from me, who have chosen this place, as it were for mine house and
habitation. Now I would see you and hear you, and therefore you shall come and
visit me and do me homage thrice a year, to the end that you may rejoice in my
presence, and I with you. And whom would not the consideration of such
kindness and bounty ravish and astonish, and cause him to say, O Lord, thou
art not contented to have shown me so great favor, unto me I say altogether
unworthy thereof, nay worthy of thy curse and malediction: but which more is,
knowing my heaviness and laziness, and that if by adding grace upon grace,
thou should not form in me a desire and power to be thankful unto thee
therefore, and to honor thee, I would continue groueling still on the ground
and bury the memory of thy benefits, thou prickest me forward, and inuitest
me to present my self before thee, and to cause thee to see by effect what
thou have wrought in me, voutsafeing of a third grace of thine, to like and
accept of my works, considering them not as they come from me, who am yet
soiled with sin, but in as much as thou acknowledgest in me thy work and new
creation. That then which the Bridegroom says in this place is the same which
is said, Psalm. 50.23. And in deed, as David says, Psalm, 116.12. What can we
render unto the Lord for so great benefits of his, but this reknowledgeme^t,
presenting our selves before his face with the confession of the mouth,
speaking of the abundance of the heart? Neither are we now to trot up and down
hither and thither as these holy pilgrims of Jerusalem, who go yet at this day
to seek after Jesus Christ in his sepulcher. For every land and country is now
sanctified unto him, 1. Cor. 10.26. and he is near unto us in every place, and
we must cause our selves to be seen and heard, lifting up of pure hands, 1.
Tim. 3.8. in all places, wheresoever it pleases him to lift up his banner. For
the question is here of a public appearance and invocation, in respect
whereof the Bridegroom leads his spouse down from the rock, and out of the
desert into the plain, when he will have the fair weather return again: as he
has specially done since about these threescore years ago. But what do we
all this while? The Lord has proclaimed by so many trompets the year of
acceptance, and our true Iubile, renewing and as it were sending again into
the world that which is said, Esaie. 61.2. and Luke 4.18. and every day he
still calls unto us in this place, My dove come out of the desert, show me
thy face, and let me hear thy voice, and I will take pleasure in it:

9 But what? There was indeed at the beginning some zeal showed, and many came
running from far to do their duty, as it is said of those which entered into
Canaan with Joshua, and the governors of that time, Ios. 24.3. But these are
now departed in peace and seem to have carried away all the zeal, and
whatsoever good thing else was among us. The Bridegroom cries by his servants,
Come and see me, and let me hear your voice. Yet for all this some have no
cares, others hear, but they hearken not unto it. Others, especially on those
days which are specially ordained for this appearance and invocation of the
name of God, had rather be a walking, playing, tippling, gathering in their
debtes, toying and sporting in the streets, and before their doors. Others
there are who will appear in the place where the Lord is, but is it to cause
their voice to be heard, that is, having diligently hearkened unto the voice
of the Bridegroom, and the prayer of their pastor, to answer with heart and
with mouth the Ame^ of Christians, 1. Cor. 14.16. that is to say, to make a
true and perpetual acknowledgement toward God, by true amendment of life?
Alas no. For were it so, the effects thereof would appear: whereas now you
shall have some sing the Psalms in deed, but their heart shall be far from
that which they sing, Esaias. 29.13. Others come to the Church to sleep, others
will not voutsafe to open their mouth or ears. If any man demand how we know
this, I answer that we see part of it with our own eyes, the rest is made
known and discovered by all the fruits of the flesh which are quoted and
numbered up, Gal. 5.19. And thither it is I must send you, you hypocrites and
conte^ners, adding for the reward which is reserved for you, if you change not
your selves and become new me^, that which the eternal says, Esa. 57.12. I will
declare thy goodly righteousness and thy deeds which shall not help thee: and Ps.
50.21. these things thou have don, and because I made as if I heard not, thou
thoughtst that I was like unto thee. But I will reprove thee, and will set all
these things before thine eyes. o what a terrible thing it is to fall into the
hands of the living god when he is angry! And therefore for the honor of god let
every one amend himself while it is time, let us consider of this great and
endless bounty of our God, who has retired and gathered together his poor
doves out of the holes of the desert, out of the powers of those cruel beasts,
and out of the jaws of the ravening Lion, inuiting us still at this day to
present our selves before him with a true repentance, and that pleasant
acceptable sacrifice unto him of a contrite heart and of thanksgiving, Psalm.
51.19. and 19.32, to the end that receiving us to mercy and finding us
fruitful trees indeed in his house, he may heap on us his blessings,
according unto his holy promises.

THE XXII SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the second Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 15.16. and
17. verses.
15 Take us these foxes and these young cubs, which destroy the vines, while
our vines bud forth.

16 My beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the lillies.

17 Until the wind of that day come, and the shadows flee away: return my
beloved and be like a young Roe or Hind-calfe, upon the mountains of
separation, the cleftes of the mountains.


1 The vineyard of the Bridegroom in danger to be wasted, by the foxes.

2 Examples of these wastes made, both in the Church of the Israelites, as also
in that of the Christians.

3 How these become at the length Wolves and Lions, destroieng the flocks and
finally not sparing themselves.

4 Examples of foxes broken in into the midst of the vineyard, begun to be
husbanded in our time.

5 The hunting of these foxes properly and directly committed unto the Pastors
of the Church.

6 Secondly to the faithful magistrates, without confounding notwithstanding
the Ecclesiastical ministry with civil Jurisdiction.

7 This vineyarde must continue always safe in the end, and the foxes must be
taken.

8 How inestimable, and for ever assured, that treasure, of the Church is,
which she says to be hers.

9 This donatio^ by reason of the marriage between the Bridegroom and the
spouse is mutual and reciprocal.

10 The Church of the Israelits and the Church of the Christians are one and
the same spouse of the same Bridegroom, and how we ought to understand the
shadows of the ancient covenant.

11 How we ought to understand that wind which rose with the light of the
gospel.

12 How it is to be understood, that the Bridegroom returns to his spouse,
seeing he never forsakes her.

13 What the craggy mountains are, over which the spouse desires her
Bridegroom to come.

14 An exhortation to practice this doctrine.

IT appears by these words which we have to handle, that the Dove is flowen
unto her Bridegroom at his call, who has gathered her with her company as
we shall afterward see, according unto the purport also of the history, that
finally all the tribes put themselves in subjection unto the anointed of the
Lord, I mean, unto David, and after unto Solomon, both which were figures of
this true Bridegroom in this respect. But to the end that the spouse should not
imagine, that this springtime brought so perfect a peace, as that nothing
should impair and disturb it she is in good time warned, that this vineyard
having escaped the former storms and te^pests, was not for all that, altogether
freed from al kind of hurt. And this he warns her of, not to affright or
astonish her, but so as to make her full of consolation. For he says not, there
are foxes which wast and destroy our vineyardes, but take us those foxes, as if
he said. Indeed there are great and little ones, but I have taken order they
shall be caught. Now to make our profit hereof, we must first of al learn that
they abuse themselves much, who are so persuaded to see the Church in so good
case as to be without her afflictions, either within or without, or both
together within and without: the experience of al ages shows us the contrary.

2 Let us therefore note here in the first place, that there is no mention
here of Tigers or Lions, which are open and declared persecutors of the
church, as were sometimes against Israel, Edom, Moab, Ammon, and finally the
Chaldeans and Babylonians: and in the time of the Christian Church, the Roman
empire, the Sarracens and the Persians, and the Turcks, but of those which are
ctept into the midst of the vineyard like crafty Foxes to keep back and hinder
the vintage, which sort of beasts, the vineyard were it never so well planted
and husbanded, never wanted. Such were in the time of Moses, Core, Dathan, and
Abyron, who as it is written Numbers, 16. being in the very midst of this
vineyard, sought suttelly to undermine the foundation thereof, under color,
said they, because the whole people were the people of the Eternal, and
hereupon pretending to overthrow the ministry of Moses and Aaron. Such were
the false Prophets who lulled the people of Israel asleep, vaunting of their
visions from God, against the true servants of the Eternal, as is especially
seen in that miscreant Sedechias opposing himself against Michea, 1. King. 22.
and in Hananias against Jeremy, Ier. 18. and by all the writings of the
Prophets: unto whom, for the most part they always lent an helping hand who
should have been the principal hunters of those foxes, to wit, the Priests,
as is witnessed throughout the whole sacred history. And what foxes were the
Pharisees, Sadduces, Scribes, Essenians, Herodians and others, who so craftily
and so sliely ventered to entrap the Lord himself of the vineyard, being
descended from heaven expressly for this purpose, to take order for this
vineyard, and traueled so thoroughly herein, that finally he thrust them out of
possession of it, and transplanted his vineyard, as he had before threatened
them he would do, Mat. 21.41. and planted it among a people, which before
appertained nothing at al unto unto him, as he had menaced the^ by Osee 2.23.
the execution of which threat is most largely set down Ephesians. 2.11. And
afterward, though the chief and principal hunters of these foxes, travailed
diligently to transplant and to husband this vineyard which had spread her
branches from East to West, and had provided it of good laborers and
husbandmen after them: notwithstanding their histories and their writings do
witness that they had always more to do against such foxes, as the great
sheepeheard forewarned them, Matthew. 7.15. (though there they be called ravening
wolves) then against all other open enemies within or without. Such were they
who would needs mingle Jesus Christ and Moses together, whose most pestilent
and pernicious error is declared and condemned, Act. 15. against whom Saint
Paul was yet afterward constrained so long and so eagerly to fight. After
these succeeded, as it were in great and mighty armies, heretics of al
sorts: some of them assayling the divinity, others the humanity of the Lord of
this vineyard: others confessing both the one and the other, but dividing Jesus
Christ into twain: others making a monster of him which should be neither God
nor man: others degrading him from his office: others impugning other articles
of our faith: others blending with the truth of Christian religion a million of
errors not only utterly false, but altogether monstrous.

3 But above all others the foxes which have succeeded certain faithful
ancient pastors of the Church of Rome, have under the color of the
authority of the City of Rome, and because the Lord at the beginning caused
the glory of his exceeding grace to shine forth, learned to play the part of
a fox so sliely and so wilily, that by little and little, and that (which is a
thing of al others exceeding strange and wonderful) helping to hunt other
foxes, they have brought all under their paws, and then stripping themselves
out of their foxes case, (but yet so, as to slip it on again when need and
occasion requires) have taken unto themselves the Lions skin, showed their
talants, torn and devoured the poor flocks, so that they have wonderfully
skared them. For this is a maxima and general rule in this matter, that if
these cubs be let alone to become foxes they fail not in the end to become
Tigers and Lions, such as Michea speaks of, Mich. 3.5. For proof hereof we
need no other witness together with the poor estate of Christendom then the
legends of the Popes written by their own secretaries, among who^ that monster
Boniface the eight bears the bell: of who^ themselves give this testimony,
That he entered like a fox, he reigned like a Lion, and died like a dog. And
know you, that when I speak thus, I meddle not with their manners which are so
infamous and detestable, that there is not a creature which demands not
vengeance up on them of god: but I have principally respect unto their false
and cursed doctrine: being no heresy concerning the office of our Lord Jesus
Christ (without the which truth, whatsoever they confess touching his person
and the points concerning it in the Creed, serves them to no other end, but
to color their lies and falsehoodes which they cover with the cloak of this
truth, according unto the example of satan their father, whom the lord put to
silence, Luke 4.34.) which is not couied, and afterward hatched, and still
nourished and maintained yet in the school of these foxes, or rather these
wolves, which are the talants and the teeth of that great monster of Rome, who
has left them to deal in the doctrine, wherein they have learned to acquit
themselves so well, that every one has his morsel of the pray: and has
snatched for himself together with his spiritualities, the scepters and
crowns of Princes. Such are among the rest these four sorts of
wallet-breethren declared sometimes by the Universities themselves to be the
locusts issuing out of the bottomless pit, of whom mention is made in the
Apocalypse. But what are al these foxes, which are become wolves, in comparison
of that treacherous carauane horde of those vermin, openly polluting the holy
name of Jesus, and selling their filthy trash and trumperie in such sort
Gratis, to them that will feed themselves therewith, that they have so well
grated, that in less then forty years, they have haled in and heaped up in
their borroughs greater and richer spoils, then all the foxes and wolves
besides could mountain up in five hundred years before, though the time served
them as well as they could wish or desire. And herein I report me at the least
to these other poor conuents of Monks and of Friars, whom these new fresh
gamesters have left only a poor coule to shroude their bald heads in, and
the tail of a white frocke to traile after them: themselves being become as
fat as bodie-lice by eating up the others brewes: as the natural Philosophers
say of the serpents, that they become in the end Dragons, by eating up other
small serpents.

4 But not to stand any longer on them who are now the firebrands and bellows
of persecutions, nay persecuters themselves, how ever they shroud themselves
under the mantle of devotion and religion, we ought to see and consider how the
Lord had no sooner begun in our time, to take his vineyard into his own
hands, but satan thrust in into it those foxes the Anabaptists and Libertines
of many sorts, from whom sprang those vile and filthy heretics of the family
of love, who shame not notwithstanding to cover themselves in speech with a
more then Angelical perfection. On the other side, are crept into the world
the Arrians, as men zealous of the unity of one only God: others who fear
least the humanity and manhood of Jesus Christ, should be kept as it were in
prison in heaven, if we believe not that it is also really in his essence in
earth with the bread and the wine of the holy Supper: and that the Sacrament
would be annihilated and abolished, if we eat not the very flesh of Jesus
Christ also with our mouths and teeth. Others there are who are jealous of the
humanity of Jesus Christ, as they say: from whom notwithstanding are crept into
the world, both Nestorians in seuering of the two natures, and Eutichians in
the confounding of the essential proprieties of the^. In a word I know not
whether there be at al any one old heresy which satan indeuoreth not to set a
broach among us, or new yet to be invented which he hammereth not in the forge,
so to break in upon this vineyard being yet young and tender, to hinder her
fruit to come to maturity and ripenes.

5 And what have we to do hereupon? Soothlie that which the Bridegroom here
says, and the Lord of the vineyard wills us to do. Take us, says he, those
foxes and those cubs which wast the vines. But to whom speaks he? Certainly
to those to whom he has given in charge to husband and look unto his
vineyard, who should be watchful and diligent as well to husband it, as also to
fence and keep it from whatsoever may hurt it, arming themselves the better
to do this with his authority and power, both in reproouing the false doctrine
by the true, and also in cutting off the dead and rotten members. For although
themselves be also members of the Church, which is here generally represented
in the person of the spouse, yet notwithstanding in respect of their particular
calling and vocation, which is to provide for the purity and suertie of the
Church, they are particularly distinguished from the rest of the body, and in
this regard they are here willed and commanded to take these foxes. Such have
been, and yet are, and shall be unto the end of the woorlde, those whose
ministry and mouth the Bridegroom always uses to declare his holy will, and
therefore they are called his mouth, because they speak being moved by the
holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.21. which for this cause specially are called in the
holy Scriptures by diverse names, to wit, Men of God, Seers, prophets,
watchmen, builders of the house of God, pastors, doctors, ambassadors of God,
the frinds of the Bridegroom, and dealers in the marriage match between Jesus
Christ and his Church, keepers of the vineyard of the Lord, dispensers of the
secrets of God, names and titles exceeding honorable before God, but despised
of men: names, I say, of great honor, but of a maruailous, yea unsupportable
charge, if we take them strictly, 2. Cor. 2.16. And this is the cause why the
Apostle calls not this charge a dignity, as they use to term it who have
forged that goodly Apostatical Hierarchy, but he calls it a work or a
business, 1. Tim. 3.1. whose charge is understood oftentimes generally by the
word of watching and feeding, sometimes more distinctlie, by attending unto
the word and unto prayers, Act. 6.4. sometimes by these words of teaching,
improuing, correcting and instructing, 2. Tim. 3.16. sometimes by these words
of planting and watering, 1. Cor. 3.6. All which are concluded in these two
points of advancing the good and hindering the il, by a watchful, naie
continual care and providence, handling the sword of the word of God with the
right and the left hand as occasion requires, as well in general unto the whole
flock, as also by dividing it particularly to every one, as it is written Act.
21.31. and 2. Tim. 2.15. Go to then, says the Bridegroom in this place, ye
Gardiens and keepers of my vineyard, be you continual in chase of these
hurtful beasts, and leave not until you have rid and freed my vineyard of
them. And by what means? Marie setting the toiles and pitching the haies of the
word of God, to catch and entrap them therein, shutting them up in their dens
and caves by this word also, compared unto fire consuming the chafe of
falsehood and lies: and if they will not be taken and tamed and transformed
into sheep, chasing them away and driving them out of the flock, 1. Tim.
1.20. and so leaving them unto the judgment of him who judges those who are
without: Tit. 3.20. and 1. Cor. 5.13. As Much is to be said concerning other
foxes, who by their scandalous manners and wicked examples, wast and destroy the
vines in like manner, and especially the tender ones: which sort of foxes are
otherwise called scabbed sheep, and compared unto leaue^ which sowreth the
whole lump, of which the Apostle gives us a rule in the person of the
incestuous, 1. Cor. 5.5.11. And these are the chief and principal hunters of
these foxes and young cubbes. For it is properly by the spirit of the Lords
mouth, that the vineyard of the Lord is planted, husbanded and preserved.

6 But besides these unto whom properly this charge appertains, there are yet
other hunters in the vineyard of the Lord, who ought to travel no less in
this hunting, to wit, the magistrates as well sovereign as other, called also
servants of god, established in authority, and girded by him with a bawdrier,
Job. 12.18. Romans 13.1. to the end they should mantaine, not only honesty of
life opposed unto all violence and dissolution, but to the end that God may be
known and obeyed by the establishment and maintenance of the true service of
God, which is called Piety or godliness, 1. Tim. 2.2. These are they therefore
who should with all their power which God has given them, uphold and maintain
the holy ministry and service of God, as well in the purity of doctrine, as
also in the discipline of the Church, each conformably unto the word of the
Lord witnessed by the writings of his Prophets, without either adding any thing
thereto, or diminishing ought therefrom, and consequently bridle as much as in
them lies, and also punish according unto the exigence of the case, the open
and convicted wicked and incorrigible perturbers of that which is the true
Archpiller and foundation of humane society, namely the purity and exercise of
true religion: and all this they should do by the order which God himself
has established, not meddling with that which appertains unto the pastors and
auncientes of the Church and the holy ministry, like unto Vzzias, 2. Chron.
26.19. Matthew. 20.25. and Luke 12.14. pertaining also as little and less a
great deal to the pastors to intermedle with civil Jurisdiction and temporal
as they call it, as unto the magistrates to administer in the Church the word
and the sacraments. The magistrates on the other side must take heed how they
make Laws to bind the conscience, or take upon them to set up a government
of the house of God according unto their own wisdom and advice: which thing
appertains unto God alone who has ordained, delivered and enregistred his
inviolable laws in his holy Scriptures, as well of the old covenant, which
dured but a time, as of the new which shall continue and endure unto the end of
the world. Which if it had been well observed, or if it might be redressed at
this day, then verily we should see the Church of God so reformed as it ought
to be: as we see how the holy Kings governed themselves in this point, as David
and Solomon: who ever took counsel of the mouth of the Lord, and did according
thereunto, without passing of their bounds. The like did Asa, 2. Chron. 15.12.
and Iosaphat 2. Chr. 17.7. and 19.11. and Ezechias and Josias, as their
history declares.

7 But will some man say, is this enough to say, Take us those foxes, seeing
there are so and so many sorts of them, and that they who should be the
hunters and takers of them, are often times themselves the most dangerous foxes
and wolves of al? Mich. 3.3. Act. 20.29. I answer that it is enough to say,
take them, seeing this word proceeds out of his mouth, which in speaking
gives us the ability and efficacy of executing that which he commands, as
experience has always declared the same, being neither the wilines of those
foxes, nor the violence of those Lions and Tigers ever able to hinder the
conservation or restoration of this vineyard, when the time thereof was come,
this heritage and possession which reaches from one end of the world unto an
other, being given unto this Bridegroom for ever, Psalm. 110. whose kingdom by
consequent, which is this vineyard, remains for ever: although that until
that later day, in the which the Angels shall rid this vineyard of brambles
and briars, and shall faggot them up and cast them into everlasting fire, Matthew.
13.41. when God shall be all in all. 1. Cor. 15.25. it be in danger still to be
thus assaulted: but yet so, that not one good and true plant of this vineyard
can be taken away and rooted up, Ioh. 17.12. and 189.

8 And this is the cause why the spouse adds this verse full of
incomprehensible comfort and consolation, saying, The Bridegroom is mine, and
I am his. For what a treasure is this? This is the only son coessential and
coeternal with God the father, in as much as he is God: and in as much as he is
man, the perfect of perfits: he in whom the father is fully pleased and
contented, in whom are all the treasures of knowledge and understanding, and who
has a name above al names, having power in heaven and in earth: and who is so
good, so mighty, so rich as he? And we, what are we? conceived and born in sin:
not able of our selves to think on that which is of God in respect of our
salvation, but culpable of just and eternal malediction. Who can therefore
conceive of such a bounty and liberality, either in respect of the giver, or
in regard of that which is given, or in respect of them unto whom it is given?
He who is the giver thereof has all the reason in the world, to hate him on
whom he bestows this exceeding treasure: the gift is no worldes-good, but the
giver himself: he on whom the gift is bestowed is not only unworthy thereof,
but worthy of the clean contrary. All which circumstances being well
considered ought so to move the senseless and hard hearted, as to be ravished
with the admiration of this so bottomless a gulf of bounty and liberality:
and make al them die for shame who are so wicked as to contemn such an
exceeding grace, what allurement soever were presented the^. For what is there
to be compared with such a treasure most freely bestowed? And what recompense
is a man able to give of his soul? Mat. 16.26. Desire we any good thing from
an high, or from below? Who shall give it us but he who is the Lord of high and
low? Wish we for any true commodity, within or without? Who shall give it us
but he who made and preserves the one and the other? And how shall he refuse
to give it him, unto whom he has given himself, and that by a donation
utterly irreuocable? So that when we demand any of these blessings, and
receive them not, let us know that this therefore happens, because he knows
a great deal better then we our selves what is for us, or because we do
naughtily demand that which is good for us, or because it is good for us to
have the denial for a time to sharpen and whet our appetite and desire, Psalm.
40.1. for otherwise we should always find this promise infallibly true,
Knock and it shall be opened unto you, ask, and it shall be given you. But we
are to observe and retain one general rule in this matter, that is to say,
that concerning temporal blessings, which have not a special promise (as
David had a special promise of the kingdom, and therefore he specially craved
it, and obtained it, Psalm. 2.6. and.4.4. and elsewhere in many places: and
Daniel after the 70. years accomplished and expired prayed specially for the
return of the people, Dan. 9.2.) we may not demand them at Gods hands but
with these clauses, If it be good, if it be expedient, when, and in such sort
as it shall please thee: but as for demanding grace at his hands by the
remission of all our sins, bringing unto him an heart truly humble and
contrite, we may and ought to crave, and demand this with all holy assurance
grounded upon him, Heb. 4.16. and Iam. 16. yea so far as to defy al our
enemies, according to the example of the Apostle, Romans 8.37. for, says he, he
which has not spared his own son, but given him for us, how will he not
give us al things with him? Let us therefore hearken unto this spouse, or let
us be rather this spouse, which says, My beloved is mine, and I am his. What
shall Satan the^ be able to do against us, seeing this Bridegroom, together
with all that he has, is ours? Why should our sins appal and astonish us,
seeing he has carried them upon the wood of his cross? 1. Pet. 2.24. seeing
he is the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world, and that that which
he has suffered for us, is ours? Shall the want of righteousness, and the
perfect accomplishment of all the Law of God which we ought to perfourm daunt
us? Why? He has accomplished the whole Law for us, and he is ours with all his
obedience, Gal. 4.4. and Romans 5.19. Shall our natural corruption affright and
terrify us? Why? He, in whom it is fully and entirely repaired for us, is ours
with all his integrity and holiness, To. 8.3. besides that this corruption
begins already to die in us, so that we be no longer in subjection unto
it, Romans 7.18. Shall death hold us still chained and fettered with his bands?
Why? He who is the life, and he that has overcome death for us by his own
death is ours. What thing then is able to trouble our repose or abate our
assurance?

9 And to the end we should be the more certain and assured, it is not only
said that this beloved is ours, but also that we the beloved are his. The
donation therefore is mutual and reciprocal. But alas what gift have we
brought him and presented him withal, having nothing in us but wickedness and
corruption? Yea verily, then when he took us unto himself with all our filthy
defilementes: not to defile himself with them, but to blot and wash them out,
and in lieu of them to deck and adorn his spouse, with that purity and
beutie, whereof we have before spoken, and shall hereafter be further
occasioned to speak of, Ezech. 16. To say the truth then, we have given him
nothing nor brought him any thing in respect of the first grace: but have done
nothing but received by the hand of faith, which was freely given us to receive
the other withal, Ephe. 2.8. Philip. 1.29. But this former grace being
received, it has been accompanied with other gifts, which we offer up unto
him together with our own persons, Romans 1.21. which he most graciously
accepts of, though he have no profit thereby, Psalm. 16.2. Luke 17.19. but
according unto his good pleasure only. In a word therefore, who can give any
thing unto him, from whom alone whatsoever is good to be given, comes and
proceeds? Romans 11.35. and Iam. 1.17. and if we present him any thing, it
comes all from him. We are therefore given unto him, because he has given
himself to us, and has bought us with the price of himself, 1. Pet. 1.18.
not as if we had bought and sold with him, to pay him or give him that which
we have received of free gift. And yet we may not come with empty hands
before the Lord, seeing he gives us wherewith to make an offering, Exodus
23.15. Will we then have a part in this great and inestimable treasure? Let us
give our selves unto him and be his indeed, and let us not do as those two
whooring sisters, of whom the same Prophet speaks, Ezech. 23. for if we be,
al is marred, and our later estate and condition will be worse then the former,
2. Pet. 2.2. This is the cause why it is added that this Bridegroom pastureth
or feeds, that is to say, makes his abode and takes his pleasure with his
spouse, among the Lillies, that is, where virtue, purity, and syncerity is,
being meant by these Lillies the fruits of the spirit, which the Apostle
reckons up, Gal. 5.22. opposed unto the stinking, venomous and wicked plants
growing up in our hearts, until God pluck them up by the roots, with which the
whole world is so thick sown.

10 But some man will say, this Bridegroom was not yet come, when this spouse
spoke thus: but I answer that seeing faith cannot be without him unto whom
it tends as unto her only end and scope, and which also has her foundation
in him who gives it and forms it in those who are his, (which is Jesus
Christ, true God and true man, and not God only or man only) and again
seeing the Church cannot be without faith being the true and essential form
thereof, if from the very promise made unto Adam, Jesus Christ, true god and
true man were not in the Church, then was there nether faith at al, nor any
Church at al. And yet the humanity and manhood of Christ began not actually to
be before then, that it was conceived by the virtue of the holy ghost in the
womb of the most blessed virgin. This I confess to be most true: and yet I
say with the Scripture, that Jesus Christ (which name imports together with
the quality of an only mediator, that which is absolutely and necessarily
required, namely that he be apprehended and considered by faith, true god and
true man in one only person) not only was, but was also sacrificed from the
beginning of the woorlde, seeing that the Church, being from al eternity
elected and chosen, was not saved but by him, Apoc. 13.8. And these things are
easily agreed and accorded, if we consider diligently that which is said, Heb.
11.1. namely that faith that is to say, this gift of God, through which, every
faithful one assures himself of his salvation, by that only mediator Jesus
Christ true God and true man) causes that, which the believer has not yet but
by hope, to be unto him already as it were present in being, and shows him
(I mean unto the spirit of the believer) that which he sees not. The humanity
therefore and manhood of Jesus Christ (without the which he should not be our
mediator, nor the object of our faith) was not in nature in Salomons time, nor
many ages after, but yet notwithstanding was really and effectually present in
respect of the eyes of faith, whereof Saint Paul is a witness (over and besides
that invincible reason which I have before alleged) who calls Christ him
whom the fathers tempted in the desert, 1. Cor. 10.9. and says that the
fathers being in the desert, did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the
same spiritual drink which we do, to wit, Jesus Christ. Now Jesus Christ to
come, and Jesus Christ come; which was to be borne and to accomplish whatsoever
was absolutely requi^^^ unto our salvation, and which was borne and has
accomplished it in his time, are not two Jesus Christ's: as also there never
was nor ever shall be any more then one god, one faith, and one Church: the
difference therefore consists in the diverse dispensing and manifesting of
Jesus Christ, and not in the essence of him: whereas Abraham could not see the
day of this Bridegroom and Lord, but he saw it by the eyes of faith, though
Christ were not yet actually in nature, Ioh. 8.56. This is it which the spouse
meant in this latter verse praying this Bridegroom that he return until the
wind of that day arise, and the shadows fly away, calling the condition in
which they were, shadows, namely, during the time that this Bridegroom showed
not himself, but under the shadows and figures of the Law ceremonial, Heb.
10.1. the substance of which, (to wit, Jesus Christ, Col. 2.17) appeared not
but afar off, Heb. 11.13. not that there was not light enough through this
shadow, to conduct the Saints unto the light of glory, according unto their
measure, seeing this light is called the bosom of Abraham, Luke 16.22. but
obscure in comparison of this great day which has brought this spouse unto us
coming in person and declaring unto us clearly and particularly, the whole
counsel of God his father touching our salvation, Ioh. 15.15. and Mat. 13.17.
as he did afterward by his Apostles, and yet does and shall do unto the end and
consummatio^ of the world, by his true pastors and Doctors, Ephesians. 4.11. in such
sort that we must distinguish the shadow of this night, from that which is
called the shadow of death, whereof mention is made Esai. 9.2. wherein we are
al of us borne, Ephesians. 2.1.

11 And we must heedfully observe this manner of speech until the wind of that
day arise, which is taken from that which naturally happens and comes to
pass; namely, that when the day begins to break, some small wind is wont to
arise, which proceeds and comes from the beams of the Sun, beginning to
chase and drive away before it the gross and thick vapors of the night:
which wind is compared to this great and incomprehensible virtue and power of
the holy Ghost which stirs and as it were blows on the world, together
with the light of the gospel, to enlighten, or rather to creat the world anew,
Esai. 65.17. I mean by that wind which was sent unto the Apostles, and which
shall never cease to blow unto the end and consummation of the world, Act. 2.2.
Matt. 28.20. and Act. 20.28. So in the creation of this corruptible world it is
said, that it stirred and moved it self upon the waters, as it were warming
and cherishing them, to hatch as it were and breed thence the creatures which
were after formed of them, by the which virtue also they are yet maintained in
their being, which either fails or is renewed by the want and presence
hereof, as it is said in the Psalm. 104.29.30.

12 But what is the cause the spouse uses here the word of returning? For
this presupposes some retire and withdrawing going before. And this is the
reason, why some have taken this word as if return were as much as, forsake
me not. But it is better we keep the signification of the word,
notwithstanding with some declaration of it. For to say the tueth, the
Bridegroom did never utterly forsake this spouse, no not when she for the most
part forgot herself and her duty greatly: for which reason we shall ordinarily
find in the Prophets, in one and the same Prophecy, the wound of
chastisement, and the medicine of grace, never befalling the like to Sion, as
unto Sodom and Gomorrha, Esa. 1.9. But because he is never so near at one
time, as at an other, not only when the drawing back is on the spouses side,
Ier. 2.3. but also when it pleases the Bridegroom so to prove his spouse,
Psalm. 44.1. and as the Lord has thought it good to make his truth to shine in
the world, more in one time then in an other, as it is to be seen in the
ancient history, especially from Joshua until the time of David: this is the
cause why the spouse beseeches him to approach nearer and nearer: as also, how
ever it be, the Lord for his part has done, though the one half has more
and more abused this grace and favor of his. This is the^ that prayer which we
in like manner should daily make, beseeching the Lord (who justly seems to
draw himself from us by little and little, having verily taken out of the
world within these few years, so many great and excellent lights of his
Church, who might yet have continued, because we were not worthy of them) that
it will please him to approach and draw nearer again unto us then ever before.

13 Finally this surname or name of addition which she uses calling them
craggie or cleffie Mountains as being full of downe-falles and hollow places,
in which the chamoyse and other beasts of marvelous and almost incredible
agilitie are mounting and skipping from cliffe to cliffe, this appellation, I
say, together with the zeal, wherewith this spouse is moved, desiring there
might be no difficulty which might hinder the arrival and coming of this
Bridegroom more near unto us, does represent unto us the heavens which she
attends and looks for: not so even and so fairly polished as they seem
unto us in fair and clear weather, but as they show sometimes crancked and
entercut with mighty heaps of clouds which a man would take to be so many
mountains and rocks full of the strangest cragges and downe-falles a man can
imagine: in so much as Esaias seems to give us a most plain and clear
exposition of this place when he says, O that thou would cleave the heavens
and come down. The spouse therefore wishes and desires, that as these
beasts are not hindered any whit at all by any cragges or downe-falles of the
rocks, to descend and go whither they will, the Bridegroom should also in like
manner iumpe as it were, from cloud to cloud to approach near unto her. But
particularly this exceeding great secret, and more then incomprehensible unto
any creature whatsoever, namely that the son, who thought it no robbery to
aequall himself with the Father, being truly such as God is, to wit, very
God; has taken on him the form of a servant, and humbled himself to the
death, even the death of the Cross: this, I say, is as it were indeed to
cleave the heavens, to descend into the lowest parts of the earth, Philip. 2.6.
Ephesians. 4.9. and 5.32. And indeed a declaration thereof was given and
represented unto John Baptist at the baptism of Christ, who law the heavens
cleft and opened, and the spirit of God to descend in the form of a Dove upon
Jesus Christ. And if we had rather seek after these mountains and steep
places here below, we may say, that seeing our sins are they which put a
division between God and us, the spouse prays the Bridegroom in this place
to draw the nearer unto us, not to respect these hindra^ces, which are as it
were high Mountains, between him and us, but to do as these chamoyse and
roebuckes do which vault and bound over the rocks how high soever they be.

14 Now to conclude as the ancient Church having the gages and pledges of
this spiritual marriage whereby they were partakers of all his blessings,
prays the Bridegroom and beseeches him to approach yet nearer unto her, and
in person, causing the shadows and figures of the ancient covenant to vanish
away and depart, so we who are fallen into this happy time, in which this
Bridegroom has manifested himself in flesh, and most clearly revealed the
light of salvation, respecting notwithstanding the full and entire effect and
accomplishment of his promises unto his later coming, ought, the nearer we
draw unto it, the more fervently and earnestly pray that his kingdom come
quickly, and that in the mean time he kindle more and more in our hearts a
true and ardent desire of yielding him all manner of obedience, inspiring most
especially with his holy spirit, both the Magistrates and the ministers,
courageously to proceed in that business which is committed unto them, to
purge the vineyard of the Lord, and to rid it of all them who may in general
or particular wast and destroy it, blessing us al more and more from an high to
his honor and glory, Amen.

THE END OF THE SERMONS UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER.
THE XXIII SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the first verse.
1 By night in my bed I sought him who^ my soul loves: I sought him, but I
found him not.


1 The spouse by falling asleep in her chiefest peace and tranquillity is the
cause of her own desolation.

2 The Bridegroom notwithstanding leaves not to awake her in his time, and
the great difference which is between this awaking and that which proceeds
from the biting of sin.

3 The faults committed in the seeking after the Bridegroom, which is the
cause why he is not found by such seeking after.

4 The greatest blessings of God both temporal and spiritual, by ill using of
them, become the instruments of man's ruin and destruction.

5 Application of this doctrine to such as are asleep in our time.

6 An other kind of sleep which turns often times into an incureable
lethargy.

7 The resolution we ought to make touching the points which are at this day
controuersed in Christendom, in the matter of religion.

8 An answer unto them, who say that we sell Paradise very good cheap.

9 We must rise out of our bed to find this Bridegroom.

10 The conclusion of this matter, with an exhortation for the through practice
of this doctrine.

WE have in the Chapter going before understood and seen the sweet and
gracious behavior of the Bridegroom in caressing and entertaining of his
spouse, and reposing of her in a most happy rest, looking for still
notwithstanding and expecting another more near arrival and coming of his,
namely then, when he should come as the Sun rising from on high to give
light unto the woorld, and when the figures and shadows of the Law should have
an end, as it is said, Esai. 9.2. and by Zachary yet more expreslie in that
excellent Canticle or Song of his. It seemed then that all went the best that
might be in the woorld, the temple of the Lord being perfected and ended with
so great magnificencie, all that service so well established, and the state of
the kingdom so wisely governed and administered by Solomon. And indeed, we may
and ought to say, that the Church was then maruailous goodly and glittering,
and all the people in exceeding great quiet and peace. The same may likewise be
said of the estate of the Church in the time of Joshua, the people being
brought as it were into the rest of the Lord, as himself speaks, Psalm. 95.11.
But what? This endured not long, as it was also foretold by Moses, Deuteronomy.
32.15. which thing is here in this place described, or rather most divinely
painted forth unto us, containing doctrine altogether necessary for our time,
that we be not deceived to the endamaging of our own salvation. For the church
of god is fallen from age to age into that miserable estate whereof mention is
made, Mat. 13.13.25. by being by little and little brought into an heavy
slumber, by her over great ease, in such sort that while she is asleep the
enemy has set up his seat and prepared it as he would in the very midst of
the house of God, as the Apostle foretold it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.5. and so on. And
when at this day the Lord would awake her, the most part have such bleare
eyes that they cannot nor will not open them: others are in so deep a slumber
that though they be waked with never so great strokes of the whip, yet they
lay their head down again upon the pillow: but in general there where the pot
seethes is our holy mother the Church. In a word if you will believe them the
gilden steeple of S. Peter at Rome, and the chair wherein they say he sat, are
the essential, immutable, necessary, and infallible visible marks of the true
religion and of the Church which they call Roman and Catholic* that is,
particular and universal both together. All this founded, if you will have me say
that which is, upon this repose of too great an ease. But to bring farther
asleep those who are already brought asleep, there are no fair pretenses
wanting, of the excellency of S. Peter among the rest of the Apostles, which
they turn into a principality: afterward for that Saint Paul so highly
commends the faith of the Romans of his time, as if their successors were
like unto them. Besides this they allege the preeminencie which the Bishops
of Rome had above others, which we know well enough, proceeded partly upon the
authority of that City, as being the head city of the whole Empire* which
preeminencie was also maintained by the godliness and constancy of the Bishops
there and the notable examples of their martyrdomes: partly also being
afterward autorized by the first council of Nice, until such time as the
persecutions ceasing, and ambition together with wealth and riches increasing,
every one sleeping soundly in their peace, entered in place of doctrine doting
dreams, so that finally the poor spouse at her awaking found herself in a
most wretched and miserable estate, in which she yet continues to this day,
persecuted in so grievous manner as she is, by the officers of the whore, who
has taken her place while she slept so quietly, as it was also expressly
foretold of the Church of Rome, both by Saint Paul, and also by Saint John in
his Apocalypse, if we will credit in this behalf the most ancient expositors,
Greeks and Latins. And (as it is come to pass by a more the^ admirable
providence of God herein) the Italians themselves, whose poems and rimes are at
this day printed and song in Rome, call her Babylon full of covetousness and
impiety, the harbor of the wrath of God, and the temple of heresy, besides
that common experience makes the same most plain and evident unto the eye of
those, who are not utterly blind. Neither is it in our time, or our fathers
time only, that satan has first begone to deal in this sort. For behold how
the governors of the Church and successors of Aaron together with the people
bewitched in like manner and enchanted, replied unto the servants of God,
reprehending their falsehood in doctrine, and corruption in manners; the Temple,
the Temple, the Temple of God, Ierem. 7.4. and that with as loud a cry, as
that seditious Demetrius cried, and caused to be cried in Ephesus, the Temple
of the great goddess of Diana, of the Ephesians yea carried headlong with the
same lying and murdering spirit, being no other difference at all between them
then this, that the Jews abused a good ground and principle, for indeed the
Temple of Jerusalem was built by the commandment of the Lord, and unto the
Lord, which could not be said of the Temple of Diana, built by the suggestion
of Satan unto a false goddess: all coming notwithstanding to one end, seeing
the Temple built and consecrated unto God, was become the place where his holy
name was most vilanously polluted and abused. This is it which we are taught
in this place by the very confession of the spouse herself, seeking after her
Bridegroom, and not finding him in her bed, where the Bridegroom, without
going far from her, had laid her, as we have seen in the Chapter going before.
And how came this to pass? Upon no other thing, but that the spouse fell
asleep in this bed, on which notwithstanding she was laid down, not to
sleep, but only to rest herself, and that continuing still watching. And yet
neither if we continue so, can we deal so well and so diligently, that there be
no default, as we shall afterward see. What other thing then can happen, but
an extreme desolation, when men fall asleep upon their ease and quiet, and
especially when they of all other are the fastest asleep, who should watch for
themselves and for others? Matthew. 13.25. But from whence is the fault? Not on
the lords side, but on the wretchedness of man, who cannot order himself
aright, neither in prosperity nor in adversity, not in poverty nor in wealth
and abundance. And if we compare both these extremities together, we shall find
both by reason and by experience, that the way of peace and rest, accompanied
with prosperity and abundance, is the more dangerous. For adversity and need
stirs up and awaketh the most senseless and sluggish, to think on the
remedies thereof, whence it is said that Necessity has been the occasion that
arts and sciences were found out and invented: but prosperity and abundance
bring the best asleep, witnesses whereof may be Adam and Eve before their
miserable fall, and Solomon who was so wise: in a word the whole history of
the Church truly Christian, Apostolical and Catholic, which flourished under
Saint Peter, and Saint John, who had neither gold nor silver, Act. 3.6. but
distributed unto others in midst of their poverty from the break of day until
night, the true riches which God had committed unto them, Act. 5.21. and under
S. Paul who lived and nourished others by the labor of his hands, preaching
unto them day and night, and that with tears, Act. 20.31.34: whereas
afterward upon the peace which Constantine granted it, accompanied with wealth
and abundance, the mother of ambition and dissolution, it never ceased until
this day to decline touching heavenly and celestial things, though in respect
of the world it have grown great and mighty. For how can the kingdom of God
and the kingdom of the world agree together? Luke 18.36. Things so contrary
one unto the other, Iam. 4.4. Thus you see then in what sort a sweet repose
and rest brings asleep not this man or that man, but the whole Church
considered in a generality, that in less then a turn is she turned and
wandered away from her Bridegroom.

2 But the Bridegroom who can never utterly forget his spouse, no not when he
has for a time in his just judgments cast her off and left her as it were to
the wide world: finds always means to awake^ her, and to form in her a
desire of returning again to find him, as it is said, Deu. 32.37. and 1. King.
8.46. which is here declared us by the spouse saying, that she sought him. And
how could this be if she were not first gone from him, and afterward come
again unto herself to think to seek after him? And that by his means who
speaks within, and says, Awake thou which sleep, Ephesians. 5.14. and Esai.
26.19. And here we must put a great difference between that sort of waking
which is proper unto Gods elect, and which proceeds from his mere grace (as
he also causes us to find the way out of which we are wandered and straied)
and that waking and good morrow of sin which the wicked have, which leads
such as are reprobate into despair, according unto that which is said, that
there is no peace unto the wicked, Esai. 48.22. and as is to be seen in that
horrible example of Judas the traitor, Matthew. 27.4. For this awaking proceeding
from the prick of sin, makes the sinner to fly before the face of the
Judge, according unto the example of Adam, Genes. 3.8. but that awaking which
proceeds from grace, and from an heart truly contrite, creates in a man an
ardent desire of returning unto his Savior: for which reason the spouse here
says, that when she awoke she sought him.

3 But what means that which afterward is added by her, namely, that she
found him not? And how agrees this with that promise of Christ verified by so
many experiences, knock and it shall be opened unto you, seek and you shall
find? Matthew. 7.7. and Luke 11.9.10. And if the Lord has caused himself to
be found of those who sought him not, Esa. 65.1. (for it is the sheephard
which seeks after the straie sheep, and not the sheep the sheepeheard,
Matt. 18.12) how is it possible that this spouse found him not? I answer that
the spouse says not, that she could never find him, which should contrary
the promise above: but that seeking after him in her bed, she found him not.
True, in her bed, for there he was not. To find him therefore, it is not enough
to seek him, but we must seek where he is to be sought: and therefore it is no
marvel though the spouse found not her Bridegroom in her bed, for he was not
there. Moreover we must seek him in a fit and convenient time if we will find
him, namely when the time is of setting the door open* otherwise we loose but
our pains to seek him, Esai. 55.6. and we must knock at the door, before it
be bolted on the innerside, Mat. 25.12. Far^her we must ask of him, of whom we
ought to ask, and who will not be mocked 1. King. 18.27. and then, that which
we ought to ask, Mat. 20.21. and again, in such a sort as we ought to ask,
Iam. 1.7. and finally, unto the end which we ought to ask it. We may not
therefore wonder, or take on with God, but with our selves, if for the most part
we find not that which we seek after. For the fault is in us. And though we
failed in no one point of those which I have above set down yet we must do
God this honor to give him leave to choose the time and the means, to grant us
that which he will give us, when we have demanded it as he has given us our
rule. Abraham believed and obtained the child which was promised him, but it
was five and thirty years after the promise was made. David obtained the
kingdom: but it was after he had waited in waiting, Psalm. 40.1. yea until his
eyes were dim and failed in looking and waiting after it, Psalm. 119.82. and
that he was hoarce with crying, Psalm. 69.3. not that the Lord is not without
al comparion more ready to hear then we are to pray, seeing it is he who
forms in us the desire of praying, and who teaches us how we ought to pray,
Romans 8.26. and it is he who must open our lips that they may show forth his
praise, Psalm. 51.17. But it is expedient and profitable for us to be so
delaied, because we are wont to make light of that which we come lightly by: in
a word how ever it be, it is he who has the times and seasons in his hand,
Act. 1.7.

4 But here the spouse seeks after him whom she ought to seek, and fails
not in any thing save this, that she seeks him of error there where he is
not: and where is that? In her bed. And yet who gave her this bed, and who
laid her there? Her Bridegroom, having so expressly invited her, and so
amiably and kindly entertained her, as we have seen in the chapter going
before, and especially in the tenth verse, and in the verses following. What is
the reason then, why he could not be found, as if he had parted clean
away? Because the spouse falling asleep, made more of the gift, then of the
giver, that is to say, gave herself so far over unto this rest and ease,
that she continued to be heavy and drowsy still. So comes it to pass in
all other temporal and spiritual blessings, when we stay and settle our hearts
and minds wholly upon them. Life it self is an especial gift and blessing of
God, in whom we are, we move, and we live. Act. 17.28. But say we once with the
children of this world, There is nothing more to be desired then to live? We
are dead whilst we live, 1. Tim. 5.6. As Much is to be said of all the
commodities and blessings of this life, albeit they be the blessings of God,
unto them on whom the gift is bestowed of using them well, as on Abraham and on
Job, Job. 31. and on a very few others. But what do the most part of the
world desire? Mary they would find Paradise in their bed, that is to say, they
would have a peaceable gospel, that they might lie down softly and sleep,
and pass their time of life with others in rest and security. I speak not yet
of them, who loose the raines to all sorts of pleasures, and give themselves
over to their unmeasured lusts: but of those who would content themselves with
a measure. Notwithstanding if we settle and rest our selves hereon, as if we
were to find herein our only felicity, we shall find our selves deceived, and
deprive our selves of the principal use of these benefits and blessings, which
is to handle them so as if we handled thorns, Mat. 13.22. and to be more
careful in the well disposing our expense, then in the increasing of our
receipt, 1. Tim. 6.18. in a word to follow the protestation of David, Psalm.
16.5.

5 For example we may and ought to say that God has at this day prepared us a
goodly soft bed, and given us rest both here and in many other places, whether
we respect that which is the principal, I mean, the purity of doctrine, and
some kind of order in the Church together with the means of being instructed
in learning and good letters, or whether we regard our civil liberty and
freedom opposed to the miserable condition of a great part of the world
besides. This is a goodly bed which God has himself made us by little and
little in this world, and which he has curtained and kept close for us about
these 60. years, notwithstanding the infinite resista^ces of our enemies to the
contrary, which is as much as if he should have built his nest in the midst
of the impetuous waves of the maine Ocean. If hereupon every man fall asleep
in his bed, and let the preachers preach what they list, they will care for
nothing but for their temporal profits and commodities: briefly, if we make
but an accessarie or a by-woorke of that which should be the principal, what
will come thereof in the end but this, that at length the principal will be
clean neglected and forgotten? And this is the cause why God has given us
some small lashes with his rod, and namely the last year, to awaken us thereby:
but who has been the better by them? And therefore let us take heed he lay
not down his rod and take up a whippe, and in the end a bar of iron, not to
awake, but to quell them who are so fast and so heavy asleep in time of their
peace and quiet. Now if but to occupy our minds a little in those commodities
which the Lord grants us, be a thing so dangerous, as it became to be to
Solomon himself, what shall become of them who have settled their minds so
far on them, as that they utterly forget the giver? What shall I say then
unto you ye rich-misers, who either have inherited houses full of wealth, or
whose labors God has so plentifully blessed, to you I speak, who put your
confidence in your riches and think on nothing else, but how to pintch and
spare and scrape and scratch together, and never make any reckoning how or
where to employ them well, you I say, who have no other god but your belly: in
a word all you who have received such a largess of gods blessings, and think
on nothing less then how to use them to his honor and glory. What shall I
say unto you? Will you never bethink your selves of so great an abuse? Never
consider of so great a disorder, fear ye not to be forsaken of him, whose
blessings you so wickedly, so wretchedly abuse?

6 But what shall become of them who sleep not in that bed which God laid
them in, or enjoy that rest and quiet which God bestowed on them, but in that
which their own lusts, and their wicked practices have purchased them? As
some plenty of riches, and goods il gotten, or some other show and appearaunce
of credit and quiet, redeemed and purchased with the loss of their conscience:
as also when any are asleep in a lewd course and train of life, whether it
be in whooredome (whereof we have a strange example in David himself, who of
an adulterer became a traitor and a murderer, by falling asleep in his sin)
or whether it be in gluttony, as we see it to be the trade of these gamesters,
tiplers, tauern-haunters, and other such dissolute people, who end their days
in misery and commonly on the gallows: for few of them have that grace given
them which is mentioned in the parable of the prodigal son. But O poor and
wretched bed, not of feathers, but of thorns and briars, full of deadly
pricking! O miserable and unhappy prosperity which bring with thee
perperuall and remediles calamity! O sleep, not sleep, but a plain lethargy
of the soul deprived of al true sense and motion!

7 But to apply this doctrine yet more nearer unto our use, when we see at
this day such differents and controversies in Christendom, it is not for us to
say, Let all be as be may, we will meddle with none of the^* as these good
fellows do, who depart out of the world, before they knew wherefore they came
into it (a most wretched and miserable condition) but we must follow the
example of this spouse, who in the midst of her ease fell not so asleep, as not
to wake again to seek after her Bridegroom, that is to say, to be thoroughly
resolved where he was, and to join hirselfe unto him. Behold the first point.
The second is, that to know where this Bridegroom is, and consequently the true
doctrine of salvation, we may not look where the greatest ease is, where the
greatest number, and on which side the greatest honors and promotions are to
be found, as we see the manner of the world to be at this day, siding and
sorting themselves with them, who seem the stronger and the more eminent me^ in
their eyes. For contrariwise, if you were of the world, the world would love
you, says the Lord, Ioh. 15.19. And this worldly blessedness and happiness is
not among them which Christ reckons up, Mat. 5. Luke 6. Nay contrariwise, if
a man be waxen fat and rich, he must become lean and slender to be able to
pass through the eye of the needle, Luke 18.28. which is the streit way which
leads unto salvation. Let us therefore remember that the spouse having sought
the Bridegroom in this bed, found him not.

8 Now our adversaries hereupon will say, that this gear touches us near,
who hold with, say they, and maintain the broad way, seeking after nothing
else but our carnal liberty, having taken away the time of Lent, and finding
fault with fastinges and pilgrimages: and what else? Promising salvation unto
all the world without any good works. And they, what do they? They eat no
flesh a great part of the year, they fast, they labor and take pains without
ceasing to win paradise: all their clergy voweth virginity: so many good men
of theirs have as streit rules of life, as none can be more. Some of them never
eat any flesh: others go wolward and in hair: others whip themselves a-vie
who shall whip most. Ye hypocrites, ye whited walls and painted sepulchers, ye
meal-mouthed counterfaites, ye deuourers of widows, and eaters up of
orphans, ye vowers of poverty to nestle and dwell in palaces, and there to
live and feed your selves fat at the costs and charges of others, seek you
your answer in the 53. Chap. of Esaias, and in the 23. Chapter of Saint Matthew.
As for those who are wretchedlie bewitched and seek to win paradise by their
own travail, to them I say, how long will you seek the kingdom of God in
meat and drink? How long will you continue to seek paradise in the broken and
stinking cesternes of your own imaginations and traditions? How long will you
be ignorant, that it is the blood of Jesus christ which has saved the true
martyrs themselves, and not their own blood? Now is this I pray you to set
a cheap price upon paradise, to call and settle the consciences of men upon him
who has redeemed them with so great a price, as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet.
1.18. and not on charmed water, or the pardons of his false successors? Do we
sever and disioine true amendment of life from remission and forgiveness of
sin? Cry we not out daily against al manner excess, riot and dissolution?
Do we not commend and recommend unto all men, all inward integrity and
vprightnes? Al sobriety? Al kind of mutual edification? But it would be too
long to make a particular reply unto every point. Let it be answered them in
a word, that touching their doctrine compared with ours, we have always made,
and still will make him the Judge, who shall judge us all by his holy word: and
as touching their life and ours, we confess that as for us we have but too
great occasion to hang down our heads: as for them, the heaven and the earth
knows too well what their merits are.

9 The spouse adds that which is properly belonging unto this matter, saying,
that when she found not her Bridegroom in this bed where she sought him,
she rose to seek him whom she so heartily loves, where ever he were. Now to
creep into her bed and there to lie groueling, and to rise, are things clean
contrary, the one to the other: and indeed it is not enough to condemn that
which is ill, but we must like and approve that which is good and practice
it. What is then to rise out of her bed? It is to quit and forsake al things
without exception, together with which we cannot enjoy Jesus Christ, that is to
say, to renounce a man's self, which is the A.B.C. of Christians, Matthew.
16.24. It is to put out one eye, and to cut off one arm, to enter rather
one-eied and maimed into the kingdom of this Bridegroom, then having two eyes
and two arms to be cast into hell fire, Mat. 5.29.30. it is to leave al things
to follow after this Bridegroom, according unto the example of his true
disciples, Mat. 19.27. it is to follow the example of that thrice happy
merchant, who sold all that he had to buy the perle be found, Mat. 13.46. it is
to be ready in the banqueting hal, and not to be hindered and kept thence
either by farm, or tillage, or marriage, Luke 14.16. it is to to love neither
father, nor mother, nor country, nor kindred so much, or more then God, Genesis
11.33. and. Deu. 33.9. and not to become a monk (as some one of the ancient
not so advisedly said, although the monkeries then, were as far distant from
those of our days, as the Moon is distant from the earth, though they were
even then, to say the truth, in some point lunaticke and fantastical) but to
follow Jesus Christ, that is to say to stick unto this Bridegroom, in
exercising every man his lawful calling in all honesty and holiness. To rise
then out of bed, is not simply to change our place, but it is as I have said
to quitte and forsake all things, which may let and hinder us from that which
concerns the peace of our consciences, and so consequently our salvation, to
keep on in the right way if we be once in it, and to find it out if we be
straied from it, and that not only to follow in general the vocation common
unto al Christians most excellently described among other places, Phil. 2.1.
but to the end that every one in special follow his vocation as we have an
express commandment to that purpose, 1. Cor. 7.20. and according unto the
example of David who having this in particular charge to find and assign the
place for the building of the Temple, God punish me so and so, says he, if
ever I enter under the roof of my house, or ascend up into my bed, if I suffer
mine eyes to sleep, or shut the lids of mine eyes before I find out a place for
the Eternal, an habitation for the mighty one of Jacob, Psalm. 132.

10 Let all the elect therefore of God, as many, I mean, as he has created
in, a desire of finding him, when they are asleep in this peace of the false
Church, learn of this spouse to say truly, and indeed, that there is no
commodity nor appearance of ease shall stay me, but I will leave them, and get
me out of my bed to find him, on whom my heart is settled and planted. And let
those who have found him take heed how they set their minds upon temporal
blessings, though godliness have the promise of them also, 1. Timoth. 4.6. or
to make their account that things once well ordered shall so continue still in
the Church, or discern the true Church from the false by an outward show of
some great estate never so well underpropped in the opinion of men, but take
heed betimes unto themselves, that this Bridegroom in whom consists the
true peace, Matthew. 12.29. never leave them, but that they continue still members
of that true Church, of which it is said, That happy is the people, whose God
the eternal is, Psalm. 44.15. To the attaining whereof, confessing before the
Lord our too continual negligence, unthankfulness, and rebellion, we will
crave pardon and mercy at his hands as follows,

Almighty God, etc.
THE XXIIII SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 2. and 3.
verses.
2 I will rise therefore said I, and will go about the City, through the
streets, and through the greater places, and will seek him who^ my soul loves:
I sought him, but I could not find him.

3 The watch which go about the city found me, and I said, saw you him who^ my
soul loves?


1 That the Lord suffers not himself to be found incontinently of his,
amidst the confusions and desolations of the Church, is for no other cause, but
to make himself to be so much the more ardently and earnestly sought after.

2 It is neither to the greater number, nor unto that which is most commonly
received, that we are to keep our selves, to find the true Church.

3 The certain, infallible, and perpetual mark of the true Church is the
doctrine registered by the Prophets and Apostles.

4 The truth continues firm and stable in the true Catholic Church opposed
unto the Heretical: but it shines not always alike, nor is alike known.

5 The doctrine of the Apostles and the Catholic Church are inseperable, and
is a testimony one unto the other.

6 The holy scripture ought to serve for text and interpretation.

7 The spirit of truth was never tied, without any exception, unto the
Leuiticall ministry.

8 Wherefore the spouse went her way farther without staying the watches
answer.

9 The spirit of truth is not tied to the^ without exception who sit in the
chair of the ministry of the gospel.

10 The holy scriptures are in all times irreproueable Judges of the true
Christian doctrine, as it appears by the testimony of Jesus Christ himself
and his Apostles.

11 Bare personal succession is not to be stood on, though the outward form
be therein observed.

12 This doctrine being well practiced breeds no confusion in the Church.

13 The horrible disorder brought in and confirmed in the Church by the
Apostatical See of Rome, and that they are neither heretics nor Schismatiques
who have severed themselves from it by extraordinary means sent of God.

14 The conclusion showing how we ought to behave our selves in this behalf.

UPON Thursday last we learned how the spouse awaked by the spirit of god, who
formed in her an holy desire of seeking him again, seeing him not in the bed
where she slept, was not therefore clean out of heart, but getting her self
up shows, that because she found him not, her desire of seeking after him was
so much the more augme^ted. And indeed as we said the last day, this is the
means by which the Lord not suffering himself to be always found at the
first, sharpeneth the faith and hope, and fortifieth the patience of his, as we
see it by infinite many of examples of the holy Scripture. So the people served
as a stranger four hundred years, in the land of Chanaan and of Egypt, and
forty years in the desert, and seventy years in Babylon. So did Joseph
endure much in prison, and David during his flight, saying in the 40. Psalm. I
waited and waited for the Lord, and he heard me. According therefore unto these
examples if in diverse difficulties and distresses touching our conscience,
either in perils or adversities, it seems, that the Lord, as I may so say,
flies from us, let us run courageously after him, until he suffer
himself to be taken of us. But who shall continue unto us this vigor and
courage? He who for the love which he bears us first, forms in us the love
whereby we love him reciprocally, as the spouse does thrice here reiterate
it: that is to say, not fainedly as hypocrites do: nor so so, as they who are
neither hot nor cold, nor seething, but lukewarm: and therefore are by and by
vomited up. Apoc. 3.16. whereas they who are violent and importune, catch the
kingdom of heaven away by an holy importunity, Matthew. 11.12. Luke. 18.2.

2 But we must especially consider that which the spouse says in this place,
namely, that she diligently sought after her Bridegroom, by the open places,
and went round about the City and found him not. For contrariwise in the
parable of the banquet, Luke 14.21. the servants are commanded upon the
refusal which the greater sort and the rich made, to go unto the open places
and streets of the City, to bring together those which were poor and impotent,
lame and blind. But this similitude tends to another purpose then this of the
spouse, to wit, to show us that they are no members of the Church, or (if they
were before) leave to be, who make more reckoning of their woorldly ease and
other their commodities and affairs of this world, then they do of their
conscience: in whose places God does often choose the poor and contemptible of
the world, as it is said in the Canticle of the blessed virgin, Luke 1.52.53.
We read also, Pro. 1.20. that Wisdom makes her voice to ring in the streets
and open places: but it is not said that she was harkned unto or received
there: yea contrariwise, Wisdom lamenteth and bewaileth the disorders which
do there reign. There is likewise speech in the parable of the sower of seed
which fell in the way, which because it pierced not into, and entered the earth,
it was incontinently eaten up by the birds. These two places may serve us for
the interpretation of this, in which we understand by the open places and the
circuit of the City, that which is commonly received and bears sway among
men. And to say al in one word, it is that mask which is called at this day
by the name of the Catholic Church, not that Catholic Church which we
mention in our Creed, but that monster which the efficacy of error has
engendered by her, who has bewitched the kings and nations of the earth, as it
has been before prophesied and foretold.

3 To answer therefore this matter, which is the last refuge of our
adversaries, what is that the spouse here says, being so affrighted and
hared, for that her Bridegroom is departed from her, while she was asleep in
her bed? It is this, which I say and repeat again, that she thought, that he
whom she sought, and so consequently the truth, and her salvation, were to be
found in the religion which was commonly received among the people. And what
induced her to think so? The promises made unto that people and to no other,
before the coming of the Bridegroom in flesh, Act. 3.25. as at this day, the
Church, say they, cannot err, hereupon to ground al their errors. Wherein
then did this spouse deceive her self? Even with that which was answered, Ier.
18.18. and presupposing (as they would gladly make us to believe at this day
of Saint Peter's steeple at Rome) that religion was nailed as it were with a
tennepenie nail, unto Abraham's race, without distinguishing the true
Israelites from the false, as Saint John Baptist reproched them in his time:
she judged of true religion according unto that which was brought in when she
was asleep, and of a long time received of great and small, whereas she should
have sought after that which was proposed and commanded for a rule unto the
people, that is to say, in the law and in the testimony, as it is said, Esa.
8.20. For seeing that the true Church judges not the the controversies of
religion, but so far as to refer her self wholly unto that which the
Bridegroom has thereof determined, by the mouth of his Prophets and Apostles,
it follows that it is neither unto that which is commonly received and
maintained, nor unto the greater number that we are to refer our selves to be
resolved, seeing that even in the affairs of this world there be more fools
then wisemen, and more wicked men then good: but we must refer our selves unto
the Bridegroom himself, who is judge both of the one and of the other. Yea, but
where shall a man find him? We must not say, (says the Apostle after Moses)
we will ascend up into heaven to find him there, or pass the Sea to seek
him. But the word is in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is to say, this
word of faith which we preach, Romans 10.8. And this is it by which we must
discern the true Catholic Church from the false.

4 What is then, you will say, this Catholic Church, in the which no where
else, Jesus Christ is found, and out of which there is no salvation? It is the
assembly of all the true elect and faithful, gathered out of al people and
nations in unity of the Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine considered in
her generality, in which assembly truly the light of the truth can never be
put out, albeit in the parts and members of the body distinctly and severally
considered, there may be some defects, doubts, and ignorances, as the history
of all times declares the same. To this Church thus universally considered, is
opposed the generality of all companies besides, which are also called
Christian, and which keep the marcke of Baptism, but have forged unto
themselves a religion, according unto their own lust and fancy, whether they
cover themselves with the name and writings of the Prophets and Apostles il
interpreted, or whether they invent a doctrine altogether new according unto
their own pleasure, for which cause such a church is called heretical, that is
to say, grounded upon a doctrine which a man has chosen and taken unto
himself, and which agrees neither with that which is Catholic, nor with it
self, but is often times divided into so many pieces as there are brains
given unto their own private and particular sense, having all of them this in
common, that they go astray and wander from the Prophetical and Apostolical
truth. I know that all this is applied against us by the adversaries of our
time, who for this cause call our Church new, and give us such titles as like
themselves best, not perceiving how themselves cut their own throats calling
their Church the Catholic Church, except they can show us that Rome and the
whole world are all one: but the controversy would be soon ended if men would
but harken unto reason. I say therefore that accordingly as it pleases God to
show his judgments upon the unthankfulness of the world, or of his mercy to
spare mankind, the true Catholic Church has sometimes shined forth and
appeared in her beauty, but not always above the false and heretical: the
painted and disguised strumpet, counterfaiting the chaste spouse of Jesus Christ
so well, and displaying the beams of her outward beauty so magnificently for
the most part, that all both great and small take her to be the true, and
thereupon the poor spouse, which is the true spouse indeed, is forced to
retire into the deserts, until the time of indignation be past, Esaias. 26.20.
Apo. 17.14. That this is so it cannot be denied, but that a man shall be
convicted by the whole history of the Church, and by that which we see at
this day with our eyes. Thence I conclude that the multitude and the greatest
and apparent number is a most false mark of the true church: but without
standing either on few or more, we must keep us unto this infallible point,
that the true Church and worthy of the name of Catholic and universal is
that, which makes a true profession of the doctrine preached and entirely
registered by the Apostles to be the only rule of truth unto the whole company
of the elect.

5 These two names therefore of Apostolical doctrine and Catholic Church,
are both of them so inseparable and agree in such sort, that the true Church is
by this true and essential marcke distinguished from the false: and again the
true church bears certain marckes of the seed whence she was conceived, 1.
Pet. 1.25.

6 And to the end that they reply not hereupon that the one and the other
assembly may allege the same text of the bible: I answer, first, that the
false Church makes no reckoning of keeping herself wholly to the holy
Scriptures: secondly, that the Scripture ought as well to be the commentary as
the Text, and that al interpretation of Scripture being referred unto the
articles of faith, as unto a certain and infallible rule to discern that which
is true from that which is false, as being the abridgement of the whole
Scripture, it will be always easy not to be deceived, except a man will
himself. Thus you see what we are to think of the co^munalty of the greater
number, which cried in Christ's time, away with him, away with him, crucify
him, which is opposed unto that which Jesus Christ calls little flock, Luk,
12.32. But let us see whether the spouse have any better direction.

7 She says then in sum that going so through the City she was found by the
watch, and she asked the^, if they could tell her any tidings of this
Bridegroom, and says not what answer she had of them: but it appears
sufficiently by that which follows, either that they answered her nothing, or
that without staying their answer she went her way farther. Now who are they,
I pray you, of the watch, but those who have the charge of watching over the
City of God? And is it not expressly said, that the lips of the Priest, are
the keepers of wisdom, because he is the messenger of god, Mal. 2.7. And unto
who^ did the Lord command his people to resort to be resolved in a case of
difficulty touching the interpretation of the Law, but unto the Priests, Deuteronomy.
17.8. yea, to answer unto it according unto the Law which they might not ad
unto, nor diminish. Notwithstanding we see here that the spouse found her
Bridegroom no more among these then in the open places and streets of the
city* the reasons this, that there is great difference, between considering of
a charge such as it is in it self, and considering of it as they discharge it,
on whom it is imposed. Moreover albeit the Lord has established an order
wherein he declares his blessing: yet notwithstanding we may not tie the
holy Ghost entirely unto them, either who are called by an ordinary vocation,
or unto them who have the place thereof, because that as the Lord in his mercy
gives true pastors and teachers, for the gathering together of the saints,
and for the work of the ministry, to the building of the body of Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 3.12. so does he also in his anger give false Pastors with strong
delusion and the efficacy of the spirit of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. punishing
by that means the contempt of his holy word. As in that which concerns the
society of men in this world, God gives good princes and governors, 1. Timot.
2.2. and Psalm. 72. and on the other side he punishes and chastises the
people, taking his spirit from their princes and governors, Psalm. 76.13. this
holy ministry notwithstanding (considered in it self) remaining in that
estate and form in the which God established it; as also the estate of Kings
and of other Magistrates, although the tyrants abuse it, Esai. 3.4. and 56.10.
Osee. 13.12. Ier. 23.11.14.15. Briefly the whole Scripture is full of such
testimonies of Kings and reproaches of Prophets and Priests. And if we come
to the proof hereof by experience, who were the greatest adversaries of the
true Prophets, Ier. 26.7. who conspired against God, profaned the Law,
covered and maintained the sins and iniquities of Princes? Ezechiel says
they were the Prophets and Priests, Ezec. 22.25.26.28. Now let us take an
account of the Priests which built, and how many pullers down and destroiers
shall we find for one builder? In a word, by whom was the corner stone rejected?
By them which are called builders, not that they were such but they should have
bin, Psalm. 118.22. Matthew. 21.42. Who interdicted the Apostles the preaching of
the gospel, opposing themselves directly against God? Act. 4.5. and 5.21. In
sum the spouse speaks here of wicked husbandmen of the vineyarde, who
after they had killed the servants of the Lord, in the end slew the heir
also.

8 We may not marvel then that the spouse found as little comfort by the
watch, as she did in the open places of the City: being a thing most
certain and assured, that if the poor Church of God, having, amiddest these
straites of hers, lost the sight of her Bridegroom when she looked so ill unto
him, had referred her self to this goodly watch to have her resolution of
them, she had but lost her pains, this watch being set rather to turn aside
and to skare these poor affrighted sheep, then to bring them again into the
right way. God therefore himself was aiding unto his spouse in this, that she
passed farther, without staying for an answer from them, according unto that
which the Lord in his time speaking of such says, Let them alone, for they
are blind leaders of the blind. For we shall see afterward that she was
beaten of the watch.

9 But let us see whether this doctrine, which we have more need of now then
ever, extend it self unto the time of the new covenant: for behold the point
wherein Satan at this day employeth his whole forces, namely to persuade men
that neither can it nor may it ever happen, that they whom they call the Church
representative (the titles whereof they afterward either shorten or lengthen
as please them, calling it sometimes the Roman Church, sometimes the Roman
Catholic Church, and sometimes the Catholic Apostolical Roman Church,
that this company I say, either has or can ever be so forsaken of God, that
it may for the most part be either it self apparantlie deceived, or deceive
others. If a man ask why, seeing this came notoriously to pass in the ancient
Church, behold their answer is ready. It was said unto Saint Peter, I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Now that Saint Peter's faith were not
at one time greatly shaken it cannot be denied. And therefore they must needs
confess, that if their representative Church have no more force then he whom
they of a notable abuse take for their foundation, it may at least for one time
be so shaken, as to deny Jesus Christ three times and that with an oath and
execration. And I would to God the like had happened to them but thrice. But to
let this pass, what manner of conclusion, I pray you, is this? The Lord by a
singular grace of his, raised up and comforted his disciple in such sort that
he acknowledged his fault without drowning himself any farther therein, and
which more is, he used him afterward to encourage and strengthen others, I
pray you, what does this appertain unto the City of Rome, or unto the Sea
afterward erected there? Save that I confess (and I say it after one of
their principal Poets whose verses themselves yet print and sing every day)
that many ages ago this Papal See having put out and defaced the ancient
Apostolic Church of Rome, is become The temple of heresy in doctrine, and an
other Sodom in manners. But what allege they farther? Jesus Christ said
thrice unto Peter, feed my sheep. The Pope therefore, and that Church which
acknowledges the Pope for their head cannot err: no though he should drive
whole cartloades of souls unto hell, no man may say unto him, sir what do you?
O God, what impudent shamelesnes is this! As if Saint Peter, the Sea of Rome,
and they who sit in it were al one. Yet this I will well confess
notwithstanding, that since the time of many ages they who have sat in this
See, and have made a throne thereof and exalted it as much as lay in them,
above that of God himself (in that they attribute unto themselves the power to
dispense with the Law of God, and the authority not to be judged of any man
living, yea to have power to command the Angels) that they, I say, are not
fallen from the faith which they never had nor never cared after or took
thought for: I let pass other allegations of theirs, which how frivolous and
foolish they be the very little children are able to judge. And what has come
to pass in this behalf which was not expressly foretold by Jesus Christ and
his Apostles, and found true by the experience of our time? Matt. 7.15. Luke
21.8. Ioh. 5.43. Act. 20.30. Romans 16.17. Philip. 3.2. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. and 1.
Tim. 4.1. and 6.3. and 2. Tim. 3.1. and 2. Pet. 2.1. and 3.16. and 1. Ioh.
2.18. Now if these so express predictions and prophecies suffice not, and that
the whole ecclesiastical story cannot serve for sufficient proof, at least
let a man now open his eyes and see the effects thereof more apparent and
great then great and mighty mountains, I mean the effects thereof in all the
ground articles of Christian Catholic doctrine, that is to say, the doctrine
which God has delivered unto his whole Church at the beginning, to remain and
continue unto the end and consummation thereof. For at the least it appears
by that we have above said, and follows upon necessary consequence, that
seeing they who ought to be the eyes of the flock are subject not only to be
blind, but leaders also of the blind to fall both together into the ditch,
Matt. 15.14. and that they who ought to have the key of knowledge, may keep it
back, and indeed have often kept it back, not only not to enter in themselves
into the kingdom of heaven, but also to keep others out, Luke 11.52. it is an
over manifest falsehoode to conclude, that without all manner of reply and
gainesaying, we must in matter of conscience and relligion, hold our selves
unto that which they, who call themselves the succeeding Church of the
Apostles, and especially that goodly Apostle of Rome, who may be judged of no
man living, commands us to believe.

10 Nay albeit we granted them that their original and beginning were as
Apostolical, as it is Apostatical, Jesus Christ who is the truth it self
might well have made after Saint John Baptist this conclusion for himself
absolutely, Ioh. 3.33. and yet he notwithstanding suffered and commanded also
that his doctrine should be examined by the scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. The Apostles
also though their doctrine were vngainsayable (considering the measure of the
spirit which they had) yet they came under this examen, Act. 17.11. and
practiced it themselves, Act. 15. and recommended the same expressly unto
others. For it is by the doctrine of the Apostles expounded by it self, that
we must discern the Apostolic Church, to which we are to join our selves:
from the false, which we must turn from and avoid: and therefore our
adversaries could by no means better show by what spirit they are led, and
that they are not successors, but usurpers and unjust possessors, since they
refuse this examen and trial, unto which they have been and yet are every day
called but in vain, except they will be both Judges and parties, but it is
thou o eternal God who shall judge of all this matter in convenient time.

11 Why then, will some reply, what manner of Church will this be if the prelates
be not the Judges of errors, and if other keep them not to their sentence and
resolution? Truly I confess that all things ought to be orderly done in the
house of God, Cor. 14.4. but what is this order? Eue^ that which the Lord of
the house has established by his Apostles. Let us then first of all keep and
observe this, and hold all that for disorder which shall be farther added,
diminished or changed: (I mean in the substance of doctrine) so that
whosoever opposes himself against this disorder, whenever it slideth into
the Church, may not be justly held for author of confusion, but ought rather to
be praised and harkned unto, as the setter up again and reestablisher of that
order, which the son of God established in his house. Secondly although the
form of outward order be observed, yet we may not tie the holy spirit to
persons without exception, for those reasons which I have proved, and because
that in many those things wherein they offend go not before but follow their
vocation, as the Apostle warns us, 1. Tim. 5.24. in whom the Church finds
afterward that she has been deceived, as all the ancient heretics and the
greatest part of them of our time may sufficiently witness. But we are to follow
the rule which the Lord gave, and which he also confirmed by his own example.
The Scribes and Pharisees, says he, sit in Moses Chair, do ye that which
they say, but do not that which they do, that is to say, so far as,
according unto the order of God established by the ministry of Moses, they
preach the truth in the Synagogues, their hypocrisy and wicked life otherwise,
may not hinder you from receiving and practicing that which they teach, for
the truth depends not on the person of him which teaches, either in doctrine
or in the sacraments. But what says Christ in an other place? Matthew. 16.6.
Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees: and in an other place, Let them
alone, they are blind, and leaders of the blind, Mat. 15.14. And indeed
himself openly condemned their false interpretations of the Law: Matthew. 5.6.
and Mark. 7.8. and cared as little for their excommunications, Ioh. 12.42.44.
What are we to do then in such a case? We must, says the beloved disciple,
prove the spirits whether they be of God, 1 Ioh. 4.1. and Saint Paul, we must
try all things and keep that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. and unto who^ is
this said? Unto every Christian who will not willingly and wittingly be
deceived, as well young as old, men as women, Gal. 3.28.

12 Neither does there ensue hereupon any disorder or confusion at all, for it
is an other thing not to suffer a man's self to be deceived, and to take upon
him the office and charge of teaching in the Church, pretending that all are
Prophets or Apostles, or Doctors and teachers, a thing utterly false and
intolerable: as appears, 1. Cor. 12.29. For the son of God himself, in as
much as he was the minister of God his father, for the preaching of his will
unto the nation of the Jews, Romans 11.18. he thrust not himself in into this
charge, Heb. 5.5. Such is then the duty of every faithful man in all times,
and principally in such a time as there is a medlie made of al things, and when
the light is smothered and darkened, neither to believe every thing upon the
credit of an other, neither also to set up a new religion unto himself apart.

13 But what shall we say of the^, among whom there is not only no order, but
(which is worse) though al things be turned vp-side-down, notwithstanding with
a desperate impudency they attribute all this while unto themselves the
precious name of the catholic church? Among whom the vocations ordained by
the son of God, for the service of his house, are al of them mowled upon the
Image of the beast, the ancient Roman Empire? Where to be called, is nothing
else but to have posted best and to be first in dated? Where there remain
nothing save the simple and bare names of charges and vocations of the holy
and sacred ministry? Where the entrance into the house of god (I mean the
scripture in which he has placed his truth) is interdicted and forbidden the
people? Where the house of prayer is not only turned into an harbor of them who
make merchandise of souls, but is changed into a shop of al falsehood and
Idolatry, yea of more abominable Idolatry then all the Idols of the Paynims
and heathen? Where Jesus Christ is changed into a dead and senseless thing,
which has neither head nor feet, naie which cannot keep himself from the
talantes of thieves, nor the teeth of rattes and of mise, and which perishes
of himself if he be not the sooner devoured? In such a case, should the poor
famished sheep, I pray you, go unto the wolves and say, cut our throats and
devour us? Should the consciences of men go unto them to be resolved, who
maintain themselves by devouring of them quick and dead? Should they to purge
and cleanse themselves, shoue themselves farther and farther into such dirty
myrie places? Should men expect and wait until the hogs resolve themselves
to live neetely and cleanely, or until the whore-maisters and whores take order
for the stews? Naie contrariwise the whole church warns and enioyneth us, as
touching doctrine, to take heed of false Prophets, and to fly not only
Idolaters but Idols also, 1. Ioh. 5.21. So did the Levites and the Priests,
retire themselves out of the kingdom of Israel, when al things were there in
utter overthrow and confusion. There continued notwithstanding an assembly of
Prophets which communicated not at al with the Baalims, nor with such as
assembled themselves there, 2. Chr. 11.14. and 2. King. 4.38.42. And the Lord
himself says, Let them alone, they are blind, leaders of the blind. Matthew.
15.14. but say our adversaries, he went unto Jerusalem, he came into the
Temple as others did, yea into the Synagogues also. I grant, but I answer
that first there was but one Jerusalem, where the public outward service was
administered according unto the word of God: the priesthood was yet on foot:
Moses and the Prophets were al of them in the Synagogues: and albeit the
doctrine was mingled with much leaue^, yet the true dowe remained still
notwithstanding, and the ceremonial service continued in his entire estate.
Secondly it was to drive out of the Temple with the whip the buyers and sellers
whom he found in the Temple, crying out full loud and full shrill against the
leaven of the Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians and others, as likewise he did in
the Synagogues. But if the Temple had been brought to that pass, as it was at
that time when the altar was made in all points like unto that which Achas the
king sent from Damascus, 2. King. 16.11. and 2. Chronic. 28.23. who will
persuade us he would have entered in thither to communicate there with them? And
when he was demanded by what authority he did these things, did he allege
unto them Cayphas or the great counsel of Jerusalem? Nothing less, for this
had bin nothing else but to make satan judge of the truth. But he says, Search
the scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. credit the testimony of John, or show wherein it is
false, Mat. 21.25. which thing we have done and counseled others to do at
this day, not to erect and set up altar against altar, as they falsely
slander us: but to set up the altar of the Lord, that is his holy ministry
against the altar of Damascus: for the perfourmance whereof the Lord having
aided with his grace many princes and potentates, to follow the example of that
good and holy king Ezechias, the Lord having likewise raised up in our time
Eliasses and Eliseusses, what should they else do but separate themselves from
such pollutions, and betake themselves under covert, who are not among the
pharisaical leaven simply, but in the fair midst of the confusion of Babylon,
as this name was given the City of Rome in Saint Peter's time if we will believe
the ancient expositors, on that of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 5.13. and which name
many of the ancients after Saint John have most clearly applied unto the
Church of Rome in their time? For I pray you, if the Prophetical scriptures
were sufficient in the time of Jesus Christ, to make him thoroughly to be known,
and to cause al contrary doctrine to fall and vanish away, the Apostolical
writings and scriptures have they empayred and diminished this clearnes, or
have they not rather bin as the sun rising, after day break? If the Baptism of
John which was nothing else but the days morning, was sufficient to direct
them whom Christ sent back thither, Mat. 21.25. and Act. 19.30. ought we now to
seek any other text or gloss, then so authentic a testimony, sealed by so
many miracles, and so faithfully registered in those writings which we call
the new Testament?

14 In a word therefore, in a time of such horrible darkness, it is not unto
these false leaders, that he must seek who will not be deceived, but he must
go farther and seek, being destitute as it were of al ordinary means, unto
the Lord himself, to be nourished as it were in a desert. And this we are
taught in the history of Elias, who was nourished all the time of the first
year of droughts by a Raven, 1. King. 17.4. and afterward by a poor Sydonian
widow. 1. King. 17.8. and who afterward by the strength of one meal walked
forty days and forty nights, 1. King. 19.8. By which example it is shown us
that the Lord in such and so lamentable a time, nourishes those who are his,
though they be sometimes so scattered here and there, that they cannot know one
another, 1. King. 18.13. and 19.10.18. that is to say, he nourishes his
Church in that little harbor of his until the time of his indignation be
ouerpast, Esaie. 26.20. when the ordinary minister is cut off, as it came to
pass in the time of our fathers in the East and West Church, until such time
as it pleased the Lord to awake his spouse and to show what difference there
is between the utter exterminatio^ of Sodom, and the visitation of Sion, Esa.
1.9. pitying the ruins thereof, and building it up again, Ps. 102.14. Which
thing our time might have taught us and does yet teach us every day, to the end
we acknowledge the great and wonderful miracles of God which have happened since
within these 60. years only, and to pray unto him day and night, to perfect
this deliverance of his people, for the love of his holy name, to whom be al
honor and glory for ever. According unto this holy doctrine we will demand of
him grace and mercy as follows saying.

Almighty God, etc.
THE XXV SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the fourth verse.
4 When I had past a little from them, then I found him whom my soul loves, I
took hold of him and left him not, till I had brought him into my mothers
house, into the chamber of her that conceived me.


1 They who call themselves the watch, and watch, are not good watchmen for all
that.

2 The Bridegroom causes himself to be the better sought after, by not
suffering himself to be found at the first.

3 An answer unto diverse temporisers or time-seruers opposed unto the
diligence of this spouse: and what we ought to answer them who object the
different opinions and diverse interpretations of the Scripture.

4 It is not enough to find that we seek after, but we sease and lay hold on
it, and hold it fast: wherein have been diverse faults heretofore and yet are
committed.

5 The love of the Bridegroom guides the spouse to seek after him and to
find him.

6 True faith is the only hand which reaches after the spouse and seaseth on
him.

7 In what sense it is said that the spouse has a mother, unto whose house
she retireth her self with her Bridegroom.

8 An application of this doctrine to the controversies of our time.

9 In what sort the Bridgroom is found of the spouse out of this house.

10 In what sense it is said, that the spouse brought in her Bridegroom into
the house of her mother.

11 How we must first necessarily enter into the house, and afterward into
the Chamber of this Mother.

12 An exhortation for the thorough practicing of this doctrine.

IT has bin showed in the Sermon before what diligence the spouse used in
seeking after this Bridegroom of hers, who seemed for her, to be lost: and how
she found him not in the open places, nor could hear any tidinges at al of
him of the watch: whereof we have largely entreated. There remains
notwithstanding one difficulty more, in that we said that by this watch were
meant the false Pastors of the City of God which is the house of this spouse,
namely, the Church: whereunto it seems that this which is here said is
directly contrary, to wit, that this watch was not asleep in their private
houses (for had it been so, the spouse had not met with them, as neither would
she have made this demand unto those which had been asleep) but that she
found it where it should be to guard and defend the City round about: which
thing the false Pastors are not wont to do, whom a man shall find rather in
their beds, or at table, or in the stews or any where else then in their
corpse degard. I answer that there are in general two sorts of these false
Pastors: for some of them are more shameful and detestable in their whole life,
and making their vices the only trade of their life they show themselves
publickely and openly for such as they be: others there be (to wit such are of
the richest and wealthiest sort) who are Church-robbers, haukers and hunters,
dronkards, fornicatours, adulterers, having no other god but their belly,
briefly such as Bernard describes the court of Pope Eugenius which is since
nothing mended, but has sowed and increased her filthy manners in all the
quarters of the world: others (of which sort are these masse-mungers,
co^fessors, graund amners,) make open profession of being baudes, stewards of
the house, clearks of the kitchen, yeomen of the horse, to have a soupe at
their masters broth and brewes. In the mean time the poor vicars must trudge
about and watch, that is to say, must bark and bay day and night at the
parchment, and make sale of their merchandise for the quick and the dead which
they have taken to farm, to sell again (as well as they may to be sauers
themselves, how ever the poor sheep pay for it) to him that offers most
and out-biddeth the rest: paying the woorld again with Christmas-carols, and
providing especially for this, that no other wolue catch their sheep. And thus
you see how the Lords sheepefolde is guided by them who call themselves the
chief pillars of the Catholic Church, and maintainers of divine service. For
which things I report me to that which heaven and the very conscience of
every one which has any at al can witness, to judge whether I slander them in
speaking thus of them or no. Others are after another sort disguized, all of
them having this one thing in common, that they are nothing less the^ that
they appear without for to be, I mean, true Pastors, but deceive, after diverse
sorts, both themselves and others. Some make nothing else but a mockery of
them who make reckoning of them, being no other within then mere Atheists:
others are poor superstitious ones, abused and abusing others, thinking to
appease the fire of the wrath of god by their inventions and devotions, sparing
neither body nor soul which they torment not, of whom the Apostle speaks,
Coloss. 2.22.23. And this is properly of those two last sorts of gardiens that
the spouse here speaks, whom a man shall find to busy from mattins to vespers
a mu^bling their crucifixe, besides their ordinary devotions: some of them of
a mere hypocrisy: others of zeal without knowledge: albeit, when there is
any question of persecuting the Church, we may then truly say, that there is
never a one of these asleep, but they al forget for a time their ordinary
train altogether, to catch and entrap as many seely sheep as seek to fly
and escape their talants: as did the great council of Jerusalem who watched al
night long, to take Jesus Christ, and to frame his enditement, when Saint Peter
himself and his companions could not keep themselves waking. This is not al
then to watch, for the Devil watches also, as do they also whom he sets a
work. But we must keep watch and ward to a good end, for they are of al
others the most dangerous, who are most diligent and expert men to do evil.

2 But let us leave these merchandizers of souls, and such as make trafique of
poor seely consciences, and come we now unto that which the spouse here
says. Which is in sum thus much, that being past a little this watch she
found her beloved whom she never left until she had brought him home to her
mothers house, yea to her mothers own chamber: whereupon we are to reiterate
that which we have above already noted, namely that when the Lord makes us to
seek him by recoiling as it were and drawing back from us, he does it not
therefore that he would frustrate that desire which he first formed in the
hearts of such as are his: but because he would by that means sharpen their
diligence, and cause us to esteem so much the more of him when we have found
him: being an ordinary thing with men to contemn that which they came light
by, whereof we have still daily experience. For if himself seeks after the
sheep which is straied, Psalm. 119.176. Luke 15.4. if he ran after Adam when
Adam fled, Genesis 3.9. if he cause himself to be found of them which seek him
not, Esai. 65. how will he neglect the perseverance of them, who seek after
him?

3 What excuse then shall our temporizers at this day have, who albeit they be
in their consciences co^uicted, expect notwithstanding some of them the
resolution and determination of a general council to be resolved: others some
assurance of peace, before they will show themselves and return unto the flock?
But if the door be shut in the mean time, who will open it? Mat. 25.10. Esa.
22.2. If the time which served to find him be lost, who will assure us we shall
find him again? Matthew. 25.10. Ioh. 12.10. Esai. 55.6. But say these kinds of
people; some, I am no cleark. Desire therefore and labor to be one. For why
has God bestowed a reasonable soul and understanding upon thee? Come thou
therefore unto him who has made the eyes, and who gives eyes unto the^ which
have none, Psa. 140.8. know that thou art blind, and thou have already received
a good beginning of light, Ioh. 9.39. Others say they cannot tell what to do,
there are so many contrary opinions among the Doctors and teachers
themselves. The like might they have said who followed Jesus Christ when the
people were divided into Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenians, Nazarites, Herodians,
Samaritanes. What must we do then? That which the spouse here teaches us. We
must take a good and holy courage unto us, and go farther. For in the end we
shall meet with Jesus Christ. But will he descend visible from heaven to make
himself to be seen? No, for he has already descended, and has withdrawn
himself up again into heaven until the latter day, in respect of his
corporal presence, yet notwithstanding he continues with his by his
quickening power to the end and consummation of the world. But where is he in a
word? Verily there whither he sends us, namely in his scriptures, as we
declared at large the last Thursdaie, which answer Abraham also made unto
that rich damned wretch, Luke 16.29. And we must truly confess that we have
herein a great advantage above this spouse considering the time when she spoke
thus: the light of the Scriptures or writings of the Apostles, being far
greater without comparison then that of the Prophets, as is most amply set
down unto us and declared, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, and by the
similitude of the body, and of the shadow which the Apostle uses, Coloss.
2.17. But they reply again and say, every one we hear dispute, alleges the
Scriptures for himself: what shall we then do hereupon? Mary first look
diligently unto this, whether it be true that every one alleges the
Scriptures. For if I should say that a great number of lies and forgeries may
be found in the writings of our adversaries, alleging most falsely for
Scripture that which is no more found in any book of the Bible, then Paradise
is in Hell, I should not lie at all. Secondly we must note that they are no
less false-saiers then the rest, who for proof of their doctrine, allege any
other testimonies, over and besides the above named scriptures and writings of
the Prophets and Apostles, unto whom we are no less forbidden to add, then
to change and diminish, seeing they contain the whole Counsel of God touching
our salvation Ioh. 15.15. and Act. 20.27. And to the end no man reply, that al
was not written which the Apostles taught: let us answer this lie first with
that which is said, 2. Tim. 2.17. where Saint Paul requires nothing, besides
the scripture, to make the man of God perfect and complete. Secondly let these
goodly unwritten doctrines and verities forsooth be compared with the
scriptures, and the day will condemn this darckenesse. Thirdly, always and as
often as there are diverse interpretations found of one and the same place, let
us know that this comes to pass, partly because every one has not one and
the same measure of understanding, and partly because the scripture is so
plentiful in all truth, that of one and from one only place, a man may draw
diverse expositions, which may be al of them notwithstanding conformable unto
the truth of edification, and every of which may as occasion serves be
profitable. But when the interpretations are so repugnant, that it must needs
be that one or more of them be false, then if we confer other places
therewith, and so expound Scripture by Scripture, as Jesus Christ teaches us
by his own example, Mat. 4.6.7. and as the ancient Councels have done (having
by this only most true and most assured means convinced al sorts of false
allegations of heretics) and if withal we refer the whole unto the
correspondencie of the articles of our faith, which we call our Creed, the
summary abridgement of every fundamental point of Christian doctrine and
religion, there is no man can be deceived, no not the simplest Idiots of all,
except they will needs deceive themselves: I mean if so be they bring with them
a docible and teacheable mind, and a desire to be taught in all humility,
according unto that which is said of the written word of God, Ps. 119.8. and
Esa. 55.1. And thus you see how following the example of the true Spouse, that
is, searching Jesus Christ in his own home, we shall find him, and never be
deceived.

4 But what is it to find him if a man seize not on him? And what is it to
seize on him if a man hold him not fast to enioie him? Verily no more to
purpose, then if a man should find good meat, and not touch it: or put it in
his mouth, and not swallow it: or swallow it, and not digest it. And alas how
many such guestes are there in the woorlde? For to let pass those who
vouchsafe not to come unto this banquet, and those also who not only enter not
them selves into it but hinder also others from entering in and that by all
manner not only craftines but violence also: letting I say, these go who are
without, let us speak of them who enter in, who see and hear him who is both
the banquet, and the banquet maker, I mean our Lord Jesus Christ, and yet
notwithstanding do neither sit down, nor vouchsafe to eat, nay not so much as
to open their mouths to chew the morsels already cut and provided for the^?
How many conte^ners and mockers are there? How many that swallow the meat
down but are fed never a whit with it, and therefore grow nothing at al in
this inward man, showing by the course of their whole life, that they as yet
have not any sense or feeling of the spirit of him, in who^ all true Christians
do live, as he also lives in them, Ga. 2.20. Behold the ruin of Israel and
Judah, which we yet see to continu before our eyes, behold what has caused the
Candlestickes of the Churches of Asia to be removed, according unto the
threatening contained in the Apocalypse, and which in the end brought in the
deluge of Mahomet and of his companion upon the four ends and quarters of the
world. We see it with our eyes, and who takes it to heart? Who thinks on that
which the Apostle foretells of the fullness of us the Gentiles? To. 11.15. in
such sort that it will happen unto us as in the days of Noe, Mat. 24.37. Let us
look unto our selves my brethren, that we be not found asleep, Lu. 12.37.
much-lesse cast out of the banquet into outward darkness, Matthew. 21.22. and
finally cast forth of the temple of God as filth and doung.

5 But we must yet better examine all the words of this so true and
faithful a spouse. I found him, says she, whom my soul loves; yea, because
he made himself to be found, and for that the true love of the Bridegroom
served for a guide to direct this spouse, whom himself loved first.

6 I seized or laid hold on him. And with what arm? Verily with that of faith,
for this is the only vessel to receive him in, this is the only hand to take
hold of him, Romans 9.30. But this faith must be firm and steadfast to hold him
without letting of him go, otherwise this is not that true faith which is the
gift of god, properly belonging unto the elect and irreuocable, Romans 12.29. but
an opinion which vanishes away, with the first wind that blows: which makes
us in some sort to taste the good gift of god, not to swallow it down and digest
it, Heb. 6.5. Mat. 13.21.

7 And how is this faith and by it Jesus Christ continued and mantained in us?
The spouse declares us in one word when she says, that she brought this
Bridegroom into the house, nay into the secret chamber of her mother which
conceived her. Now to understand this matter the better, we must note that the
Church is diversely considered: somteimes as being joined and united together
and making one mystical body with her head: so that sometimes it is called
Jesus christ himself altogether whole and entire, 1. Cor. 12.12. as if without
her he should be an head without a body, Ephesians. 1.23. and in this sense she
has no Mother, but one heavenly father alone. Sometimes she is also considered
in her generality without any respect of times or places, notwithstanding
distinguished from Jesus Christ, in which consideration she has also no
Mother, but one heavenly Father alone, together with a brother and Bridegroom:
sometimes also she is considered with distinction and diversity of time, for
which respect S. Paul says, he has begotten the Church of the Galathians, and
calls himself the father of the Corinthians in regard of his ministry, Gal.
4.19. and 1. Cor. 4.15. In which sense a man may say that the Church of
Jerusalem (and not that of Rome) has brought forth all the churches: the word
of god (which is the incorruptible seed, 1. Pet. 1.23.) proceeding and coming
from her, Esa. 2.3. According unto this sense also is it, that this spouse
which is but one and perpetual in her generality, is (according as the one
engenders the other unto the Lord) distinguished into an ancient church under
the law, and into a christian church which succeeded it: and according unto
this manner of speaking, the church of our time has for her Mother the church
which we call Primitive. What is it then which this spouse, considered as it
were in the time of David, meant to say and to teach us in this place? Namely
this, that after those troubles and disorders which happened so many times in
the time of the Judges and of Saul, she has as it were found her bridegroom
and is most happily retired with him unto her mothers house, that is to say,
has now the full knowledge and enjoying of her Bridegroom, by conforming
herself unto the true ancient Church of the Patriarcks, ruled and ordered
afterward by the Law, and which engendered her unto the Lord. For it is in the
church of God that this Bridegroom does reign and that we enjoy his graces
and blessings, the greatest part of the world remaining under the tyranny of
him who is called the Prince of darcknes and cursednes.

8 Let our adversaries the^ and gainsaiers reproach us no longer that we
attribute nothing unto the church. For contrariwise we auow and protest that
the Apostolic church is our mother, in the which the holy ghost has in his
time begotten us and nursed us, as he yet nourishes us. The controversy then
between them and us lies not in this point, whether there be any salvation
without the Church, and whether the Church be our mother in whose chamber we
must live and abide as her true children: for hereof we make no doubt. But
this is the whole controversy, namely, whether they be the true Church, or
rather the clean contrary a false strumpet, which has driven the true mother
out of doors into the deserts, and bereaved her of her children, which she
demands of her again, and which this true spouses Bridegroom makes her to
restore and deliver every day.

9 But yet there arises one, naie two difficulties more upon this matter. For
first if this Bridegroom be found no where but in his Church, and this Church
is our mother, how can it be that this spouse found him without? For how may it
be said that she brought him in into this house, if he were there already and
that she found him there? The answer is, that it is true indeed, that this
Bridegroom dwells, that is to say, declares his virtue and healthful power
in this house. But it follows not thereupon that he goes not forth, as I
may say, until he find his children even in the bosom of this backsliding
whore (as in our time he has fetched them and yet fetches them every day, out
of these sinckes of monasteries) to bring them into his house. So he went out
of Jerusalem, and sent into the East and West to call us, to make us to draw
near unto him, us, I say, which were poor Gentiles and nothing less then his
people, to bring us into his admirable light, Ephesians. 12.12. And thus you see
how this spouse found her Bridegroom abroad, from whom she was, as we have
most amply declared before, straied aside and wandered.

10 The other difficulty arises upon this manner of speech that the spouse
caused her Bridgroom to enter into her mothers house, seeing on the contrary
side, it is the Bridegroom, who seeks after us and finds us, and brings
us in into his house. This is most true, and we must do God this honor, to
confess that it is he, who according unto his infinite goodness, as he has
destinated us unto salvation in his son before the foundation of the woorlde,
so does he in his time prevent us, seeking after us al when we are straied, and
finding us when we are fled from him, and bringing us into his house, which is
also the dwelling place and habitation of our good and holy Mother. But this is
after such a manner notwithstanding, that we are not all this while like
blocks and tronckes, which a man finds and carries whither he will, without
any feeling or motion in themselves. God then seeks after us, forming in us
the desire to seek after him: he finds us giving us the means and the power
to find him: we take hold of him and embrace him meeting with him, because he
creates in us the faith which takes hold of him: he brings us into the
house of our mother, bestowing on us the grace of desiring to join our selves
unto the company of the true church never to stir or depart from it. These two
things then agree very well together, provided, that we add this, that as God
produces in us natural effects by natural causes which he has created in us:
so, if the question be of these graces which are merely supernatural (seeing
flesh and blood reveal not these things unto us, Matthew. 16.17. naie our
natural wisdom is enmitte unto God, Romans 8) we must voutch and confess
that the purity of understanding and uprightness of will are the mere free
gifts and graces of him who enlighteneth the eyes of our understanding,
Ephesi. 1.8. and creates in us both to will and to do, Philip. 2.13. So that
if this proposition and sentence be true, when we speak of the creation of
the woorlde, that it made not it self, and that a dead body raises not
himself: so is it as true, the question being of the light of the soul, be it
in the understanding or vprightnes of will, that we are truly the woorkmanship
of God by his mere and only grace, Ephesians. 2.1.5.10.

11 There remains yet one point more to be handled touching this place,
namely, concerning that which is here said, both of the house, as also of the
chamber of this mother, a thing which ought to be well and thoroughly weighed
of them who despise the holy public assembly established from al time by the
Lord in his Church, and without the which, as I may so say, the Church
(which is as much to say as an assembly called together out of the woorld) is
no Church: as a flock has no apparent form of a flock, if the sheep remain
scattered one from another. I speak here of the contemners of congregations and
assemblies, as we have among us Sundaie and Thursday Christians, naie some from
Communion to Communion: and others which make no reckoning at al of them,
wicked wretches and utterly inexcuseable before God and before men. There are
others and too too many, some of them making no conscience to betake
themselves into the midst of Idolaters, following herein Lots fault: others who
never come forth, and being reprehe^ded and accused for not giving testimony
of their Christianity, instead of confessing their weakness and infirmity, or
their distrust and covetousness, bear themselves in hand they do well enough in
reading at home in their house and praying a part by themselves. But the
Apostle exhorts them in another language, forsake not, says he, our assembly
as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. And indeed if this pretense might take
place, must we not condemn the Prophets, Apostles, and other martyrs of the
lord for madme^ and senseles? But behold how wily satan is to divide this body
in pieces, which can never be joined enough together and united. And indeed
the end of such goodly private christians makes us at the last to know their
fair domestical exercise they practice at home: which we need not to marvel
at, seeing that even those who are most diligent to frequent the assemblies and
congregations, where they are reproved, admonished, comforted, taught, stirred
up and heated every day, leave not for all that to be cold, lazy, and negligent
in their duty. Let us therefore note here, my brethren, in Gods name, that
the spouse protests she came with her Bridegroom not only into the house,
but which is more, into the Chamber of her Mother. What shall we say then of
those who will not set foot into this house, and think to keep themselves
without with Jesus Christ? But yet it is not enough to be in the house, but we
must enter into the privy Chamber and wardrob of this spouse. For such a one
may be in the house which is not in it, and who entered not in, but to come
forth strait ways again. But to enter into the chamber of this mother, is
to be in the place of her rest, and where she causes her self to be seen
and heard, nourishing there her children with the bread of life.

12 Now since our good God amiddest so many tempests, which have overwhelmed
and destroyed the woorld, and which have within these few years borne and
beaten down so many goodly Churches, the mother and her children being so
cruelly driven forth, has vouchsafed us so great and singular a benefit, to
preserve unto us this little cabin, assaulted with so many wild and cruel
beasts, shall we always contemn so great a grace and blessing and so long a
patience of his? God forbid my brethren: but let us beseech him he would
rather heat such as are a cold, thrust forward those who recoile, hasten the
slow, fortify the weak, and in general give us the grace that his word may
dwell plentifully among us, according unto the exhortation of the Apostle,
Coloss. 3.26. and that we may be fair and fruitful trees in his courts, to
depart from this house here below, unto that everlasting palace where we
shall reign eternally with him: wherein having hitherunto so notably failed,
let us crave his grace and mercy as follows.

Almighty God, etc.
THE XXVI SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 5.6.7. and 8.
verses.
5 I charge you ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hinds of the
field, if you wake, waken not my Love until he please.

6 Who is she that mounteth up out of the desert like palms of smoke,
perfumed with mirrh and ince^se, and with every sort of perfume?

7 Behold his bed which is Salomons, about the which are threescore valiant
men, of the prowes of Israel.

8 They all handle the sword and are expert in war, every one having his
sword upon his thigh, for the frights by night.


1 The spouse is so authorized by her Bridegroom, that none ever set on her
who had not the worst.

2 This authority pertains nothing at al unto the false Church.

3 Wherefore this spouse is compared unto a cloud, resembling an high and a
strait pillar.

4 What the desert or wilderness is from which this pillar comes.

5 We must come forth out of this desert and not fall out of one desert into
another.

6 The deserts of the ancient monks compared with the palaces of these
goodly fathers, and false religions of our time.

7 Wherefore the spouse is compared unto a palm or date tree.

8 What the excellent perfumes of this spouse are, and whence they come.

9 The spouse instead of resting on the praises which are attributed unto her,
how true soever they be, imploieth her self the rather to praise the Bridegroom
and to make him known unto every one.

10 What this bed was of Solomon the figure of this true Solomon who is full of
peace.

11 How safe this bed is where the true repose and rest is found.

14 Wherefore Solomon speaks here of threescore men of guard about his bed.

13 Who are the true guard and defenders of the salvation of the faithful,
especially against all invisible enemies.

14 A conclusion touching the use of this doctrine.

THE spouse traveling painefullie to find her Bridegroom, and having at the
length found him, seized on him and brought him home to her Mother, reioiceth
now and is exceeding merry and glad of this happy estate and condition of
hers, charging those about her not to waken her Bridegroom: not that he
sleeps; for, he that keeps Israel does never slumber nor sleep, Psalm.
121.4. But because his rest is the rest of his spouse, holding and keeping him
in the privy Chamber of her heart. Romans 5.1. and therefore knowing that this
rest and quiet is never without such as envy it, for whom they need seek no
farther then in the midst of Jerusalem, that is to say, of them themselves who
will brag and vau^t, that they are the principal members of the Church, she
charge them here under the name of daughters of Jerusalem, and that with
menaces and threats, that they presume not to trouble this rest of her
Bridegroom with her: as if she should say, that she is able to make the^ repent
it, if they be so bold as to do it. But touching this rest and this manner of
charge, we have spoken above at large Chap. 2. verse. 7. where the Bridegroom
gives the like charge that they trouble not the repose and rest of his spouse:
and therefore we will refer our selves unto that which has bin said thereof:
but there is notwithstanding a particular consideration offered in this place.
For it seems the spouse speaks very boldly, such a charge beseeming rather
the Bridegroom, who has al authority, the^ the spouse, who ought to refer her
whole garding and safe keeping unto the Bridegroom. I confess indeed that the
spouse speaks here very loftily and gallantly. And why should she not? For
seeing she has for her, and with her, yea within her this great and mighty
king: what is he that stands against her, whom she may not and ought not to
defy? We have hereof infinite examples, and those also joined with their
effects. Joshua commands the Sun to stand still, and he obeys, Iosu.
10.13. And we know what the Lord promises unto his, Mat. 17.20. not to
establish thereby the gift of doing of miracles as perpetual in the Church,
but to show that this spouse threatens the perturbers of this peace which the
Bridegroom gives her, seeing she has in her hand his authority and power, and
can say that her Bridegroom is hers, and therefore by consequent she may boast
of the effects of this fellowship and society with him. Now the temporal gifts
and blessings, which god bestows upon his Church, are a small thing in
comparison of the spiritual treasure which is proper unto her, although
whosoever offends the children of God even in these, they shall have the
worst, the Lord himself having given this charge, Touch not mine anointed,
Psalm. 105.15. So that no sacrilegious person, no not among the Paynims and
worshippers of false Gods had ever his wickedness unrevenged: and Egypt and
Babylon carried not far the outrages they committed against the people of God.
In a word, it is not without cause that the head speaking of his members cried
from heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4. But here the
matter concerns spiritual blessings, and the proper and peculiar treasure
of the Church, namely, the enjoying of the Bridegroom in his word, and the
government of his house. Pharao would needs seek to hinder the children of
Israel from this blessing, first simply, afterward by certain conditions.
We see what it cost him. The Assyrians and Chaldaeans, who ruined the Temple,
and destroyed the City, fared no better. So sped the Kings of Persia who
hindered the building of the Temple. Contrariwise God blessed in carnal and
woorldly things Alexander the great, who bare himself otherwise, how ambitious
a Paynim so ever he were. His successors the Kings both of Syria and of
Egypt, may serve us for example herein both on the one side and on the
other, according as they favored with all peace and tranquillity this mutual
repose of this Bridegroom and spouse, or otherwise endeavored to hinder it.
Those two Roman Captains, Crassus and Pompee, who were the first which
spoiled the Temple of God (although it were then most vilanouslie polluted by
the gardiens and keepers of it themselves) perished so exemplarilie and
wretchedlie, that he is blind who perceives it not. The third who was Titus
escaped no better. And the Roman empire, when God had served himself with it
to revenge the unthankfulness of his people, making war against this spouse,
never ceased since to be the executioner and hangman of itself, until it
fell in pieces.

2 The beast mowled and fashioned upon this Empire, against which monster we
are still in combat at this day, will say as much against us, putting her
self in the place of this spouse. But we have two peremptory replies against
them. The one, that all histories make contrary proof hereof, if we judge
thereof not by the beginning of a false prosperity, but by the issue and end
of houses and families which have favored this beast, on whom the horrible
judgment of god has finally bin brought. The other, that by the just
permission of God the prince of this world must keep some promise with his
servants, whom he tells every day showing them the kingdoms of this world,
Al these will I give you if you will fall down and worship me: and therefore
they, contrary to that which Christ answered him, Matthew. 4.9. take him at his
word, and become his servants. But such a master fails not in the end to
pay such servants their wages. And if we have but eyes to see the examples of
our time which have been showed upon the greatest of Christendom both in the
East, Weast, North, and South, we shall not need to search any ancient
records for this matter. Such is then this gallaunt and holy confidence of
the spouse to brave her enemies, in whose person the Apostle speaking, we see
how he dealt with Elymas, Act. 13.10. how he defieth all creatures, high,
middle, low, Romans 8.37. how he bears down every high thing which
presumes to make head against God, 2. Corinthians. 10.5. And indeed what power is
there of any monarcke whatsoever which can vaunt of this promise: Whatsoever
you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven? Matthew. 6.19. Understand it not of
one alone, no not of Saint Peter himself, but of the Church, Matthew. 18.17. and
1. Corinthians. 5.4. and of the true Church, not exceeding the limits of her
commission, and established by him who is her garder and defender.

3 It follows in our text, What is she that mounteth up out of the desert
like palms of smoke? Whereupon a man may first of all demand, what personage
is brought in in this place. Some think that these are the Daughters of
Jerusalem, unto whom this charge was given: but there is no reason of this. It
is therefore the Bridegroom which speaks, discoursing and talking with his
spouse in her Mothers Chamber, and magnifieng with her the graces and blessings
which himself had bestowed on her. And this very changing of the person
(namely that he turns his speech so, as if he spoke to a third person
although he spoke to her herself) has a marvelous grace. Neither must we
take this for a question or demand, as if the Bridegroom asked and enquired
after one which he knew not: but we must take it as a kind of admiration,
touching the goodly comelines and grace of this spouse. He compares her
therefore unto a pillar which is high and straight as were the palms or date
trees of that country: a pillar, Isay, of a vapor or fume mounting
countermount from the mountains of the desert or wilderness, which vapor he
also says to proceed from hence, that the spouse is so perfumed with all sorts
of excellent odors, that the fume thereof mounteth, as I may say up unto
heaven, whereof we shall speak anon. Such the^ is this comparison, which
seems to have been borrowed from this, that a multitude marching together and
coming from any place resembles as it were a cloud, as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 12.1. For how ever this spouse be brought in, speaking in this Canticle as
it were one person only, it hinders not for all that, but that the whole
company of the faithful and believing be understood by her person, joined
together notwithstanding in one body, and quickened by one and the same
spirit, as it is described unto us, Act. 4.32.

4 And if hereupon any man demand wherefore there is here mention made of the
desert, I answer that it is in respect of the first beginning of this people,
which before their iourneying into the desert, was but one family, and began
first to be a people in the wilderness, where god ordained the^ a manner of
policy and commonweal and gave them a form of a people: neither are we to
stay our selves on this desert of Arabia, and namely that of Sinay and Pharan.
For to speak in a more generality, the Church being chosen out of the midst of
the world, not only in respect of that time, but from age to age, according as
some die and others succeed them, she was indeed drawn, and is yet every day
drawn out of the most horrible and hideous deserts, that ca^ be in nature: in
consideration whereof Joshua warns the people to remember that Abraham
himself and Their were taken and drawn out of the desert of Idolatry, Iosu.
24.2. which the head of every family in Israel was in express terms as it
were to acknowledge and confess in doing fealty and homage by his
first fruits, Deu. 26.5. This is it whereunto also the lord had regard, when he
says, that instead of hearts of stone (which is the desert in which he finds
us) he will give us an heart of flesh, Ezech. 36.26. that is to say, of a soft
and tender matter, easily to receive that which his spirit writes therein,
according unto the tenor of the new covenant, Ier. 31.33. Esaias. 54.13.

5 The most part of us who are in this place may and ought to give true
testimony hereof, having been by an infinite mercy of God drawn forth of this
horrible desert and dungeon of Idolatry and superstition wherein our fathers and
we were for so long a time plu^ged. But alas how many are there who are not
ascended out of the desert, but are entered out of one desert into an other?
Not, god be thanked, that this place where it has pleased God to gather us
together, is a desert and wilderness in respect of the graces and blessings
which god has here planted and sowed, having rid it of most pestilent bushes
and woods by most painful and diligent husbandmen: but because that the
desert out of which we are to ascend to be comprised in this spouse, is that
in which we are born, and which we carry within our selves, where ever we be or
go, receiving there, and there entertaining that wicked spirit, of who it is
said, Mat. 12.43. that he seeks after dry places and deserts. Let those the^
who out of the desert of superstition and Idolatry are fallen into the dungeon
of impiety: and out of the desert of a wretched conscience which utterly
frighted and amazed them with fear, into that horrible gulf of a rotten and
senseless conscience: and out of the desert of riotous dissolution into the
pit of miserable covetousness: in a word, who out of sottishness have cast
themselves headlong into wickedness: let those, I say, know that they have
nothing to do with her of whom it is thus said, that she ascends out of the
desert.

6 And therefore neither these goodly father Eremites, nor these cloistered
Monks, nor these rabbles of religions which pester and fill every city, may
help themselves with this place. For if we speak of ancient Eremits (that is
to say, inhabitants of deserts) there is great difference between those and
these which are now. For some of them were constrained by persecutions to seek
after woods and rocks, as did Elias and Elizeus, where they abode, as we see
by their pains and labors, nothing less then idle, or spending their time in
dreaming and doting contemplation. Others withdrew themselves aside for a time,
for quiet-sake, the better to prepare themselves to al good exercises of
study, and of prayers, and of serving the Churches whereunto they should be
called. And yet we must confess that many even among these, keeping no mean
or measure, neither in their solitude, nor in their austerity of life, did both
themselves and the Churches great wrong. But wherein do these sinks of Sodom
and of Gomorrha resemble this desert? These plaunches and sties of superstition
and impiety? These harbors and lurking-holes of all cursed idleness, the
stinking vapors whereof infect both the heaven and the earth? But what mean
we to speak here of the deserts of these holy fathers? Let a man but look
upon their steeples, their towers, their cloisters, their oratories and
dormitories, their garden-plots and orchards, and especially of these of the
latter crew, these who spoil al men besides of the name of Jesuits, which is
as much to say, as Christians, to appropriate the title thereof unto
themselves, and what royal palace shall a man find comparable unto their
deserts? What man is there who by his honest pain and travel for the benefit
of this Church and common weal, in what vocation of his soever, has gotten in
all his life the hundredth part of that which these honest vowers of poverty
have raked and yet rake together every day, by doing all things as they say
Gratis, and for Gods sake?

7 But leave we these soule-slears and soule-robbers in their dens and
deserts, and let us pray unto God to keep al passengers from the^: and come we
unto this spouse which mounteth up out of the desert like unto a palm or
date-tree, in such sort, that she makes herself to be seen and appears
above all the trees of the desert. Such a one was John Baptist, drawing all the
inhabitants of the cities, yea of Jerusalem it self after him. And this is
the nature of the palm, the more it is pressed down, the straighter and
violenter it rises and swaieth upward, Psa. 92.13. even so does the virtue of
the Lord declare it self more and more toward his church, then when she is
in most weak and feeble estate, 2. Cor. 12.9. yea so far as that she
becomes able to say, I can do all things in him which fortifieth me, Phil.
4.13. For whether does not this true spouse raise herself by the virtue and
strength of her Bridegroom? Her conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.6. she is
already seated in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.6. she is already transported
into the kingdom of the well-beloved son her Bridegroom, Coloss. 1.13. A
great miracle of God in truth, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 15.32. and
therefore is the Bridegroom brought in here himself wondering at the
excellency of his own woorkemanship as the Apostle calls this spouse, 1. Cor.
3.9.

8 And to the end we should know that this excellency of hers is testified and
declared by most certain effects, he adds that this spouse is perfumed with all sorts of excellent perfumes, yea such as cast forth a cloud of most sweet
odours. Now we know that both the outward heat of the sun, as also that
inward heat which is in the earth, to temper together with moisture the seeds
of whatsoever the earth brings forth and produces, is it which draws up
these vapors, to be made more subtle, and distilled as it were in a limbecke,
and finally to serve insteede of leaven unto the element of the earth, as that
most excellent natural Philosopher painteth forth the same unto us, Psalm. 65.
Which thing may serve us for a most lively and express similitude and
resemblance of this, which the spirit of God orders, prepares and does in
the understanding and heart of the elect in our time, to cause it there to
budde, and finally to bring forth fruits of true knowledge, which are,
giving of thanks, prayers, and works of charity which ascend up even to God,
Act. 10.4. Apoc. 5.8. and 8.3. Phi. 4.18. First therefore it is through the
grace of the holy ghost, that the matter of these perfumes is given us, being
a thing which waxes not in our garden. Secondly it is by the same virtue that
they are kindled and caused to fume. Thirdly as the fume and smoke of the fat
of the beasts which were sacrificed, which could not be of it self but
stinking, was made to be of a most sweet odor, by the precious perfume which
was made upon the golden altar: so the best motions, and the most excellent
actions which can part and proceed from us, how sanctified so ever we be by the
holy ghost in this life, being considered according unto their value, there is
found nothing in them which is ought worth, or which deserves any blessing
whatsoever, and yet they leave not to be liking and acceptable unto the Lord,
and are finally crowned by him with a crown of Glory, in as much as it
pleases God to consider of us and our actions unto which he has fashioned
and prepared us, not in us but in him, in whom alone he accepts of us: Ephesians.
1.9. who has given himself for us in oblation and sacrifice unto God an odor
of a sweet smell, Ephesians. 5.2.

9 The spouse hereupon instead of standing on those praises which are
attributed unto her, describes unto us the estate and effects of him in the
government of his, first under the similitude of a bed, afterward of a coch,
turning her speech unto the daughters of Jerusalem as it is set down in the
last verse of this chapter, that is to say, unto the nation which God had
chosen to have a part in his covenant, who had yet good need to be b^tter
instructed in the knowledge of the truth, amiddest the corruptions, from which
the church is never so freed, but there has been still some defect or other on
the behalf of many, as the histories and writings of the Prophets do testify
and declare the same: besides, that how ever it be, to be a true member of the
church it suffices not when a man is come unto age, to be born in the church,
but he must be instructed and there learn and give himself wholly to the doctrine
of truth which is there preached.

10 The spouse therefore speaking unto these, proposes unto them first an
allegorical description of the magnificent bed of this king, which is as it
were the Bride-bed prepared for this king and this queen which here speaks.
By this bed therefore we will understand generally and first of all the whole
country of Chanaan where it then pleased God to make as it were his residence
and abode, having as it were abandoned and given over the rest of the woorlde
for a time unto perdition and destruction, Act. 14.16. and particularly we will
here understand, the temple, the city of Jerusalem, the synagogues, cities and
towns of the whole territory and country, yea every one of the faithful, in
as much as the Lord dwells in them by his spirit: on the other side, by
Solomon is meant, not only this name, which is as much to say as peaceable,
but also the promise made unto David of this son an eternal successor,
couched in such terms that it comprehends all in one, both the figure which
is this son of David: as also the truth and reality figured by him, which is
Jesus Christ, 2. Sam. 7.13. and 1. Chron. 17.12. Solomon therefore in this
place represents unto us this Bridegroom, the true and only peacemaker
between god and his beloved as he is expressly called the prince of peace, Esa.
9.6. and his bed at this day is the whole universal world wheresoever he is
known and acknowleged of the elect gathered out of the four corners of world,
as the same was declared unto S. Pet. by that sheet which descended from heaven
and was tied at the four ends, Act. 10.11.

11 The spouse after this, to show us that it is there and no where else that
we must seek after and find the true repose and rest, as it is declared unto
us, Matthew. 11.29. and that there is nothing more safe and assured then this
rest, adds that this bed is environed and compassed with 60. valiant men of
Israel: and who besides their prowes and courage have also experience, to
hinder that nothing fall out by night, which may hinder the fruit of this rest.
Now that which we try and experience every day shows us, how not only
profitable, but altogether necessary this doctrine is. For what is one of the
chief and principal causes of this, that so few men give themselves unto this
rest, and that so few continue in it? Is it not because that this bed seems
to be but sorily guarded, and badly defended, and therefore they fear least
they should be easily surpressed and have their throats cut. But let us know
that these carnal caitiues, do as the foolish birds do, who so soon as they
see the cat, instead of keeping themselves on their perch, throw themselves
into the talants of the enemy. For he that goes forth of the Church, casts
himself undoubtedly into the paws of the ravening lion, 1. Pet. 5.8. The
fault therefore hereof proceeds from hence, that men having no other eyes
then those of their head, and not those of faith, believe only that which they
see, and persuade themselves of that which cannot be seen, but by the eyes of
the spirit which see that which is invisible, Heb. 11.27. and Ephesians. 2.18.
except it be when God bestows some special privilege upon some, as he did on
Jacob, Genesis 32.2. and on the servant of the Prophet, 2. King. 6.17. But what
says the Lord? Thomas, because thou have seen, thou have believed: but
blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed. Ioh. 20.29. In the
mean while we do al confess that God alone is almighty, yea that none has
any power but of him, as himself said unto Pilate, Ioh. 19.11. But why do we
not ad, that it is in his Church that he truly displaieth and shows forth
indeed and most mightily this power of his? Because there are very few which
have learned thoroughly to believe that God is almighty, a friend and preserver
of such as be his, and that it cannot be that the Bridegroom suffer any one of
them to perish, whom the father has given him, Ioh. 8.9.

12 Now touching this number of 60. we are not scrupulously to stand upon it,
albeit that they who have written of numbers observe in this number a special
perfection, for which cause the Astrologers did especially choose it for the
easier and readier calculating their degrees and minutes: seeing a man may find
in it without any fraction or broken number a moity or half, which is thirty,
a third which is twenty, a fourth which is fifteen, a fifth which is twelve, a
sixth which is ten: all which numbers are found quoted in that material Temple
built by Solomon, except the fifth which is the number of twelve. Besides this
if we reckon in particular, all the Canonical books as well of the old as of
the new testament, excluding the two latter Epistles attributed unto S. John,
which are indeed as it were private letters, we shall find they make justly the
number of 60. and those are in truth as it were, the true guard of this true
Solomon, as shall be told you anon. But to take this more simply, it is likely
that this was the ordinary number of the guard who watched by night, and were
the nearest about the bed of Solomon.

13 But what are these of the guard? They are first of all the Angels which
pitch their camp about al those who fear God, Psalm. 34.8. After them are all
the creatures which it pleases him to use for the defense of his against their
enemies, as we see in the story of Pharao, that the frogs, the flies, and
the lice, maintained the quarrel of this spouse, and stayed the rage of that
tyrant. And how often did the Philistines themselves rescue as it were and
defend David from the force of Saul? But especially because our chiefest
enemies, are not flesh and blood, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 6.12. that
is to say visible enemies, but that great lion which seeks to devour us, 1.
Pet. 5.8. and so many wicked and damnable affections, which are bredde and
borne with us: and because we are to fight every hour and every moment by the
virtue of the spirit of God, to come unto this eternal rest which is here
represented us by this bed, which we yet possess not but by hope: therefore
it is against these especially that we are to be assisted and aided with our
spiritual and invincible armor and weapons. Who are then these threescore
souldiars, in this respect? They are truly these courageous and valiant
rutters and old soldiers, renowned for their infinite victories against Satan
and his angels, having all of them his sword upon his thighe, nay already
drawn in his hand, to frustrate and break whatsoever the enemies of our
salvation can enterprise or take in hand. Such were Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and so many legions of brave and valiant soldiers, whose valiant
acts are registered and recited, Heb. 11. Such were those so many faithful and
trusty Captains, whom neither Satan, nor any counterfeat show of false
wisdom whatsoever, nor any wiles, nor any cruelty of all the woorlde could
withstand or hinder from erecting and setting up their trophies and signs of
victory throughout the world: and building this holy City the foundation
whereof they have laid prepared by the Prophets 1. Cor. 3.10. Ephesians. 2.20. But
some man will say: these are dead a great while since, and how then shall they
be able to defend us at this day? Exceeding well and most assuredly, not by
their merits (for as a good ancient father, and he a very learned Bishop of
Rome has very well said, The Saints gave not, but received crowns of
righteousness) nor by their intercessions in heaven. For we have there one
only mediator both of redemption and of intercession, which is our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1. Tim. 2.5. Heb. 1.25. 1. Ioh. 2.1. And al these merits and prayers
whereof the false Pastors make themselves treasurers, and dispensers of them
for ready money, are nothing else but so many buyinges and sellings of souls:
a merchandise most abominable before the Lord. But behold how these valiant
captains are yet at this day our defenders. First by their examples, Romans
15.4. Heb. 12.1. And therefore one among them and he of the most valiantst and
trusty soldiers was bold to say, Be ye followers of me as I am of Jesus
Christ, 1. Cor. 11.1. Secondly* and principally we understand by these
threescore men of guard, those whose ministry God has used for the building of
that arsenal and artillery house from whence we are to take al those our
spiritual weapons with which the Apostle armeth his spiritual ritter, Ephesians.
6.13. I mean the holy scriptures uttered to the pen of the Prophets by the
holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.21. and yet in more greater abundance and with greater
efficacy delivered unto the Apostles, in whose writings are to be found al
these weapons set in order and prepared for every one that will use the^, taking
them and learning the use of them, from the hands of the true Pastors and
dispensers of them. Ye see what these guard are, yea see what these weapons
are, with which whosoever armeth and aideth himself cannot choose but see
Satan, the world, the flesh, and sin cast down and trampled under his feet.

14 But above al let us seek after our strength and force where it is, to wit,
in that great Solomon, of whom all the rest is but an instrument: who being
come, and having made the combat, and vanquished all his enemies by his
sufferinges in respect of the assault which was given him, in as much as he
entered the combat for us: and mastring in us from day to day by his holy
spirit these same enemies which are still stirring within us, what have we
longer to fear, to be there with affrighted? Where is then our strong hold,
whither we are at al times to fly and retire our selves? Verily in the
strength of the Bridegroom, of whom David speaking, In thee have I trusted,
says he, I shall never be confounded, Psalm. 31. And in another place, I will
not fear though thousands of enemies be camped against me, Psalm. 3.7. And
in another place, The Eternal is my light and my salvation, of whom shall I be
afraid, Psalm. 27.1. This is he then which is the strong and mighty one, on
whose side we must keep us. For even those who die in this combat are of all
others the most victorious. Now it may please the Lord who has drawn us out
of darcknesse into this light of his truth, and has placed and preserved us
most miraculously hitherunto in this holy rest and peace of conscience, waiting
for the full accomplishment of his promises, to settle and engrate in our
minds this holy assurance of his mighty power in good will toward us, that
we be never astonished by the assaults of Satan, and of such his adherentes as
he emploieth and uses against us: but that contrariwise we persevere and
continue in this holy profession of his truth, as well by mouth, as also by an
holy and christian life, until we come unto the real enjoying of all that,
which he has made us to believe and hope for, according to his most holy and
most assured promises: conformably unto which doctrine acknowledging our over
great negligence hitherunto and laziness in our duty, with other infinite
faults and offenses of ours, we will crave mercy at his hands, saying.

Almighty God, etc.
THE XXVII SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 9. and 10.
verses.
9 King Solomon made himself a Coch of the wood of Libanon.

10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, and the bottom of goolde, and the
covering of purple, and the inside was adorned with the dilections of the
Daughters of Jerusalem.


1 The Coch which is here adioined unto Salomons bed signifies unto us, how
the Church has never had any place of certain residencie and aboade on
earth, there to be tied without exception.

2 The King himself has built this Coch as well under the old as the new
covenant by those chosen woorkmen of his, without being ever lawful for men to
ad thereto, or change any thing, or else to take away any thing in respect
of the body of this Coch, which is the doctrine.

3 Neither in respect of the charges thereunto belonging, neither in regard of
the manner of guiding and conducting it.

4 A more ample declaration, that God never gave over the universal
government of this Coch to any one certain place, no not to Jerusalem it
self without exception.

5 The tyranny of the false Church of Rome over al Christendom.

6 The Cedar wherewith this Coch is built represents the sure continuance
thereof against all the storms and tempests of the world.

7 The Prophets and Apostles are the pillars of silver of this Coch maintained
and preserved by the faithful Doctors and Pastors their successors, and in
what sense this word of foundation is attributed unto them.

8 Jesus Christ is the bottom of gold of this Coch, bearing up and sustaining
the pillars themselves.

9 The covering of purple of this Coch, is the heavenly power of God, who
covers it and defends it from above.

10 A reprehension of them who have their recourse to any thing besides.

11 The testimonies of Gods love and dilection contained in the sacred
histories are the ornaments and picture tables of the inside of this Coch on
every side.

OF the bed of the Bridegroom we have already spoken, now there is here made
a most magnificent description of his Coch, according unto the whole frame and
building thereof: whereas concerning the bed there is no speech but in
general, and of the guard about it. The reason thereof is, because that to say
the truth that repose and rest which is figured unto us by that bed, in which
the Bridegroom does yet stay for and expect his spouse, there to rest with him
for ever in perpetual bliss and felicity, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. is yet unknown unto
us, naie is incomprehensible, having received nothing yet but the pledges
thereof: but the Coch representing unto us the holy ministry of the word of
truth and of life, ought to be perfectly known unto us, that it may be set up
and used among us. Moreover in that the Coch is added unto the bed, it shows
us, if we consider of the ancient covenant, that the bridegroom had in such
sort erected and set up his bed in that Temple, and the seat of his kingdom in
Jerusalem, where he said he made his dwelling place, Psalm. 132.13.14. that
notwithstanding he would make, as it were, his progress throughout the whole
country, for which cause not only the Cities of the Priests, but the
families also of the Levites, were dispersed here and there throughout the
whole country, as the sacred history shows us. But it was indeed especially
under the new covenant ratified by the coming of the Bridegroom, that he
indeed walked and made his progress* first in person throughout the whole
country, ceasing neither day nor night, preaching unto the woorld the joyful
tidinges of the perfourmance and accomplishment of the promises, Act. 10.38.
and the true year of Iubilee to be put in the possession of our true heritage,
Esai, 61. and sending after his ascending above the heavens his Apostles, and
after them Pastors and Doctors for the gathering together of his elect from all
the four corners of the world, Ephesians. 4.11. But this ministry being in such
sort polluted by little and little for many hundreds of years, that in the end
this Coch of the Bridegroom was made the throne of the whore which sits upon
the seven hills, the Bridegroom has in our time after so long an interruption
restored it again and having harnished it anew and joined his horses unto it,
has trauersed a great part of the world in it, to enlighten the eyes of the
blind, as the Poets feign that the sun guiding his chariot from East to west
gives his shining light unto the world. Such is then this Coch, the
description whereof, we are more nearly, and more particularly to consider of.

2 First therefore it is said that Solomon himself made himself this Coche,
to teach us, that whether we consider the doctrine of truth, for the
publishing and making known whereof this Coche was made: or whether we regard
the whole furniture and direction thereof, it is he that must set down the
order, and as I may say the Carpentership: he must pin it and fit it
throughout, and he must after teach the Cochemen the manner and order how he
will have it ruled and governed. Wherein there is a double fault committed. The
first is in them, who will build and frame this Coche after their own fancy
and appetite, keeping themselves no farther then likes them unto the
ordinances and prescriptions of the bridegroom: the other is in them, who
confess indeed that as for the manner and fashion of this Coche in general
considered, there must be nothing but that which is correspondent unto the
pattern which the bridegroom himself has left us, not in chalk only, but in
lively picture and pourtraite in his holy scriptures. But for the direction of
this Coche, some are of opinion that they must follow the ancient customs of
the fathers, taking away only such abuses as afterward came in: others
think that because of the contrariety of circumstances of places, times, and
persons, God has left it in the power and liberty of the Churches to appoint
and ordain the whole ordering, according as they judge it to be expedient:
provided always they tend unto the right end and mark they ought. And the
ground of all this is that God does it as it were by himself which he does by
the ministry of them whom he sets a work in his name, whether they be
Pastors, or christian Magistrates. I allow well of this ground, for otherwise
what shall be said of the ancient Church which went before the coming of the
Bridegroom in person, and of the Church, which followed the ascension of the
Lord into heaven, and which shall continue unto his second coming in person?
And he that would gainsay, and contradict this, should find himself convinced
by the whole scripture: but I deny the co^seque^ces which are drawn from
hence. Now to answer distinctly of both these points, I mean, that of
doctrine, and afterward that concerning the government of the Church: I say
touching the first, that being a thing most notorious that flesh and blood,
Mat. 16.17. (that is to say, the spirit of man such as it comes into this
world, as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 2.4.) cannot reuaile or comprehend that
which is the only and true foundation of the doctrine of salvation, that is to
say, of that which is necessarily, and absolutely necessary unto the salvation
of all such as are of years of discretion, as the Creed of Athanasius does
witness, and the articles also of our Creed called the Apostles Creed, because
it is the summarie abridgement of the whole doctrine taught by the Apostles: it
follows that we must draw all this truth from the mouth of the Lord himself,
who having spoken unto the fathers in a certain measure, Heb. 1.1. has finally
declared unto the whole world whatsoever is requisite unto our salvation, Ioh.
15.15. First by the preaching of his Apostles, who were most faithfully and
perfectly taught, yea extraordinarily, and who have with like faithfulness
executed their charge, not only in speaking, but also in writing, in such sort
that it is a mere phreasy to imagine that they have omitted to preach by mouth,
or to set down in writing any one point of the doctrine of salvation. Our
adversaries reply at this day hereupon and say, that though happily the
Apostles have taught al, yet have they not written all. But when we demand
them what the points then are of doctrine which they have omitted in their
writings, they stick fast as a man would say in the glue-pot. For either
nothing of that which they allege appertains unto doctrine and the articles
of faith: or else it is such as maybe proved to have been forged by this man or
by that man, being a thing easy to quote the inuenters thereof and the
beginning: or else it shall be found to agree no better with the articles of our
faith which are the extract of the whole essential doctrine of the Apostles,
then light with darkness, falsehood with truth. I know they are too wise to
confess thus much. But besides that these things have been so often disputed
and clearly proved, that we may say with saint Paul, 2. Cor. 4.3. that if they
be obscure and hidden, it is unto them who will not hear them spoken of, or
whose eyes the prince of this world has blinded: we have always offered and
do still offer to show and prove them to the eye before a true and Christian
council.

3 I say the same touching the whole estate of the house of the bridegroom,
namely, that by these same Apostles he has fully set up and appointed both the
vocations and charges thereto belonging, as also the exercise of them in that
which concerns the substance of the government of his family: in such sort
that it is more lawful to change, diminish, or ad any thing in these vocations
then in the doctrine, the application and execution only of the said charges
and vocations, being only left free, according unto the circumstaunce of
places, times and persons, which cannot be ordered always after one fashion,
because of the necessary diversity of them. So did Moses order himself as a
faithful servant in the house of God, having done nothing but according to the
pattern which he had seen in the mount, Heb. 3.2. and 8.5. In which afterward
nothing was changed or taken away by the true Prophets, but when it pleased
god to erect his temple, and to set up the whole building and ordering of the
ecclesiastical charges thereof: which was ordained by the Lord by the mouth of
David and effected by Solomon, and yet this estate was not to endure, but
until the coming of the Lord and master of the house, Heb. 3.6. who afterward
by his holy spirit led his Apostles into al truth, Ioh. 16.7. who withhold
and hid nothing thereof, but have declared and opened all the counsel of God,
Act. 20.27. yea left in writing to continue unto the end and consummation of
the world. Whereupon it follows, that that which is customarily, and commonly
alleged, to wit, that the master holds it for done, which is done by his
workmen, cannot have any place in this matter, I mean, neither in the
doctrine, nor in the general, and fundamental estate of the house of God, to
attribute thereby unto the successors of the Apostles, any power and
authority, of changing, adding unto, or diminishing any thing, either in the
one, or in the other. The reason is, because the Apostles have left nothing to
be set up by their successors, but have themselves taught and established all
things, having left nothing to the Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons, but to
govern themselves, and their flocks, according unto this rule and
foundation, 1. Cor. 3.11. without adding to any new thing, or clipping
therefrom, or changing ought, the Coche, God be thanked, of this bridegroom
being of an other building then is saint Peter's Church at Rome, a true figure
of false religion, in which there is always some thing to be amended, added,
or changed. And therefore they who began first not to content themselves with
such ordinances, as were truly Apostolical, witnessed by their writings,
what end thereof so ever they had, and what occasion so ever they pretended,
opened the gap to all that confusion and desolation, whereunto the Church of
God was by little and little most pitifully brought. So the^ to conclude this
point, it is the bridegroom himself, and our only and true Solomon, who has
divised and built this Coch by his trusty and faithful Cochwrights, and
Carpenters.

4 But why is this house which is so strong and stable, that it prevails
against hel-gates it self, Math. 16.18. compared here unto a Coche which is
made to go from place to place? We have already yielded the reason thereof, to
which ye shall add this which I will farther tell you. It is to show us how
shamefully and wittingly they abuse themselves, who dream that God has tied
his truth unto one sole place, or See, which men in our time have persuaded
themselves to be the Sea of Rome: in so much that some are become so blockish
blind as to think that the Catholic and Apostolic Church, and the Roman
Church is all one, adding this word unto the Apostles and Nicene Creed: a thing
as improper and absurd, what reply soever be made to the contrary, as if a man
should say, that the head of a man, and a man were al one: though we should
grant the^ that the Sea of Rome, such as it is at this day, were not only the
true Church, but which is more, the head of al particular Churches. Let us
therefore note that this true Coche is there found, where this Bridegroom is
purely preached, both in respect of his person, and in regard of his office:
without matching him or ouer-matching him with a companion either superior, as
they do who pray the virgin Mary to command her son: or collateral, as they
do who call the same virgin their aid and their hope: or else inferior, as
they do who call upon the Saints absent, or upon the dead. But some man will
say, Is there then no certain visible place, on which the Christians ought to
depend and stay themselves, to say, we must believe and do that which is taught
and commanded in such a place? Jesus Christ being asked the same question,
answers not, that it is Rome,, or any other place. But, says he, where the
dead body is, there the eagles gather themselves together, Luke 17.37. And what
is this dead body? It is says Saint Paul, Jesus Christ, and he crucified,
besides which I will know nothing, understanding by the name of Christ the
person, and by the word of crucified, all that which he has done for us, even
unto that last cry of his which shaked both the heaven and the earth, saying,
All is finished. And thus much touching the Doctrine. As for the outward
service, himself speaking to that woman of Samaria, which demanded of him,
whether they should worship in the Temple of the Samaritanes or of the Jews,
confessed indeed, that for a time, it was the Temple of Jerusalem and no other
which God had chosen there to be worshipped. But says he, the time is come
that men shall worship neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, but the
true worshippers shall worship in spirit and in truth, Ioh. 4.21.24. that is to
say, without distinction of place, they shall serve God with a pure spiritual
service, not with altar or sacrifice, but with a contrite and humble heart,
Psalm. 51.19. and with the fruits of righteousness, Psa. 50.23. To. 12.1. and
with the calves of their lips, Ose. 14.3. Moreover if we respect the former
time, we shall find that it is true indeed that the covenant was reside^t, first
in the house of Abraham, the^ in the house of Isaac, afterward in the house of
Jacob. But how was this house walked and carried up and down? Go we farther, we
shall find, that traversing the desert it made 42. stations, Nu. 33. being come
into the land of Canaa^ the tabernacle unto which the lord had as it were tied
the seat of his covenant, both in respect of the doctrine and the outward
service changed from place to place, and was in the end separated from his Arc
being taken prisoner among the Philistines, on who^ having wreked herself, she
reunited not herself unto the tabernacle where the ordinary service was kept.
Finally behold the temple built as a permanent and standing place, and
Jerusalem the capital city both of the realm, and of the priesthood. But how
many breaches and interruptio^s were there, in such sort that the temple was
shut up, and finally razed, afterward repaired, after that most vilanously
polluted and defiled? I demand therefore, where was then this catholic See,
yea and whilst it stood were we to conclude as they do at this day who call
themselves Catholic Romans, the High Priest is the successor of Aaron, and
therefore he ca^noter, and we must believe and do whatsoever is taught and
commanded by the catholic church of Jerusalem? I report me unto all the
Prophets, whether they either made or taught others to make such a conclusion?
Nay did not contrariwise cry out, both against the Priests, and against the
temple it self for those abuses which were by the^ and there committed? And
indeed where, and by whom was Jesus Christ judged worthy of death, as being a
blasphemer against God and against the temple? Where, and by whom was his
doctrine condemned of impiety? Where, and by whom were the Apostles forbidden
to preach the gospel? Where, by who^, and for what cause was Steven accused,
and stoned to death? It is then a mere bewitchednesse and frenzy to tie the
holy ghost unto one place whatsoever it be, or to any certain estate of men to
ground on them the rule of a man's faith without exception: seeing that under
the ancient people themselves, among whom Jerusalem was the place which the
Lord had chosen for his house and habitation, there were none more deceived
then they, who without any exception or limitatio^ rested and grounded
themselves on that temple, and on the personal succession of Aaron, Jerusalem
being often the seat and See not of Truth, but of Murdering of the Preachers
of the Truth, and the nest of the Baalims.

5 But can it be shown by the Scripture or by any testimony worthy of credit
that Jesus Christ has established in the world one certain place or catholic
See, that is to say, where an head should be seated having authority over all the
particular churches of the world? And if it were lawful for men to constitute
and appoint themselves one, why should Rome rather be chosen then Jerusalem the
first and the ancient of all the Churches? Called of the Prophets the City of
God? From whence the word of God should go forth into all the world? And founded
notoriously by S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles? Or rather then Antioch
where were named the first christians? and where it is notorious that S. Pet.
and S. Paul lived? But in su^me, what reasonable man ca^ be ignorant what is to
be judged of the Sea of Rome, seeing that Daniel speaking clearly and plainly
of that God on earth calls him by his name the God Maozzim: which is as much
to say in the languange of the Prophet, as the God of Rome, or the God of the
Romans, Dan. 11.38. For it is evident that this word of Rome, in the greek
tongue, which was the^ used in that country where this city was first built and
named, signifies as much as the Hebrew word which the Prophet uses. And S.
Paul speaking of him which reigned in his time, I mean the Emperor of Rome,
says expressly that of the destruction of him should be borne che child of
perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. and when Saint John names expressly the City of
seven hills, Apoc. 17.9. In a word therefore as it is the Lord which has of
his great grace built his Coche where it pleases him, never using the help of
any for the inuenting the plat and model thereof, but using indeed the
ministry of certain his faithful servants, al of them immediately chosen, as
was Moses, and after him the Apostles, for the setting up of it according unto
the form and pattern which himself and no other has devised: and giving the
name of Coch unto this ecclesiastical government, he has declared that he
would not make it abiding for ever in one place, but has used and does use,
and shall use it unto the end of the world, transporting it according unto his
good and holy will and pleasure, 1. Cor. 12.

6 It remains we consider by peece-meale the building of this Coch, according
as the pieces thereof are set down unto us in this place. This description
therefore begins first with the matter wherewith the body of the Coch is
built, namely of the wood of Liban, that is to say of Cedar, this tree having
this property, that it is as a man would say incorruptible. This is it which I
have already declared upon the last verse of the first Chapter, to wit, that
thereby thus much is declared unto us, that this holy and sacred government is
invincible, both in respect of time and of men. The reason is if we consider
the generality of the Church, because the kingdom of this Bridegroom is
everlasting, as the father promised him, Dan. 7.14. and Luke 1.33. reaching it
self and as it were walking from one end of the world unto the other, Ps. 2.8.
and lifting it self up in the end above the heavens, Ioh. 14.2. As also if we
consider of every member of the church, which are as it were so many persons
placed and conducted in this Coch, not one of the^ can perish, Ioh. 6.39. and
18.9. What do you then shall I say men or devils, who seek to ouerturn this
Coch? Who endeavor to hinder it in his course? Nay, who devise by all means to
pull it in pieces? Alas poor caitifes, it is of the wood of Liban, which
resists al assaults. You do nothing but run your heads against the
mountain, and are no wiser then your predecessors, who are dashed in pieces,
and yet the mountain continues still firm and stable. This Coche resists
iron, and therefore will turn the edge of your swords. The fire cannot consume
it, but purges it and makes it more bright and glittering. This Coch floteth
upon the water, and never goes so under but that it comes up again upon the
water. Neither can death or time set-tooth in it, and how can the earth
consume us, seeing the grave does nothing else but refine our bodies, to be
afterward clad with incorruption, 1. Cor. 15.42. Where shall then our place of
refuge be in a time of so great and so rough storms? In this Coch, my
breethren, in this Coche under the wing and protection of the mightiest of
mighties, and no where else.

7 The spouse having spoken of the matter of this Coche, comes unto the
Pillars which he says, are of silver, and made by this King Salomo^. And what
are these Pillars else but such as God has chosen and given to be the principal
pieces of the Coche, and whose ministry he uses for maintaining and
preserving of it, as the Pillars underprop and stay up the building? I mean
the Prophets and Apostles as the principal master builders, and as it were the
hand of this king to put this Coche in readiness: as the Pastors and Doctors
finding it ready made, as we have above declared, are put in trust to maintain
and keep it whole in all his parts and pieces, 1. Cor. 12.28. Ephe. 41. And
this is the cause why the Apostle says, that the Church is foundded upon the
Prophets and Apostles, Ephe. 2.20. because the Apostles received this grace to
have ended that which the Prophets had as it were hewed out and squared: as it
is said, that the wall of the City descending from heaven had twelve
foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles, Apoc. 21.14. and how
is this, but that yet at this day the true Church has no other object of her
faith then the doctrine taught by the faithful Apostles of the Lord? Ephesians.
3.12. But, some man will say, is there then any more then one foundation of the
church and the government thereof? No truly. But there are more laiers of the
foundation, but there is but one foundation only. If we respect then the work
of every foundation-laier, we shall find, that there are so many foundations,
that is to say, so many foundation works as there are foundation-laiers, one
working here, and an other there: as in the restoration and building up again
of the City of the terrestrial Jerusalem, every one wrought in his quarter
but al was one and the same wall upon the old foundation, Nehem. 2. and 3.
Here we have then the definition of the truly Catholic Church, namely that
it is it for the building whereof every Apostle has built for his part, by one
and the same doctrine founded upon one sole foundation, one and the same
Church: none of the builders being master above his felowe-builder, although
Nehemiah as Lieutenant of the king governed the whole, as a faithful
magistrate ought to procure above al things, that God reign and bear rule in
the midst of the people whom he has committed unto his charge. And therefore
here was no principality which men have falsely attributed and given unto S.
Pet. but he wrought mightily as the others did in his charge and quarter. In
this sense therefore it is that we must understand these twelve foundations,
and foundatio^-layers: only we must take heed how we say that S. Paul, who
notwithstanding built more the^ any other, 1. Cor. 15.10. and Barnabas were
forgotten in the vision of S. John. For the whole book of the Apocalypse
declares that the forms there of speaking are applied and fitted to the manner
of the Iudaical commonweal: in which because there were 12. tribes, mention
is made of 12. gates, and 12. foundation-laiers only.

8 And to the end that this may more clearly appear in this allegorical
description, let us note that these Pillars have two ends or extremes, the one
below, the other above. The base or lower end is sustained by the bottom of
the Coche, the top or upper end by the vaut of the covering. These pillars
therefore are not they properly which hold and bear up the covering, but only
because themselves have their bases, and are sustained upon the bottom. And
this is also the cause why it is said, that they are of silver: but the bottom
is of gold. First, because Jesus Christ is truly the only foundation stone, 1.
Cor. 3.11. Esa. 28.16. sustaining and bearing up the whole by his only force
and power, and therefore most rightly compared to the most fair, precious, and
firm metal. Secondly because it pleases him of his good will, and not of
any need he has of them to serve himself with these pillars of silver, in
as much as he has given an efficacy unto their ministry, and does yet
sustain at this day his Coche, I mean, the gathering together of his Saints
by the vigor of his spirit which he lays open in the heart of his, Ephesians.
4.11.12. their writings being preached in all these places, whither it
pleases him to guide and conduct his Coche, retaining always this principle and
maxima, that he which planteth, and he which waters, (which are these pillars
of silver) are nothing, to wit, beside the planting and watering, according
unto the force which is given them to plant and to water: but he is all in all
who gives the increase, to wit, the bottom and ground of gold, to those who
are well planted and watered upon him, 1. Cor. 3.7.

9 The covering of this Coch, says the spouse, was made of purple by this King
Solomon, which shows unto us the proceeding and power of God, covering from
his heaven and azured throne his poor children, exposed otherwise unto al
injuries of weather, storms and tempests. And this is a lesson infinite many
times repeated and reiterated in the Scripture: and namely, Ps. 91.1. where it
is said, that, who so dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide under
the shadow of the almighty. And Psalm. 34.15. The eyes of the Lord are upon
the righteous, and his ears are attentive unto their cry. And Psalm. 121.4. The
guard and watchman of Israel will never slumber nor sleep. The sun shall not
burn thee by day, nor the moon by night. Which thing the children of Israel
did visibly experience, being defended by day by the cloud in the scorching
desert, and by night by the pillar of fire. And Psalm. 125.1. He that trusts
in the Lord, stands fast and is for ever assured, as the mount Sion, which
shakes not. In a word the whole Scripture is full of such sentences. And
besides the Scriptures we have thereof continual experience, seeing that even
those whom a man would take to be utterly forsaken are the first and the best
provided for and assured. But this covering is not seen but with the eyes of
faith, as it is said of Moses, that he saw him which was invisible, He. 11.27.
Albeit these visible heavens might serve us thereunto, since their continued
stability and so well ordered course are as it were engraued testimonies, of the
infinite might and unspeakable assurance of the lord, as it is said, Ps. 19.1.
and 119.89.

10 But alas behold for a certain our judgment and conde^natio^, namely that
the most part of us, who vaunt our selves to be the reformed Church, that is to
say, received into and conducted by this Coche into paradise, believe not
neither the pillars, nor the bottom, nor the covering thereof. For if it be
true that the doctrine, which we (who are chosen by the great mercy of the
Lord for the doing of this) preach unto you, is the only and true object of
faith, why are we not believed, either when we teach, or when we comfort, or
when we reprehend? If we be believed, wherefore does every one make unto
himself his particular ground and resting staff? And how so will some man say?
For this were to play the parts of Idolaters and superstitious men. And are not
you such ye covetous mizers, who have nothing before your eyes but gain? I
speak unto you merchaunts, who know so well to make your commodity by the
rising and falling of crowns to the loss of your poor neighbors* who know
your cabala so well to make your profit rather by selling for time, then for
ready money, making 9. pecks of 1. bushel. I speak unto you usurers and white
wolves (though there be some who begin very young) who under color of aiding
and helping your neighbor make it your trade to live by, and to enrich your
selves by the necessity of another. Out upon you caitiues, will you be always
with us as it were in this Coch, to ouerturne not only the Coch, but your
selves and us too? To say it in a word, so many tricks of close conueyance
and deceit, so many left and sinister means reigning and swaying in the midst
of us, how loud so ever we cry out against them in the pulpit, and what Laws
soever be provided and established to the contrary, are sufficient testimonies
that we yet believe not neither bottom nor covering of this Coch: as if we
never had yet heard any speech thereof. And what shall I say of so many
renegants and Apostates, some upon a iollity of mind, others upon fear, who
have finally hardened themselves so far as to put out both their own and others
eyes? Let us here remember the net which gathers the good and bad fish,
Matthew. 13.27. which appertains also unto this Coch: as also him who was found
at the marriage feast without his marriage garment. The scandale is great, yet
so it must be, but cursed be they who are guilty thereof. Matthew. 11.8. There
must also be heresies, that they which are current may be known, 1. Cor.
11.19. But let us preach God that we be not of this number, being vpheld and
stayed upright by his mercy, and that looking down we stay our selves upon this
bottom and ground of pure gold, which is our only foundation, and looking up
we must cast our ancre on that throne where the same Lord and master of ours
does sit diversely considered, I mean, as he sustaineth us below to lift us up
together unto himself in everlasting life, and preserving from above that
which is here below for a time.

11 There remains the ornament of the inside of this Coch which the spouse
says to be adorned, that is as a man would say, tapistred with the dilection
of the Daughters of Jerusalem: that is to say with histories painted, or
rather engraued in the holy scriptures, which testify unto us the infinite
dilection which this true Solomon bare unto his Jerusalem. This allegory is
founded hereupon, that from all times great Lords and Ladies are wont to
adorn the hals of their house, and their coches and horselitters with clothes
of tapistry, or paintinges, or or carved histories, as also their sepulchers
and monumentes. But especially men are desirous to have and see the pourtraits
of such personages as they bear affection unto. After this sort is that
spiritual Coch of our Solomon the frind of Jerusalem described in the Gospel,
in so much that he wept over it when he went thither there to be condemned and
crucified, Luc. 19.41. And what shall we say hereupon? And who is able to
conceive on the one side so many the bounties of the Lord or acknowledge on
the other side so many our ingratitudes? Let us therefore pray the Lord that
he will open and enlarge our understanding to conceive at the least in some
measure both the one and the other, and give us grace that adoring and
magnifying the one, and abhorring and detesting the other: we may be made
worthy to consider and understand the contents of these so goodly and lively
pictures, I mean the sacred histories, which are so many infallible
testimonies, of those more then infinite and incomprehensible compassions of
this Bridegroom toward his Jerusalem, Ephesians. 3.19. and 5.25. namely toward
the assembly of his elect, both before and during and after the terrestrial
Jerusalem, tapistred I say, and carved in this Coche into which he causes us
to ascend and seateth us therein to contemplate it on all sides, according unto
the example of David, Psalm. 27.4. as in the terrestrial Jerusalem this was
figured by the precious seelings and other rich ornaments of the same, to the
which God be al honor and glory now and for ever, Amen.

Almighty God, etc.
THE XXVIII. SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 9. and 10.
verses.
9 King Solomon made himself a Coche of the wood of Lebanon.

10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, and his bottom of gold, and the
covering of purple, and the inside was adorned with the dilections of the
daughters of Jerusalem.


1 The shogges and iuttes of this Coch hinder not the repose and rest of them
who are in it, and there is nothing to be compared unto their happy estate.

2 A large description of the great travails of the Clergy of Rome for their
feigned mother Church.

3 What the merits of the superstitious are.

4 The Coch is conducted by the wind and secret spring of the sole providence
of God, without any either wheels of Coch-horses: the holy ministry
notwithstanding for all this established in the Church not excluded.

5 A description of the most memorable histories carved in the inside of the
Coche, from the creation of the world until Salomons time.

6 How this Coche has always passed victoriously, and triumphantly thorough
the midst of all tempests unto the coming of the true Solomon into the earth.

7 How this king descended down on earth has see up his Coche in a far
greater magnificent estate then ever before, and has co^ducted it by a
marvelous swiftnes from East unto west, having finally ouerturned the Roman
Empire, stubbornely set to hinder his course.

AN application of this dilection and power of God unto this, that he has
already begun in our time, harnishing again and putting in frame his Coche
which was plucked in pieces by evil Cochers. We have already spoken very much
of that which is contained in this text so full of doctrine and consolation,
that the more a man considers of it, the more he finds in it to profit
himself thereby, as in truth it is not without cause that this canticle or song
is named the Canticle of Canticles, or song of songs. Besides that therefore
which we have already drawn from this text, I say that it is not without great
cause that the Lord speaks in this place of a Coche or horselitter, which
serves unto two uses, namely to rest in and to trauail in both together.
Albeit therefore that the children of this world judge us to be as they suppose
in the most tickle and uncertain state in the world, as being in continual
motion and agitation, and (as the Apostle says 1. Cor. 4.11.) vagabondes,
having no certain place of dwelling: notwithstanding we trauail in a Coche of
gold, borne up with pillars of silver, covered with purple, and with infinite
matters of pleasure and recreatio^ carved and engraven in this Coche, which can
nether be ouerturned, nor stopped, or stayed for one minute of time, what ruts
soever or hinderaunces men lay in the way of it within or without, although it
make not always the like iournies. For proof hereof I take the saying of the
Lord. Rejoice, says he, and be glad when men revile you, and persecute you,
and say all manner of evil against you for my names sake, falsely. Math. 5.11.
For when are we shocked and mightily tossed if not then? But in the mean time
we are so conducted in this Coche that these shocks and shakinges, which seem
to them without to menace our ouerturning, are unto us within no other then as
a man would say, a daunsing and pleasant rocking, to the utter despiting of
all those who laugh at that which cannot come to pass, to wit, our ruin and
downfall: and they themselves while they laugh at us, fall into the ditch they
dug for us, as we see how the Prophet takes up an holy laughter upon them:
Psa. 9.25.16. And the Apostle is bold to defy all those which assault him, be
they on high or below: Romans 8.38.39. who was no frantike when he said,
teaching us to say the like with him, that he thought he never had occasion of
rejoicing and vaunting himself, ^ut in the cross of Jesus Christ, by which,
says he, I am crucified unto the world, Ga. 6.14. This Coche then is such as
wherein we may travail on still and take our rest: but yet not without some
agitation. For this Coche is driven through the mountains down a thousand
downfalles of the world. They, says the Lord, who are in kings houses and
palaces wear soft clothing: Math. 11.8. Let the^ therefore being cambericke
clad and fether laid, go fair and softly down to hell, if they will take no
other way then that. But as for us, let us suffer our selves to be carried into
Paradise with all the iumpes and ioltings it shall please God, so we ariue at
the end we tend unto, by the way which our head and chief Captain is gone,
Romans 8.17. Heb. 10.20.

2 True it is that the chiefest of the^, of whose case I speak, allege the
contrary, and say that they are the men who keep the strait and narrow way,
who bear the brunt of the ill weather: whereas we seek after nothing else but
the liberty of the flesh. For they abstain from marriage, but we have wives.
Chaste men good Lord and continent: if you believe not me, let their
courtisanes, their concubines, their stews and brothel-houses, their Sodom
and Gomorrha which infect the heaven and the earth, be witnesses. And to the
end they allege not that they approve not these things, but condemn them as
deeply as we do: let them show me what they endeavor to the contrary,
they I say, who have both the spiritual and the temporal sword, and should
take order against such shameful filthiness, either by ecclesiastical
censures, according unto the holy Ghost speaking by the mouth of Saint Paul,
which ought to serve for an inviolable rule, or at the least according unto the
canons, how ever they dispense with gods Law, which is a thing utterly
intolerable, either by such punishments at the least as the civil laws of the
Paynims themselves have appointed, seeing they occupy the places of temporal
estates and seignories. And seeing their head has power, as he pretends he
has, over Emperors and Kings themselves, why does he not execute it against
those who govern their people and subjects so il? Because, his subjects would
tell him, you must first begin with your selves, with your clergy, and your
Sodom. They fast and abstain from eating of flesh a great part of the year.
And what do we? We have taken away the Lent, and eat every day indifferently
fish or flesh, or both. We call to witness of their fastings, and great pains
they take for the Church, their faces and their bellies, their Katers, Butlers
and Cooks, and how many millions of flagans and bottels? They sing Mattins,
many Masses, little and great: they have their hours, first, third, sixth,
ninth, their Vespers, Complins and Salutations. And what do we? We do nothing
but preach. It is true, and I confess it, that all their business consists in
chaunting and thrush-warbling. And what pains think we does that good holy
father take to be carried upon men's shoulders, to lift up his foot so often to
have his pantofle kissed, to tell over so many millions of Crowns which come
flowing in unto him on all sides, besides the fatherly and continual care he
takes to have the booty and spoil of so many souls, and bodies, so
lamentably bewitched to their own sight and knowledge? Goodly marks doubtless of
the true Catholic Church, and perpetual enemy of the world, Iam. 44. to see
Meffiers the reuerendissimies have their long tails carried up by their
traine-bearers, afterward trained up and down in their Coches with their
courtisans, to make the very Sun to blush at their impudent shamelesnes: and
yet these are the Nurcery of that Oecumenicall See. What shall I say of the^ who
are gaping after these Cardinals hats? what of these goodly gardiatane bishops,
of these bishops titularie, and portatiue, of Abbots, Priors, and the like,
with whom we may justly suppose that the devil himself makes himself sport,
though all of them serve him in good earnest, except it be such as openly both
by their words, and all their horrible dissolutions show that they believe
neither in God nor in the devil. For behold to what point the world is come.
And as for these great religious men who merit both for themselves and others,
alack how ill they be lodged in their royal and more then royal palaces:
alack poor men how they are famished, when the world fights who shall
bestow most upon them, and their own mouth is never stopped not to demand, or
their hands so troubled with the gout, not to take and receive whatsoever
comes. O the small warmth they have in their Iacobine chambers! o how ill they
are clothed in their frocks and other their habits, which have no fault in them
nether winter nor summer! o the hard penance discipline they bear at their
girdle! o the poor fraternity of Jesus, who have gotten within the compass of
thirty years more by their charitable gratuitie, then all the rest of the
monks in five hundred years before them!

3 If hereupon it be replied that there are some truly religious who go wolward
and in hair, live hardly and austerely, whip and scourge themselves in good
earnest: though we granted them all this, and that they did an hundred times
more then is reported of them, yet come they nothing near Baals priests who
cut and sliced themselves with rasors having crien out from morning until
noone, whom Elias notwithstanding with full mouth mocketh 3. Kings. 18.27. or
the religious Mahumetanes of diverse sorts and fashions. And how ever it be, if
austerity of life were an essential mark of true religion and holiness* (as the
poor and simple people bear themselves in hand it is) then were saint John
Baptist to be preferred before Christ Math. 3.4. not that we blame or
discommend temperancie, as neither the exercise required to tame and subdue
this body of ours which rebelleth against the spirit. But contrariwise we say,
that such ought the life of every Christian to be, and we confess that we
fail in the other extreme, as if having taken away the superstitious
distinction of days and meats, we had forbidden men to fast, to give
themselves to prayer and al holy exercises: not as if we had commanded every
day to eat fish and flesh. We say therefore in sum, that for a man to feed
his horse moderately, yea to make him to fast, when, and so as need requires
(for fearing least fatted at too much ease, he wax headstrong and fall to
kicking and flinging, in steed of carrying his rider well and quietly) is
far an other thing, then by hard and evil handling of him to make him
utterly unprofitable, in such sort that he faints and falls flat under a
man, or cannot but with much ado, set one foot before an other, when a man
would use him. Moreover we ad that it is an unjust and intolerable thing to
make the rules of such exercises certain and general, which thing was never
appointed by the word of God, nor practiced in the christian Church so long as
it continued in her purity, seeing that under the yoke of the law it self
there was but one fasting day appointed generally to be observed every year. I
ad further, that whereas the best and the most excellentest works which the
holy Ghost works in those who are most holy, cannot be taken in account for
satisfaction of our gilt, or payment of our sins before God: it is a most
abominable error to think to gain paradise by eating or not eating by
marying or not marying, by eating flesh or eating fish. But I confess I do
the world great wrong to enter into dispute of such things against them,
against whose unchaste and gluttenous Epicurian life the heaven and the earth
demand justice at Gods hand. Leaving them therefore to be carried in their
Coch in full gallop to the place assigned them, I refer them by the way unto
that which all the Prophets have written against the hypocrites and
traditionaries of their time, and unto that which the Lord himself says in so
many places of the Evangelists, and saint Paul expressly Romans 14.17. speaking
of that which was for a time forbidden by the commandment of God himself, who
has not buried Moses to make place for humane traditions, Coloss. 2.23. 1.
Timot. 4.3.8.

4 Let us now return to this Coche of the bridegroom, prepared by him therein
to receive his spouse. A man may therefore marvel why there is here no
mention made of wheels or of Coch-horses: things which seem altogether
necessary to make this Coche to go. But the reason is evident, namely because
this Coche moves not properly by any human art and industry, but by the
sole virtue and power of him who made the Coche and conducteth it after a most
especial and divine manner. And yet this is not therefore to exclude the
ministry, either of Angels, which thing is represented unto us in that
heavenly chariot which Ezechiel saw with his wheels: Ezech. 1.5. or that of
men, seeing that before the spouse was compared unto the Coch-horses of Pharao,
as also Elizeus said seeing Elias carried up on high, My father, my father, the
chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, 2. King. 2.11. or natural causes,
whereof mention is made Exodus 1.10.13. and 14.21. and Psalm. 18.11. but to show
us that all the second causes (the question being of that which concerns the
kingdom of God) do work always in such sort, that God reserueth unto
himself the glory of the effect of them, according unto that which the
Apostle says even of his own ministry, that he which planteth and he which
waters is nothing (I mean in respect of the inner working) but God is al who
gives the increase, 1. Cor. 3.7. So far is it then that any man, nay any
Angel of heaven can guide the course of this spiritual Coch, that contrariwise
themselves must be guided and conducted in this Coch by the wheels of his only
providence who has made it and conducteth it, and that by such carriers,
mountains and valleys incomprehensible unto any creature. Notwithstanding the
holy ministry was not omitted in the description of this Coch, in which they
were represented by the pillars of silver as we declared this day eight days

5 Besides all this, the inside of this Coche being richly and costly carved
for a testimony of the dilections of this Bridegroom toward the daughters of
Jerusalem, ought not to be lightly passed over. And what is all this else, but
that which is comprised in the sacred books of the Scripture filled with an
infinite number, not of dead pictures, or such as are of humane woorkmanshippe,
but of memorable stories, penned and uttered by the holy Ghost. Let us
therefore now, my brethren, enter into this Coche, and let us see whether it be
possible to see and behold any thing in heaven or in earth, which may be
compared unto these caruings and engrauings. There we see first, this great
woorke-master, making all of nothing, all things appearing suddenly at the
sound of his word, and this goodly principal piece of work of man, mouled as
it were upon the pattern of the Divinity it self, Genes. 1.26. There we see
afterward this mighty Creator in the person of him who was after made our
deliverer and redeemer in person, running after those two forlorn children,
applying unto that deadly wound, so soon as it was made the remedy of an
immortality far more excellent then that whereof our first parent had
deprived himself, and us all his posterity, Genes. 3.1. Go we farther and
behold the Bow of the Lord engrauing in heaven the patience of the Creator
which endures still unto this day, Genesis 8.13. notwithstanding our rebellion
continued almost four thousand years after the flood. Look we farther, and
with what pleasure do we behold Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, walking through
infinite by-waies and dangerous, and in the space of four hundred years their
race, amidst most profane people, full of unthankfulness and desperate rage,
multiplied unto the number of six hundred thousand persons, besides the weomen
and little children. Behold a little farther the vndauntable insolency of Pharao
minding to stay the course of this Coche beaten and vanquished, by frogs, by
flies, by lice, at the shaking only of the rod of one of the servants of
this great king. Behold after this the Coche charged with so great a multitude
passing on dry land through the midst of the sea, which swallowed up all the
enemies which pursued it: behold the bread sent from heaven, behold with one
stroke of a small rod the most hard rocks cleft, to water almost 40. years
long all this multitude. Behold the Coche, arrived at the river of Jordan after
it had beaten down and battered two mighty kings, passing the river on dry
ground, making the high walls of Jericho to moulder and fall to ground before
it. Behold this Coche battering down, trampling under, dashing in pieces
thirty kings beyond Jordan. Behold the people in this Chariot of triumph,
victoriously placed in the land of promise, where they are so chastised for
their faults, that notwithstanding they obtain in the end, so many miraculous
trophies as this Coch sustained assaults, yea beating down their enemies
sometimes with pitchers, Iud. 7. sometimes with an Oxe-goade, Iud. 3.31. though
for one time he suffered his Arc, which was as it were his seat in the
conducting of his Coche, to be taken as it were prisoner: but what? This was to
cut off Dagons legs and arms, 1. Sam. 5.4. to strike his enemies on the hinder
parts, and by lashing them with the whip to make them serve him for horses and
thillers to bring his Coch whither pleased him. There follow after this,
lamentable and heavy things, but the Coch remaining selfe-vpright, only
discharging it self of many which had shoued themselves into it, and became
unworthy to abide in it. Such was amongst others that caitiue Saul, having
embrued himself with the blood of one of the principal pillars of this Coche,
1. Sam. 22.16. and it seemed that then, and after that, this Coche was
ouerturned, or altogether stayed. But God did speedily provide for it, having
raized a faithful Cocher representing himself, I mean David that great
Prophet and king, who having conquered and afterward prepared Jerusalem,
raised up to honor, and so far favored of God as to be called his City,
his House, his Rest, and having finally provided and disposed all the furniture
of this Coche, repaired as it were all anew, he left for successor the
chief builder thereof, namely his son Solomon, who brought this excellent
woorcke unto an end with such direction, wisdom, and magnificencie, that
there was never seen among the Kings of this world the like thing, being in
this respect the figure of the true Solomon, King of peace, and Lord and
eternal son of David. Lo these are the pictures of the inside of this Coch
of which the Spouse speaks in this place, as being engraven and carved in the
inside thereof.

6 And if a man will pass beyond the time of Solomon, as the holy Ghost
intending prophetically to bring forth testimonies of the dilections of this
bridegroom until his coming in person, yea even unto the end and consummation
of the world, we shall find that the nearer the time and term appointed of God
approaches for the real execution of his promises, the more evidently did the
ardent affection of this bridegroom show it self toward his Jerusalem, how
perverse and unthankful so ever she showed her self. But some man might
think that this Coche was then at the least somewhat evil affected, when of 12.
tribes 10. were cast out of this Coche under Roboam. But this is clean
contrary. For as a family of 12. persons, whereof ten should be found traitors
and such as had conspired the death of their mother, is never a whit enda^maged
by the casting of those ten rebellious and disloyal persons out of doors, but
rather eased and purged of great filth: so did the Lord by throwing out of his
Coche such caitifes and miscreaunts. And as for the remnaunt which remained in
this Coche if the king again take a view many times of the estate of his
house, what has followed thereof but which happens unto barnes and garners,
namely that the corn is the purer and cleaner the oftener it is winowed and
sifted? It is true it might seem that finally this Coche being most
miserably guided by them unto whom this King had given the chardge thereof,
was not only ouer-turned but broken into a million of pieces, nay turned
utterly into dust and powder, though it often resisted, and namely under
Iosaphat and Ezechias. But what? If we consider well of all we shall find
the clean contrary. For so far is it that they who seem to have had this
advantage might vaunt themselves of those victories, that contrariewise it is
the King himself who led and conducted and set himself his enemies a
work, not to overthrow and ruinate his Coche, but first to discharge it of
that great number of villainous and profane persons gotten into it, and
afterward to vnharnish it: and thirdly because it had a long journey to make,
namely as far as Babel over so many rivers and troublesome ways, and minding
also as it were to vnthawe his people waxen stiff and beno^med with overmuch
ease they sat at, it pleased him to guide the^ on foot even into Chaldea,
using the Chaldeans as his Sompters, to carry his vessel of gold and of silver,
which he delivered them as it were in keeping. And as for his Coch, seeing it
so villanouslie used and so il handled as it was, he would not only have it to
be vnharnished as I said before, but also vnpinned, disioynted and pulled
asunder; but yet so that the pieces remained sound and good, as indeed in his
good time he set it together again, and that by the appointment and ordinance
of the Kings themselves otherwise his enemies and successors of them who had
pulled it in pieces. If hereupon a man reply unto me the servitude of the
people of God, I confess it, for they had well deserved it: but I add that
during this very captivity, behold the people how captive and prisoner-like
soever they were, governor of Babylon in great authority in the person of
Daniel, behold the royal edictes for the worshipping of the God of Daniel,
behold the tyrant himself brought to feed among the brute beasts, behold
Babylon it self captive, and the people of god restored and restablished with
great privileges, and restitution of their holy vessels. And what afterward? Is
not this that King who beat down the Kings of Syria and of Egypt, though
sometime he had given them an entrance even into his house there to take them
and entrap them?

7 And if we pass yet farther we shall see that it was then, then I say
indeed, that this great King showed his infinite dilection and love toward
his Jerusalem (that which went before being nothing else but the pledges as it
were of the fiansailes) when he set up this Coch of his in Jerusalem which with
an incredible swiftness passed from East to West, and from North to South by
the mighty and impetuous wind of his mouth, represented on the day of
Pentecost by two things most swift and light, and of most sudden effect,
namely by a mighty and violent rushing wind, and by fire in the similitude and
likeness of tounges. And this is indeed the time when both the mighty power
and more then cordial affection of the King of this Coch trained indeed upon
the wings of the four winds, appeared; having beaten down that great mount
of the Roman Monarchy, and blowing now to ruin and overthrow the beast
molded upon this pattern and seated in the Temple of God upon the very same
seven hills. For the declaring of which things in particular it is not one
sermon, nay the life of many men one after another can serve.

8 Only I will say that this second Coch not new in it self, but spiritual in
as much as it was figured by the first being external and gross according
unto the time, being fallen after certain ages into most wicked hands, and
most wickedlie and vilely conducted, has been harnished again in our time,
and restored unto his former estate, having trauersed, as still it does trauerse
a great part of the world, with terrible iuts, but so guided by him which is in
heaven and keeps up the wheels thereof without forsaking them, that God be
thanked therefore, the greatest and mightiest who endeavored with all their
force to stay the course of it, have served for litter, being beaten down and
trampled under it: and if there have been any who through the violence of
such shogginges are leapt out of the Coch, it has been to fly up on high,
whither this Coch leads al it carries, causing them to leave only their case
on earth, as well to serve for a reproach and perpetual remorse of conscience
unto some, as to leave unto others an example of firm and invincible
constancy. And seeing that God has bestowed this grace upon us, my brethren,
yea continued so long a time, as to have set up his Coch amongst us also, and
to have received us into it as it were out of all the countries of the woorld,
let us be heedefull to behave our selves as it becomes us, that we be never
cast out of it, and to pray unto God with David, Psalm. 23.6. and 27 4. that we
may continue in it all the time of our life, and that he will there entertain
us with his favor, until that latter day in which we shall be carried up on
high, there to reign with him eternally, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Amen.

Almighty God, etc.
THE XXIX SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 11. verse.
11 Daughters of Syon, come forth and behold this King Solomon with the crown
with which his mother crowned him in the day of his espousailes and the
gladness of his heart.


1 The knowledge of the true Jesus Christ, and of the true Church is requisite
unto salvation, and the one must teach us the other.

2 The true Church insteede of busieng her mind on her self, gives herself
wholly to the praising of her Bridegroom to lead all the world unto him.

3 Al they which are in the Church are not therefore of the Church, and there
is found a false Catholic Church too in the midst of the true.

4 A man must first go out of himself to contemplate this King.

5 Secondly he must go out of Syon it self when the King is parted thence,
and that Babylon has there set up her banner.

6 A man must go forth, but it is to find and contemplate this King.

7 It is another thing to contemplate this King then simply to look on and
behold him: and how this contemplation has been always entirely
spiritual, the spirit notwithstanding being instructed, by the hearing of the
word, and by the sight of the Sacraments.

8 Whereunto and to whom the sensual contemplation of the presence of this
king being in the world serves.

9 Certain testimonies that we should not nor must not seek after the bodily
presence of this King on earth, since the time he is ascended the heavens.

10 A conclusion of this doctrine teaching us where and how we must
contemplate this King.

11 An opposition and refutation of the doctrine contrary to this truth.

12 An exhortation better to contemplate and serve this King then men have done.

13 This King is souerain, spiritual, and eternal, delivering over to no
creature the authority of imposing Laws on the conscience, nor to noting that
which men are to do concerning his service, nor touching that which we must
believe unto salvation.

14 What the commission is both of the spiritual officers and Christian
Magistrates of this King.

15 High treason committed against this King, with answer to the objections
of the same.

16 An exhortation to contemplate and know this great King and Savior.

THAT which we have already learned as well of the matter as of the building and
adorning of the Coche Royal, ought to cause us to acknowledge the excellency
thereof. But yet we must confess that that which is within is a great deal
more fair, I mean first of all this King, and afterward the Queen, the
excellency of whom is painted forth unto us, namely that of the King by the
mouth of the Queen, and that of the Queen by the mouth of the King, both of
them good and certain witnesses one unto the other; a doctrine of all others
especial and necessary. For first seeing eternal life consists in the
knowledge of the father in his son whom he has given us, Ioh. 17.3. and
Satan cease not to present unto the world counterfeit Iesusses, Matthew. 24.5.
and so by consequent false Churches, there is nothing more necessary then
thoroughly to know and take marks of the true Jesus Christ, and his true spouse.
Secondly there are not a few men who care neither for Jesus Christ nor the
Church as they ought to care for and esteem them, because they do not
thoroughly know of what value the one and the other is: in such sort that such
manner of people are easily enticed an other way by the vain appearance of the
world dazeling them some after one sort, others after an other, 1. Cor. 7.31.
besides that this King and this Queen considered with the eyes of flesh seem
so foul and evil favored, men are loath to come too near them, so far are
they from being willing to keep themselves unto them, Esaias. 53.2.3. and 1.
Cor. 4.9.13. And therefore it is not without cause that Psalm. 45.14. it is
said, that this beauty is within, which thing we are diligently and
particularly to consider. Let us therefore consider first the person which
speaks, then to whom she speaks, and afterward how and whereof she
speaks, to the end we may make our profit the better by it. For this was not
written for one day, but that this voice should ring night and day in our
ears, pearcing even unto the division of the soul and of the spirit: Heb.
4.12. It is therefore the spouse which speaks and which ought to be heard of
us under pain of being reckoned and accounted among profane persons and
publicanes, Math. 18.17 and Luke 10.16.

2 But because this authority of the true Church has served Satan's turn at
all times, in transferring it unto the false, we must therefore withal
consider what this true spouse is, to take heed the better of her which
boroweth her name. It is therefore she not which entiseth men unto her self,
as harlots do, but inciteth them to contemplate her Bridegroom, yea and that
crowned, as anon by Gods grace we will handle.

3 She speaks unto the daughters of Syon, that is to say, unto them whom God
has vouchsafed this favor to send unto the^ the message of salvation, whether
they receive it as they ought, to become as it were members of this spouse who
calls the^, which is the assembly and mystical body of the believing: or
whether they make themselves unworthy of the grace which God offers the^.
This is signified unto us in the parable of the ba^quet, Luke 14.14. in which
we must note that which is there said that all they who were invited began with
one accord to excuse themselves, though they took diverse excuses, to show us
that there is also as well a false Catholic Church, that is to say a Church
general agreeing in that which is ill, though they be divided in opinions, as
there is one true and only Catholic Church, hearkening unto with one accord
this only and true bridegroom. And this is the cause why I said before that
there are two sorts of daughters of Syon, so called because the terrestrial
Jerusalem was the mother City of the people of God. The one sort therefore
were as it were the waiting gentle-women of this spouse, to enter in after her
by order, and together in company unto the marriadge banquet, as it is said,
Ps. 45.15. The other were in the church but not of the church, and being there
as it were only to behold what was done there, or otherwise to do their own
business, of which sort I would to God we saw not so many of the like examples
amongst us.

4 Now to come unto the third point, namely the better to understand of whom,
and how this spouse speaks, we must especially weigh and consider her words.
Come forth says she. And how so? For if Syon be the habitation of the Church,
why should a man come forth of it to behold the King who notwithstanding has
there chosen himself his habitation? Psalm. 87.2. and 132.15. I answer that
this serves not but for a sharper condemnation, to be corporally in Syon, if
our affection be not there also, and that to have our affection there is to go
forth of our selves, to say with the Apostle Gal. 2.20. I live, howbeit no
longer I, but Christ lives in me.

5 Moreover when as Jerusalem it self is for the most part polluted and
defiled, and the king is in this respect driven forth and chased thence, a man
must go forth if he will contemplate him, as in deed this King went forth, and
has raunsomed and redeemed us, being crucified without the terrestrial
Jerusalem, where we must also go forth after him, as the Apostle warns us,
Heb. 13.12. So this is then an other reason why we should go forth, whereof
the spouse in this place speaks, and this pollution is showed us by many
examples. Pilate was within Jerusalem as was also Herod, and yet so far were
they from knowing of Jesus Christ though he were before their eyes together
with the justice of his cause, that contrariwise the one condemned him against
his own conscience, the other sent him away with ignominy. Yea the very
troops and companies who the day of his entrance cried so loud, Hosanna,
ceased not to cry the friday following, away with him* away with him, crucify
him. It is not therefore without cause, that it is said unto the daughters of
Syon that they must come forth to contemplate this King crowned. And we have at
this day more need then ever of this advertisement, the same belonging
properly unto us which was said unto this spouse her self Psalm. 45.11. who
now teaches her daughters the same lesson, Forget thy people and thy fathers
house, as we are also bidden to do: Luke 14.26. And in what state was Syon
then when Babylon had planted her banners in the very midst of Syon, as it
happened to the people, when Bethel was turned into Bethauen, that is to say, the
house of God into the house of iniquity, according unto that which was
foretold by David Psalm. 118.22. by Esaias. 28. by Ierem. 14.14. by Ezechiel in
his whole 13. Chapter, by Jesus Christ the master, Matthew. 23.38. having driven
and that at two sundry times out of the house of his father those whom he
calls thieves, Luke 19.46. together with the buiers and sellers, Ioh. 2.14.
Math. 21.12. and who finally set fire in it and left not a stone upon a stone
Math. 24.2. Now who can say that this visible company was then the true Church
and not rather directly opposed unto it? And which therefore was not to be
forsaken according unto the commandment of the Lord, Math. 15.14. To depart
with the Eagles thither, where the dead body was, Luke 17.37. Now that the like
should come to pass in the christian Church, and especially in that o^ Rome,
the Apostles have most clearly foretold us, namely saint Paul, Act. 20.30. 1.
Tim. 4.2. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. and S. John in the Apocalypse. according unto the
exposition of the greek and latin authors. Who can doubt therefore, but the
same being come to pass in our time in the Weast and East Christendom as it
is apparent unto the eye unto such as are not altogether blind, we ought to
come forth out of that Sion polluted and tra^sformed into Babylon, and follow
the example of the Leuits under Jeroboam, 2. Chr. 11.13. and the saying of the
Lord, Mat. 15.14. and the practice of the Apostle, Act. 19.9. So have we done
in our time, and so do, and will do always in such a case all the true
children of God, withdrawing themselves from this West Babylon that they perish
not with it, but know and contemplate this king crowned, to join themselves
unto him, leaving the creast of her which is seated upon the seven mountains,
until God in his time send her into the lake of fire and brimstome, Apoc.
20.10. In a word, because it is a thing impossible to serve Jesus Christ and
Baal, and there is no communion between light and darkness, 2. Cor. 6.14. we
must abandon and forsake the kingdom of darkness if we will see unto salvation
this king of light.

6 Come forth therefore says this Queen unto her daughters. But what to do?
For it is an easy thing to go, naie to leap out of one mischief into
another. And we see at this day (alas a most miserable case) where many
forsake superstition to cast themselves headlong into impiety, and as it is
said, Luke 11.26. change one devil into seven others worse then he was.

7 Behold therefore the reason why this Queen adds, and contemplate the King
Solomon. But we must know what it is to contemplate. It is not simply to look
upon a thing, as at the entrances of kings every man gets him up into a
window, or goes out into the street to see him pass by, and after that
there is an end. But to contemplate is rather an action of the mind then of the
eyes, when to take the thorough view of a thing and perfectly to know it, a
man looks round about it and peereth to the very bottom: which is said of
S. Peter when he came unto the Sepulcher, and leaned his body down into it to
see thoroughly whether the body of the Lord were there or no, Luke 24.12. Yea
but will some man say, when these things were written, the king figured by
Solomon was not yet visible, seeing he had not yet put on him our flesh, and yet
still at this day, having withdrawn himself so far from us shall not be seen
until his latter coming. I confess all this, and I say farther that even so
long as he was in this world truly visible and in sensible and palpable flesh,
yea after his resurrection, Luke 24.39. so far is it notwithstanding, that this
visible nature caused him to be known, that contrariwise to see him man as
others, and so vile and contemptible without, was as it were a veil over the
eyes of the beholders, hindering not only such as were carnal, as they who
called him Nazaren, Ioh. 1.47. and Carpenter the son of a Carpenter, Mar.
6.3. and Herod who did nothing but mock him, Luke 23.11. but his disciples
also to see and apprehend either his majesty, or that which we ought
principally to seek after for our salvation, albeit his glory shined in his
words and in his works. And this is the cause why Jesus Christ answered
Philip, requesting him that he would show him his father, Ioh. 14.9. that it
was expedient that he should depart, Ioh. 16.7. It is therefore for the eyes of
the understanding enlightened by the spirit of God to found the secrets of God,
which are revealed to make this King contemplated and known. But our outward
senses serve they to no purpose? I say contrariwise (setting a part that which
God can do, and which he has extraordinarily done in some, when it seemed
good unto him to do this miracle) that two outward senses of ours are
thereunto not only profitable, but ordinarily altogether necessary, to wit
the hearing especially, and after that the eyes: not that we see or hear this
King in person, but because that by this means he informs our understanding
to contemplate and to know him. For if he be known and conceived by faith,
and faith is bred in us by the hearing of the word, by the which he manifests
himself unto us, Rom 10.7 it follows necessarily that it is in the word of
this king that we must seek after him and know him, who and what he is. And
consequently if faith be a virtue which has his seat in the understanding,
being there created by the virtue of the holy Ghost, and afterward maintained
and increased by the use of the visible sacraments, in which the understanding
sees and considers that which is signified and presented unto it* it
follows that this apprehension and consideration or contemplation be
spiritual and not corporal, although the understanding be informed by that
which it hears in the word and sees in the sacraments. For if it were
otherwise, what should the faith of the fathers be, who went before his coming
in the flesh, who notwithstanding did so thoroughly contemplate him, that under
other sacraments they did eat the same meat, and drank the same drink with
us, being made partakers of this true king Solomon, without whom there is
neither faith nor eternal life, 1. Cor. 10.3.4. So did our father Abraham see
him in the circumcision, which was unto him a sign and seal of his
justification by faith, Romans 4.11. because he embraced the word when he was
yet uncircumcised, Romans 4.3.10. So did the holy fathers see him and embrace him
both in the promises heard and received by faith, Heb. 11. and in the shadows
of the ceremonial Law, of which this true Solomon was the substance, Col. 2.17.
So the blessed virgin Marie before she conceived him essentially in her
virginal womb, conceived him by the ear, receiving by a true faith the word of
the Angel, Luke 1.38. as Elizabeth knew it by a Prophetical spirit, and
praised her greatly for it, Luke. 1.45.

8 This does not hinder notwithstanding but that they who lived in the time of
his conversation among me^, and whose eyes of their understanding the spirit
did withal enlighten, Ephe. 1.18. and opened the ears of their heart, Heb.
16.14. were not aided and helped to believe at the beginning, and afterward
confirmed in that which they already believed, by that which they saw, heard,
and touched with the hand, as we see the same in Simeon, Luke 2.28. in Anna the
Prophetess, Luke 2.38. in the Samaritanes of Sicher, Ioh. 4 42. and in the
Apostles, Mat. 13.16. Ioh. 1.14. and 2.22. and 1. Ioh. 1.1. yet that which
causes faith to be bred in the understanding of the seers and hearers, is not
the sight nor the hearing of the body, but the action of the mind enlightened
by the holy Ghost. And therefore said the Apostle unto the Ephesians (who
notwithstanding never saw with their eyes, or heard with their ears Jesus
Christ in person) Christ dwells in your hearts by faith: and again Ephesians.
4.20.21. speaking of the hearing touching the word which he had preached unto
the^, ye have not says he so learned Jesus Christ, if so be ye have heard
him, and have been taught by him.

9 Now to show that this corporal sight was not ordained to be always the
mean to know this king, but only for that time he conuersed among men in that
visible flesh which he carried up into heaven, it appears both by many
express textes of the Scripture, as also by necessary consequences following
thereupon, so we presuppose and agree upon these three points. First that the
question be in this place of his body and not of his divinity in it self,
which has always been, is and shall be invisible: secondly that Jesus Christ
has taken unto himself from the beginning and for ever an humane body with all
his proprieties, without which no body can be a body: and thirdly that the
eyes have an action bounded and limited by which they cannot see (except it be
by way of miracle) that which is not present, or which is over far removed
from them. Behold therefore Jesus Christ who says expreslie, reprehending and
blaming the incredulity of Thomas, Happy are they which have not seen and
have believed, Ioh. 20.29. And in another place, ye shall not always have me,
Mat. 26.11. Ioh. 12.8. And Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 5.6. While we are strangers
says he in this body, we are absent from the lord. And Phil. 1.2. I desire to
be dislodged and to be with Christ. And Coloss. 3.1. Seek ye the things which
are above where christ sits at the right hand of God. And Saint Peter, Act.
3.21. the heavens must contain him until all things be restored. In a word,
as often as it is said that he goes unto the father (this being understood of
the departure of his humanity) so often does he witness his absence, as also so
often as he says that he wilcome. For no man is said to come unto a place
where he is already. And to think that the true body of this king is in his
essence in any part without possessing a place and being visible in himself,
can be no more done without transforming the body of Jesus Christ into a
spiritual essence, then it may be said that his divinity is circumscribed
within space of place without transforming it into a corporal essence and being.

10 Let us conclude therefore that this true Solomon in respect of his
divinity cannot be seen with the eyes, though he be every where essentially,
and especially in this humanity which he has united personally, unto
himself. And as touching his humanity, it can at this day be no more seen
of us by our eyes then his divinity, not that it is in it self invisible
(seeing that the celestial glory has not abolished his corporal nature,
corporal and therefore material, visible, and measured according unto his
dimensions) but because he has withdrawn it from us above the heavens truly
and properly until his return in the later day. And therefore it is unto the
contemplation of the understanding enlightened by the holy spirit, and unto
faith (by which Saint Paul says, he dwells in our hearts) and unto the
inward eyes, before which it is said that this king is painted forth unto us,
Galat. 3.1. that we must refer this advertisement and warning of the spouse,
Come forth and behold this King, to wit, in his word purely preached, of which
the Apostle speaking said unto the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.15. I have begotten
you in the Lord; and to the Galathians 4.19. I travel again to bring you forth,
until Christ be formed in you. And according unto this sense also is it that it
is said of the sacraments, that is to say, of the visible signs adioined unto
the word, touching Baptism that we put off the old man to put on Jesus Christ
in whom we are made new men, Galat. 3.17. and Coloss 3.9.10. and as touching
his holy supper, that we eat his flesh, and drink his blood.

11 Now this truth cannot be better understood and known then by comparing it
unto the language of the Church of Rome at this day, which usurps the name
of this spouse, and inuiteth also her companions to contemplate Jesus, but God
knows what Jesus Christ, whereof we will speak anon. But where to contemplate
him? In a painted and material Image of wood or of stone. And what shall I
there see? His remembrance say these deep contemplators. For that Image will
tell you that he was crucified for sinners. Just. But first this manner of
teaching is forbidden expressly by God in the second commandment, and elsewhere
in infinite many places, and is such as in the time of saint Jerome himself
was accounted execrable, as the Epistle of Epiphanius Bishop of Cipers which
he took pains to translate out of greek into latin, to this effect,
declares. Farther, what shall it prevail me to know and remember that Jesus
Christ was crucified, if I know not what was the true cause of his death, the
good that returns to me thereby, and the mean to attain unto it? Now what
can this crucifixe teach me of all this? For besides the form which is but a
vain appearance, this crucifixe is nothing else but a dead and corruptible
matter. But say they this is taught by word of mouth. Nothing less. For if we
consider but of their Curates, Vicars, Priors, or Abbots, Bishops, Archbishops,
Primates, Cardinals, and especially their chief head, every one knows that
not one among an hundred of them knows any more then does the crucifixe of
wood or stone. And they who know any thing what account make they of preaching?
On the other side if we consider of their service, as they call it, what is
the people taught by it, since it consists of nothing but of songs in an
unknown tongue, beside the Idolatries and mere mockeries of God therein
committed? For the rest, if happily some wa let-brother open his mouth
sometimes in Aduent or in Lent, what is their doctrine else as we have already
many times showed in the exposition of this same Canticle, but so many
blasphemies against all the parts of the office of Jesus Christ crucified? But
besides this, what thing is it else but to mock God and all Christendom, to
say that they teach these things as they ought, and yet do forbid the holy
Scripture to be interpreted or read in the vulgar tongue, and such as al
Christians understand? But there is yet more, for they teach that it is
sufficient unto salvation to know that which their Church believes, without
any farther enquiring or knowing what it is. And what meditation, I pray you,
or contemplation can a man have of that, of which he knows nothing, and of
which he is no whit bound to know any thing in special? But provided a man
have a good meaning and refer himself to the articles of their faith, be it
as be may, and kneel himself down before a Crucifixe, or sometimes seek a
great way for one when he has one hard by, or be as ready to say an Aue
Maria, as a Pater noster (for indeed the one in this case is as good as the
other, being as little understood of him that says it, as it is heard of the
Image before which he prays) behold a merit by and by achieved, behold the
wrath of God very well appeazed. And how so? Is this to pray unto God in
spirit and truth, Ioh. 4.24. to present our selves before him in faith,
without the which a man cannot please God, Heb. 11.6. To believe and to be
ignorant of a thing is this al one? Is this this faith by which we stand? 1.
Cor. 16.13. by which we beat back the fiery darts of our enemy? Ephesians. 6.16.
1. Pet. 3.9. in which we ought to continue grounded and stablished? Coloss.
1.23. Is this that doctrine which we must meditate day and night, without
inquiring after it or knowing it? Psalm. 1.2. And if this be it, how shall we be
ready to yield a reason thereof, according unto the ordinance of the Apostle,
when we never knew what it meant? That is to say, how can we give an account
of that, for which we never made either spent or received? And who teaches
this lesson? That does saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3.15. And how is he the true
successor of saint Peter who not only knows ought himself, but forbids
also and takes from others the only mean of executing that which S. Peter
requires? Are not these sort of men rather those of who^ Jesus Christ said,
that they neither enter into the kingdom of heaven themselves, nor suffer
others to enter thereinto, Math. 23.13. in such sort that truly it may truly
be said, that their graund Porter carries not without cause two keys, the
one to shut up Paradise as much as lies in him, and the other to open hell
unto every one that will go thither? But let us leave these preachers of wood
and of stone, dead and dumb as they be, which themselves will have called the
preachers of Idiots: and let us come unto him whom they pretend to be
personally and really this very king, as big and as great as he was hanging
on the Cross. And what does he say? Does he teach? Does he exhort? Does he
reprove? Less a great deal then the other, which seems to be that which he
is not, where as this nether is, nor seems to be he, and in deed if we
believe them themselves who make him, and who are so shameless in their
writings as to call themselves the creators of their Creator, he is not there
to preach but to be sacrificed and offered, not without exceeding mockery,
because that he which offers him does eat him, and drink him, leaving
nothing at al unto him, unto whom he says that he does indeed and really
offer him. And yet this is the maine ground, chief point and sum of their
divine service, and this is their own language to lift up God in respect of
the actor, the priest: and to see God in respect of the looker on the people,
or at least to speak more pertinently which they say, to lift up Jesus Christ
and to see Jesus Christ. But they must show that which they do both in words
and in deed

12 But let us get us out of this mire, and praise God that he has pulled us
out of it. And on the otherside let us employ diligently all our mind
thoroughly to know, and as thoroughly to serve him who has opened the eyes of
our mind and our heart unto this effect, that we fall not into greater
reproof then they who fail in this point either of ignorance or of
superstition; whereas the covetous conte^plate nothing else with their mind
and eyes but their riches, the fornicators are given utterly over unto their
uncleanness and wantonness, having their eyes full of adulteries and other
infamous villainies, the gluttons think on nothing else but their good-cheare,
the ambitious nothing but on their pomp and vanities: and so on in the rest:
whereas al things which presents it self before our eyes, ought to draw us
rather unto that which all the world preaches unto us, namely to consider the
wisdom, power, and infinite bounty of such a worke-man, and to dedicate and
consecrate unto him both our soul and body in an acceptable sacrifice, Romans
12.1. It is not enough therefore to contemplate him, but we must acknowledge
him for such a one as he is, which is the end and scope whereunto all this
contemplation ought to be referred. In a word we ought to confess and adore
this King Solomon and that crowned. And with what crown? With that which his
mother crowned him withal. And when? In the day of his fiansailes and mirth.
Let us therefore consider again al these points directly.

13 We know well enough what this word of king imports, namely a
sovereign power over his subjects ordered with reason. And thus it is, that it
is taken in this place, but yet with the differences which are between this
king and al others which have bin, are, or shall be ever in the world. All the
other kings therefore except this, are in such sort sovereign over their
subjects, that their countries are limited, the time of their dominion bounded,
their power reaches no farther then the body and goods, and all this with a
charge and condition to yeald an account one day to him on high, who has
established them in their thrones here below. But this king, to the knowing
and contemplating of whom we are in this place invited, has all power in
heaven and in earth, not only because he is god coeternal and coessential
with his father, but also in as much as he is man, unto whom all government is
given over al creatures be they high, middle, or low, Math. 20.18. Ioh.
5.27.1. Cor. 15.27. Philip. 2.9. and that for all eternity Luke 1.33. Esaias.
9.6. And not only over the bodies, but over the souls also of his friends and
true subjects to defend them unto the end of the world, Math. 28.20. And
finally to make them really his coheires in the everlasting kingdom, Romans
8.17. Heb. 2.10. And likewise over his enemies in the midst of whom he
reigns, Psalm. 110. Repressing them, chastising, destroying, according as he
knows to be expedient for his glory and for the salvation of his, as the
whole sacred history does witness, waiting for his full victory and dominion
which is promised him of the father, 1. Cor. 15.28. It is therefore very true
that this king in as much as he is God with his father, has altogether with him
all power and all empire, yea over every temporal estate of this world,
sitting in the midst of Magistrates Psalm. 182. losing and girding the collar
and girdle of Princes, Job. 12.18. As he also demands them an account of
their government, Psalm. 58.1. But here is mention made of a kingdom which is
not like unto them of this world, as the king has himself declared it, Ioh.
18.36. the one concerns all men, the greatest part whereof shall perish by
their own fault, Math. 7.13. the other concerns them who are especially
called the house of God, although there be more which are called then chosen,
Math. 20.16. In the one the question is of the government here below which
passes no farther, in the other the case is of the government of the
conscience, reaching farther the^ this life. The one is temporal, the other is
eternal: the one is sensual, the other is spiritual: and if there be any
thing visiblie and corporally administered, it is to lead us farther and beyond
this world: the one is administered of God by the Magistrates whom he
appoints with power and authority to make laws and politic statutes
according unto that natural equity which he gives them: in the other which
concerns the dominion over souls, this authority is more high then that it
may be communicated unto Angels themselves. This King therefore has always
been, is, and shall be he, who binds the souls and consciences, having
reserved this only right unto himself: in so much that if an Angel from
heaven should say, I will have this to be law to bind the conscience, we ought
to have him in execration, as attributing unto himself the power of God alone,
seeking to reign over his son our mediator, Gal. 1.8.

14 And in this point is it also that the difference of these two kingdoms
consists. For as for the affairs of this world, whereas al may be understood
and governed by this light of natural understanding and wisdom it has
pleased God to leave unto me^, according as it pleases him of his bounty to
dispe^se it, they may ordain laws and statutes either to command or to
forbid, and impose temporal pains on the transgressors of the^: but so, that
they must one day yield an account unto the king of kings. But as touching this
spiritual regiment, the officers of this king have no other power nor authority,
but to declare and publish the ordinances which he has made, adjoining unto
them the promises and threats such as he has delivered unto them and left in
writing, with the execution, either of absolution toward the repentaunt, or
of condemnation toward the incorrigible rebels: but, in the name of this king
according unto the tenor of the commission he delivered them, under pain of
Nullity, Mat. 28.18. and all after a spiritual kind of proceeding, exhorting
and reproving by the word, and binding and loosing by the same and no
otherwise. And as touching christian magistrates they being also commanded to
do homage unto this king, Psa. 2.12. they are also officers truly of this
spiritual kingdom, yea principal ones, but not to approach unto the altar,
as that proves which happened to Vzziah otherwise a good king and zealous, 2.
Chron. 26.16. but to arm with their authority the spiritual ordinances of this
king, as did David, Solomon, and their good successors, and to repress in due
sort such as not willing to order themselves unto this king, and despising his
spiritual officers, seek to overthrow the true service of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13.
As we shall find that neither any true Prophet usurped this authority, but
always used this true preface, So has the Lord said. And when some would
have lifted up John Baptist unto this degree, he answered contrariwise and
said, I am not worthy to unloose the shoes of his feet, Ioh. 1.27. and Moses
contented himself to be a faithful servant in Gods house, Hebre. 3.6. having
made all things according unto the model which was shown him in the mount,
Heb. 8.3. and having expressly forbidden to ad or to diminish ought from that
which God had ordained by him, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. In a word this is a thing
never yet heard that the Prophets added any thing unto the commandments of
God, or made any law to bind the conscience. Contrariwise the lord speaking
by the mouth of Esaias expressly condemns every Doctrine invented by men,
Esaias. 1.12. and 29.13. which Jesus christ calls Pharisaical leaven, of which
he wills us to take heed, Mat. 16.11. And if this have place in that which
concerns the will of this King touching that which he will have us do in this
life to conform our selves unto his will, as well toward him, as toward our
neighbors, what shall we say touching the doctrine of the Gospel, that is to
say, touching that which we ought to believe of God unto salvation, as it is
spoken, Luke 1.77. Act. 20.17. What blasphemy is this then to belie the son
of God, witnessing that he has declared unto his Apostles as unto his friends
whatsoever he received from God his father? And what shall we say of the
Apostles? That they added, changed, or clipped anything from the tenor of their
commission, bearing these words, go, teach the^ to keep all those things
which I have commanded you? Shall we say also that touching the substance of
the ecclesiastical discipline and substantial exercise of the holy ministry,
by the which the son of God will have his house to be governed until his
latter coming, that the holy Ghost taught not the Apostles al, or that they
did not acquit themselves faithfully of al, without omitting of any thing? At
the least let us believe S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11.23. though it be there especially
spoken of the administration of the holy Supper, and Coloss. 2.16. and the
verses following in which is contained whatsoever may be said of this matter.
Let us believe Saint Peter also aduertising the pastors expressly (unto the
company of whom he joins himself not as a prelate, but as a companion, in
the same ministry) to feed every one his flock, not as having a lordship
over the Lords heritage, but that they be ensamples to the flock, 1. Pet.
5.1. Whereunto S. Paul agreeing, 1. Cor. 7.35. protests that he will not ty
and entangle any man. And thus you see what this name of king imports in this
place, joined also with the name of Solomon, which signifies as much as
peaceable, and is meant of the exercise of this kingdom in regard of this
spouse which is his Church, over which himself alone has power, quickening,
justifying and saving it, as it is he also alone unto whom she yields al
obedience in that which concerns this spiritual kingdom. It remains we
consider whether this king be taken for such a one as he is among the^, from
whom we have separated our selves. Alas nothing less. For he is no otherwise
called King among them, then he was of those who whipped him in Pilates
iudgement-hal: not that I will say that an infinite number of poor people who
wander without a shepherd have the same meaning which they had, but because
that in effect it comes al to one end. And to prove that this is so, let us
see whether they leave unto this king one sole point of his roialty and
regality, which is not violated by their doctrine. First they say they have a
King Lieutenaunt Catholic and universal. Ask the^ who this is, and they will
answer you, he which sits in the Sea of Rome. If you ask on what right:
they aleage that for his right possessorie, there are so and so many ages that
they have been in this possession: as for their right petitorie, it is that
same which was granted by the Lord unto S. Peter. Now if we would but debate
these allegations, it were an easy matter to show that there was never such
impude^cie either seen or heard to propose such things. But though we
presupposed all this, that is to say, that darkness were light, I demand of
the^ whether a lieuetenant of a king has more authority then he who sent him
to keep his place: and if he have not or cannot have, I demand, whether
shrowding himself in this lieutenauntship with all manner violence and
unlawful practice, and being so desperate and presumptuous that there is no
manner falsifiyng of the will of his king which he commits not openly, he
may be tolerated as lieutenaunt of the king, or whether he ought not to be
charged of high treason against his head. Now, that he of who^ we speak is
such a one, it appears first by this that it shall never be found that the
degree Episcopal is of the law divine, but of the law positive, as we term
it, besides that a man may point out the beginning of it, so far is it that
Jesus Christ or his Apostles set up an Episcopalitie universal. And hereof I
call him whom they call the chief of the four Doctors, for a formal witness
after the holy scripture. Secondly if we will decide this matter by the
ancient Canons which meant to bridle this degree Episcopal, we shall find
(I speak it before God and men) that there is neither Pope, nor any
conuenticle or degree of that hieraticall clergy, which is not excommunicated
and degraded by their own Canons. But let us come unto that which is done. Can
any one deny me this, that this lieutenant attributes unto himself this
authority to be judged of no man, though he should carry whole cart-loades
of souls unto hell? If this be denied, shall not a man find it in the very
words of their decrees? But you who say you have succeeded Saint Peter in his
Lieuetenauntship, ought you to be ignorant that he was reprehended and
reproved by Saint Paul in Antioch, and that publicly in a matter concerning
his Apostolic charge? Yea says S. Paul, Gal. 2.11. Because he was to be
reprehended, and that he walked not with an upright foot? Have you also
forgotten, or do you dissemble that which the same S. Peter warns the
Pastors not to bear rule over their flocks, because they appertain unto the
master and not unto the servants whose charge is limited? Pass we farther.
Truly he whose lieutenant this man says he is, has without reply to the
contrary all power both in heaven and in earth and that by good right. For he
cannot err, neither in as much as he is God, nor in as much as he is man
altogether perfect. And who can challenge unto himself this perfect knowledge
and vprightnes, but he must make himself equal with God? But pass we yet
farther. These two points are most notable and clear and certain, namely, that
the law moral, which is nothing but a refreshing and renewing of the law
natural, which sin could not utterly destroy out of the heart of man, Romans
2.14. and likewise the new covenant ratified in and by our Lord Jesus Christ,
ought to be kept inviolable unto the end and consummation of the world. How
then would this king establish a lieuetenant in the world utterly to abolish
both the one and the other? But because this matter requires a more ample
discourse, we will refer the surplussage until the next week.

16 Be we therefore heedefull, my brethren, to have always this voice of the
true Church in our ears, Come forth ye daughters of Syon, and contemplate this
king Solomon, and let us consider that we are not here to rest our selves upon
these base and corruptible things, but to this end, that acknowledging this
King, we consecrate both soul and body unto his service, and tend wholly unto
this end, praising him for that great grace he has vouchsafed us to drive us
out of this thick and palpable darkness to behold him in his holy word: and
let us make this grace of his available unto us to his honor and glory,
waiting for the nearer and clearer sight of him in that heavenly kingdom,
which he has prepared for us before the foundation of the world. So be it.

THE XXX SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as follows
in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 11. verse.
11 Daughters of Syon come forth and contemplate this King Solomon with the
Crown with which his mother crowned him in the day of the fiansailes, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart.


1 He who falsely says he is Liuetenant general of this King on earth,
falsifieth herein his ordinances by all kind of falsehood: and first of that
which is in the law moral touching the first commandment.

2 Touching the second.

3 The third.

4 The fourth.

5 The fifth.

6 The sixth.

7 The seventh.

8 The eighth.

9 The ninth.

10 The tenth.

11 Another sort of abominable falsification in the Law ceremonial.

12 A strange abuse by which the Law is confounded with the gospel, and men
sent to seek after their salvation in that which serves for an enditement
against them.

13 A exhortation to condemn this so false a doctrine.

WE stood the last thursday upon this point, namely whether he, who some
ages since, calls himself supreme head of the universal Church, as
Lieutenant of that king of whom mention is here made, be not rather guilty of
high treason against his divine majesty, though we should grant him his
Liuetenant-ship he pretends to have, and that because he has deserved to
be utterly degraded, seeing it cannot be that this souerain king ever gave any
man authority to falsify in any sort that which he ordained to be stable and
perpetual unto the end and consummation of the world: and this is it which we
are now again to prove and handle. I say therefore that there are three ways
of falsifying an instrument, namely by adding, by clipping away, or by
changing, in such sort that the instrument of the truth, whereof the question
is, receives thereby an alteration. Let us then see now whether al these sorts
of falsification have not been and yet are committed by him of whom we spoke,
and let us begin with the Law moral. The first commandment forbids us to
have any other God then the only sovereign father, son, and holy Ghost. Now
what is it to have any other thing for a man's God, but to attribute unto it
that which is properly belonging unto this only God, whether a man conceive
this opinion within himself, which is inward Idolatry, or whether a man yield
it any outward service appertaining unto God alone, which is outward Idolatry,
both these two being abominable before God? Now then is not this to make of a
creature, naie of a demi-creature a God, to persuade a man's self that it
hears and understands the words and thoughts of men, absent, from as far
as that which is above the highest heavens is removed from the earth, and which
is more, speaking and thinking in one instant in an hundred thousand diverse
places? This property I say, of being every where, and of knowing the thoughts,
is it not properly belonging unto the divine essence alone? Their reply is that
this were indeed to make gods of creatures, if they said that these creatures
did hear and understand of themselves that which is said and done in an
instant in their absence, in so many diverse places, and by so many diverse
persons: but that this is given by Revelation unto the Saints which are dead:
as we see how Elizeus by Revelation of Prophetical spirit, knew and saw
and heard in his absence, what his servant Gehezi said and did with Naaman the
Syrian, 2. King. 5.26. And it seems that the like may be said of Saint Peter
in that which he discovered of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.4. And thereupon
they say, that if God vouchsafed his servants this grace, remaining yet here
below in the infirmity of their flesh, how should he not bestow much greater
upon them now when they are with him in glory? And thus you see how the
peoples eyes be at this day bleared, being not able to consider that this
whole reply is grounded upon an imaginary and fantastical presupposal. For as
touching the means it pleases God to use here below for the edification and
preservation of his Church, his word assures it us not only in general but
also in special by the whole course of the sacred history: namely that it
pleases him to use the ministry of men as an ordinary means and of Angels
themselves by visions and commissions extraordinary. And therefore it pleased
him during the ABC of the law, as the Apostle speaks unto the Galathians,
Gal. 4. to reveal unto his servants not only that which was said and done
here and there, but also things to come so far as he would use them in their
charge and vocation: but not that he ever gave the^ simply to know or
understand either thoughts or al things present done and said in their absence,
but only the^ and so far as he would employ the^. And so it is that that
excellent prophet Elizeus speaks, 2. Ki. 4.29. which thing we see to have
happened unto Nathan who was constrained, for going too far, to unsay that which
he had said, 2. Sam. 7.3.5. And when Elias thought that al was lost in Israel,
did he not show that God revealed him not al things? 1. King. 19.10.18. But
if we speak of the heavenly government, in what place of Scripture, by what
example of sacred history, shall we find this imaginary commerce and dealing
of the living, with the spirits of the saints departed this world, having
finished their course? For as touching the blessed Angels, we are taught that
their charge has bin and so continues still, to be sent and employed for
those effects and purposes it pleases God: but it follows not therefore
that they hear or know al things, neither shall we ever find either
commandment to call upon them, or any example in the Scripture that ever they
were called upon by any servant of God, no not when they appeared unto him. But
we shall well find that it is not so lately that the Invocation of angels was
reprehended by the Apostle expressly, Col. 2.18. Moreover let us see what is the
original of this Invocation of the Saints departed, so il grounded. The
ground therefore of it in a word is double, to wit, their Merits, and their
Intercession. Of their Intercession we will afterward speak by it self. As
for their Merits, whence are they drawn? Not from the holy scriptures which
oppose them directly unto Grace, Romans 4.1. But though a man should grant them
this, and that there had bin in those personages a perfect observation of the
Law without any defect, those who merit are they not sufficiently satisfied
and contented with the payment they have received, to wit, with eternal life,
according unto the tenor of the legal covenant, do all these things and
thou shall live? Whence comes the^ the rest of the merits which they call the
treasure of the Church, and of which they make every day so great a
merchandise and yet it is not exhausted and spent? And if the Saints, as they
call them, have had so many and such plenty of merits that there is an
infinite surplussage of them, what need had they of those of Jesus Christ?
Besides this unto whom have they given that charge of distributing of them?
Where and when and who passed the covenants of this bargains? Besides all this
if it be true which is taught in the schools, as it is most true that the
merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, which we only approve, draws his infinite
virtue from the divinity in which his humanity is personally subsisting, how
can this same virtue be attributed to those merits of Saints, though they
rebate never so much from them, without attributing unto them also some divine
nature? And what is it else but to adore the creatures to attribute unto them
an heavenly and divine virtue and power? As the power to preserve the soul or
the body, to sanctify the spirit, nay to do forth sins which the Jews
being more blind a great deal, knew to say that it appertained unto God
alone, Luke 5.21. What shall we then say of their holy water, spetle, holy
wax, holy bread, and of their Agnus Dei, and other their trashe? Finally who
will excuse the adoration of the Chrisme or holy oil so many times and so
expressly reiterated in their Ceremonies? Who will not marvel at their
blasphemy, that kneeling down on their knees before a cross of woodde or other
such matter, they salute it and call it their only hope? Neither will any
gloss serve here, that this is not said unto the cross, but unto Jesus Christ
who is represented crucified there. For the clean contrary appears by their
own words, which are these, O Cross all hail, our only hope in this time of
the passion, the gibbet on which was hanged in flesh the Creator of flesh. And
what more? Can the blessed virgin Mary be called Queen of heaven, without
parting this kingdom? Our Lady, without matching a companion with the only
Lord? Our life, our hope, our sweetenes, without placing her manifestly in the
throne of the godhead? But (o most horrible blasphemy that ever was spewed
forth!) can a man request her, without degrading of Jesus Christ, that in
respect of the person of the father, she pray: but in respect of Jesus Christ
his son, that she command him of her motherly power and authority? And yet
notwithstanding this is not only said, but song and howled forth in their
temples: and who so finds fault with this, he is an heretic. I conclude
therefore, that there are in this church so many false gods as there be
creatures called upon and served with a religious adoration, that is to say
concerning directly the conscience, and the divine service dew to one only
God the father, son, and holy ghost: and as many as there be temples and
altars consecrated and dedicated unto creatures: and how then can that Church
be the true and only universal Church?

2 This first commandment which is the ground and foundation of all the rest
being overthrown, what may a man conclude of the rest? As for the second,
containing two principal points, namely an express forbidding to make any
likeness of any creature high, middle, or low in the cause of religion, or to do
any reverence to the^, I will not say of this commandment as of the other. For
they have gone a great deal farther in this then in the first, which albeit in
effect they have violated and broken, yet have they left him written as he was
by the hand of God. But as for this second, seeing that if he remained there,
painted Images and Statues must fall to ground, they have so entangled it with
the first, that they have finally eclipsed it altogether: a most intolerable
presumption, and inexcusably execrable, seeing that the Lord who engraued it as
it were with his own hand and without the ministry of man, declares that
not one sole little letter of the law may not be blotted out Math. 5.18. So
then already this fault, I mean this eclipsing of this commandment by those
of whom we speak is without all excuse. But how on the other side may the
transgression thereof be excused, when in their churches, chapels, streets,
great places, in cities and in fields there are found so many nests of statues
and all sorts of Images? We know well their goodly replies, which yet are such
as vanish away like smoke at the least word of this commandment. The true
sense thereof besides that it is most clear in it self, whence may it be
better gathered then by that which has been generally observed in the
christian Church for more then three hundred years together? Images, say they,
are the books of the common people. And what can such dumb doctors teach, set
up and established against the express commandment of God, who has not
only forbidden to adore and worship them, but to make them, I mean to have
them used in the matter of religion? And experience has finally showed why the
Lord distinguished this commandment into two principal heads, to wit, first
forbidding to make them, and after that to worship them. And indeed since
the first entering of Images into the Church, men have for a long time
confessed that there was no honor due unto them, but when Idolatry was once
entered, then they said that this honor was not done unto the statua or Image,
but unto him which was represented by the Image. A most false excuse. For if it
were so, why should a man use more devotion to one Image of the same saint,
then unto an other? And if this were the meaning of these worshippers of
Images, as they say it is, what other thing is this the^ to answer, that a man
plays not the Idolater with the Image, but with him whom the Image does
represent? I speak in respect of the Images of he and she saints as they call
the^. For who will dare to say (but he shall be convicted by the whole
scriptures) that if the virgin Mary, or the Apostles, and by consequent other
true Saints were alive at this day on earth, that they could suffer that me^
should kneel unto the^? That they should offer up candels unto the^, that they
should present incense before the^, that they should preach of their merits?
Their whole doctrine and their whole life being clear contrary unto it. I let
pass to speak of their setting out of these goodly statues and pictures of
their our Ladies as they call them, clad in their summer and winter garments,
of their virgins attired like shameless strompets, of horses, asses, dogs and
swine which charge their altars among their saints, of their tapers and lamps
burning before their blind statues, and other such mere and inexcuseable
Idolatries, all which notwithstanding is covered with the goodly name of
devotion. Alas o Lord how long?

3 As for the third commandment an oath being the true fealty and homage which
the conscience owes unto God his only Lord, not only as present, and
knowing the things which are most secret and hid, but also as judge and
revenger of al falsehood, the great and only living God being as it were set and
placed in his throne to be made judge of the truth unknown unto men: can it
be denied but there are so many felonies, so many idolatries, so many
degradations of the true and only divinity, as there be oaths made by the
creatures, high, middle, low, or by other fancies which men do forge and
devise? For to swear is not only to take unto us a witness in general, as a
man may do unto the very insensible creatures, Deuteronomy. 3.1. and Esaie. 1.2.
but it is to take him whom we swear by to be a witness of our conscience,
which thing appertains unto god alone.

4 As for the fourth commandment, every christian ought to know that so far
as it was ceremonial it has an end, not that in lieu of the seventh day
called the Sabbat, we should Iudaize the Sundaie (for this were not to impose
an end unto the figures, by the real coming of the truth Coloss. 2.16. but
only to change the day) but to the end that according unto the ordinance of
the Apostle which may be gathered evidently, 1. Cor. 16.2. and Apoc. 1. as the
memory of the creation of the world in six days was celebrated in the
sanctification of the seventh day (and that notwithstanding in the deliverance
of Egypt, the order of the months and the beginning of the year were
changed) so by the new creation of the second world, which the Prophets call a
new heaven and a new earth, Esai. 61.17. and 66.22. appearing by the
resurrection of the Lord, the true light of this new world ought to be renewed
and celebrated the day which we call the Sundaie, that is to say, the day
of the Lord, after a special fashion, and such a one as distinguishes this
day from other in respect of the principal use: as in the time of the
Apostles themselves this day was celebrated by a more special assembly of
the faithful. But that the Christians should otherwise abstain from their
work without it were for that time which was requisite for their assembly:
this was never commanded nor observed, until that Christian Emperors made an
ordinance for it: indeed most commendable, to the end we should not be
otherwise distracted: to give our selves over the more to all holy things. But
what? All this is now become with them a very Iudaisme, in such sort that to
open a shop window, or to give one blow with the hammer, is such a sin, as
should raise an whole city in a commotion: but not to game, to go to the
tavern, to play the whoremaster. For this is now grown into a custom. And
as if the exercise of a Christian were to do nothing, under a color of
devotion, they could not content themselves with two and fifty sundaies, but
they must have so many holidaies added, that almost the third part of the
year is passed away in such idle festiual days. And though we grant them
all this time, to sanctify the name of God, be it on the sundaie or on other
holydaies, or to celebrate the memory of great and holy personages (not to
speak any thing of a great part of them which are in their calenders) what is
it else with them but to blaspheme and to commit Idolatry, as all their divine
service is notably patched up and clouted therewith?

5 As for the commandment of honoring of father and mother, under the name of
whom is comprised al lawful superiority: dare they deny that the pharisaical
traditions, by which the Lord declares that this commandment was so
shamelesly broken, is not the fetch they have used to snare within their net
Duchies, Earledomes, and other Lordships? The foundation of their great towrs
and steeples, the pretense of the destruction of families by millio^s? If a man
will not seek far after Antiquity, at least let the Gratis of these last
comers, who attribute unto themselves the name of Jesus, common unto al true
Christians, open the eyes of such as are blindest, who have gotten by their
serviceable gratuities more goods and revenues, then a good part of all the
hospitals in France have. And what shall we say of their exemptions from
ordinary justice, of the superiority usurped by Bishops, Abbottes, Priors,
Curates over the Justice of kings, and especially by that goodly universal
Bishop over Emperors, Kings, and Princes, so far is it that he paieth tribute
unto who^ tribute is due, according unto the example of Jesus Christ himself,
and of him, whose successor notwithstanding he says he is, not shaming to call
a good part of Italy and the Capital City of the Roman Empire the patrimony
of him who testifies of himself that he had neither gold nor silver, Act. 3.6.

6 Now if we speak of the sixth commandment touching murders, how can it be
more evidently transgressed the^ by their liberties and privileges of granting
mercy to the greatest Criminals, and that horrible abuse of Clergy? Moreover
let a man but consider the taxes of the Chancery of Rome, he shall find at how
many thousand ducats the murder of father and mother is taxed. Demand the
reason of all this: and it is that, which they taught the^ who constrained
Pilat to crucify this King of who^ we speak (as they yet at this day
persuade Kings and Potentates to crucify him in his poor members) namely
this, Nobis non licet interficere quenquam, that is to say, It is not lawful
for us to put any man to death. And indeed I confess that neither civil nor
criminal justice pertains unto them, being as it is distinguished from the
ministry of the word, Lu. 12.14. and 22.25. and John. 8.10. and 2. Timot. 2.4.

7 As for the seventh commandment concerning the observation of holy marriage I
will not stay in this horrible filthy ste^ch which neither the sun can abide
to see, nor the darkness of the night cover, nor the earth bear and endure, al
of these demanding vengeance at Gods hands who shall hear them in his time.
But they will reply against me that their doctrine does not approve this.
But who knows not, who sees not, who acknowledges not, who feels not all
that stinking filthiness, the like whereof neither was, nor ever could be in
the world, which entered in floodwise into the Church by the gate of that
goodly vow of single life, called not without cause by the Apostle a doctrine
of devils, 1. Tim. 4.2. I know well their replies. But o heaven, o earth, o
hundred thousand millions of rapes, fornications, adulteries, incests,
ouerthrowinges of Gods and man's law, testified before God and men, and
demanding vengeance of such desperate and so long a time continued enormities.
But farther though all this were nothing, what is this abomination so
shamelesly practiced in our time of dispensing with the marriage of Uncles and
Nieces in degree of consanguinitie? A thing not only condemned by Gods law in
the case it self of affinity only, Leuit. 18.14. but detested so expressly by
the poor Paynims themselves, who have blushed at such a case as the Roman
histories ca^ witness. And yet for all this, when it so pleases them, marriage is
forbidden unto the seventh degree of such as be collateral. Alas o Lord how
long?

8 As for the commandment which concerns theftes, it were wonder a man
would say it might be maintained by them, who live not but by sacrilege, to
wit, with the goods belonging unto the poor, of which they make themselves the
receivers without yielding any account.

9 I say the like of the last commandment save one, speaking of false witness,
being in no point more damnably violated then in the overthrowing of the
witnessings and testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles irreproueable
witnesses. Finally the last commandment passing even unto the root of the
evil which is in us, and without the which the Apostle witnesses that he had
never known in deed what sin meant, Romans 7.7. is it not as much or more openly
violated then any of the rest by their doctrine, when they teach that neither
the understanding nor the will of man are wholly and entierly subjected unto sin
and death by original sin: but that there still remains a certain disposition
and inclination unto that which is true and good: whence they draw their
merits of congruity and preparation? Afterward when they teach that by the
very action of baptism, yea by the virtue of the water, original sin is (if
not altogether) yet in part so done away, that the child of a Turk or Jew
being baptized and dying before the age of discretion goes into paradise, and
as for those who come unto age, that that corruption which rests in them is
not sin, but only a little spark of fire under the hot ashes to exercise us.

10 As for the other kind of the law concerning the outward divine service,
the spirit of error has done the clean contrary, tending notwithstanding
unto the same end. For having abolished the Law moral which should
notwithstanding be perpetual, he has clean contrary found the means to
establish the Law ceremonial, knowing that Jesus Christ had imposed an end
unto it: and this dessein of his has he executed by a marvelous slight,
which has deceived those of the better sort. For if he would have persuaded
them that he would set Iudaisme up again, or retained Paganism, men would
have openly withstood him. And therefore he objected that the great simplicity
of the outward service of God both in the ministry of the word and in the
administration of the sacraments would breed a contempt, and therefore it
would be good to have some petite matters beside, not that this should be of
the substance of the doctrine or of the sacraments, but to make the things more
commendable, and men more attentive and devout. This being once thought to be
good by an efficacy of error, he added, that using withal some ceremonies of
the Law not to Iudaize but to turn them unto a a good use, and doing the same
soberly in certain points like others without superstition or Idolatry, would
be a mean to win the Jews and the Idolaters the easier unto the true
religion. Thence came Holy Water, square-Caps, Surplisses, hoodes, bald
crowns, chaunting of prick-song, altars, distinction of days and of meats,
with the rest of the furniture of all that goodly ceremonial service, as if God
had imposed an end unto the legal ceremonies, of which himself was the
author, to give authority, not unto the Apostles (who never ordained, nor
practiced such things, naie contrariwise established and recommended the true
and pure simplicity as well of doctrine as of ecclesiastical government) but
unto them who should come after them, to cut and clip off al at their
pleasure. If any man will deny this, the sight thereof discovers the fact,
if we confer their inventions with Moses and with profane histories. True it
is that touching this point they want no allegations of certain books forged
at pleasure, but so doltishlie written, that a man need go no farther for
proof of such forgeries. And thus you see how the spirit of error by a just
judgment of God has served his turn with the holy Law of God, for the
destruction of men, and al under the shadow of establishing of it and teaching
the right use thereof: a thing most miraculous and wonderful, how men could
become so brutish as not to suffer a man to touch their sore, so far are they
from seeking after or desiring to find or receive a remedy.

12 But touching the law moral the abuse there of appears most strange in
this, that there is no one special commandment, which has not been more
openly ouerturned in Christendom then ever it happened in the synagogue of the
Jews, as the reprehension which the lawe-giuer himself makes, does witness of
them from point to point in saint Matthew chap. 5.6.7. But the fault is yet more
dangerous in that, that the use and scope there of is turned vpside down.
Which thing has been so much handled by saint Paul, especially in the epistle
to the Romans and to the Galathians, that it cannot be but an inexcusable
reproach unto them who call themselves Christians to dispute of this point any
more. In sum, the law shows us, will we or nil we, what we owe unto God and
neighbor, and that no man neither discharges, nor is able to discharge his
debt in this behalf, being utterly undone and made vnpayable by the natural
corruption of mankind, which thing notwithstanding neither exempteth him out
of debt, nor from the penalty adjoined unto the contract, which is everlasting
death. For to think that God renounceth his debt without entire payment made,
is to transform God into man. This is then an inexcusable folly to seek
after the salvation of the soul by the obligation of death, that is to say in
the law moral, which argues our condemnation, and which can use no other
language unto us then his tenor imports. And yet notwithstanding this is the
foundation of the hope given of finding in a man's own merits, or those of an
other, (whereof a man may furnishe himself for ready money unto the
distributer) that which is found, as we will anon declare, in Jesus Christ
alone, having satisfied for us, in carrying our sins upon the tree, 1. Pet.
2.24. and accomplished al righteousness for us, Mat. 3.15. Gal. 3.13. and 4.4.
and yet notwithstanding behold the matter, behold the end and whole substance
of the Church of Romes divinity at this day touching our salvation.

13 It remains to declare the falsification committed in the other part of
the word of God, which is our soueraign happiness, I mean the covenant of
salvation in Jesus Christ alone, promised unto the Fathers, and finally sent
into the world, namely into Judea in proper person, and after unto all nations
by the ministry of the Apostles and others sent hither and thither by them,
which is that which we call the Gospel, Tit. 1.2.3. that is to say, the good
and true healthful news. But we will differ this point unto an other time,
tha^king in the mean time our good God and Father, that it has pleased him of
his singular mercy and grace, to have opened our eyes to know and detest such
abuses, desiring him to give us farther grace so to use his truth, that we
witness by our good life and conversation, that his spirit has not only
wrought in our understanding, but also formed our affections unto his
obedience, that we be not the more inexcusable before him, the more graces
and blessings we have received. Amen. And because we have been hitherunto so
unthankful for so great a benefit, let us demand of him favor and mercy
with heart and with mouth as follows.

Almighty God, etc.
THE XXXI. SERMON. Our help be in the name of God etc. It is written as
follows in the third Chapter of the Canticle of Canticles, the 11. verse.
11 Daughters of Syon come forth and contemplate the King Solomon with the
Crown with which his mother crowned him in the day of his espousailes and the
gladness of his heart.


1 How this King is degraded of all his degrees in the Apostaticall Church of
Rome at this day.

2 First of his dignity Royal.

3 Secondly of his state Prophetical.

4 Thirdly of his Priesthood.

5 A false distinction between venial and mortal sins.

6 An other false Doctrine touching the guilt of sin, and the punishment, and
of the sins committed before and after Baptism.

7 How our sanctification is by their Doctrine falsified.

8 How the Intercession of one mediator alone is taken-awaie and abolished.

9 A conclusion of all this matter.

10 Who the mother is who has crowned this King.

11 What the time of his fiansailes is.

12 Wherefore this day is called the day of the gladness of this King.

13 An exhortation to embrace the grace of this king, and to make it available
unto us.

WE have yet one point more to handle upon that which I began to show on
Thursdaie last, to wit, how this king is spoiled at this day of his glory in
that which is the principal part of his diadem royal, I mean touching that
which concerns the office of his mediatorshippe, witnessed by the Gospel
called the power of God unto salvation unto every one that believes, Romans
1.16. and by Esaie the Arm of the Lord, Esai. 53.1. A matter of so great
consequence, that there cannot fall out any different or controversy among
men, which is more nearer to be looked unto. I say then that this dignity or
rather majesty of this king, mediator between God and his Church, consists
in three points, namely in his royal dominion, spiritual, and sovereign in his
kingdom, yea over sin it self and over death: afterward in the office and
charge which he received, to be the true, and to speak properly, the only
Prophet and declarer of the counsel of God touching the salvation of mankind:
and thirdly in his eternal priesthood. Now not any one of these three points
remains in his entire in the Church of Rome at this day, which by consequent
is nothing less then the true and only spouse of this king. Which thing we will
endeavor to open and make plain unto you, howbeit summarily, because the same
has bin already handled at large by us upon the first chapter of this Canticle.

2 But these words of the king crowned, leading us again unto it, and for that
this point can never be too often declared and handled, we will enter again most
willingly into it. In sum therefore I say that a man could not more openly
have encroched upon this royalty and prerogative of his, then by ordering the
estate of the house of this king besides and contrary unto his express will,
in eclipsing of some of his laws, and establishing of others altogether anew:
and as for such as were ordinary, retained for the ordering of the government
established by the soueraign prince (to wit by the son Heb. 1.2. and 3.6. and
Apocal. 13.17.) in cutting and clipping them at his pleasure, not suffering
himself to be reprehended of any man, to dispense, to bind, to lose against
all law of God and man. As for his prophetical sovereign authority, by the
spirit of whom all the ancient prophets spoke, 1. Pet. 1.11. and who
afterward himself in person declared all the will of God his father, without
keeping back any thing thereof, Ioh. 15.15. and has since his ascending up
into heaven until he return not to teach, but to judge, continued to declare
the same unto the world by his faithful Apostles enlightened with a particular
virtue and power of the holy ghost, Ioh. 16.3. Act. 20.27. Gal. 1.8. Ephesians. 4.11.
1. Pet. 1.12. How could a man degrade Jesus Christ of this dignity more openly
then by falsifiyng of all that which he preached both by adding to and
clipping from, and by turning white into black, and light into darkness, as is
in Esai. 5.20. Yea so far, as notoriously to forbid this declaration of his to
be read thorough al nations and peoples in a known and intelligible language,
fearing, say they, least men should become heretics, that is to say, fearing
least the light should engender darkness, and the truth lying. And what is this
else, then neither to enter into the kingdom of heaven, nor to suffer others to
enter in, Math. 23.13. then to hide the light under a bushel, Math. 5.11. There
remains the third point of his office of Mediator, namely his eternal
priesthood, which consists in two chief points: in our redemption, and in
his intercession: the which redemption has two parts, the expiation of our
sins, and our sanctification, which we will handle from point to point
distinctly. First therefore there is that which we call original sin, which
ought to be considered of in two diverse respects, namely touching the
corruption of the whole man, which is as it were the essence of this sin,
(whereof we shall afterward speak in handling the point of sanctification)
and touching that which follows it, namely that which makes us guilty, and
children of wrath worthy of the curse of God from our conception, Psalm. 51.7.
Romans 5.14.18. Ephesians. 2.3. There are afterward the fruits proceeding from this
cursed root, which bind us specially unto eternal death: which root of sin,
albeit it be so deaded by the holy spirit in those who are regenerate, whereof
we will afterward speak, notwithstanding it leaves not to bud forth,
though it be not with such a final effect as before, being a perpetual war
between this flesh, that is to say the remnant of original sin, and the spirit,
that is to say the power of god, and his effect in us. Gal. 5.17. which combat
is most lively described and painted forth unto us by the Apostle, To. 7.
proposing himself for an example.

5 If therefore we demand these goodly Doctors and teachers of theirs, how the
fruits of this vice are pardoned us, they will answer with us that it is by
the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. But if we desire to have a
farther declaration of this answer, then Satan, who was before disguised,
begins to show his horns. For it is he in deed who has learned them
certain distinctions, by which this goodly first answer of theirs vanishes
away as smoke, namely the distinction, first between mortal and vemall
sins, which deserve (say they) nothing but temporal punishment, whereof a
man is purged by some displeasaunce and remorse of them, with one Asperges of
holy water, one bishops blessing, and other such inventions. Whence it would
follow in sound logique, that such sins have nothing at all to do with the
death and passion of the Lord, seeing the evil requires no such pain in him
who commits it. Thus you see how these good Physicians in steed of using
one purgative remedy only, and without which every sin becomes deadly,
cast the poor consciences of men in a sleep (as the empeirall practicks use
the medicines which they call narcoticall, that is to say such as benowme and
ded the diseased) until at the length they become senseles and past feeling in
all sin and wickedness, Ephesians. 4.19. and swollen and puffed up until they be
ready to break again with the false opinion of their sati^factions and
merits. Now in place of this we are taught by the holy scriptures, that it is
true in deed that all sins are not equal in quality, Ioh. 19.11. But as
touching the effect generally considered, every offense against God, yea both
our perverse nature and every motion thereof, be it never so small, and depart
it never so little aside from the commandments of the law, which is
spiritual (that is to say, respects principally that within, although no
consent, nor any effect of deed or of word do follow, Romans 5.12.14. and 7.14,)
is worthy of death, yea of everlasting death, Romans 6.23. As this Priest is he
alone, who by means of the payment which he has made for the malediction and
curse which was due unto us, and he alone without exception which takes away
the sins of the world, Ioh. 1.29. is the propitiation for our sins, Romans
3.23. which he has borne upon the tree in his own person, 1. Pet. 2.24.
namely for them, unto whom it is given to repent, 2. Tim. 2.26. and to believe,
Ioh. 6.44.45. not that Repentance or Faith it self merit salvation any way,
or have any place of satisfaction toward God (seeing eternal life is of free
gift, Romans 6.23) but because that god has appointed and given true Repentance,
as a good way to be prepared to receive pardon, Psalm. 51.12.19. and Faith, to
apprehend him and to apply him unto us unto eternal life, Ioh. 3.16. In a word
therefore, all sin in his own nature is mortal and deadly, and contrariwise
all sin (except it be the sin against the holy ghost which is
unpardonable) is pardoned the believing by the only oblation of our eternal
Priest once made, Hebrew. 10.10. and Romans 5.1.

6 Their other distinction is double, namely between the guilt and the pain
satisfactory, separating the one from the other: and between the sins going
before Baptism and those which are committed after, and al to bring the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ unto this point, to make that which proceeds
from us of some worthiness and merit, which they call condignely meritorious,
an abuse which can in no sort agree with the priesthood of Jesus Christ, the
sole and immediate cause of the Remission of our sins, and so by consequent
of our salvation in this respect, Psalm. 32.1. These good Doctors and teachers
therefore, as touching the sins which go before Baptism, grant indeed that
they are entirely pardoned both in respect of the guilt, and in respect of the
pain, and that by the means of some virtue of the sacred water, with the
action it self of Baptism, reserving notwithstanding for the young Infantes
which die before they come unto the age of discretion, a certain place, which
they call Limbus, where they are in some small enjoying of the joys of
paradise, as are those infantes which are dead when they are borne, or die
before they be baptized. But as for the sins which are committed after
Baptism, the guilt and trespass only pardoned, there remains the
satisfactorie pain to be paid as they say: and in what money? By Fastings,
Alms, Pater-nosters and Aues, Pilgrimages, Foundations, and other pains and
penaunces imposed in Auricular confession. And hereunto you must add Pardons,
Indulgences, and the merits of Saints. But yet is a man freed and quited of
all when he is dead? No. But he must go and pay the rest in an other world,
in the fire of Purgatory. But they say that he which is there can merit no
longer, and therefore he must come out of this fire by the prayers and good
works of the living, and especially by a number of Masses, Obits, Requiems,
Holy Water, and other like devotions. But what, shall he come forth? Nay that
they cannot tell, though they tax every mortal sin at a certain number of
days and of years. But put case one for whom we still pray at all
adventures, be come forth already long since? Mary this shall be set of upon
the tail of another score, to be allowed other. And whereto then shall the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ serve? Forsooth to make all this available, and to
send you into the fire of Purgatory for a certain time, whereas otherwise you
should have gone into hell fire for ever. And yet, when it so pleases the
merchant royal of Pardons, he does more then Jesus Christ himself. For he
absolueth a culpa and pana, that is quitteth both the sin and punishment
thereof, and commands the Angels to draw what souls it pleases him out of
Purgatory. And is there any thing he can do more contrary unto the effect
of that oblation which Jesus Christ himself has made of himself upon the
cross? Yea the spirit of lying, by the just judgment of God has passed yet
farther upon those which have loved and do still love darcknesse better then
light, Ioh. 3.19. according unto the Prophecy of Esaias, Esai. 29.10. and that
of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. and 2. Tim. 3.13. For he has so controuled and
countermaunded the oblation once made for all by Jesus Christ himself, that he
has borne men in hand and persuaded them, that they must every day really and
actually reiterate the same: and whereas the holy supper of the Lord was
properly and peculiarly ordained and established, that we should be made
partakers more and more of that mystical union of Jesus Christ together with
all his merits unto eternal salvation, 1. Cor. 10.16. and secondly to
celebrate in solemn wise the memory of his holy and only sacrifice once for
all made with solemn thanksgiving, they have converted the same into a daily
sacrifice actual and real of the very and true body of Jesus Christ unto God
his father, by an High Priest anointed and shaven to this end and purpose, and
that with a greater efficacy then the first, which Jesus Christ that perfect
and only Priest and sacrificer of himself, made upon the cross: seeing that
according unto their own saying, this of his reserueth still the satisfactorie
pain, but this which is made by their priests makes an entire satisfaction,
yea say they both for the quick and the dead. And this is it which they call
their Mass, the which is so rooted in the hearts of the abused and abusers,
that there was never a more execrable blasphemy in the woorlde, nor more
directly contrary unto the priesthood and sacrifice of the Lord, nor more
stubburnely and cruelly maintained and defended.

7 There follows the second point of our Redemption, namely that which is
called sanctification, because that by it being drawn out of our natural
pollution we begin to be cleansed and framed unto justice and uprightness. It
is also called Regeneration or Newe-birth, Ioh. 3.3. because that by it we
become new men as touching the qualities of the scule, our understanding being
enlightened to know and embrace the truth of God, Ephe. 1.18. and 4.24. and
Coloss. 3.10. As therefore man made not himself, but the only power and bounty
of god created the world, Psalm. 100.3. so must we confess that this very
grace and power alone makes us new creatures in respect of the qualities which
are within us, in him who is made unto us also Sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.30.
For the effecting whereof, first all the pollution and filthiness of the nature
of man in the first Adam, was abolished in the flesh of this High Priest our
second Adam, conceived in the womb of the virgin by the holy Ghost: to the end
that we being united by faith with him we should be found in him with that
uprightness which the Law requires of man, Romans 8.4. I mean by merely free
Imputation. Secondly this same Jesus Christ, drawing us unto himself by his
holy spirit forms in us both to will and to do, Philip. 2.13. being made
and created anew in him unto good works which he has prepared to the end that
we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. It is then this only Priest apprehended by
faith, in whom we find such and so perfect a cleansing of this original
stain, the same being imputed unto us, that the mortifying of this same
corruption in us, and the spiritual virtue and power fighting in us are at a
combat within us against the relics of our pollution whilst we wait for our
full incorruption and glory in body and in soul until the latter coming of
the lord, Romans 1.24. Gal. 5.17. 1. Cor. 15.28. when he shall crown of his grace
and mercy his works in us, 1. Cor. 15.58. 2. Tim. 4.8. This is then the sum
of the Article of our Sanctification whereof we have the seal in holy
Baptism, in which the water represents unto us the blood which was shed for
the remission of al our sins, together with the virtue of the holy ghost
abolishing and burying the old man corrupted, and forming in us that new man,
to increase in us from day to day, Romans 3.4. Gal. 3.27. Coloss. 2.12. 1. Cor.
3.21. Clean contrary unto all this, our adversaries teach us, first of all the
merits of preparation, and say grace must prevent the remnant of our nature
not altogether slaued unto sin: but only feebled, and yet still in some sort
free, so that there is a concurrence of this nature and of grace, and thence
they draw an heap of those goodly merits whereof they have a storehouse
full, to sell to every one that will buy. Farther they say that original sin
is really abolished by the water of outward Baptism, and by the virtue of the
words pronounced together with their Chrisme and other ceremonies: As Much say
they of all actual sins going before Baptism* in those which are baptized
at years of discretion, whether he which is baptized believe or understand
what baptism means, or not: provided only they be not in mortal sin, as
they call it. And thus you see how these brave doctors fail most absurdly and
blockishly in this so necessary an article, first in being ignorant how great
and deadly our original malady and sickness is: secondly sophisticating and
corrupting the sole and only remedy against it, both in blending with it that
which is naturally in man, and in attributing unto the water, to the sound of
words, and finally to their own inventions that which cannot be given unto the
Angels themselves, but we must substitute and place them in the seat and room
of this only high priest.

8 There remains the point of Intercession, which is as much to say, as
Interuention, or a coming between, to put himself between God his father and
them who call upon him in spirit and in truth, which these goodly doctors do
so expound, as if Jesus Christ were upon his knees, before his father,
receiving our requests and supplications according unto the manner and fashion
of the princes of this world, who have their Referendaries or masters of
Request, contrarying herein themselves, who in their Letany say not unto Jesus
Christ, Pray for us, as they crave of their saints departed this mortality,
but have mercy upon us. And that upon great right. For Jesus christ having in
the execution of his priesthood here below, prayed so earnestly and fervently
for us, and for the whole Church unto the end of the world, as we see him to
have done, especially, Ioh. 17. and having been without doubt heard for ever
(mediating the oblation once made afterward by him for the full abolishing of
that which put a division between God and us) has no need any more to make
new prayers for us, seeing he has now all power of the father to govern us
and to grant us all things we require: but it is said that he makes still
Intercession for us, because the virtue and force of his oblation is always
present before God, as also because all the prayers of the Church which is yet
here below are made in his name, in whom alone also they be received and
sanctified by his mediation and Interuention between the father and us. Now
in lieu of this Doctrine testified and verified throughout the Scripture,
having made notwithstanding a Referendary and master of Requests, turning
themselves suddenly clean backward, and considering of his majesty and glory,
they teach that it were marvelous presumption to go directly unto so great a
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: and therefore say they, we must first
speak unto others to have access unto him, as a man that will have access
unto a King, will speak first with the Vshers of his presence, or with the
groom of his chamber, or other his fauorits. And who are they? Here now every
man according unto his private devotion has power to choose himself a
particular patron, beside the general, amongst which they attribute the
sovereign place unto the blessed virgin, and that by her motherly authority to
command. And here every ones merits are proposed and their particular
commissions of healing this or that disease. And whereupon I pray you are all
these Intercessions grounded? Not upon any word of God, not upon any example of
the Prophets, or Apostles, or any other of their time: not upon reason, seeing
this cannot be done but we must attribute unto these Intercessors, that which
is entirely proper and belonging unto the divinity and Godhead alone, without
which Jesus Christ himself should be il and in vain called upon as we have
before showed: all this notwithstanding, this has by little and little slipped
into the Church by the efficacy of that spirit of error which they used who
resisted Jeremy, keeping themselves to their queen of heaven, Ier. 44.17. as
they of whom we now speak hold themselves to theirs. And what I pray you
has brought in this cursed overthrow of the true invocation of God in
Christendom but the distrustfulnes of the favor and good will of our Mediator
toward us? And yet what shall we find either in heaven or in earth which
has given us or could ever give us such assured testimonies of his love and
dilection? For we cannot so much as pray as we ought, without he do first
prevent us by his holy spirit, Romans 8.25. so far is it that there can be any
more prompt and ready then he to help us. Now no prayer proceeding from
distrust, or from our only imagination, be it forged anew or retained by an
evil custom, can be acceptable unto God, Iam. 1.6. and Ioh. 4.22. and
therefore above all things is this holy assurance upon the only truth, love
and power of the only mediator reco^mended unto us, Heb. 10.19. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
bereauing us by consequent of all presumption of ourselves. Why but, say they,
we pray one for an other, and do also crave the prayers one of an other without
any derogation at al unto the authority or office of Jesus Christ who is our
sole mediator: true, we use the mutual prayers of one an other as being
environed al of us with the like necessities, to the mutual participatio^ of
which, charity does bind us, and which we may and ought to cause to be
understood of one an other, according to the word of God and the examples of
the holy Prophets and Apostles. And what is this to the invocation and praying
unto of Saints, the spirits of whom are in heaven in their rest not able to
be conceived of us, and their bodies are in the dust waiting together with us
for the latter day? Therefore when such as are yet living demand and crave the
mutual prayers of their brethren, this is not to make them Intercessors, or to
adioine them for companions unto Jesus Christ, or as subordinate mediators
between Jesus Christ and us, to rank them and cause them to march in
procession as they do in their Letanies. But this is to join our selves and
them together, to address and direct our selves to one and the self same God
and father in the name of this sole and only mediator as well of Intercession
as also of Redemption, which are two points altogether inseperable, as saint
John witnesses calling Jesus Christ our Advocate in the same sense that he
called him our propitiation meaning to exclude all other Advocates and all
other propitiators toward God. 1. John. 2.1.2. being none besides him in
whom our prayers, or other works whatsoever are acceptable. Hereupon they
reply again that so they also add, Per Christum Dominum nostrum, that is to
say, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Yea but this is after they have joined with
him subordinate companions, both in the merits of these and those, as also in
pardons and whatsoever else comes into their thought (which is nothing else
but to derogate as much from the mediation of Redemption) and besides in the
Intercession of others toward him: yea with their motherly authority, falsely
attributed unto her, who never thought upon any such usurpation. In a word
therefore this is nothing else but to do as they did who in Pilates house
called Jesus Christ by the name of Prophet and king: but it was when they
buffeted and scourged him, Ioh. 19.1.2.

9 Thus you see my brethren, what the Jesus Christ of this false Church is,
from which the mercy of God has withdrawn us, to know and to serve the true
and only Jesus Christ, true God and true man, having a name above every
creature high, middle or low, in his celestial and eternal Empire, who has
declared unto us all the counsel of God touching our salvation by the contents
of the writings of his faithful Prophets and Apostles, being the only eternal
priest and by virtue of this Priesthood our sole and only mediator as well of
Redemption as also of Intercession between the father and us unto eternal
life, in the which faith the Lord give us grace to live and die to enjoy one
day on high eternally with him the glory which he has purchased by the price
of himself.

10 It remains now we consider of what manner of Crown this spouse here
speaks, and who this Mother is who has crowned him therewith. Now then by
the Crown, that Majesty and power more then Royal is meant, with which our
head is crowned, as it is said Psalm. 8.6. and is expounded Heb. 2.9. and Math.
28.18. But who may this mother be, who has crowned him therewith, seeing it is
of the father only that he craves it, both in respect that his divine
majesty was as it were abased in the infirmity of the flesh for a time, Ioh.
17.5. as in respect of the superiority over all the world promised unto him in
regard of his humanity, Psalm. 2.8. and Psalm. 110.1. expounded by the Apostle,
1. Cor. 15.24. Ephesians. 4.11. and Philipp. 2.9. This place therefore has diverse
interpretations. To let pass therefore the interpretation of certain
contemplative, or rather of dreaming and doting Doctors, who have appropriated
not only this place, but almost all that is said of the Church in this
Canticle unto the person of the virgin Mary, who was truly blessed among all
faithful women, but not therefore as these folish superstitious have imagined,
as if Jesus christ did hold of his mother the crown of his Empire: whereas it
is his mere gracious bounty which made her his mother, inasmuch as he took our
flesh in her virginal womb, and who has crowned her with such measure of
glory as pleased him. Others have understood by this word of mother the
humanity of Jesus Christ, which contrariwise is crowned in him and by him, who
has honored it so far with his personal union. It seems unto me that by
this word of Mother a man may more rightly understand in this place the City
of Ierusasalem, as being the capital City of the kingdom, and so
consequently the mother of al such as are borne there, and namely in respect
of Solomon who was there b^rne, and was there crowned, and so also in regard of
him of whom he was the figure. For albeit Jesus Christ was not borne in
Jerusalem according unto the flesh, notwithstanding he there took his
crown, Psalm. 2.6. and that by the testimony of Pilate who knew not what he
did, Ioh. 19.19.22. as it was also said by Esa. 2.3. and Mich. 4.2. that he
should come forth of Jerusalem, that is to say that he should there be
borne, in respect of the quality of his celestial kingdom, which consists
in the setting up and government of his Church, as it came to pass by express
commandment, Act. 1.4.12. This exposition, besides the foundation which it
has, serves unto great edification, this coronation and this Crown being
diuersely considered: in as much as Jerusalem a figure of the Church in her
estate here below is sometimes restricted unto the elect, and sometimes also
comprehends all those who say they are of this company, of which
notwithstanding some of them are not known, as S. Paul before his couersion
was among the Pharisees, others are like darnell among the good corn until
such time as God threshe it out. This is then the cause wherefore the true
spouse desiring, according as this spiritual marriage implies it, that all the
world if it might be were joined with her in one body under this head and
Bridegroom, inuiteth the other Daughters of Jerusalem, to come in good
earnest and not for fashion sake or outward appearaunce and profession only,
to contemplate the true king of peace in this royal majesty of his, wherewith
their common mother, to wit Jerusalem, had crowned him, I mean so far as
that earthly Solomon was the figure of this true king and Bridegroom, and not
that the majesty of this Solomon proceeds from his spouse, but from the
eternal father, as also by a correspondence the coronation of the terrestrial
Solomon celebrated by those of Jerusalem, proceeded not of them of the City but
from the ordinance and commandment of David, which the city accepted of. But
it may be together with this, that the holy ghost speaking by the mouth of the
spouse to the disloyal of Jerusalem in particular, would in this place vpbraid
them the same with which S. Peter did, Act. 2.23.24. and 3.13.14. and Saint
Stephen, Act. 7.52. conformably unto that which was foretold, Zach. 12.10. and
Mat. 26.64. as if she said. Behold indeed the true king of peace accepted
and crowned with all majesty of Jerusalem. Come and see him you who desire
your own welfare and salvation: as for you the contemners and persecuters of
him, look upon him hardly unto your confusion. You have bought him of a
traitor, and condemned him by false suborned witnesses. It was through your
cryinges that Pilate scourged him, that he crowned him with thorns, that he
crucified him. You have denied him to be your king, and have sought to put
forth the title of his royalty, yea you mocked him on his cross, you shut up
and sealed his sepulcher to hinder his victory, and yet lo he is a king maugre
your despite, having vanquished all his enemies upon the Cross, even unto
Satan, sin and death. Behold how he sits above every creature at the
right hand of the father, and thence it is he shall come to condemn all his
enemies, and to absolve those who are his for ever. There it is you shall see
him unto your condemnation. Yea the sufferinges which you caused him to endure
were the way by which he is entered into his glory, Luc. 24.46. Behold I say
in what sort this spouse might by a Prophetical spirit reproach the Daughters of
Jerusalem. But besides all this to express yet more clearly this name of
Mother, I say, that this which is here said of this coronation of Solomon by
his Mother may be also referred unto that which is in his history, namely unto
that, that the crowning of him came to pass by his Mother, in as much as she by
the suggestion of Nathan put David in mind in good time of his promise which
he had made of leaving the crown unto Solomon and not unto Adonias. Which
being referred unto the true Solomon, we must attribute the crowning of him
unto the heavenly father which is somewhat referred unto the Mother in respect
of him which was the figure of him: seeing in similitudes it is not necessary
that all the parts thereof agree throughout.

11 It remains yet we expound what this day of the espousailes is, and of
the great joy of this king. Whereupon we must call to remembrance that which I
have already more then once reiterated upon this Canticle, namely that in
this spiritual marriage, which is here mentioned, there are so many degrees
to be considered as there be approchings of the Messiah near his Church by the
manifestation of his will. Until the time of the Law therefore there was the
treaty as it were of these fiansailes, and the time after the Law (which was
as it were the chalking forth of this Bridegroom) shall be accounted as it were
the solemnizing of the fiansailes, especially in the building of the Temple,
and in that so magnificent establishing of the Leuitical priesthood. Afterward
at the coming of the Lord in flesh this marriage was really contracted by
words of the present, according unto that which the Apostle expressly
teaches us, Ephesians. 5.25.29. the contract of the new covenant being ratified
and confirmed by the new seal of the holy Supper, as appears by the tenor
of the institution of it, and by the scope and end whereunto it tends,
namely, to the communion of body and goods with this Bridegroom 1. Cor. 1.30.
and 10.16. in such sort notwithstanding, that the full and perfectly real
consummation of this marriage, appertaining unto the enjoying of eternal life,
1. Cor. 15.28.54. is differred unto the day of his glorious appearaunce, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.17. and elsewhere in many places. As this is also the end and
hope of this spouse waiting for now with no less devotion this second coming,
whereof she has the pledges, then she did sometimes upon other pledges expect
his first. Unto what time therefore shall we refer these espousailes and this
joy and gladness? Solomon the son of David being set before us in this
place as a figure of the true Solomon, and his coronation in Jerusalem here
below being represented unto us as no vain figure of the real taking of
possession of the true Solomon in the heavenly Jerusalem: it seems that it is
not to be doubted, but that according unto the ordinary style of the
Prophets, the time of the sole^nising of the fiansailes, under the which this
Canticle was written, is properly mentioned in this place: but yet so, that it
is joined with that which is figured, that is, with the solemnising of the
espousailes, as if it were one and the same time. And indeed this has bin
always the right manner of speaking of the figures and shadows of the Law
ceremonial, that the people was always led unto the substance and body of
them, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 2.17. and throughout the whole Ep.
to the Hebrews, in such sort, that for want of observing of this method those
abuses have bin engendered which are reproved, Psalm. 50. and so often by all the
Prophets, and finally the pharisaisme reprehended by our Lord Jesus Christ, and
afterward by the Apostls. And yet at this day the selfsame fault is still
committed by them, in the Sacraments ordained by Jesus Christ, and in others
forged by men. Briefly Salomo^ has in this place declared by this divine medly
of himself crowned in his fiansailes in his Jerusalem, with the espousailes of
the true Solomon in his celestial Jerusalem which was to be gathered out of al
nations of the world, that he had not forgotten, that the promise made
concerning him to David his father, had in such sort lincked him with the other
son of David, of which himself was only the figure and shadow, that it might
seem at first sight that the Lord spoke of one only person and of one only
eternal kingdom, 2. Sam. 7.14. and 1. Chron. 17.13.

12 Now that it is not without great cause that the spouse calls this day
the day of the gladness of the heart of this bridegroom, appears by the more
the^ marvelous effects. For if this bridegroom had not taken an unspeakable
pleasure, to make his very enemies his spouse, how would he have given his life
for the winning of her, Ioh. 15.13. and Romans 5.8. How would he have objected
him self unto the horrible wrath of God for us? Gal. 3.13. How going unto
death would he have prayed so fervently for us, Ioh. 17.20. How would he
have protested, that he desired nothing more then this oblation of himself to
carry our sins upon the tree, which is the principal article of the contract
of this marriadge? Luke 12.50. How would he have protested of that singular
desire he had to celebrate that last supper with his disciples, Luke 22.15. How
in the anguishes of death which were more horrible a great deal in his soul
then in his body, as that frightfull cry of his which obscured the sun,
shook the earth, and claue the stones, namely that, My God, my God why have
thou forsaken me, declares, would he have prayed for the^ who crucified him?
Lu. 23.30. on whom also afterward he showed mercy, Act. 3.17. which he yet
continues to do at this day toward us so unworthy of so great and
incomprehensible favor.

13 Go too then (my brethren) unto whom in our time this king is as it were
again appeared, to cause us to see the brightness of his crown buried as it
were before in such thick darkness of ignorance and superstition, which were
covered with the name of Christianity and true devotion, let us pray him, with all our heart, that this infinite love and charity of his which shows us from
on high the flowers of his crown, to cause the glory of that kingdom which
was prepared for us before the foundation of the world, Math. 25.34. to be
poured down upon us: Let these things (I say) pearce our hearts to cause us to
go forth of our selves, to the end that we may thoroughly contemplate this
king there where he causes himself to be seen of us, let us know him, love
him, follow him through all the path-waies it shall please him to conduct us,
until we arrive unto the full consummation of this most holy conjunction in
the which he shall be all in all in his: Amen. And because that having hitherto
done the clean contrary, we have so often and so greatly offended him, let us
crave grace and mercy at his hands as follows.

Almighty God, etc.
THE END OF THE SERMONS UPON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE CANTICLE OF CANTICLES.

