FOUR GODLY AND LEARNED TREATISES.

Entitled, I. A Remedy against Covetousness. II. An elegant and lively
Description of Spiritual Death and Life. III. The Doctrine of Self-denial.
IV. Upon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.


DELIVERED In sundry Sermons, by that late famous Preacher, and worthy
instrument of Gods glory, JOHN PRESTON, Doctor of Divinity, Chaplain in
Ordinary to his Majesty; Master of Emanuel College, and sometime Preacher of
Lincolnes Inn.

The third Edition.

Printed at London by T. C. for Michael Spark, and are to be sold at the blue
Bible in Green Arbor. 1633.

A Sum of the chiefest points, contained in the Remedy against Covetousness.
Covetousness defined, and plainly showed what it is. page 1, and 30 Idolatry
consists in three things. p. 1 In what sense, covetousness is called
idolatry. p. 2^ To seek* help and comfort from riches or any creature, and
not from God alone, is vain and sinful. ibid Covetousness which is idolatry,
is to be mortified. p. 3 and 46 The uncertainety of riches. p. 4, 5 Reasons why
riches are uncertain and vain. p. 6, 7 Men spend so much time in seeking
after riches, and tryfles, that they have no time to serve God. p. 8 The rich
man, may not glory in his riches and wealth. p. 9 God can give us comfort
without riches. p. 10 Having the creature only, without the love and favor of
the Creator, we have the husk with^out the grain, the shell without the
kernel* ibid All our sins proceed from overvaluing of the Creature. p. 11
They that seek their happiness in riches and in worldly things, seek it the
wrong way. p. 13 Happiness sought and placed in God (with whom is no change)
must needs be perpetual. p. 15 Whatsoever men can leave their children,
without Gods blessing, is nothing worth. p. 16 Blessings considered without
thankful reference to God, they cease to be blessings. p. 17 Those that have
but a small Cottage, are many times more happy than many rich men. p. 19 We
must judge of outward things not by sense and feeling, but by faith and
rectified reason. p. 20.21 The creature cannot yield us comfort without God. p.
22 Riches come not always by labor, nor comfort by riches. p. 24 Though all
causes concur and meet together, yet (without God) the effect follows not.
p. 25 Future spiritual and eternal things, are not uncertain, p. 26 Every
one is guilty of this sin of Covetousness, more or less, p. 27 To love or
joy in riches, i^ adulterous love and joy. p. 28 Signs to know whether our
love to the creature, be right or no. 28.29 Our affection or desire to riches,
is inordinate in four respects. 31 If we be soundly humbled, we confess our
selves, not only unworthy the least of Gods mercies, but worthy to be
destroyed. 32 Riches and wealth may not be sought for by unlawful means. 33
Our end and scope in seeking to get riches, must be, not to serve our selves,
or our own lusts, but to glorify God withal. 33 Seeking for riches in a
wrong manner, is inordinate in five particulars. 34 In what respects, riches
are a blessing. 35 Men may lawfully desire riches, referring and submitting
their wills to God. 36 There is a threefold necessity, wherein men may desire
that which is necessary. 37 Reasons against desire of superfluity and excess.
38.39.40 The end of men's callings is not to scrape and rake for riches and
wealth. 41 Men may lawfully take care to increase their estate, observing the
right rules in doing it. 44 When a man is to be accounted and holden for a
covetous man. 45 Exhortation to mortify this earthly member, Covetousness. 47
Effectual means to root Covetousness out of our hearts. ibid
A Sum of the principal matters contained in the second Treatise.
CHrist proves himself to be the Son of God, in that he can quicken the
dead. page 51 What our estate is, being out of Christ. p. 53 What spiritual
death is. p. 54, and 57 The cause of life, p. 56 Three kinds of spiritual
death. p. 57 The signs of death, four. p. 58 The degrees of spiritual death.
p. 60 Great difference between spiritual and natural dead. p. 62 Spiritual
death voluntary. p. 63 A twofold image of God in man. ibid Why the Law is given
to men that are spiritually death. p. 66 Difference between external bodily
binding, and the bands of sin. p. 67 The great Quaere or question that every
man is to make concerning himself. p. 68 Two hindrances of this search. p. 69
The new spiritual life works a change in men. p. 70 How Christ should be the
end and scope of all our actions. p. 72 ^he charracters and marks of men
spiritually dead. p. 73, and 79 Repentance makes a dead man to be a living man;
and therefore not to be delayed. p. 83 Natural men are but dead men, what
excellencies soever they have. p. 84 How to value the Ordinances of God. p. 85
That all who are in Christ, are in a state of life. p. 88 From whom, and with
what, this life is hidden from natural men. p. 89 The Saints misreported and
evil spoken of. p. 90 Men are hardly persuaded, that there is such a new
spiritual life of grace. p. 91, and 94 Proofs of it, besides or without the
Scriptures, ibid The effects and experience of a new spiritual life. p. 92
Differences between superstition and the morrall life; and this new spiritual
life of grace. p. 93, etc. Common and true Grace, wherein they differ. p. 95
Signs to know the spiritual life of grace by; and the comparing it with the
natural life. p. 96, and 59 What is expected and required of them, to whom
this talent of the new life of grace is committed. p. 98 They that spend their
time in idle sports and vanities, are yet dead. 10^ The happy estate of being
in Christ, and to be par^takers of this spiritual life, is to be known and
prized accordingly. 101 How and in what sort, we must mind worldly things. 102
All other things vain and deceivable, in comparison of this spiritual new
life. 103 This is a prevailing life. 104 This new life is far more excellent
than the common life. 105 The union between Christ and us. 106 The life of
grace brings liberty to them that have it. 107 Which should make those that
have it not, to seek it; and those that have it, careful to retain and keep
it. 108 Though the best may sometimes be foiled, yet they recover themselves,
and maintain a war still against their corruptions. 111 How to know whether
we walk in the Spirit, or no. 112 How to know, whether our works be living
works, or dead works. 114. etc. Motives to make us desire this blessed
spiritual life. 120. etc. All men seek happiness, yet never find it without
seeking God. 128 Repentance puts a new life into men. 129 Means to get this
spiritual life. 130 Knowledge, the first means, ib. 131, etc. The second
means to get this life, is to be much in doing. 134 The third means to get
this life, is to get faith, 136 The fourth means to get and increase this
life, is the communion of Saints, 140 The fifth and last means to get and
increase this life, is the hearing of the voice of the Son of man, 14^ The
hearing of this voice, is the only means to translate men from death to life,
144.145. etc. What the voice of the Son of God is, 146.147 This effectual
voice consists in two things, 147 Three degrees of working this light of life,
by the Spirit. 148 A double voice of the Son of man* 149. etc. Those that
hear (viz. obey) the voice of the Son of man, have experimental knowledge.
150 Effectual knowledge bred by this voice, makes men approve, justify, and
relish the ways of God. 155 A right knowledge breeds holy affections. 156
Lively knowledge brings forth action. 157 We must examine our selves, whether
we have heard the voice of the Son of God, or no. 159 Which we shall know by
our lives and actions, 160 The first impediment hindering men from hearing
Christ voice, is selfe-wisedome, or self conceitednesse. 161 The second
hinderance or let, is long custom. p. 162 The third let is similitude, which
like false wares deceives men. p. 163 The fourth impediment, is false
experiments, in some works of God, that should draw us nearer to him. p. 164
The fifth impediment is ignorance. ibid The sixth impediments, is
inconsideration. p. 166 The seventh impediment, is a certain stiffenesse and
obstinacy of will or mind. p. 167 Means how to hear profitably. ib. etc. To
practice a little, is the way to get more. p. 168 Fearful judgments on them
that receive not the love of the truth, p. 169 God curses barren and
unfruitful bearers. p. 170 Disobedience to the Gospel, grievously punished,
p. 171 Means to hear the preaching of Gods word profitably for our
conversion, and building of us up in our most holy faith. p. 172 The second
means. ibid The third means, p. 174 The fourth means. p. 175 The fifth
means, p. 176 The sixth means, p. 180 A Caveat or warning both to Ministers
and people. p^ 181 Vain excuses will not serve before God, p. 182
The Sum of the chief points contained in the Treatise of Self-denial.
OVt of Christ, we are dead men, 185 By Christ we gain life eternal, 186 What
we must do for Christ, viz, Deny our selves, take up our cross, etc. ibid
Whosoever will have benefit by Christ, must follow him. ibid Two maine
impediments that hinder men from following Christ. ibid Whosoever will be saved
by Christ, must deny himself. p. 187 What it is to deny our selves, p. 188
What our self is, ibid Why corruption of nature is reckoned a man's self. p.
189 In every man there are two selfs, ibid Reasons of Self-denial, p. 190
God will not bind us to that which is simply unpossible. p. 191 A man may
lawfully love himself, p. 192 To deny our selves, is to deny every sin,
stock and branch, p. 193 We cannot follow God and the world both. 194 No
happiness to be found out of God. 198 Great equity in denying our selves. 199
The fruits of the flesh, and of the Spirit. 201 How prone our nature is to do
evil. ib. And how we may know it. 202 How to try, whether we have interest in
Christ, or no. 204 How to know whether we deny our selves. 207 Means to deny
our selves. 208 God multiplyes comforts to them that deny themselves. 209 In
cleaving to God, we must leave the care and custody of other things unto him.
210 The right knowledge of Christ, makes us deny our selves. 211 The manner how
we should deny our selves. 212 The ways of God are full of Crosses. 215 And
the reasons thereof. 216 The ways of God have much difficulty in them, and the
reasons thereof. 217 Yet the ways of God are pleasant to any man that is
upright. 220 Reasons why difficulty in Gods ways, should not discourage any
man therefrom. 221 We must make account before hand, and prepare for troubles
before they come. 223 It is not the way to heaven that most men go. 225 What
causes persecution to follow the Gospel. 226 If we suffer not in Gods cause
for well doing, we shall suffer of God for evil doing, p. 227 Answer to them
who say, they can do no good in Gods cause, p. 230 Against discouragement by
being a lone, p. 231 Many thousands lose their souls, because they think
less will serve the turn in Gods service, than indeed is required of them. p.
232 Satan's wiles in deceiving men, ibid Cold, slight, and customary performance
of holy duties, does no good at all, p. 233 We must go through, fighting, till
we have the victory, p. 236 It is hard to bring our souls to good duties. ibid
The crosses and difficulties that are in Gods ways, are an argument to prove,
that the doctrine came from heaven. p. 239 The cause that the ways of God are
so hard and difficult. p. 240 The difficulty in Gods ways, ought to be a
means to humble us, p. 241 All that look to have benefit by Christ, must
follow him. p. 242 Christ is to us an example of the rule (viz.) of the Law. p.
243, etc. Though Christ himself be absent in the body, yet he has left guides
to lead us, in his stead. p. 243 The Saints that lived before us, and went in
one path of truth, are our guides. p. 244 We have the word, the Spirit, and the
Saints, for our guides. ib. What it is to follow Christ. p. 245 And how to
follow him. p. 246 We must follow Christ at all times, p. 247 We must follow
Christ all manner of ways inward^ly and outwardly. p. 248 The object and
example which we must follow, is Christ. p. 249 And not his example only, but
his precepts also and commandments must we follow, p. 252 False boasting
Christians refuted, p. 253 Difference betwixt the wicked and the godly, in
sinning. p. 254 Many follow Christ for worldly respects. p. 256 Difference
betwixt the falls of good and evil men. p. 257 We must be content to forsake
all for Christ. p. 258 And to bear all things for his sake, ibid. We ought to
have the same mind in us that was in Christ. p. 259 Against false, unconstant,
double minded men, p. 260 We must not stand still at a stay, but grow in grace,
and endeavor (what we can) toward perfection, p, 261 We must not presume to
go before Christ, but let our minds and desires yield to his will. p. 262 Five
things required of them, that will truly and sincerely follow Christ. p. 264
The Contents of the three Sermons on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
THe maine and principal privilege that we have by Jesus Christ, is Eternal
life. p. 265 The drift of S. John's writing is, that believers might know, they
have Eternal life. p. 266 Another great privilege that we have by Christ, is,
an assurance to be heard in our prayers, p. 267 Unless a man be in Christ, he
may not apply unto himself any of these two privileges. ib. Except we be in
Christ, we have nothing to do to meddle with those holy mysteries, or Symbols
of the love and favor of God in Christ. p. 267 Every one that comes to the
Lords Table, ought to examine himself concerning two things. p. 268 Rules to
examine our selves, and find whether we be in Christ or no. ib. A double act
must pass in those that are in Christ; one on our part, another on Christ's. p.
269 Four things to be considered, in the act on our part. ib. Every man
naturally seeks some excellency or other p. 270, 271. To excel in grace and
holiness; to have our sinful lusts mortified, is that excellent thing
Christians should and ought to desire, and labor for. 272, 273 To keep God's
Laws and commandments, is the wisdom of Gods people. 274 How a man may
know, whether he reckon Christ his chief treasure. 275, 276 The creatures
that were once exceeding good, are now through man's sin, become all vanity
and vexation of spirit. 277 A man should be at any cost, and rather part with
any thing, than with Christ Jesus, who should be our chief treasure. 278 What
answer our hearts ought to make to Satan's temptations, and the worlds
allurements. 279 To find whether Christ be our life, and cheifest joy, we must
consider what it is our thoughts feed upon and delight in. 280, 281 How to
know whether Christ be our chief refuge, to fly unto. 282, 283 A carnal man
in his distress, knows not whither to go. 286 The wicked in their troubles
fly unto men for their refuge. 284, 285 The Christian in his distress is wont
to betake him-himselfe to Christ. ibid. and 287 How a man may know whom he sets
up for his chief commander, 287, 288 There are three great commanders in the
world. that divide all mankind (almost) between themy 289 (...) (...) (...)
(...)
COLLOS. 3.5. And Covetousness which is Idolatry.
Covetousness which is Idolatry, that must be mortified as well as the other
earthly members. Now this Covetousness is nothing else; but an inordinate and
sinful desire of getting or keeping Wealth or Money. The inordinate lusting
after Honors, that is styled Ambition; too much affecting of Beauty, is
called Lustfulnesse; and Lust is an inordinate affection, which when it
propounds Riches for its object, is called Covetousnes, which is Idolatry.
Now Idolatry consists in one of these three things: First, in worshipping the
true GOD in a wrong manner, apprehending him as a Creature, giving that to him
that agrees not with him. Secondly, when as we make the creature a God; that
is, by conceiving it under the notion of a God: so did they which worshipped
Jove, Mars, and those Heathens that worship the Creatures as Gods. Thirdly,
when as we attribute that unto it, which belongs unto GOD: as to trust in
it, to delight in it, to put all our trust and confidence in it: when as we
think, that it can perform that unto us which God only can, this thought is
Idolatry. Now that Covetousness is Idolatry, is meant only in this sense when
as we think that riches can do that for us which God only can; as that they
can do us good or evil. Esaias, 41 23. If they are Gods, says God, let them
do good or evil. God only does good and evil, therefore he is
distinguished from Idols because they cannot do it. Affections follow
opinions, and practice follows affections. Therefore Heb. 11 6. He that will
come to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of all those
that seek him. None will worship God, unless they believe that God can
comfort and releeve them in all their distresses; So no men will earnestly
seek after wealth or riches till they have an opinion, that riches and wealth
will yield them comfort, or be a strong tower of defense to free them from
inconveniences; this makes them to trust in them, and this thought is Idolatry.
There are two Points of Doctrine that arise from these words: The first, is
this.

That to seek help and comfort from any creature, or from riches, and not
from God alone, Doct. 1.
is vain and sinful.

The second is this.

That covetousness which is Idolatry, Doct. 2.
is to be mortified.

Corinth. 8.4. An Idol is nothing in the world; here it is Vanity. Secondly,
Sinfulness, there is no greater sin than it. It is extremely vain, because
we attribute that to it that does only belong to God; To think, that if I am
well, if I am strong in friends, have a well bottomed estate, that then my
mountain is strong on every side, I shall not be removed, this is sinful and
vain; ye shall not live a jot the better or happier for it; A strange
Paradoxe, contrary to the opinion and practice of most men. If we consult with
our treasures, do not we think that if we have such wealth and such friends,
that we should live more comfortably and happily? There is no man but will
answer that he thinks so: But yet my brethren ye are deceived, it is not
so: It belongs to God only to dispense of his Prerogatives, good or evil.
Psalm. 33.17.
A Horse is but a vain thing, says the Psalmist, to get a victory: That is,
though it be as fit a thing as can be in it self, yet if it be left to its
self without God, it is but vain and can do nothing. So I may say of Riches
and other outward things; riches are vain, and honors and friends are vain
to procure happiness of themselves. So Physic of its self is vain to
procure health; without God they are nothing worth: he that thinks otherwise
erreth. Luke 12.19. It was the folly of the rich man that he thought so; and
therefore sang a Requiem to his soul, Eat drink and be merry, O my Soul,
thou have goods laid up for thee for many years: he did not think himself
happy, because he had an interest in God and his favor, but because he had
abundance of outward riches; And therefore you see the end of all his
happiness, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, and then
what is become of all his happiness? Yet such is our folly, that most of us
reflect on the means and on the creatures, and expect happiness from them.
But Christ tells us, they will not do the deed; this night shall they take
away thy soul, and then all thy happiness is gone. The rich man thought
before that he had been secure as long as his wealth continued with him, that
he needed not to expect any calamity; but now he sees that he built upon a
sandy foundation. David though an holy man, being established in his kingdom,
having subdued all his enemies, and furnished himself with wealth and
treasure, he thought that his mountain was then made so strong that it could
never be moved; that to morrow shall be as yesterday and much more abundant;
but, no sooner did God hide his face, from him, but he was troubled, Psalm.
30.7. To show, that it was not his riches and outward prosperity that made him
happy, but God only: So Daniel, 5.23. Be^shazzar when as he thought himself
happy, being environed with his Wives, Princes, and Servants; when as he
praised the gods of silver and the gods of gold, abounded with all outward
prosperity and reposed his happiness in it, is counted but a fool by Daniel
for it; Because he glorified not God, in whose hands his breath and all his
ways were; and therefore he was destroyed.

These things of themselves will not continue with us, nor yet make us happy.
We take not a step to prosperity or adversity, but Gods hand does lead it. My
brethren that hear me this day, that have heretofore thought, that if ye had
such an estate, such learning, such ornaments, and such friends, that then ye
were happy; to persuade you that it is not so, it would change your hopes and
fears, your griefs and joys, and make you labor to be rich in faith and in
good works. It will be very hard to persuade you to this, yet we will do what
we can, and add certain reasons which may persuade you to beleve it to be
so, if God shall add a blessing to them, and join the operation of his Spirit
with them to persuade you.

Reason. 1.
First, this must needs be so, in regard of Gods All-sufficiencie; he alone is
able to comfort without the creatures help: else there were an insufficiency
and narrowness in him, and so he should not be God. If he could not fill
our desires every way, he were not All-sufficient; Even as the Sun should
be defective, if it needed the help of torches to give light. God is blessed
not only in himself, but makes us also blessed; it is the ground of all other
Commandments; Thou shall love and worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou fear: Deuteronomy. 6.13. Matthew. 4.10. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
We must love him with all our hearts, with all our souls; let not the
creature have one jot of them, because all comfort is from God. Genesis 17.1. I am
God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be perfect: that is, love me
altogether, set your affections on none but me, ye need not go unto the
creature, all is in me. If the creature could do any thing for to make us
happy and not God, then we might step out to it; but the creature can add
nothing to it, God only is all-sufficient to make you perfect every way;
though the creature be used by God as an instrument, yet it is only God that
makes you happy and gives you comfort, and not the creature.

Secondly, it must needs be so because of the vanity and emptiness of the
creature: It can do nothing but as it is commanded by God; he is the Lord of
Hoasts, Psalm. 59.5.
who commands all the creatures, as the General does his army. A man having
the creatures to help him, it is by virtue of Gods command. It is the vanity
of the creature that it can do nothing of it self, except there be an
influence from God. Look not then to the creature it self, but to the
influence, action and application that it has from Gods secret concurrance
with it. What it is to have this secret concurrance and influence from God unto
the creature, you may see it expressed by this similitude; Take the hand, it
moves because there is an imperceptible influence from the will that stirs it:
So the creature moving and giving comfort to us, it is Gods will it should do
it, and so it is applied to this or that action. The Artificer using a hatchet
to make a stool or the like, there is an influence from his Art that guides
his hand and it: so the creatures working is by a secret concourse from God,
doing thus and thus. And to know that it is from God, ye find a mutability in
the creature, it works not always one way* Physic and all other things are
inconstant; sometimes it helps, sometimes not, yea many times when as ye have
all the means yet they fail; to show that there is an influence from God, and
that the creatures are vanishing, perishing and unconstant of themselves.

Thirdly, It must be so, because it is sinful to look comfort from any thing
but from God: because by this we attribute that to the creature, which only
belongs to God; which is Idolatry. The creature steals away the heart in an
imperceptible manner, 2 Samuel 15.6.
as Absalom stole away the peoples hearts from David; or as the adulterer
steals away the love of the wife from her husband. This makes you serve the
creatures: this makes you settle your affections on the creatures: if they
fail, ye sorrow; if they come, ye joy: and ye do this with all joy, with
all delight and pleasure, and desire; This is a great sin, nay it is the
greatest sin: as adultery is the greatest sin, because it severs and
dissolves the marriage; so is this the greater, because it severs us from God,
and makes us cleave to the creature.

The maine Consectarie and use from this, is; Use. 1.
To keep you from hasting after worldly things: men are never weary of seeking
them, but spend their whole time in getting of them; and this is the reason,
why the things that belong to salvation are so much neglected: men spend so
much time in a thousand other things and trifles, that they have no time at all
to serve God in: they are busy about riches, honors, credit, or the things
whereon their pleasures do pitch: but if this be digested, it will teach you
to seek all from God, who disposes all things, and to whom the issues of life
and death, Psalm. 68.20.
of good or evil* do belong. Consider with your selves and you shall find;
that the reason wherefore ye seek for outward content and comfort, is because
you think it will do you good if you have it, or hurt if you have it not. But
herein you err, giving that to the creature which only belongs to God. Esaias,
41.23. If the Idols be God, says the Lord, let them do good or evil; The
scope of this place, is to cut off the whorish and adulterish affection of
those, who have an eager and unweaned desire after earthly things, by showing,
that they can do us neither good nor hurt. Therefore God punished David
exceedingly for numbering the people; 2 Samuel 24.
because he thought that they could strengthen him against his enemies without
Gods help. Wherefore, Jeremy, 9.23.24. Thus says the Lord, let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might,
neither let the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glories, glory
in this; that he understands and knows that I am the Lord, which execute
loving kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the earth. As if he should
have said: If these things could do you good or hurt, there were some reason
that you might seek them: but there is nothing in them that you should desire
them; For it is I only that execute Mercy and Judgment, all good and evil is
from me. Therefore Psalm, 62. we have this caveat given us. If riches
increase set not your hearts upon them, magnify not your selves in them or for
them, for all good and comfort is only from God; else you might set your
hearts on them; but now all power and kindness is from him, therefore your
wealth can never do it.

Object.
But it may be objected: That God does comfort us and make us happy in this
life by means, and riches are the means; Wherefore then may we not seek to
them to get this comfort?

Answ.
To this I answer; That God does reward every man according to his works, not
according to his wealth. Yea he can comfort us without these; For he is the
God of all Consolation: 2. Cor. 1.3. and that both Inclusive and Exclusive; all
comfort is in him, and from him, none without him. If we think to have it
from honors, wealth or friends, we deceive our selves, for they are vain and
profit not, 1 Samuel 12.21.22. Turn ye not aside, for then shall ye go after
vain things which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain. All these
things without GOD, will profit you nothing.

Object.
But will not health, wealth and friends profit us?

Answ.
No, not all, they are vanity, they are empty in themselves, they cannot do
it: they are in themselves but vanity; having the creature ye have but the
husk without the grain, the shell without the kernel. The creature is but
empty of it self; except God put into it a fitness to comfort you, all is
vanity and nothing worth, and this vanity is nothing but emptiness. And this
serves to correct the thoughts of men, who think that if they had such an
estate, all their debts paid, if they had such and such friends, then all would
be well with them: and who is it that thinks not thus? But let those that
entertain such thoughts, consider the vanity of the creature: all our sins
proceed from the over-valuing of the creature; for sin is nothing but an
aversion of the soul from the immutable God to the creature. Labor then to
conceive of the creature aright, to see that it is vain: this will keep you
right, and hinder you from going from God and cleaving to the creature.

To press this further, consider these four things first.

Psalm. 39.6. Surely every man walks in a vain shadow, surely they are all
disquieted in vain: He heapeth up riches and knows not who shall gather
them: If we look comfort from riches, we look it but from a shadow, all our
labor is in vain. There is a shadow of the Almighty in which some men walk,
Psalm. 91.1.
where they shall be sure to find this comfort: Others there are that walk in
the shadow of the creature, in the vanity of their minds, seeking comfort from
it; those who thus walk shall be deceived. A shadow though it seem to be
something, yet it is nothing; it may seem to have the lineaments of a man or
some other body, yet it is nothing: So these outward things may seem to have
something in them, but yet indeed they have nothing; those who seek for
comfort in them commit two evils, Ierem. 2.13. They forsake God the fountain
of living waters, and dig unto themselves pits which will hold no water. God
having all comforts in him, comforts never failing; because there is a spring
of comfort in him, yet we forsake him, and dig to our selves pits, which if
they have any water it is but borrowed, and not continuing; and that water
which they have is none of the best, it is muddy and will not always continue*
wherefore pitch your affections on the tru^ substantial good, not on vanities:
If we see a man come to an orchard full of goodly fruits and he should catch
only at the shadow of them, netling his hands, and spending his labor in
vain, we would account him either a fool or a madman; yet we in the clear
Sunshine of the Gospel, (such is our madness) do catch and seek after
shadows with trouble of mind and sorrow of heart, neglecting the substance.

ye go the wrong way to get it.

Luke 10.41.42.
Martha* she was troubled about many things, when as one thing only was
necessary. If ye seek comfort in earthly things, ye must have a thousand
things to help it, but godliness which has the promise of this life and of
the life to come does yield this comfort of its self, if that ye seek it in
it. It is a great advantage for us to have all comforts in one thing:
Godliness only has all these comforts, therefore seek them in it.

whom is no shadow of variety or change. James 1.17.
Every creature is weaker by how much it has more dependency on another
creature: and so are ye weaker by how much more ye depend on outward things.
If ye depend on friends, they may change their affections, and become your
enemies, or death may take them away, and then your happiness is gone: If ye
depend on riches, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eye on that which is not? For
riches certainly make themselves wings, and fly away like an Eagle toward
heaven; and then your happiness is gone: But if ye seek and place your
happiness in God, in whom is no change nor alteration, then it is perpetual.
A dependancy on things that are mutable will yield no comfort, because God will
have all to depend on himself: therefore, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ of God is made
unto us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. That
no flesh might rejoice in its self, but that he that glories, might glory in
the Lord. For this end, God conveied Christ unto us; that he might make us
believe, that we fare not the better for any creature, that so we might
rejoice only in the Lord: therefore he has made Christ redemption from all
evil, that he might furnish us with all good: Christ has redeemed us from
hell and misery, from want of good things: seek not then a dependancy on the
creature, think not that it will better you, and this will make you to depend
on Christ. Therefore for these regards correct your opinion of worldly and
outward things, and judge of them with righteous Judgment: depend only on God
if you will have him to be your portion, as he was the Levites: Refuse him not
as the Israelites did, depend on him in good earnest. A little you say, with
Gods blessing will do much. Labor not therefore, neither toil ye to leave
great portions to your children (the common pretense that men have for their
covetousness) though you leave them never so much, if Gods blessing be not on
it, it is nothing, it can yield them no comfort; yea many times it is an
occasion of their hurt. If then Gods blessing be all in all, if that only can
administer comfort and make us happy, I would ask you this question? What if
ye did leave your children only Gods blessing, would it not be sufficient
though you leave them little or nothing else? Ye think not so: and yet
whatsoever ye can leave them without Gods blessing, is nothing worth. Preachers
labor much in this, to draw you from worldly things, and all to little
purpose: It must be Gods teaching that persuades within, that must effect it:
ye must therefore take pains with your hearts, the generality of the disease
shows that it is hard to be cured; Labor therefore to find out the deceipts
which do hinder your practice of these things; which are these.

One Deceit that deceives men is, that they are ready to say, Deceit. 1.
that these things are the blessings of God. Why then should not we rejoice in
them? As for afflictions they are crosses, and therefore we grieve for them:
if these then did not add to our blessedness, why count we them blessings,
and account Poverty as a cross?

To this I answer, that if ye take them as blessings ye may rejoice in them,
as the instruments by which God does you good. Blessings are relative words,
they have reference unto God: if ye consider them without reference unto him,
they cease to be blessings: therefore if ye consider them merely as
blessings, ye may rejoice in them. Now ye receive them as blessings:

is done in earth, is first acted in heaven; the Sun is first eclipsed there,
and then here: so your estates are first eclipsed there, before that they are
here. Look therefore on GOD, and on these as merely depending on Gods will,
and then you enjoy them merely as blessings.



may have more gladness and comfort in their hearts, than those whose corn
and wine are increased, Psalm. 4.7. Those who have but a small Cottage and a
bed in it, are many times more happy, more healthy, and sleep more quietly,
than those rich men, whose wealth will not suffer them to sleep: Eccles. 5.12.
Many there are, that seem to want outward things and comforts, yet are full of
inward comforts and delights: Many there are, who like Paul and the Apostles, 2
Cor. 6.10.
Seem to have nothing, and ye^ possess all things: As it is all one with God
to help with few as with many; 1 Samuel 14.6. 2 Chr. 14.11.
So he can comfort with few friends and external blessings, as well as with
many: Yea he can make a little that the righteous have, Psalm. 37.16.
more comfortable than all the revenues of the ungodly, be they never so great.
That which has been said of blessings, the like also may be said of crosses;
ye may grieve for them if ye take them as crosses: but withal take heed,
that you account not those things crosses which indeed are no crosses. Want was
no cross to Paul, nor yet Imprisonment: Phil. 4.12. Acts 16.25.
for in the one he abounded, in the other he sung: It is advantage unto us
many times to have outward blessings taken from us. It is advantage to us to
have blood taken away in a Pleurisy: it is good sometimes to lop trees, that
so they may bring forth more fruit; so it is good many times for us to have
crosses to humble us, and to bring us nearer to God: yet ye may sorrow for the
loss of these things, and take it as a cross, if ye can say this from your
hearts, that ye are not afflicted, because ye are made poor, because your
wealth is taken from you but because it is Gods pleasure to take it from you,
either for the abuse of it, or else to punish you for some other sin. So if
that ye are cast into some sickness, ye may not grieve for it as a cross
merely, as it is a sickness, but as you conceive the hand of God in it,
laying it on you as a punishment for your sin.

Deceit. 2.
The second Let and Deceit is, the present sense and feeling that we have of
the comfort that comes from abundance.

Men are ready to say, that they feel comfort from abundance of outward
things; therefore whatsoever you say to the contrary, is but speculations and
fancies. Men are guided by sense, which cannot be deceived; we find and feel
comfort in these things by experience, we see a reality in these things, and
therefore whatsoever you say to the contrary, is but vain, and to no purpose.

Answ.
To this I answer, you must not judge of things according to sense, for sense
was never made a Judge by God, to judge of these things; but judge of them
according to faith and rectified reason, which judges of things that are to
come, that are past and present all together, and so can best judge of these
things as they are.

Now for to help your judgments in these things.

Vanity of vanities, and that all is vanity. Eccles. 1.2.








Now for Sense: you must understand that there is a double sense.





There may be an inward distemper, which may make our joys to be hollow and
counterfeit: there may be sadness of heart, when as there is outward joy;
because there is an inward and supereminent sense which affects the heart
another way: and therefore, Eccles. 2.2. External Joy, is called mad Joy;
because we mind it not: It is the joy of joys, and life of comfort that is
from within, that proceeds from the inward man. As the soul is stronger, and
the more it is in health, so it finds more comfort, both external and
supereminent comfort: Graces are to the soul as health is to the body; the
more and greater they are, the more comfort they administer.

Object.
But ye may object that the creature can administer its own comfort, and of
its self.

Answ.
To this I answer; That there is an aptness and fitness in the creature for to
comfort us, but yet it can yield us no comfort without God: Wherefore keep
your affections in square, have so much joy and delight in the creature, as the
creature requires, and no more; if your affections hold a right proportion with
their objects, they are right; therefore thus far ye may joy in the
creature, and no further.

1 Cor. 7.30.
ye may joy in it as if ye ioyed not, and sorrow in it as if ye sorrowed not.

Cor. 7.29.30.31. Brethren the time is short, it remains therefore that those
who have wives, be as though they had none; that those that weep, be as though
they wept not; that those that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and those
that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not
abusing it, That is, let your affections be loose to these things: Take any of
these outward things, ye may cast your affections on them in a loose manner:
go no further than this; For the fashion of the world passes away; Ye may
be taken away from it, and it from you; therefore affect it no otherwise, than
a transitory thing, and with a loose and transient affection, willing to
depart from it, whenever it shall please GOD to take it from you.

affection; they are things of a dependent nature, they have no bottom of
their own to stand on, they only depend on God, and so ye may love them as
depending on him: eyeing the Fountain, and not the Cesterne from whence they
flow* take not the light from the air only, but look to the Sun from
whence it comes.

Deceit. 3.
The third Deceit, is false reasoning: We find it otherwise by experience: we
see that a diligent hand makes rich, and brings comfort: we see that labor
brings learning; and for the labor which we take to get it, in recompense of
it, it makes us happy.

Answ.
To this I answer, That this chain does not always hold: God breaks it many
times; riches come not always by labor, nor comfort by riches; except God be
with the labor, the labor profits nothing. Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build
the house, they labor in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the City,
the Watchmen watch but in vain. It is in vain to rise up early, to go to
bed late, to eat the bread of carfulness: Ye shall not reap the fruit ye
expect, unless God be with your labor. If Christ be absent the Disciples
may labor all night and catch nothing; Luke 5.5. etc
but if he be present with them, then their labor prospers, then they
enclose a multitude of Fishes: So when as we labor and take pains, and
think to be strong in our own strength without Gods help, we go to work
with a strong key which will not open; but if Gods hand be in the business,
we do that with greater facility and ease which God has appointed we
should do. You may see this in Joseph, God purposed to make him a great man,
see with what facility he was made the Governor of Egypt next to Pharaoh
without his own seeking, and beyond his expectation: So it was with Mordecai;
so with David: God appointed to make them great, and therefore they became
great notwithstanding all oppositions. On the contrary, let man go on in his
own strength, and he shall labor without any profit at all: Hence it is, that
many times we see a concurrencie of all causes, so that we would think that
the effect must needs follow, and yet it follows not, and if it does follow,
we have no comfort in it.

Judas and his Apostleship. A man may have tables well furnished, Riches in
abundance, a Wife fit for him, and yet have no comfort in them, because God
puts a secret disproportion betwixt him and them.

Elisha his servant was ready in the nicke, when the Shunamite came to beg her
possessions and Land of the King, 2. King. 8.5.6. He was then telling the King
how Elisha had restored her son to life, which furthered her suite: So on the
other side, Abraham, When he was to offer up his son Isaac: in the instant
God sent the Ram tied in the Bush, Genesis 22.13. So Saul when as he had
purposed to kill David, God calls him away to fight with the Philistims: and as
God hinders the effect for good, so he does for evil.

E^cles. 9.11.
The battle is not always to the strong: when there are causes and the effect
follows not, it is because God does dispose of things at his pleasure, and can
turn them a contrary way: health and comfort, joy and delight, follow not
outward blessings, except God puts it into them.

The fourth Deceit is this: These things are certain and present, Deceit. 4.
but other things are doubtful and uncertain, we know not whether we shall
have them or no.

Answ.
To this I answer, it is not so: Future, spiritual, and eternal things, are
not uncertain* but those things which we enjoy here, are; those things which
we here enjoy, as also we our selves, are subject to changes and alterations:
we are as men on the sea, having storms as well as calmes. Wealth and all
outward blessings are but transitory things: but faith and spiritual things
are certain and endure for ever: we have an Almighty and unchangeable God, 1
P^^. 1.4.
an immortal incorruptible inheritance: that fades not away, reserved for us
in the highest heavens. In temporal things, who knows what shall be to
morrow; in them thou can not boast of to morrow: Prou. 27.1.
but as for spiritual things they are certain, there is no ambiguity in them.
But the maine answer that I give is, that here we must use our faith; consider
the grounds on which faith relies, and then the conclusions and consequences
that arise from them, take heed to them and be not deceived. If ye believe God
to be the Rewarder of all those that trust in him, as you say he is, Heb. 11.6.
why rest you not on him? Why are ye not contented with him for your portion?
Why think ye not him sufficient? If the creature be God, then follow it; but
if God, be God, then follow him, and be satisfied with him: Labor therefore
for faith unfeigned, and walk according to it.

If then it be vain and sinful to seek help and comfort from any creature,
Use. 2.
or from riches, and to think that they can make us live more comfortably;
hence then consider the sinfulness of it, and put it into the Catalogue of
your other sins, that formerly ye have had such thoughts. Every one is
guilty of this sin more or less, and this is a sin not small, but of a high
nature; It is Idolatry: In the times of ignorance, Satan drew many men to
gross Idolatry, to worship stocks and stones; but now he draws them to
another Idolatry less perceptible, and yet as dangerous in Gods sight as the
other, who is a spirit, and can discern and pry into it. Io^. 4.24.
Let us therefore examine our hearts, and consider how much we have loved and
trusted the creature: let us condemn our selves, and rectify our Judgments,
and judge of things as they are: Let us not think our selves happy for that we
enjoy the creatures; let us not think ourselves blessed in them, but only in
Christ, because it is not in their power to make us happy. If we have so joyed
in these, or loved them so as to love God less, it is adulterous love and joy.
We have no better rule to judge of adulterous love than this, when as our love
to the creature, does lessen our love toward God.

Now least we be deceived in our love to the creature, I will give you these
four signs to know, whether your love to it be right or no.

First, see if your affections to the creature cause you to withdraw your
hearts from God. Ier. 17.5. Cursed be the man that makes flesh his arm, and
whose heart departs from the LORD: It is a sign we make flesh, our arm,
when as we withdraw our hearts from God; we make the creature our aim, when
as it withdrawes us from God. 1 Timothy 5.5. She that is a Widow indeed, trusts
in God, and continues in supplications night and day: This is a sign that
they trusted in God, not in the creature, because they pray unto him. Consider
what your conversation is, whether it be in heaven or no: Phil. 3.20. Our
conversation is in heaven: the neglecting and not minding of earthly things in
the former verse, showed him not to be of an earthly conversation. The more our
hearts are drawn from God, the more are they fixed and set on earthly things.

Luke 16.9.
Do ye make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon, not caring for these things
when they come in competition with a good conscience, or do ye forsake GOD,
and stick to them?



in these: on the contrary, nothing troubles a worldly man, but losses and
crosses, sin troubles him not at all: By this judge of your love to Riches,
whether it be right or no.

Thus much of the first general Doctrine; we come now to the second, which is
this.

Doct. 2.
That Covetousness is to be mortified.

That Covetousness is unlawful, all know it: the things therefore that will
be useful in the handling of this point, will be to show you what
Covetousness is; and why it is to be mortified.

Now to show you what it is.

Covetousness may be defined, to be a sinful desire of getting or keeping
money or wealth inordinately.

Luke 16.19.
or to fare deliciously every day; or else to spend them on some lust, Iam. 4.3.
as well as to keep them.

Secondly, it is, of getting or keeping money; of getting it inordinately, when
as we seek it by wrong meeanes; or of keeping it inordinately; and that in
two cases. First, in not bestowing it on our selves, as we ought. There is
tenacity of this sort among men, Eccles. 4.13. There is a great evil under the
Sun; namely, Riches kept by the owners thereof to their hurt: When as it is
comely and good for a man to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his
labor that he takes under the Sun, all the days of his life which God
gives him, for this is his portion: And thus to take his Portion and to
rejoice in his labor is the gift of God. Eccles. 5.18.19. Then secondly, in
not giving to others, being too straight handed, having goods and seeing othrrs
to want.



Now this affection of seeking money is said to be inordinate, in these four
respects.









every man, that is his Portion here, Eccles. 5.18. And he that desires and
withholds more than his portion, is he that offends in the measure, Prove.
11.24.

But how shall I know Gods Will, and what my portion is?

Answ.
I answer, by the event: see in what estate and condition God has set you, see
what estate he has given you, this is your Portion, and with it you must be
contented. GOD has a Soveraigntie over us, we are but his subjects, and must
be contented with what he gives us: you are contented with that which your
Father or your Prince gives you; therefore you must receive that which God
bestows upon you, with all humility and thankfulness. If we be soundly
humbled, we confess our selves worthy to be destroyed, Ezech. 36.32. We
confess with Jacob, Genesis 32.10. That we are unworthy of the least of Gods
mercies; that the least Portion is more than we deserve. The Prodigal being
humbled, was contented with the lowest place in his fathers house, to be as
one of his Fathers household servants: Luke 15.19.
and so we ought to be content with that Portion which God has given us, be
it never so small, because it is more than we deserve; and if we desire or
seek for more, this desire is sinful.

Secondly, as we ought not to seek wealth more than is our due; so we ought
not to seek it by unlawful means; not by usury, gaming, oppression, fraud,
deceit, or any other unlawful means. I add this of gaming, because it is
unlawful (though it be little considered:) for it is no means that God has
appointed or sanctified for to get money; because it is neither a gift nor a
bargain. I dispute not now; whether playing for trifles, to put life into the
game be lawful, but of gaming with an intent to get and gain money or wealth;
this I say is an unlawful means, and such as have gotten money by these
unlawful means, are bound to restitution.

desires as much Physic as will cure him, and no more: so we ought to desire
as much as will serve our necessities, and no more. But if we desire it for
ambition, pleasures, or any other by-respect, this desire is sinful and
inordinate.



James 4.4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship
of the world, is an enmity with God, and whosoever is a friend of the world, is
an enemy to God? If we be in love with it for its own beauty, it is sinful,
it is spiritual adultery.

he that trusts in Riches shall fall, Prove. 11.28. And therefore, if we have
food and raiment we ought therewith to be contented, 1. Tim. 6.8. And not to
trust in uncertain riches.

Tim. 6.17. Paul bids Timothy, Charge those that are rich in this world, that
they be not high minded.

David, he would number the people to glory and trust in them: this is
sinful; For he that glories, must glory in the Lord not in them: 1 Cor. 1.31.

days are sorrows, our travel grief, and our hearts take no rest in the
night. Eccles. 2.23. When as we seek it, not staying Gods leisure; such a
desire is inordinate, importunate, and sinful: therefore, 1 Timothy 6.9.10. Those
that will be rich, (that is, such who make too much haste to be rich,) fall
into temptation and a snare; and into many foolish and hurtful lusts which
drown men in perdition and destruction, and pierce them through with many
sorrows.

But now you will object, Quest.
that riches are blessings; and demand of me whether you may not desire riches
as they are blessings?

Answ.
I answer, that it is true, that they are blessings, and the reward of the fear
of GOD. Prove. 22.4. By humility and the fear of the Lord, are Riches and
Honor. Therefore it is said of David, that He died full of Riches. 1 Chro.
29.28
Abraham's servant reckoned them as a blessing. Genesis 24.35. The Lord has
blessed my Master greatly and he is become great, and he has given him
Flocks, and Herds, and Silver, and Gold, and Menservants, and Maidservants,
and Camels and Asses: Jacob counted them as blessings, Genesis 32.10. And Christ
himself says, Acts 20.35.
That it is more blessed to lend than to borrow, to give than to receive; may
we not then desire them? To answer this, ye must know, that there is a
twofold will and desire. First, a remiss will, which is rather an inclination
than a will. Secondly, there is a peremptory will, which is mature ripe and
peremptory: with this latter will we may not desire them, but with the former
we may; for in the 1 Timothy 6.8. If we have food and raiment, let us therewith be
content: If any man have a desire to be rich; yet having food and raiment let
him not so desire more riches; but that he may be content with it; yea having,
or having them not, ye must be content. Now there is a double content; the
first is, as when a man is sick (to express it by a similitude) yet he may
pray for health, and use means to get it with a full and perfect will, yet
with a depending on Gods will: so we being in want may desire riches and wealth
with a full will, sitting in the mean time under Gods hand, and referring and
submitting our wills to his will. Secondly, there is a content, whereby having
sufficient for food and raiment we suffer not our wills actually to desire
more, nor to go beyond the limits which God has set us. God has promised
outward blessings as a reward of his service, and propounds them to us, as so
many arguments and motives to stir us up to fear him: and therefore we may
desire them as his blessings, with such a remiss and subordinate desire as
this; when as we set bounds and limits to the sea of our own desires which are
in themselves turbulent, and submit our selves wholly to Gods will. Christ
being to die had a will to live, yet not a full and resolute will, but a will
subordinate to Gods Will. Father if thou will, Mat. 26.39.
let this Cup pass from me, yet not my Will but thine be done: his will was
but an inclination, and not a will; so we may wish riches with a remiss will
and inclination, but not with a perfect will; that is, we may not go about to
get them with a full desire and resolution.

But how far may a man desire wealth? Quest.
Where must he set limits to his desires? where must they be restrained?

Answ.
I answer, that he may desire food and raiment, he may desire that which is
necessary for nature, without which he cannot live and subsist: as a man may
desire a ship to pass over the sea from one country to another, because he
cannot pass over without it: so a man may desire food and raiment in the sea
of this life, because without it he cannot finish his course which God has
prescribed unto him.

Now there is a threefold necessity.

First, there is a necessity of expedience, as if a man has a a journey to
go, 'its true, he may go it on foot, yet he may desire a horse ride on,
because it will be more expedient for him: so you may desire with a remiss
desire, so much as is expedient for your vocation and calling, so much as it
requires.





Now besides this desire of things necessary, there is a desire of
superfluity and excess: this desire proceeds not from nature but from lust;
because we desire such a degree of wealth, either to raise our estates, or that
we may bestow it on our lusts and pleasures; that like the rich Glutton, Luke,
16. We may be well clad and fare deliciously every day. Many men's lives are
nothing else but playing and eating, eating and playing, and are led always in
this circuit: To desire wealth to this or any other superfluous end is very
sinful, and it must needs be so for many reasons.

First, Reason. 1.
because man's life stands not in abundance and excess: therefore Luke, 12.13,
14, 15. verses. When as a certain man spoke to Christ to speak to his brother
to divide the inheritance with him: he said unto him, Man who made me a Judge
or devider ^ver you; and then bids the multitude to beware of Covetousness;
because that a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things that he
possesses: That is, though ye have never so much wealth, yet ye shall not
live the longer for it; your life consists not in it, no more does your
comfort: for they will but please the sight of your eye, they will not make you
more happier than you are; seek not therefore superfluity, for your life
consists not in abundance: He is but a fool, that thinks that these things
will make him happy, that these will make him rich: all they that are not rich
in God, Luke 12.21.
are poor; and if they think themselves happy and rich in these things, they
are but fools.

be content with food and raiment: Nor yet from nature, 1 Timothy 6.8.
which seeks not superfluities; therefore proceeding from lust it must needs
be sinful.

Prove. 30.8. Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, feed me with food convenient
for me, not with superfluities: And in the Lords Prayer we are taught not to
pray for superfluities, Mat. 6.11.
but, Give us this day our daily bread, that is, as much as is necessary for
us, and no more: therefore we may not desire it. The seeking of more than is
necessary does hinder us, and not further us; a shoe that is too big, does
hinder a traveller, as well as one that is too little.

Agurs Prayer, Prove. 30.8.9. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with
food convenient for me; least I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the
Lord? Fullness and excess is always dangerous: full tables do cause
surfeits, full cups make a strong brain giddy. The strongest Saints has been
shaken with prosperity and excess, as David, Hezekiah, Solomon; they sinned by
reason of excess in outward things. It is dangerous to be rich, therefore it
is David's counsel, Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase, set not your hearts upon
them. Mar. 10.23.24, 25.
A rich man cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: It is easier for a Camel
to go through the eye of a needle, than for him to enter into Heaven: For if a
man be rich, it is a thousand to one, but that he trusts in his riches, and
it is impossible that he who trusts in his Riches, should enter into heaven.

Tim. 6.8. If we have food and raiment, let us therewith be content. This is
the bound that God has set us, we must not go beyond it. If it were lawful
for any man to desire and have abundance, then it were lawful for Kings; yet
God has set limits to them. Deuteronomy: ^7.17. He shall not multiply Horses nor
Wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he greatly
multiply to himself silver and gold, that his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren: God has set us down limits and bounds how far we should go,
therefore to pass beyond them is sinful, but we pass beyond them, when as we
desire superfluity, therefore the desire of superfluity is sinful.

But may not a man use his calling to increase his wealth? Quest.


Answ.
I answer, that the end of men's callings is not to gather riches, if men make
this their end, it is a wrong end; but the end of our calling is to serve God
and man. The ground of which is this. Every man is a member of the Common
wealth, every man has some gifts or other, which must not lie idle: every man
has some Talents, and must use them to his Masters advantage; and how can that
be, except he do good to men? Every one is a Servant to Christ, and must do
Gods work: no man is free; every one is Christ's servant, and must be diligent
to serve Christ, and to do good to men. Romans 12.6.7.8.
He that has an office must be diligent in it, and attend on it: every man
must attend his calling, and be diligent in it. If riches come in by our
calling, that is the wages, not the end of our calling, for it looks only to
God: we must not make gain the end of our callings; there are many that make
gain their godliness, and the end of their professions: Romans 16.18.
Some preach only for gain: others use all other callings only for gain:
but if any man will make gain the end of his calling, though he may conceal
and hide his end from men, yet let him be sure that he shall answer God, the
searcher of the hearts for it: on the other side, if a man by diligence in his
calling have Riches following him, he may take them as a blessing of God
bestowed on him, Pro. 10.4.
and as a reward of his calling. The diligent hand makes rich; that is, GOD
will surely reward it; not that we must eye riches and make them our end: Pro.
10.22.
GOD makes a man rich, and man makes himself rich. God makes us rich, by being
diligent in our callings; using them to his glory and man's good, he does cast
riches on us: Man makes himself rich, when as he makes riches the end of his
calling, and does not expect them as a reward that comes from God. I shall
express it by Jacob. Jacob he serves Laban faithfully, Genesis 30.43.
and God blessed him so that he did grow rich: he went not out of his
Compass and Sphere, he took the wages that was given him, and because Gods
end was to make him rich, God enriched him by his wages, as a reward of his
service. The more diligent a man is in his calling the more sincere and
upright, the more God does bless him, and increase his riches. God makes men
rich, Pro. 10.22.
when as he gives them riches without sorrows, and troubles, when as they
come in with ease, without expectation and disquiet: Man makes himself rich,
when as there is great trouble in getting, keeping, and enjoying them: when as
he uses his calling to get riches, or when as he uses unlawful means. The
method that God uses to enrich men, is this; He first bids us seek the
kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, Mat. 6.33.
and then all these things shall be administered unto us as wages: we must
look to our duty, and let God alone to provide and pay us our wages: he that
takes a servant, bids him only to look to his duty, and let him alone to
provide him meat, drink and wages. We are all but servants, God is our
Master, let us look to our duty, and leave the wages to him.

Quest.
But whether may not a man take care to get wealth? Is not a man to take care
for his estate, to in^rease it and fit it?

Answ.
I answer, he may lawfully take care of it, observing the right rules in doing
it, which are these.

God: if he does fill himself with too much business in his own calling* or
step into other callings, this is sinful and inordinate. If a man in his own
calling, fill himself with so much business that he cannot intend the things
of salvation, that he is so much tired with them that he has no spare time to
search his own heart, and do the particular duties necessary to salvation, he
then fails in this, and sins in his calling.

Abraham was poor and so was Jacob, yet God made them rich and mighty: they
were diligent in their callings, and God brought in wealth. God calls not a man
to trust in himself, to make riches his aim and end, to seek excess,
superfluity, and abundance; to live deliciously, to satisfy his lusts and
pleasures; Our aim must be Gods glory and the public good, and then GOD
will cast riches upon us as our wages.

Thirdly, let it be a right care, and not an inordinate care: There is an
inordinate care which choakes the Word; Mat. 13.22.
ye may know whether your care be such a care or not, by these three signs.







But when is a man a covetous man? Quest.


Answ.
I answer, that then a man is a covetous man, when he has desires arising
within him, which are contrary to the former rules, and he resists them not; or
else resists them so weakly and feebly, that he gets no ground of them: he
sees no reason why he should resist them, and therefore gives way unto them. A
man is not a covetous man, nor yet an ambitious man, which has covetous and
ambitious thoughts; for these the holiest men have; but he that has such
thoughts, and strives not at all against them, or else strives but weakly, he
is a covetous or ambitious man. A godly man may have these thoughts and
desires, but he strives strongly against them, gets ground of them, and gives
them a deaths wound: but the covetous man he yields unto them, the godly man he
gets the victory over them.

Idolatry, and Spiritual Adultery: and then it is a bitter root having many
stalks on it: he that does any thing to hold correspondency with it, he that
does belong unto it, to him it is the root of all evil. Luke 16. It keeps a
man from salvation, it choakes the good seed of the Word sown in men's hearts.
Mat. 13.22.
Secondly, it must be mortified; for the vanity of the object is not worth the
seeking: therefore, Luke 16.9. Earthly treasure is set down in a comparison
with the true treasure, and expressed in these four circumstances.

the Mammon of unrighteousness and wicked riches, because it makes men wicked;
it being opposed to spiritual blessings, which are best.

It is least, because it does least good, preserves us not from evil, does the
soul no good.

false treasure, it has but the shadow of the true, it shines as if it were
true, but yet it is false and counterfeit.

our own, it is another man's; Riches are the goods of others, not our own,
Luke 16.12. and Luke 10.41.42. There are four attributes given to riches.
First, They are many things, and require much labor; Martha was troubled about
many things. Secondly, they are unnecessary, one thing is necessary. Thirdly,
they will be taken away from us. Fourthly, they are not the best: and
therefore our desire after them should be mortified.

From hence therefore be exhorted to mortify this earthly member,
Covetousness, Use.
which is Idolatry; a sin to which all men are subject. Young men though they
want experience of Riches, are notwithstanding subject to this vice; but old
men are most subject to it, though they have least cause and reason for it.
Professors of Religion are subject to it, many times it grows up with the
Corn and choakes it; therefore use effectual means to root it out of your
hearts.

not to incline your hearts to Covetousness, it is impossible for man, Psalm.
119.36.
but easy for God to do it.

we are never humbled for sin, so much as we should be; and this is the
reason why many would rather let Christ go than their wealth and riches.

Godliness with content, which is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. This will heal the
malady, and take away the false pretense of gathering, having, and affecting
riches.

FINIS.
AN ELEGANT AND LIVELY DESCRIPTION OF Spiritual Life and Death.

DELIVERED In diverse Sermons in Lincolnes-Inne, November the 9.th. M.DCXXIII.
upon John, 5.25.

BY I. P. then Batchellor of Divinity, and Chaplain in Ordinary to the
Prince his Highness.

Ignatius Epistola 15. ad Romanos.

Mors est vita sine Christo.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes for Michael Spark, at the blue Bible in
Greene-Arbor. 1632.

AN Elegant and lively description, of Spiritual DEATH and LIFE.
JOHN 5.25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that the hour is coming and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live.


THE Occasion of these words was this: when as Christ had affirmed to the
Jews, that God was his Father, and the Jews went about to kill him for it, ve.
18. He proves what he had said by this argument: He that is able to give life
to the dead is God, or the Son of God; But I am able to give life to the
dead; ( The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and those that hear it shall live;) Therefore I am the Son
of God. In brief, these words show Christ's Divinity by the effects of it, that
he can quicken the dead.

In these words we may consider these parts.

The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and shall live. Secondly,
the instrument by which he does it, and that is, by his Word; which is not
meant only the bare preaching and hearing of the Word; but such an inward,
commanding, powerful, operative word, that makes men do that which is
commanded them: Such a word was spoken to Lazarus being dead, Lazarus come
forth; and he did it. This word commands men, and makes them to obey it.

the hour is coming, and now is; that is, the time shall come when as it
shall be abundantly revealed, the fruit of the Gospel shall appear more
plentifully and fully hereafter, but yet it is now beginning to appear; there
is now some small fruit of it. Verily Verily I say unto you: And these are the
parts of this Text.

Out of these words I purpose to show you these three things.

What the estate of all men is out of Christ.

what we gain by Christ.

What we must do for Christ.

out of Christ, for this will make you to prize him more. And the point for
this is,

That every man out of Christ is in a state of death, or dead man: that is,
Doct. 1.
All men how ever they are borne living, yet they are still dead men: without
the living Spirit the root is dead. Hence are these places of Scripture, Genesis
2.17. The day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death. Mat. 8.22. Let
the dead bury their dead. Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light. The meaning is, that all men are
spiritually dead. This will be of some moment, to show you that you are dead
without Christ. Ye account it a ghastly sight to see many dead men lie
together, it affects you much: but to see a multitude of dead men walk and
stand before us, that affects us not. The natural death is but a picture or
shadow of death, but this spiritual death, is death indeed: As it is said
spiritually of Christ's flesh, Ioh. 6.55. That it is meat indeed. Now that you
may know what this death is, I will show you,







What this spiritual death is


For the first; what this death is; it consists in two things. First, in death
there is a privation of life: then a man is dead, when as the soul is
separated from the body: so a man is spiritually dead, when as the soul is
separated from the quickening spirit of Grace, and righteousness: Romans 7.1^.
This is all our cases, In us there dwells no good, there is no Spirit of life
within us: the Soul is so out of order, that the spirit is weary of it and
forsakes it. When the body grows distempered and unfit for the Soul to use,
then the Soul leaves it. Even as when the instrument is quite out of tune, a
man lays it aside; whiles it is in tune he plays on it: So a man dwells in a
house as long as it is habitable and fit to dwell in, but when it becomes
unhabitable he departs: so, as long as the body is a fit organ for the soul,
it keeps it; when it becomes unfit, it leaves it. Even so the holy Ghost lives
in the soul of man, as long as it is in good temper, but being distempered by
sin, the holy Ghost removes. You may see it in Adam* as soon as he did eat
of the forbidden fruit, the holy Ghost left him, and he lost his Original
righteounes.

the souls of men: This you may see Heb. 9.14. where the works you do before
regeneration, are called, Dead works: there would be a contradiction in
calling them dead works, if there were not another positive evil form in
man, beside the absence of the quickening Spirit, Romans 7.18. Chap. 8.1.4. to 10.
which form is called Flesh in the Scriptures.

Object.
But it may be objected, that sin is a mere privation of good, that it is a
Non-ens; therefore flesh cannot be said to be an operative quality and form
of sin.

Answ.
To this I answer, that though all sin be a mere privation, yet it is in an
operative subject, and thence it comes to pass that sin is fruitful in
evil works. As for example, take an Horse and put out his eyes, as long as
he stands still there is no error; but if he begins to run once, he runs
amiss, and the longer he runs, the further he is out of the way wherein he
should go; and all this because he wants his eyes, which should direct him: So
it is with sin, though in its self it be but a mere privation, yet it is
seated in the soul, which is always active: Anima nunquam otiosa; The
goodness that should inlighten it is taken away, and there is a positive evil
quality put into it, that leads us on to evil.

Consider farther whence this death proceeds, the original of it, is the
understanding and mind of man, which is primu^ vivens, and ultimum moriens.
That which lives first and dies last. The cause of life is the understanding
enlightened to see the truth; when the affections are right, and the
understanding straight, then we live; when it is darkened, all goes out of
order. Ioh. 1.4. speaking of Christ, it is said, that in him there was life,
and the life was the light of men: he was life because he was light, he did
inliven men, because he did inlighten them. therefore Ephe. 5.4. the Apostle
speaks thus to men; Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light: because light is the beginning of spiritual
life. Therefore it is said, James 1.18. Of his own will begot he them, by the
word of truth: that is, the word rectifies the understanding and opinion, which
is the first thing in this spiritual birth: and Ephe 4.22.24. Put off the old
man which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts thereof; and put on the
new man, which after God is created in holiness, and perfect righteousness.
The old man is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts: that which is here
called deceitful lusts, etc. in the Original, signifies, lusts proceeding
from error, and holiness proceeding from truth; Lust proceeds from error, in
mistaking things; for lust is nothing else but affection misplaced, proceeding
from error: and that holiness in which God delights, in which his Image
consists, comes from truth. When Adam was alive, he judged aright, because
then the wheels and affections of his soul were right: Being dead by reason
of his fall, he lost his sight, he saw no beauty in the ways of God; and this
is the case of all unregenerate men: but when the Spirit rectifies the
judgment and convinces men of sinn^ and righteousness, then they begin to
revive. To be dead is to have the understanding darkened, the judgment
erroneous: to be alive is to have the understanding enlightened, and the
judgment rectified; And thus much for the first, what this death is.

We come now to the kinds of this death, The kinds of Spiritual death.
which are three.



Ephe. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins: and
there is a death for sin that is contrary to the life of Glory.

God joins himself to the souls of good and bad: to those that are not
sanctified, he joins himself in a common manner, and thence it is, they have
common joy, common comfort, common civility; to the godly he joins himself in
an extraordinary manner, by which they have extraordinary joy: now when God is
separated from the soul, then comes a perfect death; see it in the separation
of God from Christ's humanity. God withdrawing himself from him but for a time,
Mat. 27.46.
he cries out, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me; As God withdrawes
himself more or less, so is our joy, our sorrow more or less. Thus much for
the kinds of this death.

The symptoms of Spiritual death.
We proceed now to the Symptoms or signs of this death, and they are four.

The first is this; men are said to be dead when they understand nothing, when
as there is no reason exstant in them, when they see no more than dead men. The
life is naught else but the soul acted: then a man is said to live when the
understanding part is acted. So man is spiritually dead when as his
understanding is darkened, when as he sees or understands nothing of Gods
ways, 1 Cor. 2.14.
because they are spiritual* and he carnal.

Object.
But it may be objected: men understand things belonging to faith and
repentance, carnal men not yet sanctified have some understanding of these.

Answ.
I answer, that they may understand the materials belonging to godliness as
well as others, but yet they relish them not, they see them not with a
spiritual eye. Tit. 1.16. They are to every good work reprobate; they cannot
judge aright of any good works, as to like, approve and love them, to see a
beauty in them as they are good: Romans 8.7. the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
with God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, the Greek word is (...);
the meaning is not that they understand it not, but they like it not, they
relish it not, they taste it not; they think of Gods ways, that they are but
folly, 1 Cor. 2.14. They are at enmity with them, they count them dross.

opus operatum, but they cannot do it in an holy manner; their prayers, their
hearing, receiving of the Sacrament, and the like, are dead works without
faith the principal of life, how ever they may be fair in other men's eyes.

have hard hearts which cannot repent, Romans 2.5. when they have hearts as hard
as a stone, Ezekiel. 36.27. or when they are affected with them only as natural
men apprehend evil; not from a quickening Spirit, but from a self-love.

pictum putavi esse verum, and verum putavi esse pictum:) they may be much
alike, yet they have not that liveliness and beauty as living men have, Psalm.
96.6. Psalm. 110.3.
Gods beauty ( the beauty of holiness) is not found in them.

Object.
But it may be objected, they have many excellencies in them, they know much,
they excel in moral virtues.

Answ.
I answer, they may have excellencies, as a dead man may have Jewels and chains
about him, yet they are dead: they have them, but yet they are as Jewels of
gold in a Swines snoute; Prove 11.2^. 2 Pet. 2.22.
they are as Swine, their good things make them not men; they are beautiful,
yet they are but dead men; as the evil works of good men make them not bad
men: so the good works of evil men, make them not good. Thus much for the
signs of this Death.

The degrees of Spiritual death.
use of them. Romans 2.12.13, 14, 15, 16
The Gentiles they shall only be condemned for breaking the Law of nature,
because they knew no other Law; The Jews they shall be condemned for sinning
against the Law of nature, and the Law of Moses, they had a double Law, and
shall be condemned for the breach of it; Christians having a treble Law, the
Gospel, the Law of nature, the morrall Law, shall be condemned for all three,;
and among all Christians, such as have had more means, and better education,
the greater shall their punishment be.

enmity to the ways of God, Romans 1.30. Heb. 10.29. Acts 5.39.
being fighters against God, and enemies to the Saints; this is the lowest
step. The second degree is, when as men are not so active that way, but yet are
dead in pleasures, ambition, 1 Timothy 5.6.
covetousness, and the like. There is a generation of men which trouble not
themselves to oppose God and the Saints, but give themselves to pleasures, and
like those Widows, 1 Timothy 5.6. are dead in pleasures, while they are alive.
The last step in this death, is the death of Civility. Civil men come nearer
the Saints of God than others, they come within a step or two of heaven, and
yet are shut out; Mar. 12.34.
they are not far from them the kingdom of Heaven, as Christ said to the
young man; yet they miss of it as well as others.

Romans 14.17.
others have peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost, the beginning of
eternal life. And thus much for the degrees of these deaths.

Object.
Now hearing that all are dead in trespasses and sins, ye may object; If we
be dead, why do you preach unto us? If we be dead, we understand not, we
move not, we are not capable of what you say.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer, First, there is a great difference between this spiritual
death, and natural death.





which the Spirit breathes the breath of life; whereas naturally dead men
cannot come to the means of life.

Answ. 2.
Secondly I answer, that though ye are dead, yet hearing may breed life, the
word can do it. There was an end why Christ spoke to Lazarus, that was dead,
Lazarus come forth, because his word wrought life; Ioh. 11.43.44.
therefore though ye are dead, yet because the word can work life in you, our
preaching is not in vain.

Ezekiel. 18.31. Why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? implying that this
spiritual death in sin, is a voluntary death.

Object.
But ye will object, men are not quite dead, there are some relics of Gods
Image still left in them; how are they then dead?

Answ.
To this I answer, that there is a double Image of God; first a natural,
standing in the natural frame of the soul, as to be immortal, immateriall;
So there is understanding, will and reason, and some sparks of life left in
us, as the remainder of a stately building that is ruinated: but yet there are
no sparks of the living Image of God left in us the spiritual Image of God
consisting in holiness and true righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24.
remains not; the Papists indeed deny it, but how will they answer the rule of
the Fathers: that Supernaturalia dona sunt penitus ablata, naturalia quassata;
that supernatural gifts are utterly taken away, no sparks of them remain.

Object.
But it will be objected, that though men by nature have nothing left, yet there
is now an universal ability and grace, an universal sufficiency given unto
them.

Answ.
universal grace, is the same thing that nature is, but they put another
term upon it; it is found in nature, and common to all wherever it is,
therefore it cannot be grace. For in grace there is always something that is
peculiar.



it would take away all election: there might then be prescience, but no
election, no predestination to death or life.

Paul made it such matter of difficulty to answer that question of election,
Romans 9. If Aristotle and other Heathen, if every one have such a general
sufficiency, Paul would not have made such a scrupulous answer, Romans 11.33.
and have cried out of the depth.

that which is borne of flesh is flesh, Ioh. 3.5.6.
and that which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit; we are all borne of the
flesh, and cannot therefore have this spiritual sufficiency.

Object.
But yet there are some spiritual gifts in men.

Answ.
I answer, that we cannot have these spiritual gifts if we are not borne of the
Spirit; that which is borne of the flesh is flesh. Not Bellarmine himself, nor
any man else will say that all are borne of the Spirit. It is our Saviors own
speech. John 15.2. Every branch in me not bearing fruit, he takes away, and
it is cast out, and withered; that is, as the branch not being in the root,
brings forth no fruit, so men as long as they are not ingrafted into Christ,
bring forth no buds, no fruit at all; they may hear the word, but they cannot
make use of it, they cannot do it without the Spirit, and that is free: it
breaths where it lists: compare John 3.8. the Spirit breaths where it
lists, with John 6.44. No man can come unto me unless the Father draw him,
that is, not as a sheep is lead with a bough; for Christ does not say, no man
will come, but, no man can come except the Father draw him; compel him as it
were by force, not persuade him by entreaty: that is, unless he changes, and
takes away his wolvish will.

Object.
But it will be objected, that God draws every man.

Answ.
I answer, that the context concludes against this. For Christ does bring this
in, to show the reason, why many did not receive his Doctrine; and he
concludes with this, that men therefore do not receive it, because God does
not draw them: None can come unto me except the Father draw him.

Object.
I will answer one objection more and so conclude: If we are dead, to what end
is the Law given, why are we commanded to do thus and thus, if we be dead?

Answ.
To this I answer, that the Law is given to this end, to show us our weakness,
and to lead us unto Christ: it is not given us to keep exactly, for that is
impossible: it was impossible to keep it through the weakness of the flesh,
Romans 8.3. the Law was therefore given that we might know our weakness; not
that we should keep it, but that Christ's righteousness might be fulfilled in
us by faith. Gal. 3.24. the Law is our schoolemasted to bring us to Christ,
that we might be justified through faith, that is the end of ^he Law.

Object.
But it will be objected: that in as much as we are commanded to do things
impossible, man's nature is destroyed, for man is a free creature. Secondly, the
command implies an absurdity, an impossibility, to bid a man do that which he
cannot do; to bid a man that is in a deep Well, bound hand and foot, to come
out himself is foolish; ye may blame him for falling in, it is absurd to bid
him come out.

Answ.
To this I answer, that there is a difference between the external binding,
and the bonds wherewith a man is fettered by sin; There is an external
impediment, which a man cannot remove, as when he is fettered in the well; but
there is no external impediment, when as men are bound in the chains of sin.
When we command you to do thus and thus, all the business is with the will,
we rather say men will not, than they cannot come. There is liberty when as a
man has eligibile or non eligibile; when he has a thing in his own choice,
when there is no impediment, when he may argue both ways: If a man out of the
perverseness of his nature does it not, it is not compulsory, but free; a
beasts action is not free because he cannot reason on both sides, but man when
he considers arguments on both sides, when he can say, do not do such a
thing, but do such a thing; when he can conceive arguments on both sides, he
is free; there is no such external impediment in him, as to bid one in
darkensse, to do a thing of the light, or one bound hand and foot in a pit,
to come out; since the chief impediment here, is in the depraved wills of men,
which God does rectify and change by his grace and Spirit, through the use of
means.

If then every man out of Christ be in an estate of death, Use 1.
let every man examine himself, and consider whether he be a dead man or no;
this is the great quere or question in this mutability and incertaintie of
things. Let us make the life to come sure; our life is uncertain here; but
have we this spiritual life, are we living men? then we are happy: but are we
dead? then he that is not partaker of the first resurrection, shall not be
partaker of the second. It is too late to begin to live, when we are dying,
certainly the time of our natural death is a time of spending, not of getting
or inquiring after life: If ye defer this search while ye are in health,
when ye lie on your deaths bed, when ye shall see heaven and hell immediately
presented unto you, this question will hold you solicitous, and then you shall
see that this spiritual life, is the life indeed. The time of this natural
life, is not long; the candle burns not long if it burn out; yet it is oftener
blown out than burnt out; men oftener fall down than come down from the tree
of life: this Tabernacle is often thrown down before it falls down, therefore
in this short life make your selves sure of eternal life.

Now there are two things which hinder this search and inquiry after
spiritual life.



It will be our wisdom therefore to consider our end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. To help
you therefore in this Quere, whether you are dead or alive?

Romans 7.9.10 I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came,
sin revived, and I died; that is, the Commandment awakens my sins, and
they being aalive I died; sin when it affrights not a man's conscience, then
he is dead; when it wounds the conscience, then he is alive. The Law being
brought to the soul by the Spirit, ye see the rectitude of the Commandment,
and your own obliquity and crookedness; then sin is alive and ye die. Peter
preaching to the Jews, Acts 2. recites to them their sin in crucifying the
Lord of glory, which sin was made alive, and pricked them at their hearts.
Sin was dead in David, till Nathan and the Law came unto him, afterward he
lived and was humbled. Luke 5. Peter seeing Christ's Divinity by the draught of
Fishes, cries out, Depart from me Lord, for I am a sinful man; he had sins
in him before, but they were dead; then they were made alive. Paul, he had
sins that were dead in him, but when the outward light (which was but a tipe
of his light within) did shine about him, then he dies, and his sins were
made alive: So Joseph's brethren had sins, but they were not made alive till
they were put in prison, Genesis 42.21.22.
then their sin in selling their brother Joseph lived, and they died. Has
sin ever been alive in you by the commandment to slay you? that is, has it
bred such an apprehension in you, as of death; (not a sigh or two for a day,
that is no slaying of you, but ye must apprehend sin as death, as one that is
to be executed forthwith apprehends death, so must you apprehend sin) then
it is a sign, that there is life within you.

Who ever is in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17.
is a new creature; it works a general change from death to life; it makes all
our actions to be vigorous, like the actions of living men, Old things pass
away, all things become new, it makes men lead a new life: If old acquaintance
and lusts would draw us away, we answer that we are dead, that we live no more
to these, that now we have not our own wills: Christ lives in us and works in
us, Gal. 2.20. It is not I that live, but Christ lives in me. The same mind
will be in us that was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. Now if ye desire to know
whether Christ live in you or no, or whether you are in an estate of death; you
must see whether you have these two things which are in every one in whom
Christ lives: first see whether you live to him: He died that we should not
live to our selve, 2 Cor. 5.15.
but to him alone. In moral things the end and principle are all one. Before
Christ lived in you, all you did was from your selves, ye were your own
principle and end: but Christ living in you, there is another end; ye eye
Christ, ye look to him, all that ye do is done in sincerity, it is done for
him and from him.

Quest.
But how can Christ be the end of our callings, eating, drinking, and
recreations?

Answ.
I answer, that of every action Christ must be the end, ye must do as a man in
a journey; though every step he treades he thinks not of his journeies end,
yet the general aim of every step must be for that end, and that causes
every step: so in all ye do, the general end must be Christ.

John. 6.68. When Christ demanded of the twelve, whether they would likewise
go away; Peter makes this answer; Lord, whither shall we go? thou have the
words of eternal life.

If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall live in them, says Christ: you shall
live in them as in your proper element, as the Fish in the water; every motion
out of it, is to death. There are two sorts of men to whom this trial does
belong.

The first are those, who have a name they live and yet are dead, like the
Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1.

those who are dead indeed.



The characters of thos^ that are spiritually dead.
as the Angels that came to Lot, and Abraham, and had created bodies. So these
dead men do all the actions that living men do; they hear, they pray, they
read, but they turn it not into flesh and blood, because there is no life in
them: they are not the stronger for hearing, or any thing they do; they thrive
not, as those that have the Boulimia, they eat and drink yet they grow not,
because there is an Atrophy in their bodies. We preach to men, yet they are the
same this year as they were the last: they have a name to live and yet they
live not, they turn not the means to flesh and nourishment; it is a sign of
a living man that he grows. That which is said of a good wit, that it makes
use of every thing, may be said of grace; it turns all the passages of Gods
providence into nourishment; storms as well as fair gales, help a living man
to the haven. Affliction, prosperity, all put him on and help him forwards.
Take one not having this life, do what ye will, he thrives not; as an
unthrift, put him to what trade you will, he thrives not, he is still on the
losing hand; so these men, prosperity, adversity, help them not: put any
thing to a dead man to do, he does it not; so these men, the Word and
Sacrament helps them not, because they are dead.

These men have golden outsides, they seem to have the Kings stamp upon their
actions, yet they are but counterfeit; they pay God in counterfeit coin, not
in current money; their actions have a form of religion, 2 Timothy 3.5.
but yet the power is wanting; all they do is but a mere formality; their
Prayers, their Sabbath keeping are but in show; those actions and duties that
have most power and life in them, they do least of all relish, they taste them
not, because they have no life in them. In general, all the actions that men
wanting life do, they are but dead works, they may be deceived with them for
a time, but when death comes, they shall find them to be but dead. Remigius a
Judge of Loraigne tells this story, that the devil in those parts did use to
give money to Witches, which did appear to be good coin, seemed to be current
money at first; but being laid up a while, it then appeared to be nothing but
dried leaves: so the devil deceives men now, he makes them to do outward
actions, which have a fair show, but when they need them, they then appear as
they are, to be nothing but dead leaves, because the principle of life is
wanting.

A third property of assumed bodies is this, that they are taken up only for
a time, and then are laid down again, as the Spirits that take them listed:
so in these men which seem to live, there is an inconstancy and mutability in
their lives, they lay down their religion as occasion serves. If that they did
was done in respect to God, it would be always the same, their company and
occasions would not alter it; but because it is not done in respect to God,
therefore as their company and occasions are mutable, so is their religion.
Jude 12.
They are as inconstant as Clouds without rain, that are quickly scattered;
like wandering Stars, Hosea 6.4.
or like the morning dew, that is soon dried up. The Saints have an
inequality in their lives, yet they never die again; they may be sickly, 2
Jude 12.
but these men are twice dead, trees plucked up by the roots, that never grow
again: The Saints may be as sheep soyled with a fall, but they can never
become Wolves again, but these men they turn Wolves again, so did Pharaoh
and Saul. The Saints have their Turbida intervalla, their ebbing and flowing,
their full and their waine; but yet all these cloudings do but obscure their
graces not extinguish them: the darkness of the night extinguisheth not the
light of the Stars, but covers it; so do these cloudings but only cover the
graces of the Saints. All the goodness of other men that seem to live, are
but Lucida intervlla, they are good but by fits, when as those that live are
bad but by fits, Nullum fictum est diuturnum, their goodness is but counterfeit,
therefore it lasts not, it holds not out.

Sardis, Reve. 3.1. that had a name she lived, and yet was dead: their works
are not perfect throughout, they were but linsey-wolsey, they were not through
paced in the ways of God, but shuffell; they graspe at both, and comprehend
neither; they do many things, but not all. As the young man that came to
Christ, Christ looked on him, and loved him; what distinguished him? one thing
was wanting, Mar. 10.21.
his works were not perfect, his heart was set upon his wealth, he would do
any thing else, his heart was not weaned or divorced from it. Saul had a name
to live, but yet his works were not perfect, when Samuel came not, 1 Samuel
13.8.9.10.
then he was discovered; that was but his trial, he would not rest in God.
Herod did many things, yet he was not perfect, Mar. 6.20.
he would not leave his incest; so all that have but a form of religion they
are Wolves though they have a sheepish outside, they are not perfect, ye shall
know them by their works.

But what works are those that we cannot see them do? Quest.


Answ.
I answer, they may be exact in the first, yet fail in the second Table, and
those that practice the duties of the second Table, fail in the duties of the
first. If men be exact in the duties of both Tables, their religion is pure and
undefiled, Iam. 1.27. If they fail in the duties of one table, to make their
religion pure, is to mend in the other. These civil men wrong no man, yet they
content themselves with a bare formalitie; this is not pure Religion: we say
this is pure Religion, if ye be fervent in prayer, and content not your
selves with formality of Religion without the power.



all, is put in all Paul's Epistles; these love not all the Saints. Ephe. 1.15.
Col. 1.4. 2 These. 1.3.


familiarity but the Saints; yet love them with a love of pity, and we all
fail in this love.

those that excel in virtue. If your hearts be not right, Psalm. 16.^.
ye dislike all those that go beyond you in holiness, and practice.



The marks and signs of those wh^ are spiritually dead.
ye shall know them by these marks or Symptoms.



Object.
But the Saints want heat as well as others, they also are cold.

Answ.
I answer, though sometimes they want it, yet they are quickly made hot again,
because there is life in them; as Charcole is quickly kindled, because it has
been in the fire, so the Saints are soon kindled, brcause they had fire in
the^ before. Others are as green wood, or rather as matter that is not
combustible, as the Adamant, that will not be made hot with fire; Living men,
admonitions and the fire of good company will heat again, so will it not the
others.

Secondly, ye shall know them by their stiffness and hardness. It is a sign
of death to be inflexible: Wicked men are as hard as flint to Gods commandes,
but as soft as wax to that which humors them. Are ye tractable? Do you
delight in your own ways, and yet continue the same men, keep the same
company? Do ye abide still in the same place, or go on in the same tract?
then ye are dead: In many things you may be tractable, but the maine is,
whether ye are flexible in those things that are connaturall unto you. These
deal with us as Iohanan did with Jeremiah, Ier. 42. He said he would go down
into Egypt, he would do any thing, that God should hid him, whether it were
good or bad; but when Jeremy had told him and the people that they must not go
down into Egypt, then they say that he spoke falsely, God did not send him
with such a message: If Gods will had suited with his, he would have done what
he would have had him to do: your trial is when you must offer up your
Isaacke, when you must part with those things that are most sweet unto you.

they have eyes and see not, Psalm. 115.4.5. Psalm. 135.15.16.
ears and hear not, mouths and speak not, feet and walk not, they have
senses to discern, but there is yet an inward eye, they want; they see no
beauty in the ways of God; therefore they think there is no such matter,
because they have eyes and see it not, they have mouths and taste it not, they
relish it not, they smell no sweet savor from the graces of the Saints, when
as the graces of the Saints have a sweet savor, like an ointment powered out,
Cant. 1.2. So for feeling, they feel not, they are not sencible of the
judgments or threatenings; the Law nor the Gospel move them not, they have
hard and insensible hearts; the more insencible they are, it is a sign, they
are more dead: the more sencible we are of the threatenings or promises, the
more life is in us.

Lastly, dead men are speechless; Mat. 12.34.
there is no breath in them. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. The dry and empty channel drives not the mill, but a full stream
sets it on work. If the heart be full of life, the tongue is full of good
speeches, Prove. 10. The words of the righteous are as fined silver, because
there is a treasure within them; but the words of the wicked are nothing worth,
because their hearts are evil. As it is said of evil men, that their tongues
are set on fire of hell; so the tongues of the righteous are set on fire by
heaven. Esaias 19.18. they speak the language of Canaan. In hypocrites there is
loquacity as blasing meteors, and in Saints there is sometimes an indisposition
by reason of some sins, which make them like to springs that are dammed up
with stones and mudde. Yet judge not of them by such fits, but take them as
they are in their ordinary course; the mouth speaks out of the abundance of
the heart. Every man is delighted in some genious operations, in things that
are suitable to him; if there be abundance of life, abundance of grace within
a man, he delights to speak of it: as all men are severally disposed, such are
their speeches. Now all these are privative signs of death, I will add one
more that is positive.



Object.
But I do much good, I abstain from much evil, may some men say.

Answ.
To this I answer, that if one member lives, it is a sign the whole body lives;
so if one mortal sin live in you, it is a sign you are dead. Truth of grace
cannot stand with one mortal sin unrepented, unsubdued: one disease kills a
man as well as an hundred; so one living lust kills you: Does any lust live and
reign in you, it kills you.

Object.
But what is it to live and to reign?

Answ.
I answer, when a man cease to maintain war with his lust, and resists it
not; when a man lays down the weapons, when he sees his lust is natural to
him, and therefore yields unto it, then it reigns in him. There is no man that
lives the life of grace, but he has this property, that he strives against
all sin to the utmost, not in show, but in sincerity; he strives against the
occasions of sin though they foil him; he still maintains war against
them, and so they live, and reign not in him.

2. If every man out of Christ be in an estate of death, let us not defer
repentance, Use 2.
but do it whilst we may. Repentance makes a dead man to be a living man:
What is it that makes you defer repentance? Ye think ye can change your
courses, and sorrow when you list, therefore ye defer it. If men be dead, and
repentance puts as it were a new soul into them, makes them to pass from
death to life, then it is not so easy a thing. Suppose ye had Ezekiahs
warning, Esaias 38.1.
is it in your power to make your selves live? No, it is beyond your power; God
only can do it. Every man lies before God, as that clod of earth, out of
which Adam was made. God must breathe life into him, else he continues dead.
God does not breathe life into all, He quickens whom he will. Ioh. 5.21.
It is your wisdom therefore to wait on him in his Ordinances: if ye have
good motions begun in you, press them forwards, they are ofsprings of life.
Think seriously, am I dead or alive? If dead, why then say, its not in my
power to quicken me, its only in God to do it, and he does this but in few,
those whom he quickneth are but as grapes after the Vintage, Ier. 3.14. Esaias
17.6.
or as the Olives after the beating; how then shall I be in the number? Give
your selves no rest; know that it is God that breaths, and then depend on
him. Make that use of the doctrine of election, with care and more solicitude
to look to your selves. God works both the will and the deed of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13.
work out therefore your salvation with fear and trembling. If repentance be
a passage from death to life, if it be such a change, then labor for to get
it. The Spirit does not always strive with men; Genesis 6.3.
ye are not always the same, ye will stick in the sand, grow worse and
worse, if ye grow not better and better. No more power have you to change your
selves, than the Blackmore has to change his skin, Ier. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spots; the time will come, when you shall say as Spira did:
O how do I desire faith, would God I had but one drop of it; and for ought we
know he had it not.

Thirdly, learn from hence to judge aright of natural men; Use 3.
for all the excellency they have, yet they are but dead men; If a man be dead,
we do not regard his beauty; all excellencies in natural men, are but dead.
It is a hinderance in the ways of God, to over-valew outward excellencies, and
to despise others that want these trappings: let us say, for all these
excellencies, yet he is but a dead man, we know none after the flesh any more,
2 Cor. 5.16. Again for your delight in them, know that this death differs from
natural death, for these dead men are active, and ready to corrupt others,
they have an influence, that does dead those, who are conversant with them,
sin communicates as well as grace. Nothing so great a quench-cole, as the
company of bad men: there is an operative virtue in them to quench men's zeal,
as the droppings of water will quench the fire, though they cannot wholly
extinguish it being once kindled.

Fourthly, if all out of Christ are dead, Use 4.
learn to judge of the Ordinances of God, and the means of salvation, let us
not undervalue nor overvalue them; the Ordinances cannot bring life of
themselves, no, not the Word, nor Sacraments; If ye are sick and send for the
Minister, he cannot quicken you; the Ordinance is but a creature, and cannot
give life. If we speak to the ear, and Christ speak not to the heart, it is
nothing: Let your eyes therefore be fixed on Christ, beseech him to put life
into you, and pray to God for a blessing on the means: the Ordinances are but
dead Trunkes, as Pens without Ink, or Conduit-pipes without water. Learn then
that God does convey life by the Ordinances, that they themselves cannot give
life, therefore do not over-valew them. Yet know withal, that God does not
work but by his Ordinances; the spirit breathes not in Taverns or Play Houses,
but in the Church assemblies. Act. 10.44. whiles Peter was preaching to
Cornelius, and his family, the Spirit fell upon them: so the Spirit fell on
others by laying the Apostles hands on them; the ordinances are the Vehiculum
of the Spirit; give what is just to them, and no more; give them neither too
little nor too much, do not overvalue them, but yet neglect them not: neglect
not the Sacrament, ye know not what ye do when ye neglect to receive it, ye
think that ye ate and drink your own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.
if ye receive it unreverently; Absence from it is a sin as well as the
remiss and negligent receiving of it. Sickness and death ye fear, why then
do you neglect the Sacrament, why do you receive it unworthily? Whence are
those Epidemicall diseases amongst us? the cause of them is from hence, that
ye neglect the Sacrament, that ye receive it unworthily. 1 Cor. 11.30. For
this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep. Consider the
danger of neglecting the Sacrament, Levit. 23.29.30.
he that came not to the Passover, must be cut off from the children of
Israel; the same Equity remains still in the Sacrament; the cause of that
was, because he was to come up with the rest, to remember the death of the
first borne of Egypt, and the redemption from their bondage, he being passed
over thereby: It is now the same sin to neglect the Sacrament, the Equity
still remains. Are ye so strong in faith as ye need it not? To be absent
from the Word, ye think it a sin: so it is to be absent from the Sacrament;
nothing can excuse you. If a master bid his servant do a thing, and he goes and
is drunken, so that he cannot do it, will it excuse him? If you have made your
selves unfit to receive the Sacrament by commiting any gross sins; the
unfitness will not excuse you. If a man has an occasion to ride a journey, if
he miss one day, he will take the next: so ye if ye miss the Sacrament once,
be sure to take it the next time* It is The Sacrament is administered twice
every Term, and sometimes thrice.
divided here, that so if ye miss once, ye may receive it the next time; take
heed therefore how ye neglect it. The end of the Sacrament is to worship God,
to set forth Christ's death, it is the chiefest part of God worship; therefore
give it the chiefest respect. Now from hence see the necessity of this life of
grace: how can ye come to the Sacrament, if ye are dead men? Labor therefore
for this life of grace. And thus much for the first point, that all men out of
Christ are in a state of death.

We come now to the second, which is this.

That all in Christ, are in a state of life. Our scope is, to show you what you
are out of Christ, and what benefits ye receive by being in Christ; we cannot
go throughout all particulars, but we will take the greatest, life and death;
the one the greatest good, the other the greatest evil. All in Christ are
living men; this is the greatest benefit, because death is the greatest evil:
therefore by the rule of contraries, life must be the greatest good. Farther,
men prize nothing so much as life; this experience shows, and Satan himself
could tell, that skin for skin, and all that a man has, he will give for
his life, Job 2.4. Beyond experience, God himself threatens death to Adam, as
the greatest evil; The day that thou eatest of it, thou shall die the death.
Genesis 3.3. Now all that live this life are living men, and have all things
pertaining to life, 2 Pet. 1.2. they have all that pertaines to life and
godliness, that is, all things necessary for the nourishing and cherishing of
them, life were else unhappy; take beasts and plants, they having all belonging
to their life, are happy, and they are said to live: take any natural life,
when as a man has food, and raiment, and recreation, he is said to live. A man
lives when he has life, and all that appertains unto it. I will divide this
Doctrine into two parts, and I will show you two things.





First, that there is such a life, as this; It is needful to show you, that
there is such a life, That there is a spiritual life. Matthew. 13 55.
because it is a hidden life. God hides these spiritual things, as he hid
Christ under a Carpenters son: so he hides the glorious mysteries of the
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10. and 11.
under the base elements of Bread and Wine; he hides the wisdom of God, under
the foolishness of preaching: 1 Cor. 1.21.
he hides those whom the world is not worthy of, under sheep Skins, and
Goats Skins, Heb. 11. yea, Col. 3.3. Our lives are hid with Christ in God.

But from whom is this life hidden? Quest.


Answ.
I, answer, that it is hidden from natural men as colors from a blind man;
they are there, and he sees them not.

But with what is it hidden?

Answ.
I answer, that it is hidden: First, Quest.
with this natural life, we see it not because we have this life, it is hid,
as the Sap in the root, or water in the spring.

Cor. 6.10. The Saints are as poor, as despised, as having nothing; Christ had
a base outside ( there was no form or beauty in him that we should desire
him: Eay 53.2.
and so have the Saints being conformable to him; they are like other men for
their outsides.

a wine-bibber, Luke 7.34. Matthew. 9.34.
a friend of Publicans and sinners; one casting out devils by Beelzebub: and
therefore he became a stumbling block unto many. Esaias 8.14.
The Saints are likewise misrepresented, they are evil spoken of, they are
presented to men's understanding otherwise than they are. There are a generation
of men, that pervert the strait ways of God, Act. 13.10. that is, they make
them seem crooked, though they are straight, notwithstanding, they pervert
them, as a crooked, or false glass, perverts a face that is beautiful,
representing it in another shape; or as a stick that is half in the water,
and half out, seems to be crooked, and yet is straight in it self.

Quest.
But in what is it hidden?

Answ.
I answer, that it is hidden in Christ, as in the fountain, Col. 3.3.
as in the heart and soul, as in the subject wherein it dwells. Men what ever
they profess, believe not this, that there is such a life, because it is a
hidden life; what course then shall we take to make you believe it? The
Scriptures you will not deny, yet you will be as hard to believe them, as you
will be to believe that there is such a life; We will therefore say something,
without the Scriptures, to persuade you that there is such a life as this.

First, there is a life which the foul and spirits lives; as the Angels they
move, act, and understand; though they eat not; there is therefore a life,
besides this common life.

are said to be, where they work, because they have no bodies as we have, to
make them be locally there: so the soul it also lives, where it is occupied;
as if it be occupied about heavenly things, Phil. 3.20.
then we are said, to have our conversation in heaven. Take the understanding
and faculties of reason, they sway not men; but the Ideaes, truths and
opinions that dwell in the understanding, sway men. There are three lives in
man, there is the life of plants, of beasts or sense, and the life of reason; I
may add a fourth, and that is this spiritual life, which is an higher life of
the soul; Where there is an evil life, there is death, but where there is a
good life, there is this spiritual life: See it in the effects, for these are
but speculations.



live not to themselves, but to the Lord, 1. These. 3.8.

Torments, Heb 11.37.
imprisonments and death; they are content to do that which is the ruin of
their lives, which they would not do, had they not a more speciall-life within
them. 2. Cor. 4.11. We which live are always given up to death for Jesus sake,
that the life also of Jesus, might be made manifest in our mortal flesh: That
is, for this cause God suffered his children, to be in danger, that men might
know, that they live an other life, and have other comforts: this appears by
our readiness to be exposed to death; all which shows, that there are some
that lead an other life.

Object.
But it will be objected, that the superstitious, and those of another religion,
will suffer death as well as the Saints: and moral philosophers are retired as
well as the Saints: and those who have but common graces, live this life as
well as the Saints: therefore these experiences prove not the point
sufficiently.

Answ.
I answer, that it is true, that superstition does work much like Religion,
moral virtue does many things, like true holiness; and Common grace, does
much like true grace; yet it is no good argument to say, that because a
dreaming man dreams that he sees, therefore a living man that does see, does
but as he: A picture is like a living man, yet it follows not that a living
man is dead, because the picture is dead; it is no Argument to say, that
because morrall virtue does many things like true holiness, therefore true
holiness does them not: They may be like in many things, yet not in all
things; the cause of all deceit is, because we cannot discern of things alike,
therefore I will show you how these differ.





All things are new, 2. Cor. 5.17.18.



Epicures thought one way the best, the Stoics another; but the Saints seek a
happiness, in denying themselves, which helps to perfect them.



Now we have done all this, there is not yet sufficient said, to make it
sufficiently appear, that there is such a life of grace; these and an hundred
other Arguments and reasons, will not make natural men believe, that many men
live other lives than they. But when they see the life of holiness blase in
their eyes, they say it is but gilded over, it is but hypocrisy. These
reasons may prepare and confirm, but they cannot persuade; we must therefore
believe that there is such a life. John 3, Christ treates of this, that there
is such a life; he tells Nicodemus, that he must live it, and be borne again;
He wonders at it, how it can be, Christ therefore concludes in the 12. verse:
If I have told you earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if
I tell you of heavenly things? that is, it must be believed, that there is such
a life: sense believes it not, yet it is easier to believe it, because it is
wrought on earth; others things are harder than this to believe, because they
are wrought in heaven; though this be wrought on earth, yet it is hard to
believe, and must be believed. And thus much for the first part of the
doctrine; that there is such a life.

What spiritual life is.
we have showed already what death that is contrary to it, is, by which ye
may partly perceive, what this life is; yet we will give you some other signs
how to know it. This life is a real life, as real as the other, though it
consist not in eating and drinking, as the other does; it is a life of faith,
it is not seen, yet it is as real as the common life, as will appear by
comparing it with the common life.





Romans 12.2. Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove
what is that good and perfect, and acceptable will of God, that is, that ye
may be able to discern of it, as the touchstone discernes of gold, or the
taste and palate of meats.

are sensible of sin, judgments and threatenings, which others are not, being
hard and dead.

Ephe. 4.16. They being knit to Christ, according to the eflectuall power,
working in every part, increase, and edify themselves in love.

Psalm. 91.9.
company, habitation, ( God is our habitation from everlasting) with the same
realitie, though not with the same visibility, and so exposed to sense as the
other. The cause of this life is the holy Ghost, Ioh. 6.63.
who is to the soul, as the soul is to the body; he is the cause of it: the
end of it, Romans 11.36.
is the Lord; all is done to God; No other life is so, this life is of God,
through God, and for God: when you find such a realitie in your actions
tending to God, when he is your aim, then ye live this life.

If this be the condition of all that are in Christ, to live and be quickened,
Use 1.
see what is expected from you to whom this talent is committed; every
excellency is a talent, it must not lie dead, but be improved for our masters
use: the sin is great if ye do it not: the neglect being of a greater thing,
the sin is greater. God sets a proportionable account On his benefits, and
expects a severe account from us, if we use them not. Be exhorted then to
live this life: some live much in a short time; some never live this life at
all; one man may live more in one day, than another man in an hundred: for to
live is nothing, but to be stirring and doing. 1. Tim. 5.6. Those who live in
pleasures are dead whilst they live: so he that is occupied about riches or
honors, is dead: all that time that men are occupied about riches and their
estates, about credit, honors, and the like, making them their end, is a time
of death: ye have lived no longer than ye have acted duties of new obedience.
If you sum up your lives according to this computation, to how short a
reckoning will they come? A wise man speaks more in a few words, than a fool
does in a multitude: one piece of gold has more worth than a hundred pieces of
brass; as we say of an empty oration, that there is a flood of words, but a
drop of matter; so if you consider your lives, and see how long ye have lived
in death, bungling out your time; you will see that ye have lived but little
in a long time; therefore now be doing something; redeem the time; Ephesians. 5.16.
be busy in doing or receiving good, be still devising to do something for
God, and to put it in execution: spend your fat and sweetness for God and man;
wear out, not rust out; flame out, not smother out; burn out, be not blown
out. So did Christ, so did Moses, so did Paul, making the Gospel to abound
from Jerusalem to Illyricum: Exodus 3. etc. Romans 15.19.20. Act. 13.36.
so did David, the text says, that he served his time; he did not idle it
out, that is, he lived not as his own master, but he did do all to God, as
to a master: All the worthies of the Church have lived thus: and not only
they, but poor Christians likewise are still doing, they serve God and men,
they are useful, they are the men that live. Those who spend their time in
sports, in gaming, in business, in serving wealth and honor, in moral
discourses, in Histories, in hearing and telling of news, Act. 17.21.
as the Athenians did: these are dead men, they do not live: As we say of
Trees, that if they bring not forth fruit, they are dead; so what ever men do
if they bring not forth fruit, if they glorify not God, they are dead. See
what a price is put into your hands, see what ye have done, and mend whiles
ye may; bestow not your price amiss. There are many Talents, yet none like
this of life: take therefore the Apostles exhortation, Gal. 6. While ye have
time do good: life is but an acting, ye then live when ye are doing good* We
see how many men fall from the Tree of life, as leaves in Autumn; the candle
of this life is quickly blown out: have therefore a better life in store, be
not always building, never inhabiting, always beginning, never finishing;
Stultitiae semper incipit vivere; folly always beginns to live: It is the
fault of most men, they are always beginning, and never go on. Let us take
therefore the Apostles counsel, 1 Pet. 4.3. Think it sufficient that we have
walked formerly, as we have done; the time which remains, let us reckon it
precious, and bestow it to better purpose.

Secondly, if every one that is in Christ, Use 2.
be in an happy estate of life; then let men from hence know their state and
condition, let them often reflect on their privileges, behaving themselves as
men, that prize them, and bestowing their time as well as may be; let as few
rivulets run out of this stream as you can. We pray, Matthew. 6.10.
that we may do Gods Will on earth, as perfect as the Angels do it in
heaven; we should therefore practice this as we pray for: their life is
without interruption, they are in communion with God; let us then be always
doing, having our thoughts above; let not cares and business call us off; but
let us comfort our selves in God, acting that which is for his glory: wherefore
prize this life, esteem it much, know what ye have by Christ, and consider the
excellency of this life above all others. That ye may know the excellency of
this life, consider it comparatively with this other life, that we live: It
has three properties wherein it differs from, and excells this common life
which we all live.

Answ.
First, it is an eternal life. Ioh. 6. Your fathers did eat Manna and died,
but he that eats of this bread, shall die no more, but he shall live for
ever: that is, this is the advantage that ye have, by the life that I shall
give you: those that did eat Manna, the food of Angels, died, and Ioh. 4.
Those that drink of this water shall thirst again, that is, those that live
another life than this, shall die and thirst; but those that live this life,
shall never die. To live this life is when the soul lives in the object; there
is a living in the subject, yet this spiritual life is when the soul lives in
the object, when as it is set on God. Take men that live other lives, ye shall
see that their lives are short; A man living in honor, that being the thing he
minds and intends, it is in potestate honorantis, there is no constancy in it,
it is brickle. If a man lives in wealth, sets his mind on it: Why riches take
their wings and fly away, Pro. 23. and then their life is ended. So if a man
lives in pleasure and music, they pass away, and then he is dead; those who
live in these things suffer many sicknesses and many deaths, as their hearts
are more intent upon them. Quest.
But it may be we may not mind these things? Yes, as if we minded the^ not,
as a man that hears a tale, and has his mind elsewhere, 1 Cor. 7.29.30.
or as a man that baits at an Inn, his mind being somewhere else; If ye mind
them, ye die in them; he that minds the best things, never dies, because there
is no change in them. God is always the same; his favor and love is constant;
see therefore that ye prize them. As a time that is infinitely long, exceeds
that which is a but a span long in quantity, so does this life exceed the
natural life, in perpetuity, and excelles all other lives in excellency.

feeds it is meat indeed; the other is not so: Ioh. 6.55.
look upon all the comforts of this present life, they are not such indeed;
take wealth, pleasures, honors and the like; wealth is but a false treasure:
Luke 16.11. it is called the unrighteous Mammon, the false treasure; (Et falsus
Hector non est Hector:) in comparison of the true treasure it is nothing.
Therefore Solomon, Pro. 23.5. speaking of riches says; Will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not? these riches are nothing: So for honors, all
praise among men is nothing, it is but vainglory, and vain because it is
empty and has nothing in it: so the pleasures of this life are but sad
pleasures, the heart is sad at the bottom: the riches the comforts of this
life, and only these are riches and comforts indeed: the actions of this life,
are actions indeed. In eating and drinking there is sweetness, but when we
feed on the promises by faith, then we taste sweetness indeed in them. One
that is weary, being refreshed with sleep finds sweetness and ease; but it is
another refreshing, that those find who have been weary and heavy laden with
sin, Matthew. 11.28.
and are n^w refreshed, this brings comfort to the soul. So to think of
houses, wife, children, and lands; to consider all the actions that we have
done under the Sun, and all that we have passed through, is pleasant: but to
think of the privileges we have in Christ, that we are Sons of God, and
heirs of Heaven, Romans ^.16. 1 Ioh. 3.1.2.17.
this is comfort indeed: especially to think of the good works we have done;
what good prayers we have made, what good duties we have performed, these are
actions indeed, and bring comfort indeed. All the actions of this life are
actions indeed, this life is a life indeed; in death you shall find it so,
that Christ's body and blood are meat and drink indeed; that remission of
sins, and peace of conscience, are comforts indeed, peace indeed; they are
such now, though ye think not so; ye shall then know, that this life is life
indeed.

Thirdly, this life of grace is a prevailing life, swallowing up the other 2
Cor. 5.4. the Apostle desired death: not to be uncloathed, but to be clothed
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life; that is, desiring death, I
desire not to be deprived of the comforts of this life; then I were unwise: I
would not put off my clothes, but to be clothed with a better suite; I desire
a life to swallow up this life; not as a Gulf swallows that which is cast
into it, or as fire swallows up the wood, by consuming it, but a life that
swallows it up, as perfection swallows up imperfection, as the perfecting of
a picture swallows up the rude draught, as perfect skill swallows up
bungling, or as manhood swallows up childhood, not extinguishing it, but
drowning or rather perfecting it that it is not seen. The life of grace being
perfect, swallows up imperfection; he that lives the life of grace, has the
imperfections of this natural life swallowed up: For example; before we live
this life* we magnify riches, honors, and Gugaes; but the list of grace
coming, we have other kinds of comforts then: as a man that is to be made a
Prince, contemnes the things he before admired. The weaknesses we are subject
to, are swallowed up in this life: al sickness and trouble ar swallowed up in
this: so are all our frailties, and imperfections. This should teach us to set
a high prize upon this life of grace; that we dye no more if we live it; that
it is a life indeed, that it swallows up this other life; compare it with
other lives, it far excels the^ all: this therefore should move us to desire
and seek it.

Secondly, this life of grace must needs be more excellent than the common
life, because it makes a man a better man, much better than he was, this puts
man into a better condition: elevates and puts him into a condition equal to
the Angels, and beyond in some respects. That ye may understand this, ye must
know that every thing is made better, by mingling it with things that are
better than it self, as Silver being mixed with Gold, Water with Wine, are
made better than they were before. There are two things required to make a
thing better. First, that that thing with which it is mixed, be of a better
nature than the thing it self. Secondly, that there be a good union. Nothing
puts so high a degree of excellency into us as this, that we are united unto
God; this uniting to God is the chiefest good. Secondly, this union betwixt God
and us is a perfect union. There are many unions; as first there is a relative
union, such as is between man and wife. Secondly there are artificial and
natural unions, as when two pieces of bords are put together, so that one touch
the other: so when grain, and grain of another sort are mixed together; there
is a nearer union than this, when as water and water are mixed together: nearer
than this, is the union that is betwixt the soul and the body, Such a union as
this, is there between us and Christ: we are in him, as the branches in the
vine, Ioh. 15.1.2.
we are incorporated and knit to him, this puts us into an higher degree of
excellency: silver mixed with gold is better* yet if we could take the spirits
out of gold, and make silver take the nature and quality of it, it would be
much better. We put on the Spirit and quality of Christ, when as we live this
life* Lusts which are most contrary to this life, puts us below men, and makes
us worse than Beasts; this life puts us beyond men, and makes us equal with
Angels. All men desire some excellency which is done by adding something to
them; some desire wealth, some learning, some honor. Consider then if ye live
this life, ye go beyond all others: nothing beyond Gods Image; nothing better
to be united to than God: let this set the life of grace at a high rate in your
affections; men do it not, and therefore they despise religion in its self,
and in those in whom it appears.

of the Saints: comfort themselves in the Lord their God; this life gives
liberty, which is an addition of some perfection: it makes us to do things,
that we could not do before, and to do them in another manner. A man having
gotten an Art, has liberty to do those things which before he could not: as
one that has gotten the Art of logic or geometry, can do that which before
he could not do: as one in health has liberty to do that which he could not
do being sick: water being hot, has liberty to hea^e, which it could not
before. There is no liberty to do holy actions, but this liberty of the life
of Grace: the Spirit of life adds liberty to do the actions of life. 2 Cor.
3.17. Where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, to do things which before
we could not; as one having an Art can do things that he could not do
before: This, though you prise it not, whiles your mountain is strong, yet the
time will come when ye will need liberty to pray, repent, and trust in God;
and then ye will find the preciousnesse of it: this then sets a price upon this
life of Grace, and should make you to desire it.

Use. 3.
Thirdly, if it be a happy condition, and the privilege of those who are in
Christ, that there is such a life for them; let this ^each men to seek, to
live this life of grace, to get it if they have it not; to confirm it if they
have it; to abstain from lust, the sickness of the soul, and the means to
quench this life: take heed of estranging your selves from God, who is the
principle of this life, take heed of dejections of mind, the cloudings that
damp this life. This life is to be active, to act much in the ways of God;
when a man is cheerful and vigorous, he lives a life of nature; so he that
has a quick and nimble sense, and is forward and busy in good works, lives
most this life of grace: He that rejoices most in God, has most comforts,
most life; Take heed of the contraries. Idleness, sencelessenesse, and
barrenness are contrary to life; take heed of them; take heed of sadness that
rusts the wheels of the soul, whereas joy does oil them. Do all to further
this life; avoid all that hinders it. Labor now to be translated from death
to life; that which hinders us, is, that we think we are in a state of life,
when we are not. Now ye may know whether ye are alive or no, by seeing whether
ye are dead or no; But because ye may be certain whether ye are alive or
not; I will give you some positive signs of life to know it.

ye are translated from death to life, ye are living men if ye love the
Brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.14. If a man be a living man, he lives in another element
than he did before; Every living man converseth with those of the same kind,
Signs of spiritual life.
as every creature does; Sheep with Sheep, Lions with Lions, Doves with
Doves; so living men will converse with living men. Not loving the brethren,
we are in a state of death. Every creature must have an element to live in; a
new life must have a new element: evil men out of their companies are as Fish
out of the water. Every life has likewise a taste and appetite; a new life
has a new taste and judgment. Pro. 29.27. An unjuste man is an abomination to
the just: and he that is upright in the way, is an abomination to the wicked:
that is, one hates the thing that the other loves: he that is alive, the things
which before he loved, he now hates: he abhors the things, that evil men
delight in. That which is a dogs meat, is a sheep poison, as the proverb is:
so that which wicked men delight in, is as odious as poison to the just. To
judge this life by; see what your company and delights are, nothing can be
less dissembled than company. In his company man does speak out of the
abundance of the heart, he then bewrayes himself what he is: there is no dead
man, no living man but he is inward with the like: no sign so much poynted at
in the Scripture, as this, Ye are translated from death to life, if ye love
the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.14. and Ioh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye
are my disciples, if ye love one another: this rule will not deceive you.

a man lives, for it he will contend; he will let any thing go rather than it.
If ye live this life of grace, ye will maintain it: and ye can do no
otherwise: 1 John. 3.9. He that is borne of God cannot sin: to be borne of
God, is to lead a new life; he that lives a new life, admits not the things
which tend to the destruction of it: Compare this with the 1. Pet. 2.11.
Abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul: he that is borne
of God sins not; that is, he yields not to sin with his good will, but
struggles against it; as one in health strives against sickness, resists the
disease, and maintains a war against it.

Object.
But yet the best are foiled:

Answ.
It Is true, yet they strive, they never yield; they maintain a war: and this
they do not only by discourse, but there is a natural instinct that puts
them forwards: they may be cast back, yet they return again: they may have a
sickness, that takes away sense: they may swound and be astonished for a
time, yet after they contend for life: Every evil man contends for his life:
he leads his life in some lust or other, from which if he be drawn he
returns again; as a thing that is lifted from the earth, will fall down to
it again: he reckons the ways of God hard, and opposite to him: The wisdom
of the Spirit is enmity to the flesh: neither can it be subject to the Law of
God, Romans 8. it cannot but resists it. Every creature labors to mainetaine its
being: so evil men continuing in sin, strive naturally against all that
would bring them out of this life of sin: So the Saints they live a life of
grace, and labor to maintain it. John. 6.68* Christ asking his Disciples
whether they also would go away? Peter made this answer, Lord whither shall
we go? thou have the words of eternal life; that is, whiles we conceive thee
to be the principle and fountain of this life, we cannot depart from thee. The
Saints will let go friends and life, and all for this life. Count therefore of
others and judge of your selves, by contesting for this life: strive to
mainetaine it, let all go rather than it.

Thirdly, ye may know whether ye have this life in you or not, by the fruits
of it, as the tree is known by its fruits. If the word turn the flock into
its own nature, ye know it by the fruits. Gal. 5.25. If ye live in the
Spirit, ye will also walk in the Spirit; that is, if ye profess your selves
holy men, show it by walking in the Spirit: holy men will be doing that which
is good. This is the surest trial, our works will not deceive us: other
things which consist in imagination may. 1 Ioh. 3.10. In this the Children of
God are manifest and the children of the Divill: who does not righteousness is
not of God, he that is of God does not unrighteousness. Consider then what
your walk and your actions are, and by them ye shall know this life.

Object.
But how shall we know whether we walk in the Spirit or no?

Answ.
I answer first, that there are many by-walkes, and if ye walk but in one of
them, ye walk in the flesh, and not in the Spirit. Iam. 1.26. If any man
seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own
heart, this man's religion is vain: that is, he that makes this sin his
trade, and walks ordinarily in it, his religion is vain. Secondly, ye may
know it by the guides ye follow. Evil men they follow three guides. Ephe.
2.3. they follow first the world, secondly, the Divill, thirdly, the flesh.
Holy men have three contrary guides, first, the renewed part within: secondly,
the holy Ghost; thirdly, the course of the Saints. Go ye the broad way?
oportet Sanctos vadere per diverticula, the Saints do not so: Follow ye the
stream? fulfill ye the will of flesh, or of the Spirit? what are your
actions? Ephe. 4.17. I charge you that you henceforth walk not as the Gentiles
do in the vanity of their minds: that is, holy men may have vanity in their
minds, yet they walk not in it as others do: evil men may have other
thoughts; yet they walk in the vanity of their minds; and albeit that evil
men walk not in all the ways of sin, yet they are dead: there is but one way
to hit the mark, but there are a thousand by-ways: a holy man may stumble in
the ways of God, and have some foyles, but he leads not his life in sin, he
strives against it: he that leads his life in any known sin, not resisting
it, and will do it, and not cross himself in it, is dead; his religion is
vain.

Object.
But what actions are there, that holy men do, but that wicked men and others
do them?

Answ.
I answer; that there is no good actions we do but they may be dead works: as
men may pray, and keep the Sabbath, yet they may be but dead works: they may
do them for a show, yet they are dead. A shadow has all the liniaments of a
body, yet it wants life; so the works of hypocrites, they want life; consider
therefore, whether your works are living works; you may know it by these
three signs.

Gal. 5.6. In Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love, with Gal. 6.15. In Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision availes any thing, neither uncircumcision, but a new
creature: all that proceeds not from a new heart, and from faith which works
by love, is nothing: this is the root of all, when all our actions come from
faith, which works by love: else though they are never so specious, they are
but dead works. It is no matter whether ye pray or not, whether ye receive the
Sacrament, keep the Sabbaths or not, they help not a jot unless they come
from the principle of life, a new creature.



Hosea, 10.1, Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to himself. If
ye bring forth fruits to your selves and not to God, ye are but empty Vines,
God accepts you not.

when as the sound and light of the Gospel comes, Act. 17.30.
then men are tried: In times of ignorance, God regards not men so much, but
now in the time of the Gospel, see if it be powerful, and whether you set
your selves about holy duties. Matthew. 3.10. Now is the Axe laid to the root
of the tree: that is, since John's coming there is a distinguishment twixt
living and dead trees: A tree is not discovered to be dead, till it withers* no
man will cut down a tree in winter, because he knows not then whether it be
dead or no; the Spring distinguishes the dead and living trees, in the winter
they are all alike* The Spring is the powerful preaching of the word; if men
spring not then, if they come not in, they are dead. Those whose education has
been good; those who live under a powerful Ministry, now is the Axe laid to
the root of the tree with them; it is a sign they are dead, if they profit
not by it.

Pet. 2.2.5. As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word that ye
may grow thereby, if so be that you have tasted that the Lord is gracious:
that is, if ye are alive as you profess your selves to be, you shall know it
by your behavior to that which does nourish your life. First, ye will long
after the word, as the Child does after the Teate. If the Child be hungry,
neither apples, nor rattles, nor any thing else can quiet him but the Teate: So
nothing can quiet these but the Word. Others may have excuses; they will have
none; Either they will live where the word is, or they will bring the word home
to them; they will bring themselves to it, or it to them. they desire the
sincere milk of the word; many things may be mingled with the word, that do
please the wit, yet those who live the life of grace, desire the sincere word,
the pure word, without any mixture. that they may grow thereby: many desire it
to know it only: if ye desire it as newborn babes, it will make you better
and better; you will grow by it: Many hear, but as men having an Atrophy in
their bodies, they grow not, no fruit comes thereby. Matthew. 13.20. Mark^. 6.20.
the second ground received the word with joy; and Herod heard John Baptist
with gladness; but where there is true grace, they go farther; they delight
in the word, it is sweeter to them than the honey: few can say so in good
earnest, Psalm. 19.10.
that the pure word is sweeter to them than Honey or the Honey Comb. Job he
esteemed the word more than his appointed food, Job. 23.12. The second food of
this life i^ good works, Ioh. 4.32, 33.34, is the place out of which I collect
this, where Christ being asked of his Disciples to eat: said, that he had
other meat that they knew not of; then said they, has any man brought him
ought to eat? He says unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his work. Do you good works with such a desire as men
eat and drink? do you hunger and thirst after them, desiring for to do
them? Then ye are alive. Hypocrites may do much, but it is not their meat and
drink to do it; examine therefore your selves by these signs, whether you
are alive or dead. This is the preaching of the law, to show you the narrow
differences of life and death. The first step to life is to know* that ye are
in a state of death: the Law must go before the Gospel, to prepare its way,
Math. 3.2.
as John Baptist was before Christ: ye must be brought to their case in the 2
Act. 37. Who were pricked at the heart; ye must be brought unto the case of the
Iayl^^, Act. 16. Luk* 15.16.17.
and of Paul: to the case of the Prodigal, that you may know your estate:
then ye will come home and not before. Our end is to preach life and comfort
to you, not damnation. Romans 15.4. All Scripture is written for our comfort: now
there are many things in the Scripture that tend to discomfort and terror, yet
their end is comfort; as Physic is sharp for the time, yet the end is
health. We desire not to exclude any, but to bring you in whilst you have
time: the market is then hard to make, when ye lie on your death beds, labor
to know it in time: your death is a time of spending not of getting; it was too
late for the foolish Virgins to buy oil, when they were to attend the Bride
groom. Math. 25.
We desire not to affright you with false fears, but to admonish you, that you
be not deceived. I find this sentence, Be not deceived, prefixed before many
places of Scripture, where Gods judgments are denounced, as 1 Cor. 6.9. Be not
deceived; neither fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the
Kingdom of God; and Ephesians. 5.6. Be not deceived with vain words, for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience; to
show, that men are apt to deceive themselves, in such cases as these, thinking
themselves to be in be^ter estate than they are. Consider your sins and apply
them. Consider your particular sins, actio est singularium. Consider your
particular sins, your particular actions, these will work upon you. This
course Peter took with the Jews, Act. 2. ye have crucified the Lord of life;
so Christ told Paul, that he was a persecutor, Act. 9. so John. 4, he told the
woman of Samaria her particular sin: he that she now lived with, was not her
husband; so God told Adam, thou have eaten of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3. If
ye are guilty of any gross sins, as drunkenness, covetousness pride,
ambition, and the like, consider them. Consider your other sins, minoris
infami^, not minoris culp^* as neglecting of holy duties, misspending the time,
inordinate gaming, overly performing of holy duties, unprofitable hearing,
keeping of bad company, profaning of the Sabbath, and the like. Consider then
the terrors of God and hell, know with what a God you have to deal, and what a
burden sin is; if God charge these on your consciences ye cannot ^eare them.
I desire not by this to burden you, but to unburthen you of your corruptions.

Now seeing this life is so excellent, I will add certain motives to make you
to desire it. Motives to stir men up to desire and seek this life.


First, it is a happy life; and it must needs be so, because it is the life of
God and Angels: it is that life which we shall live hereafter; ye may live
this natural life, and want happiness. This life of grace and the life of
glory differ only in degrees, not in kind; the competent judges of this are
the Saints, who have tried both. Heb. 11.15.16. If they had been mindful of
that country from which they came, they had liberty to have returned; but now
they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly. In a Heard of Swine, if
some stray away from the rest, and return not again, it is a sign they have
found a better pasture: so when men leave their companions, and return no
more, it is a sign, they have found some better things. Conceive not then of
this life as many do; to be only a privation, or a melancholy thing, nothing
but a mere mortification; this is a life, which has its comforts, eating,
recreations, and delights; ye loose not your pleasures if ye live it, but
change them for advantage: he that leads this life, dies as the corn does;
from a seed it grows up into many stalks, he gains by this bargain.
Christ does make an hard bargain with none, he that deals with him, gains a
hundred fold. Mark. 10.30.
If ye part with temporal wealth, ye have spiritual treasures for it: if
you part with your worldly pleasures, ye have joy in the holy Ghost: have ye
crosses, ye are sanctified in that which is better; loose ye this life, ye
have eternal life.

Prove. 3.17. All her ways are ways of pleasure. Those who walk in the ways
of God are full of pleasure; this life brings a double pleasure; first, the
reward of it, secondly, the comfort in performing the actions of it. Every good
work as the Hebrew proverb is, has meat in its mouth; the living of this
life, has a reward sufficient in its self, as appears by this. All pleasures
follow some actions, and therefore men desire life, because it is a continuance
of action: so men delight in new things because as long as they are new, the
intention remains: The actions of this present life are full of change; and
therefore of discomfort: but the actions of this spiritual life are constant
and perfect; and those actions that are perfect, there is pleasure following
them, as beauty follows a good constitution, or as flame the fire. The actions
of this life are perfect actions, and the perfectest actions have the most
perfect delight; the actions of this life are most perfect actions, therefore
they have most perfect delight, because they are the actions of the best
faculty, about the best object. All actions have the denomination of their
perfection from their objects: these are actions of the soul, they are
occupied about God, therefore they are the best and highest actions. He that
lives about the best object, greatest content does follow: he that lives this
life, lives about the best object; therefore he has greatest content, all the
ways of it, are ways of pleasure. There is more comfort and Assiduity of
consolation in this life, than in any other. In other lives, every one
according to his humor has his delights, but yet they are not permanent,
because he delights in transitory things; but he that lives the life of
grace, delights in things that are truly delightful at all times: other
delights are but delights at some times, in some places, they are not always
so: but he that lives the life of grace, pitcheth on those that are always so.
Prove. 14.15. A good conscience is a continual feast. Other comforts may fail;
a man may fall into affliction; riches and pleasures may be taken away, then
the days are evil; but a good conscience is a continual feast, that is, be a
man's case what it will, his comfort is never interrupted. All other comforts
are about sense, or things of this life, which are subject to alteration; but
this life and the comforts of it, admit no change. A man being sick, he
cannot do actions of health, they are restrained: so one in prison is not at
liberty to do what he would* but the actions of this life are assiduous, they
cannot be interrupted: ye may pray continually, rejoice evermore, 1 These.
5.16.17.
ye may always have communion with God.

Luke 10.41.41. this is shadowed in that of Martha, and Mary: Martha busies her
self about many things, she wanted many; but Mary had one thing that was
profitable for all things, that removes all evils, brings all happiness; and
that is Godliness which is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Psalm. 18.26. I walk purely with those that walk purely. This is not only to
be understood of the consolations of grace, but also of common blessings, being
the fruits of this life: there is no sorrow with them, there is a pure comfort
without any mixture of sorrow. God giving these blessings in mercy, they are
free from mixture of discomfort; but being not the fruits of this life of
grace, being reached by sin and sinful means, or God giving them in his
providence, not in his mercy, there is sorrow in them: ye may have riches,
honors, friends, and all outward things, and yet they are not pure blessings,
because Gods blessing is not mingled with them.

drown you into perdition, 1 Timothy 6.10.
and pierce you through with many sorrows. If ye affect heavenly Treasures, if
ye affect praise with God, ye may be as covetous of them as you will.

Phil. 3.20.
that it may have its conversation in heaven, and with God. Pervert this order,
it destroys the creature. Beasts living the life of sense, it does perfect
them, for that is their utmost end: man having reason, living as a beast,
destroys himself, because that is not his end; he that perfects himself as a
beast, destroys himself as a man: perfectio mentis est perfectio hominis. Let
this stir us up, to live this life: it is the utmost end of all. To be
Lawyers, Physicians, and other callings, help us in the living of this life,
yet they are subordinate to it: drown not your selves in subordinate things;
if ye do, it is your destruction: therefo^^ pitch on the principal:

Eccles. 7.4. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, that is, this
life disposes us to think of death the end of all, which to do is wisdom,
Deuteronomy. 32.29, O that they were wise, then would they consider their latter end.
In other things the beginning is good, the end is bitter; but the actions of
the life of grace are sweet, ye fare the better for them; the very remembrance
of them is pleasant, and the reward of them comes not long after: All other
things are called perishing meats, John 6.27. There is a parable in it: that
is, they are as perishing meats, that are sweet in the palate, yet they pass
away; but this endures unto eternal life, it continues. The worst thing in
this life ye never repent of: as it is said of sorrow for sins; 2 Cor. 7.10.
that it is sorrow never to be repented of: but the best things that ye do in
the other life, ye repent of. All other things that ye do they may be sweet
for the present; yet as it is said of drunkenness, Prove. 23.32. so may it be
said of them, that they bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Adder, though
they seem sweet. The strange woman is sweet: yet Prove. 5.4. her end is bitter
as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword. Goods evil gotten are sweet for the
present, yet their mouths shall be filled with gravel, that got them. But on
the other side, Prou. 20.17.
the end of all the actions of this life is good: as it is said of Job, that
his latter end was more than his beginning, Job 42.12. So may it be said of all
those who live this life: Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. If a man being to die, and having
ended his days, should put all his honors, wealth, and pleasures into one
balance, and his good works, all his faithful prayers, all the actions of
the life of grace into another, he would find them to be best. The bad man does
as the Silkeworme does, winding up himself into his ill works, he perishes;
the other winding up himself in his gracious actions, enters into salvation.

Ioh. 4.24.
as the creature is pleased with that which is like it. God is a Spirit and
will be worshipped in Spirit, and truth; he is a living God, and does delight
in a living man: we our selves delight not in dead men, no more does God:
therefore Romans 12.1. We are exhorted to give up our souls and bodies a living
sacrifice to God. God regards not dead bodies; be ye living sacrifices, which
is the act of your will, acting the duties of this life. This is called walking
with God; Genesis 5.22.
which is to be in his presence, to go his way, and to maintain communion
with him: this is when as men do, audire et reddere voces: when there is
natural delight: when as they are in presence one with another; and therefore
walking with God, and pleasing of God, are used promiscuously for one and the
same thing: For, Genesis 5.22. it is said of Enoch, that he walked with God, and
Heb. 11.5. It is said, that he pleased God.

Object.
But you will say, what benefit is this?

Answ.
I answer, that is it great. God disposes of all things in the world; is it not
wisdom then to have him your friend? Genesis 28.9. Jacob being to take his
journey, Isaacke said unto him, God all-sufficient be with thee. God is
all-sufficient; if ye have him, ye have all: In the creatures there is no
such thing, there is nothing but vanity in them, they are but as candles, or as
Stars to the Sun. God is all-sufficient: all the happiness of the
creature, makes not men happy: All men seek happiness, yet they never find
it, without having God: All happiness is in Gods favor; In outward happiness
you must have other compounded things. Christ rebuked them that counted her
happy in the creatures, saying; Blessed is the womb that bare thee, Luke 11.27.
and the Paps that gave thee suck; No, says Christ, these will not make a man
happy; but blessed are they which hear the word of God, and keep it; having
God ye have all things; God disposes all things, and gives the comfortable
fruition of them. Ye may have all outward things, and yet want comfort; Gods
curse makes all miserable, though ye have all that the creature affords;
therefore give your selves no rest, till ye have got this life, without which
God delights not in you.

Adam losing Gods Image was not happy, because God was gone from him; yet he
had all the creatures which he had before. This life of grace brings us to that
state, that Adam was in at first; this restores us to it; seek not then your
happiness where it is not to be found. We all do as the Prodigal did, Luke
15.13. to 20.
we get our portion into our own hands, and go from our Fathers house, and
seek for our happiness elsewhere; but ye shall find at last, that all else
is but husks: Thus the Saints have found it. This life of grace gives rest to
the soul, all else in the creature is but vanity and vexation of spirit.
Vanity is nothing else, Eccles. 1.14.
but an insufficiency in the creature to give that content that we looked for
in it: as when we look for water in an empty well, seek for that in the
creature that is not in it; we see its vanity in the absence of the good we
look for, and presence of the evil we looked not for. In God ye find rest
and tranquillity, such a tranquillity as is in the Sea, when it is without waves;
as is in the upper region of the air, where no tempests are. Look on the
lives of men, who are taken up with trifles when they are young, when they come
to a riper age, greater things move them; when men are wiser, they feel the
apprehension of higher things; when ye lift up your souls and keep them on
the wing, ye are freed from troubles and cares. Paul had a greater measure of
this life than other men, his Epistles which do transcribere animam,
transcribe as it were his soul, declare as much: and hence was it that in all
his troubles and afflictions he was full of constancy and comfort: the more
constantly we live this life, the greater gainers shall we be.

Jacobs or Esau his case, till we know we have it: make haste therefore to get
it. It lies not in your power; Ioh. 3, 7.8
The Spirit breaths when and where it lists; ye may fear that God will not
give it you, if you spend your life in vanity. Take one who neglects you all
the time that he is able to do you service; if he seeks unto you in his
extremity for his own ends, what answer do you give him, but this? Seeing he
has neglected you when he was able to do you service, you may justly refuse
him now, he is able to do you none. So if ye neglect God whilst ye are able
for to serve him, and seek to him in your extremity, take heed that ye
receive not that answer from him, as the Israelites did in their extremity,
Iud. 10.13.14. Ier. 7.16. c. 11.14. c. 19.11.
Go to your Idols, and let them help you: nay, he forbids Jeremiah to pray
for them. Consider this, and make haste to live this life of grace; ye cannot
get it of your selves, God must put it into you.

Now if these motives move you to seek this life, and after examination of
your selves, The means. to get this spiritual life.
ye find it not to be in you, then use these means to get it.

primum vivens, the first living part: and therefore ye shall find, that life
and light are put one for the other, Ephesians. 5.14. Stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give you light: and Ioh. 1.4. Christ was that light, and that
light was the life of men; this life stands in inlightning the mind: add to
this light, ye add to life. The reason why men are dead, is, because there is
a darkness in their souls, they see not the ways of God: therefore they act
not, they step not forwards, because they are in the dark: All shining is from
light, as ye increase light, so ye increase life. Ephe. 4.18, it is said of the
Gentiles, that they were strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance
that is in them. The knowledge of God, brings men nearer to the life of God.
Ephe. 4.24. Holiness is said to proceed from truth, the words are; put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness, which
proceeds from truth.

Object.
But you will object, that there are many who abound in knowledge, who have life
little enough: that ignorant men live this life most: that none live it less,
than those that know most.

Answ.
To this I answer, that there is a double knowledge: First, there is a mere
inlightening and informing knowledge: Secondly, there is an operative knowledge:
ye may have enough of the first, and be never the near: but it is the last
that helps and gets this life: and this knowledge is the gift of the
sanctifying Spirit, this is the operation of God: we do but inform and teach
men, we cannot make them do any thing: we cannot make them practice. Gods
teaching makes this knowledge operative; persuades every way, works every way.
Secondly, there is a knowledge in the habit, and a knowledge in the act, which
produces actions: these are set down obscurely. In the. 2 Pet. 1.12.13. the
Apostle there says, that he would not be negligent to put the^ always in
remembrance of those things, though they knew them, and were established in the
present truth: yea I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to
stir you up by putting you in remembrance: Peter did not write unto them that
they might know those things habitually; for so they knew them before; but that
they might know them actively, and might presently act them: for that end he
wrote. The first knowledge is as sparks raked up in ashes, the other as
sparks blown up: the first is as the sap in the root; the later like the sap
that fills the branches with leaves and fruit: the first is a general
knowledge gotten by contemplation; the last is a practical and active
knowledge, a knowledge to practice. The Scripture exhorts to do things that
intend this knowledge Deuteronomy. 4.1. and Deuteronomy. 6. the Israelites were exhorted to
hear and know the statutes of the Lord, that they might do them; to speak of
Gods word and works, which acts their knowledge, puts them in remembrance of
Gods mercies, and stirs up their minds. Josh. 1.8. he is commanded to read
the Law, and to meditate in it day and night; he must read it not to know it,
for at that time, there was little written; but he was to read it, that he
might do it.

Object.
But if we do this so much, it will hinder and interrupt our businesses, so
that we shall fail of our other enterprises.

Answ.
To this I answer; that this will not hinder them, but they shall be done the
better, as oyling of the wheels makes them go the better. Psalm: 1.2. he is
said to be blessed, that does meditate in the Law of God day and night. Your
knowledge being brought to action helps you much; often hearing of the word,
which puts you in remembrance, adds to your life, though it hinders you in
other things. Those who have not the word to hear, live not under preaching
Ministers, who will not be at the cost to get them, or live where they are not,
are much to blame, and live not this life. Act. 8.18. to 25.
Simon Magus sinned, in thinking that the holy Ghost might be bought with money;
do not they also sin, who do less than he? that will not give money for to
have the Gospel brought unto them? There is the like fault, when as men may
have the word, and come not to it. If they come to it, though it adds not to
their knowledge, yet it helps their acting and life. Those who neglect the
constant reading of the word, who are not constant in private prayer, those who
neglect the speaking and talking of good things, they neglect this life. That
Arabian proverb, Shut up the five windows, that the house may be full of
light, will be of good use here: that is, the five senses being shut up, the
fuller of light shall we be: the not stopping up of them, makes men ignorant,
cares and businesses possessing men's minds, there is no room left for better
things. Let your minds be still plodding on that which may further you in grace
and truth. It is ignorance that makes men strangers from the life of God, Ephe.
4.18. and this is not an ignorance that proceeds from want of knowledge, but
from the badnesse of your hearts; Hard hearts make men ignorant: why do men
hear and yet are ignorant, but because their hearts are hardened? Heb. 3.7.8.
they regard not the word, and so they grow not in knowledge.



Object. 2.
But I must be full of life ere I can do actions.

Answ.
I answer that one begets the other; action begets life, and life begets action;
as health produces exercises, and exercise procures health.

Object. 3.
But I am indisposed and unfit for such actions.

Answ.
I answer, that if ye are indisposed, the more need you have to be doing, else
you are more unexcusable; the way to get heat is to be acting: as motion does
bring life to a benumbed member, so does it to the soul: be awaked, be
stirring, this will revive you again, Christians hearts are awaked when as
they themselves sleep; Cant. 5.2.
if they stir them up, there will be more life in them, Romans 2.13. when
Christians begin to languish, their medicine is to rise up and be doing, whence
Saint Paul admonishes the Galatians, Gal. 5.16, To walk in the Spirit, those
who have the Spirit stand not still, as one that cannot stir, but they are
still acting and walking: this acting helps this spiritual life; first by
enlarging and intending this life. Secondly, by preventing that which
increases death: the more we walk in the ways of life, the more we prevent
the way that leads to the Chambers of death: Be doing therefore, if not one
duty yet another. In the steppings out of your callings, be doing; be reading
and praying; Conferring and talking of good things; the neglect of this is the
cause why there are so many dwarfes in grace. Men content themselves with
morning and evening duties, and it is well if they do them* but do you the
actions of life more constantly and abundantly. It is the corruption of our
nature that we are not doing: life is maintained by the actions of life*
habits are mainetained by actions that are suitable to them; We live in the
commandments by well doing, as the creature does by food: Good actions
mainetaine life, it receives strength from well-doing: Set therefore your
selves to pray, to do holy duties, be still praying, doing more and more; the
more ye do, the more life increases.





such a thing will hurt him, it produces an action of the will, abstinence: if
a man be persuaded that he shall dye without the Physician, he sends for him.
So in all other actions, persuasion is that which sets a man on work. So in
spiritual actions, if we are persuaded that such a sin committed will not
make our bodies sick but our souls, we will not do it; if we are persuaded
our souls shall fare the better if we do such a thing, this make us to do
it: being persuaded we shall have a recompense of reward, it produces action,
and the more action the more life.

Ioh. 5.12. he that has the Son has life. First, the Son of God infuseth
life into him, to whom he is conjoined; the conjunction betwixt Christ and us
is but relative: as between the King and the subject; when the subjects
resolve to take such an one for their king, they are conjoined to him; so when
a woman resolves to take such a man for her husband, she is conjoined to him.
The action of taking Christ, is to take him as a Lord, to serve him, as a
Savior, to have all comfort by him: he that has the Son in the relative
union, shall have him in the real union: the Son will quicken you, as the
soul does the body. A Christian has the life of the Son of God. Gal. 2.21.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: all that I do, Christ does it in
me: all that the body does, the soul does it: the body lives not, but the
soul lives in it. After that manner Christ lives in us: not a good thought or
affection, nor any resolution or motion of the soul, but comes from Christ:
being united to Christ by faith he lives in us. Ioh. 6.43. he that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, shall live. As flesh gives life to the body, so
the Son gives it to the soul; To eat the flesh of Christ, is to prize him,
to desire and long after him, which is after the spirit of bondage; to eat
him, is to take him, to come to him, to have him for your God: In these two
things stands the eating of Christ, First in prising him exceedingly, so as to
part with any thing for him; and to take up his Cross with all losses.
Secondly, in beleving him to be yours, and you his: this eating and drinking of
the body and blood of Christ, expresses our relative union with him, and then
follows our real union: the Spirit immediately gives this: he that does the
first, shall have the second.

Object.
But how shall we do to believe this?

I answer, ye see the old Adam communicated corruption to all his posterity,
because they were borne of him; so those who are borne of the new Adam, that
is, those who take him and believe in him, have grace communicated to them by
him: 1 Cor. 15.45. to 50.
this new birth makes you as capable of Christ, as the other does of the first
Adam: why then shall not the second Adam communicate grace as well as the other
does corruption? The philosophers were all deceived in this point, from whence
corruption should come; but we know that it came from Adam; Ioh. 1.16.17.
and so does grace come from Christ. To get this life, let us seek it in him,
let us believe more, let us be humbled more, repent more, and take Christ more:
take him on any condition, prize him, set him at the highest rate, hold him
fast. As in the actions of marriage, those who are to marry will not part upon
any condition; they take one another for richer, for poorer, for better for
worse: after this manner must we take Christ, the more ye take Christ thus,
the more ye have the Son, and so ye live more the life of grace. All grant
that this life comes by the Spirit; and there is no way to get the Spirit but
by the Son. Ye must first eat ere ye can be nourished; ye must fix your
eyes on his passion, as the wife does fix her eyes or her husband: ye must
seek this life from the Spirit ultimately, but ye must first have the Son,
and then ye have life: He must have the Son that will have this life; he
must be ingraf^ed into Christ as the branches are into the root: Ioh.
15.1.2.3.4.
get Christ, and then this life shall abound in you.

The mouth of the righteous is a well spring of life, Prove. 10.20. they put
life into those that have it not, and increase it in those in whom it is, Ephe.
4.24. Their speeches minister grace to the hearers; they edify them: hearing
of the word of life, and talking of the fountain of life, puts life into men.
The life of the body does not communicate it self to others; it is otherwise
in the life of the soul; the life of it makes others to live more: as Iron
sharpens Iron, so one holy man does another. See it by the contrary. In evil
men who are dead there is an aptness to dead others, their words are as
continual droppings to put out this life; their tongues are set on fire of
hell, James. 3.6. The tongue of good men is a cole fetched from the Altar, they
have fire within them. When two lie together they keep one another warm;
there is action and redaction; which engender heat: so it is in the communion
of Saints; it is a powerful means to get and increase this life. The tongue,
the example and communion of the righteous is full of life, it is powerful to
make men live. Gal. 2.14. Paul speaking to Peter, says, why compellest thou
the Gentiles to live after the manner of the Jews? he used not outward
compulsion, his example and life was a compulsion. The company which we keep,
compells us to do as they do: Evil company are the Devils snares, they do
as brambles, keep us in, and fetter us: the sutablenesse of evil companions
draws out our secret corruption: He that resolves to live this life, must
resolve to withdraw himself from evil company, who are a strong temptation
unto evil, and betake himself to the communion of Saints.

There is a difference between leading our selves into temptation, and being
led into it: when you lead your selves into temptation, (as you do when as
you rush into evil company) you are out of the pale of Gods protection: If you
touch pitch ye cannot but be defiled with it, wherefore make your company
good: this is an effectual and powerful means to beget this life in you. 1 Samuel 10.10.11.12.
Saul being among the Prophets, changed his spirit, and became a Prophet: one
that goes fast, makes those that go with him to mend their pace. Act.
11.23.24. it is said of Barnabas, being a good man and full of the holy Ghost,
and of faith, that he added much people unto the Lord. Which manner of speaking
shows, that the speeches of those who are full of faith, helps to breed
faith: that if men be full of the Spirit, they quicken the Spirit. Evil
company deads men: they are the trunkes through which the Devil speaks: and
this deading is done in an insensible manner, and then most of all where it is
least perceived. Evil company poisons men; a man turning his opiaion (which
company can do,) is most of all poisoned, when as he thinks that he has least
hurt.

the hearing of the voice of the Son of God: this will beget and increase
this life: that is, if when we speak to your ears, he speak to your
hearts, then ye live. Ye have two teachers, the one is he that speaks to you,
the other is Christ. Heb. 8.1^. They shall no more teach one another, for they
shall all be taught of God. There are two sheapheards, the one is he that
feeds you, the other is the great sheapheard of the sheep: There are two great
voices, Heb. 13.20.
the one speaking outwardly to the ear, the other when as Christ speaks
effectually to the heart.

When Christ speaks inwardly to the heart, then men live and not before. This
is such a speech as Christ spoke to Lazarus, Ioh. 11.43.44.
Lazarus come forth, and he came: his speaking puts life into us. Now what is
this inward speaking of life to the heart? It is nothing else but to persuade
fully, and every way to convince us, that it is best to take Christ, to set to
an holy course, to lead a new life. There is a speaking that comes near this
life, and is not it: that is, when as men hear and understand the way, and
apprehend the things of God, but practice them not. Here is a proximity to this
life, yet it is not this life. Let a man come so near as that he thinks he
acts it, yet he is dead if he act it not: when he acts it, then he is made a
living man; and then he thinks and believes, that the ways of sin are
evil, and that they are evil to him. When God does convince us that such a
thing is evil, and that it is evil to us, then we live and not before. A man
having a business to do, if all be done but one thing, the not doing of this
one thing crosses all the rest; but that being done, his business is brought to
pass: so in this life of grace; if a man have many offers of grace which do
not fully persuade him, this is not enough, if Gods help be absent: but when
once he speaks, he does fully convince and persuade us, and makes us to
continue. As Satan having leave, from God never gives over vexing man; so the
Spirit of God does never cease to keep us in good things; and where there is
this life, there the Spirit dwells.

Quest.
But after what manner is this effectual persuasion wrought?

Answ.
I answer, when as God gives an ear, and speaks a voice for it to hear: He
that has an ear to hear, says Christ, let him hear. We then hear, Matthew.
11.15.
when as there is a listening and yielding disposition wrought within us: When
as we preach, there are many that have hard hearts, and nothing for to soften
them; therefore the word falls from them as rain from a stone: but if there be
a man that God will choose, he fits his heart, and so he is persuaded. This is
called the opening of the understanding, Luke 24.45. He opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. When we speak to
men, we sow as it were upon fallow ground which will bear no Corn unless God
plow it. Those that saw the miracles of the Loaves, esteemed them not, Ioh.
6.26.
because their hearts were hardened. Ephe. 4.18. They are alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their hearts, that is, they are not sensible of sin, and death, the word or
the threatenings: when God takes away this hardness, they are fit to harken;
then comes light the beginning of life, which is the informing of the
understanding, to judge righteous judgment. Those who have the life of Christ,
if he speaks, it quickens them. It is the inward voice that quickens: seek
therefore to God earnestly; that Christ would speak to your hearts: ye hear
and are not quickened, because he speaks not. And thus much for this second
point: that all in Christ are in a state of life.

We come now to the third point, that may be noted out of these words, and it
is this.

That the voice of the Son of God, Doct. 3.
is the only means to translate men from death to life. Men before they hear
the voice of the Son of God are dead; Christ by his voice makes them living
men. This voice is the only means, to give life: there is no voice but this
that is able for to do it: that is the scope of this Text. This proposition may
be resolved into two parts. First, nothing else is able to translate men from
death to life. Secondly, this is able for to do it. As it is said of faith,
that it justifies, and nothing else but it can justify: so may it be said of
this voice, that nothing else can translate men from death to life, and this
can do it. To translate from death to life is nothing else but effectually to
persuade and change the heart: now nothing else can thus persuade and alter the
heart, but this voice of the Son of God. God himself frames the heart; it is
as a curious framed lock; none can pick it, but he that knows the turning
of it. God only fits the persuasions to the turnings: men's persuasions are as
one that will unlocke a lock with a wrong key. God only can persuade Iapheth
to dwell in the Tents of Shem; Genesis 9.27.
Ministers cannot do it. Esaias. 57.19. I says God, create the fruit of the
lips; that is, I make them to bring comfort. I create the fruit of the
lips for peace by my power. That this is so you may see by diverse reasons.

Reasons of the point.
First, that it is so, see it by this; we speaking to the quickest, often times
they believe not, but then others do: the same sometimes believe, sometimes
not. If man were the sole cause, the word would have the same effect at all
times.

Ephe. 1.19.20. The same power that raised up Christ from the dead, raised us
up: it is an almighty action to give this life.

Ioh. 5.21. Romans 9.15.
he quickens whom he will: he has compassion on whom he will have
compassion: If men could translate men from death to life, then it would not be
proper to God to do it:

Lastly, as nothing else can do it, so the voice of the Son of God is able
for to do it. At the first creation all was made by the voice of God; he
says, Let there be light, Genesis 1.3.
and there was light: let him say to any man, follow me, and he does it.
Matthew. 9.9. he says to the Publican sitting at the receipt of Custom, follow
me; and he left all, and rose up and followed him. Christ speaking to his ear
and heart, made him to follow him; his speech was like the speech of Elias to
Elisha, he followed him, 1 King. 19.19.20.
and could not choose but do it; Christ speaking we cannot but follow him.

But what is this voice of the Son of God that translateth men from death to
life? Quest.


Answ.
I answer, it is nothing else but an inward work of the Spirit, by which he
persuades men effectually to turn from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan to God. It must be understood of the effectual working of the
Spirit, because who ever does hear it, lives: this voice renews and changes
men, translating them from death to life. Now this effectual speaking consists
in two things. First, in propounding the object, the truth to the heart.
Secondly, in the persuasion of the truth.

Moses beginning his book, says, that in the beginning it was thus, and thus
God did; he does not persuade them by arguments to believe it: Genesis 1.1.
so John begins his Gospel without persuasions, In the beginning was the word,
etc. so the Apostles commission was, Go and preach that Christ is Come; Ioh.
1.1.
he that believes shall be saved, Mark. 16.15.16.
he that believes not, shall be damned: The word of it self is sufficient
authority: when the Gospel it self is thus propounded, then the holy Ghost
kindles light in men. And when as the Gospel is propounded, and light kindled,
then this life is wrought. Now there are three degrees of working this life by
the Spirit.

Act. 16.14. The holy Ghost opened the heart of Lydia, to attend unto Paul's
preaching. We sow on fallow ground till the Spirit opens the heart to attend to
the things that are spoken.

Ioh. 16.8. The Spirit shall convince the world of sin: that is, it shall
convince and persuade thoroughly: none can do this but the Spirit. It does also
farther persuade men, that it is good for them to be convinced, and this is
when the knowledge is full; when as all the corners of the heart are answered,
and the mind resolved to practice: Hypocrites and civil men are persuaded,
yet not fully; therefore they never practice; if one objection of the heart be
unanswered, ye never come to practice.

James 1.21. The ingrafted word is that which is made able to save your souls,
and none else. Men may attend for a flash, but the Spirit must ingraft the Word
into the heart; which as a sprig ingrafted, grows bigger and bigger, and has
fruit from the sap: other men having truths not fastened on them, they grow
weaker and weaker.

To understand fully what this voice of the Son of God is; ye must know that
there is a double voice. First, an outward voice of the word which all hear.
Secondly, an inward voice of the Spirit. This I collect out of Esa. 6.9. Go to
that people and tell them, hear ye indeed, but not understand; see ye indeed,
but not perceive, that is, they shall have an outward hearing, an outward
knowledge, but not an inward. There is a common knowledge which all those have,
who live in the Church: and there is a knowledge that is only proper to the
Saints, which saves them. The differences twixt these two knowledges; that of
hypocrites, and of them in sixth of the Hebrews; twixt common knowledge, and
effectual knowledge that is wrought in the hearts of the elect, are these.

Heb. 4.11. The Word is sharper than a two edged Sword, discerning the thoughts
and intentions of the heart, piercing even to the dividing asunder the soul
and spirit, and of joints and marrow: that is, that Word of God that is lively
indeed; that voice of God that is effectual to salvation, it is sharp, it
strikes not in general, but enters the inward parts. A staff cannot enter the
flesh, it may bruise it; but the voice of Christ enters like a two edged Sword,
discerning twixt morrall virtues, and supernatural things wrought by the
Spirit; it distinguishes exactly twixt the rectitude and obliquity of men's
hearts: this is proper only to the saving knowledge of the Word. As nothing is
hid from God, but it is naked to his sight; so it is to his word: See if the
word be distinct to you, else you know nothing. A man never knows any thing,
till he knows the Elements, parts and grounds of it; the voice of the Son of
God only makes you know things thus particularly. So in other things ye know
not till you know particulars. Aristotle says; a man is not a Physician, that
knows things in general, in the gross, but he that knows them in
particular. This is not to be a Physician, to know that such dry meats are
good for a moist stomach, unless he also know dry meats and the Symptoms of
a moist stomach: so it is in the knowledge of the Word. To know what
regeneration is, is not enough, except ye know the parts, the kinds and signs
of it. To know that none are translated from death to life, that love not the
brethren, is not enough, 1 Ioh. 3.14.
except ye know the brethren and love them. To know, that he that is in
Christ has crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal.
5.24.
is nothing, except ye know that ye your selves have crucified it. This
particular knowledge is that which makes manifest to a man the secrets of his
own heart, 1 Cor. 14.25. that is, the voice of the Son of God, discerns
the secrets of the heart, to know things particularly that are in it. Ioh. 10.
The sheep distinguish the voice of the sheapheard, from the voice of a
stranger: when men come to hear, they hear the voice and distinguish not the
sound, because they want this particular knowledge.

Secondly, this hearing of the voice of the Son of God works a quick sense,
in the hearts of those that hear it, which the outward voice does not: and
this follows the former. Let knowledge be particular, it works quick sense.
Heb. 4.11. the word is called lively in operation: now life consists in
quickness, and motion; the voice of Christ speaking effectually breeds
quickness. Sola individua agunt et sentiunt, A knife in general cuts nothing,
the particular knife cuts. To know in general you are sinners, have corrupt
natures, offend in many things, works nothing; it is the reflection on your
particular sins that works, this makes men tremble. Act. 2.36.37. Peter
having told the Jews that they had crucified Christ, that pricked them at the
heart. As it is of sins, so is it of comforts, particular comforts only
work. If one can say, I am thus and thus, then comfort follows: so particular
threatenings make men sensible. When God said to Adam, Have thou not eaten of
the tree whereof I said thou should not eat? this made him fear. Genesis 3^
The word does breed a quick sense: they who have not this true voice sounding
to them, ( Esaias. 6.9.) In hearing they do not hear, and seeing they do not
see; their hearts are fat, their ears heavy, and their eyes shut. Romans 11.8.
God has given them the spirit of slumber; that is, when as men hear his voice
in a common manner, they are as a man in a slumber: it stirs them not: their
hearts are fat; that is, they are senseless: for fat is without sense. The
property of them that hear in an ineffectuall manner is this; they have a
spirit of slumber, they are as one hearing a tale, when as his mind is
otherwhere. If the things propounded were natural, they would hear them well
enough; but they are spiritual, therefore they are dull of hearing them.

Cor. 2.6.9. We preach wisdom to those that are perfect: such wisdom, as
eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man; but God reveals it to us by his Spirit: that is, the cheifest in
knowledge, have not seen with their eyes, or heard with their ears; but those
that hear the voice of the Son of God, have an experimental knowledge which
others have not. This experimental and saving knowledge has trial. 1. Ioh.
2.13. I write unto you fathers, because you have known him that was from the
beginning: expound this by the 33. of Ezekiell, 33. When this comes to pass,
then shall ye know that a Prophet has been amongst you: that is, when I
shall do this, they shall know experimentally that there was a Prophet amongst
them. 1 Ioh. 5.19. we know that we are of God; that is, we know it
experimentally; they can say of this, as it is said in the 1 of Ioh. 1.1. That
which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the words of life, delare we
unto you. David takes it as peculiar to himself, Psalm. 9.10. They that know
thy name will trust in thee, for thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek
thee: that is, they that experimentally know thee will trust in thee: for thou
never faylest them that trust in thee: they know it by experience. 1. Pet. 2.3.
Desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby: if ye have
tasted that the Lord is gracious. We find in the Saints a longing after God:
they desire him, which others do not: thus did David: Moreover they have
assurance of salvation, which others have not; and this assurance comes from
sense: optima demonstratio est a sensibus; the best demonstration is from
sense; as he that feels the fire hot knows it best; tasting breeds longing;
assurance from experience breeds certainty.

Ioh. 6.63. The Spirit quickens, the flesh profits nothing; the words then
that I speak, they are Spirit and life. Christ having spoken, that his body
was meat indeed; many were offended at it: then he said, The Spirit does
quicken, that is, ye accept not my words, because ye have not the Spirit, ye
have but flesh* that is, a common knowledge; my words are spiritual, and you
are carnal, therefore they do not relish you. These words are otherwise
interpreted by some: that is, these materials profit nothing without the
Spirit; but the other is undoubtedly the meaning, for so it is through the
Scripture: the Spirit profits, that is, saving knowledge wrought by the Spirit:
men not having it, do not approve it. It cannot be otherwise; where the voice
of Christ does sound effectually, there they justify this: Wisdom is
justified of her children, Luke 7.35. Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the feet
of them tha^ preach the Gospel of peace? that is, they see much beauty in the
ways of God, that they are beautiful to them, they are vile to others. The
Scripture often touches this, that when as there is but a common knowledge,
men relish not the word, Romans 8. they taste not the word: the spiritual part of
the word crossing them, is bitter to them. 2 Cor. 2.15. The word is compared to
a sweet savor; to many it is not so, to some it is the savor of death to
death: it is a savor diffused through the house, many there are who abhor
it, and being guilty of death it leads them to death: In others it is the
savor of life; that is, they smell a sweetness in it, it brings them to life,
to heaven; the word being powerfully taught, there comes a savor: some smell
sweetness in it, others do not so. Luke 2.35. When Christ shall come, the
hearts of many shall be opened to approve or disapprove him: therefore he is
said to be set for the fall and rising of many: So when he came some said he
was a good man, Ioh 7.12^
others that he was a devil: some said that the Apostles were good, some that
they were bad: 1 Cor. 4. and 2 Cor. 6^
See how ye approve the word in its self, and as it is expressed in men's
lives.

These. 1.6. My word was to you not in word but in power, because it did work
in you joy in the holy Ghost. Ier. 23.29. God comparing the word of true and
false Prophets together, says thus; My word is as fire, and as the hammer that
breaks the stone: it is the powerful word if it stirs your affections.
Luke the last, Christ speaking to the Disciples that went with him to Emmaus,
their hearts burned within them: they were full of holy affections. Consider if
ye have these holy affections. Holy affections in the Scripture are ascribed
to this knowledge, every where, where men hear, or know a. right: Psalm. 112.1.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his
Commandments. Psalm. 1.2. Blessed are they that delight in the Law of the Lord:
See whether there be holy affections wrought in you by the word. Act 26. Math.
13.
Felix did tremble at the word; so the second ground received the Word with
joy, but not with holy joy.

Object.
But how shall we distinguish them?

Answ.
I answer, that if your joy be holy joy, afflictions will not put it out: if
your joy be carnal joy, persecution puts it out: but joy in the holy Ghost is
not extinguished by the contrary.

Heb. 4. It works in men's hearts and lives mightily, to overcome all
contraries. Esa. 6.10. Make the heart of this people fat* make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed;
that is, Let them have such a common knowledge as civil men and hypocrites
have, and no more; least seeing aright, they understand with their hearts and
be converted, and they be healed. Seeing with their eyes, is meant seeing with
this knowledge, which if they see with, their hearts will be wrought on: their
hearts being wrought on, they are converted, and then they are healed. This
follows on the other. Let the affections be stirred, and actions will
forthwith follow, because they are the immediate principles of action; what one
affects he does; these are tied all on one string: flashy affections, flashy
actions. Ioh. 6.45, Christ speaks thus of this knowledge; They shall all he
taught of God; every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes to me: that is, every one that hears this true voice of the Son of
God, comes to me, that is, they breed actions whereby they come to me. See if
your knowledge be operative. Iam. 1.22. the Apostle distinguishing of hearers,
says thus, Be not hearers only but doers too; if ye find not this
operative working change, Christ has not spoken to you.

Object.
But even the Saints have many defects in their actions, therefore actions follow
not hearing and knowledge.

Answ.
To this I answer, that as their actions are weak and faint, so their knowledge
is weak. Heb. 12.5, They often forget and must be put in mind. 2 Pet. 1.13.
They must be stirred up by putting them in remembrance of those things which
they have forgotten. Secondly, this fail is from some doubt, from some shaking
within: when as you see a defect in actions, or affections, it is because you
want this convincing knowledge. The way to stir up affection and action, is
the Word, which increases this operative knowledge.

If then it be so, Use 1.
that the voice of the Son of God is the only means to translate men from
death to life, let us examine our selves, whether we have heard the voice of
the Son of God, or no? If we have not, then let us know our cases, and be
humbled: they that have not heard it are dead. Consider it is your distinct
knowledge, not a knowledge in gross or general, that inlivens you. Know ye
the passages and working of regeneration and repentance? find ye the Word as
fire, and as a hammer? the Word is such in its own nature, and will be found
so of them that receive it aright. Have ye an experimental knowledge? approve
ye Gods Image, his ways in the Word, or in the lives of the Saints? do ye
justify wisdom? are your hearts opened at the hearing of the Word? do ye
like it? At Christ's coming many hearts were opened, because then his Word
came, and it opened many men's hearts, showed them what they were. How do ye
affect the Word, and Image of God in the lives of the Saints? how do ye
realish holy affections in them? blessedness goes always with them.
Affections are always a sign of this life: have ye received the Word with
them? have ye sorrowed for your sins? do you delight in God? This will beget
holy affections which will last; afflictions will not put them out; holy joy is
not damped with afflictions, carnal joy is. What are your lives and actions?
If ye seeing others holy, cannot do as they do, this voice has not spoken
to you. All who hear Christ's voice will come and be doing. Iam. 1.22. If doing
be joined with hearing, if ye are doers as well as hearers, this voice has
spoken to you; if your practice be not joined, ye are deceived. If ye find
upon examination that ye have not heard this voice of the Son of God,
remember that Christ's sheep hear his voice; Ioh. 10.3, 4.
ye may therefore fear ye be lost sheep if ye hear it not. He that has
an ear hears the Gospel; If it be hidden, it is hidden to those that perish;
2 Cor, 4.3.4.
where men live in ignorance and hear not, God regards not it so much: that's
not the time of trial. Act. 17.30.
So where they have the Word as wheat covered with chafe, it tries not; but
when the Word comes with authority, and not as the Scribes; when Christ's
voice sounds in the Word, see how ye are affected: if then ye hear not, ye
are dead. Cant. 2. Christ's coming is compared to a Spring time, wherein the
flowers appear on the earth, and the birds begin to sing, and the trees put
out their green fruit: that is, when Christ makes himself known, it is
Spring time: do you spring when the Word comes, when the messages of salvation
are made known unto you? If not, ye are dead. Our end in speaking this is not
to trouble you, but to bring you to salvation. I will therefore show you what
keeps men off from hearing Christ's voice, that knowing the impediments ye may
remove them. Now the impediments are seven.

Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness with him: therefore, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man seem to be
wise in the world, let him become a fool that he may be wise: that is, let him
lay aside that wisdom which begets pride in his heart. Michals disposition
is in every one of us more or less, she despised David: so men chalk out a
way to themselves, in which they will go, they will seek their own ways,
and will not be subject to the Law of God. Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity
with God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can it be. 2
Cor. 10.5, the Apostle speaking of imaginations, says, that men with them
build up themselves against God, and will not alter their courses. The greatest
opposition is in men's minds: take a man that has a true opinion, it is easy to
remove his lusts, but false judgments are as bulwarks against Gods wisdom.
Men will do thus and thus because they think their state is good. The Scribes
and Pharisees come not to Christ, Luke 15.1. but Publicans and sinners came: so
it is with men now, do we lay open their sins unto them, yet they will not
be persuaded: men will be righteous of themselves, and will not be persuaded
that Christ must be made unto them righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and redemption, and wisdom. This opinion of our selves is a great
impediment, this contemnes the Way of God, and fashions out our own ways;
this contenting of our selves with our present estate makes us to err:
therefore Psalm. 119.21. Cursed are the proud that are always erring from thy
Law: Self conceit makes men err.

Ioh. 4.12. the woman of Samaria was much held off with this argument. Christ
coming to teach her the doctrine of salvation; Art thou greater, said she,
than our father Jacob that gave us this Well? This opinion that our fathers
have gone this way, and it is transmitted to us, hinders men much; men cannot
endure newness. Lot is taxed for this by the Sodomites, Genesis 19.9. This fellow
came in to sojorne here, and will he now be a Judge? So Act. 17. Paul
preaching at Athens, the Athenians asked, What new doctrine is this that thou
preachest? Men being accustomed to a way, it winns their opinion; men having
once judged, are loath to judge again: custom winnes their affection. Change
is troublesome: men having gone long in a course they will still plod on in the
same tract. Custom of our fathers, or country, or place where we are, our
own custom makes us loath to forsake it.

Exodus 7.22. Pharaohs heart was hardened because the Magicians did the same
miracles, that Moses and Aaron did; So similitude hinders men from embracing
the ways of Christ, and God. Men seeing Papists austerity like our
mortification, their suffering like true martyrdom, they are persuaded of
their ways, as we are of ours; so for civility, when as men see it so like
religion, as a spark is like the fire, they embrace it: All deceit is from
similitude, false wares having the same dye that true have, deceive the buiers:
so falling stars are like other stars. When we see some men that profess
religion to be false hearted, we think all are so: wherefore Phil. 1.10. The
Apostle prays, that They might abound in all knowledge, and judgment to
discern of things that differ: This proximity makes us deceived.

Exodus 8.15. When as the Frogs were removed, Pharaoh his heart was hardened:
rest made him harden his heart: so many times it makes men slight the word, and
afflictions which God lays on them. We may see this in Soldiers and Mariners;
none more ready to contemn dangers than they, because they have often escaped;
they delude the works of God that should draw them to salvation. Roots will
make the weeds grow again, not being taken heed of. Romans 2.4.5.
The long suffering of God should draw us to repentance, but it does not so. 2
Pet. 3.3. In the last time shall come mockers, walking after their own lusts,
and saying* Where is the promise of his coming? for all things continue as
they were from the beginning of the creation; that is, men shall feel nothing,
apprehend nothing that God does; judgments being believed they second the
Word; being eluded, they hinder us and it.

Ioh 4.10. If thou had known the gift of God* and who it is that speaks to
thee, thou would have asked of him. There is enough in religion to make men
love it, if they knew it: there is virtue in it, there is beauty and profit in
it. Esa. 57. There is a peace in it; Pro. 3.17. Pro. 16.31:
all the ways of it are ways of pleasantness there is honor in it; old age
is honorable with righteousness. But men's hearts are full of darkness; they
see not, neither do they understand it. 2 Pet. 2.12* They speak evil of the
things they know not; Its true, they know the things, (...), they know them not
experimentally and really, and that deceives them. 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man
think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. One
may know all things, and yet know nothing, as he should: Ignorance deceives
many, it makes them to measure religion by a false rule, and common opinion.
Act. 24.14. it is called heresy; when ye judge of it by external shows, all
baseness is outwardly in religion, it is as like a costly thing covered with
straw: Christ was hid under a Carpenters Son; Matthew. 13.55. 1 Cor. 1.21.
preaching under the name of foolishness: so our ignorance in attributing
things to false causes keeps us off. If the Gospel be hid, 2 Cor. 4.3.4
it is hidden to those that perish; there is a double ignorance; privative, and
positive; that is it, by which the God of this world blinds men, breeding a
false persuasion of good, and a good persuasion of evil.

Deuteronomy. 29.2.3. Ye have seen, says Moses, all that the Lord did before your
eyes, in the Land of Egypt, upon Pharaoh and his servants: ye have seen those
great signs and miracles which he did, yet the Lord has not given you an
heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear until this day: that
is, ye have not profited because ye have not considered. We think if that we
had lived then, we had believed, yet we see how few of them did believe: we
believe the Scriptures, yet what inconsequence is there in men's lives, because
we do not consider things. Consideration helps to perfect men's actions; it
is as a circular line; one part helps the other. If we look back and
examine our actions, it helps; want of it hinders. What is repentance, but
consideration? Ier. 8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What
have I done? want of this keeps men from salvation. 2 Chronicles. 6.37. If they
bethink themselves in the Land whither they are carried away, and turn and
pray unto me, in their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss,
and dealt wickedly; then I will hear. So Ier. 8.6. God harkned whether any
would say, What have I done? men go on and consider not. Hosea. 4.11.
Whoredom, and new wine, steal away their hearts; that is, it makes them not
to consider. Mark. 6.52. They considered not the loaves, therefore their hearts
were hardened: they were fearful in the ship, because they considered not the
miracle of the loaves.

Romans 8. the flesh is not subject to the Spirit, it crosses it: one reckons
not a man his enemy unless he cross him. It must be so; every creature as
long as it has a being, opposes that which is contrary to it: so every man
that delights himself in such or such a lust, will not be circumcised,
cleansed and washed from it, Luke 19.14.
he will not have Christ reign over him; he will have his elbow room. Those
men that are not translated from death to life, they count the ways of God
either vanity or folly, and will not submit unto them, nor yet hear Christ's
voice.

Now the means, the helps, The means how to hear profitably.
and ways to break through the impediments, and to receive the Word with
profit, are these.

First, to hear profitably, that the voice of the Son of God be not a
common voice, but peculiar, take that rule which is set down, Luke 8.18. Take
heed how ye hear. Christ gave that admonition to his hearers, and I give it
to you: look to your selves, take heed how ye come to hear the Word; do it
diligently: the reason of this is added in the same verse: for unto him that
has shall be given, and from him that has not, shall be taken away even that
which he seemed to have. That is, if ye hear and get a little knowledge, ye
shall have more: he that yields some fruits, shall bring forth more: he
that does some things, shall do more, God will bless you. But from him that
has not, shall be taken even that which he seemed to have: that is, your
hearts shall be hardened, and that common knowledge which you have shall be
taken away, Ioh. 15.2. Every branch that bears not fruit God cuts down. God
looks into a Congregation to see who does make conscience of hearing; those
that do, he purges; but those that profit not, he curses: he takes not away
their lives, but their graces, makes them wither in the inward man, and so he
comes to death. Luke 19. He that had ten Talents, he that had most, had more
given him: To practice a little is the way to get more. The Talent is taken
from him, Math. 25:
who did not use it, and given to him, that had most Talents. There are two
rewards for him that uses the Talent well. First, he shall have m^re.
Secondly, he shall be ruler over ten Cities; he shall have comfort here, and
hereafter: he shall have more comfor^ and grace. See how he dealt with
Nathaniel, Ioh. 1.50. Because he confessed Christ to be the Son of God, and
believed because Christ saw him under the Fig Tree, which was but a small
thing; Christ tells him that he shall see greater things than these. Ioh. 7.17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God: that is, if ye practice according to your knowledge* you shall know more,
it shall be confirmed to you. Let men know and not practice, then Romans 1.21.22.
Because when they knew God, they glorified him not a^ God, neither are
thankful, therefore God gives them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of
their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, and to
worship Idols; as he dealt with the Gentiles. So in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Because
they received not the love of the truth; because they heard much, and did not
embrace it, God gave them up to strong delusions to believe lies. See it by
experience: when as men play with their knowledge, God gives them up to
heresies. The Spirit of God will not strive long with them. God has commanded
us, Genesis 6.3. Matthew. 7.6.
not to cast Pearls before Swine; and will he himself do it? Consider what
ye do in every doctrine of salvation, that is preached to you; ye either
relish it, or not; ye obey it, or disobey it; ye taste it, 2 Cor. 2.16.
or disrelish it: If ye taste it not, it is a savor of death unto death; that
is, it brings death and leads to hell: if ye savor it aright, it brings to
heaven. There is no true doctrine, but the not obeying of it brings something
to your damnation. When the savor of Christ's knowledge is made manifest, not
receiving it, ye reject it, and it brings a curse. Heb. 6.7.8, The earth which
drinks in the rain which comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet
for him by whom it is dressed, receives a blessing of God; but that which
brings forth thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned: that is, the word is as rain it makes, herbs and weeds
to grow: if herbs grow, God does prosper it more; if it falls upon rocks it
withers more and more; God does curse it. It is not in the knowledge of
divinity as in other sciences: in them ye may neglect a year or two, and get
it again; but it is not so in this; ye will not be able to return again,
ye are near a curse, ye cannot redeem it. See what follows in the
neglecting of the Word. In the, 2 Chronicles. 36.15.16. God sent his messengers
rising up early, etc. because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his Word,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose up against his
people, till there was no remedy. Grace may stand with infirmities before they
are reveiled, but being reveiled the light discerns them. If men refuse, God
indures it not. Act. 17.30. The times of that igno^rance God regarded not, but
now take heed, the Gospel being reveiled; God will bear no longer. Before
John Baptist came, the Axe was not laid to the root of the tree; Math. 3.10.
but as soon as he came, it was; because then the Gospel was made known; he
revealed the truth. When the truth is once revealed, if men do not then
receive it, God indures it not. Heb. 3.13. To day if ye will hear my voice,
harden not your hearts. God will not stay longer than this day. There is a day,
(when it is we cannot prescribe) after which God will not offer grace: but
commonly we see that men being of the age of discretion, and having the way
showed, if they neglect it then, they commonly perish. God has a secret time.
The Jews had their day; but because they accounted them selves unworthy of
everlasting life, Paul did turn from them to the Gentiles, Act. 13.46. Saul
had his day, he had common gifts and profited not, therefore God forsook him.
So Israel had their day, but when they neglected it, God bids Jeremiah not to
pray for them. Consider what you have heard of the Sacrament, that ye may not
absent your selves from it, in the places wherein you are, without weighty
affairs, which will excuse you before God: so for the Sabbath; you know it
should be kept; because it is holy; and if it be holy, I would ask you this
question; whether it be holy in whole, or in part? If all of it be holy, it is
not arbitrary, it must be sequestered from common uses. The vessels of the
Sanctuary are said to be holy, because they were not used but about holy
things: So the Temple is holy, because it is a place set apart for Gods
service: so time is holy, when it is bestowed on holy things, holy thoughts,
holy duties; consider that it is holy, and that every part thereof is holy; and
then deny if you can, that it is not to be sanctified. Some men spend their
time which they should redeem, Ephesians. 5.16.
in idleness and gaming; most in drunkenness and disorder, and not as they
should. Ye have heard of mortification; ye have heard the doctrine of
changing from death to life; apply them, and take heed how you hear; ye that
heard it negligently shall grow worse and worse.

These. 2.13. that is, to receive the Word, not as the Word of man; but as the
Word of God. This makes the Word of Christ effectual, to hear it as the Word
of God: that is, consider, whose word it is. Consider the ground of it, that it
proceeds from God who is present, God is there, and we speak in his stead: God
spoke to the Israelites in Mount Sinay, Exodus 20.
and would have continued for any thing we know, yet the people desired that*
Moses should speak unto them. We beseech you in the stead of Christ, 2 Cor.
5.20.
to be reconciled unto God. This is of much moment, to hear it as Gods Word:
morrall truths may build you up in morrall virtues, and may be profitable to
that purpose; but they will not breed spiritual life: that the Word only
does, being received as the Word of God. John 6.65. when as Christ demanded of
the twelve, whether they also would go away? Peter made this answer; Lord,
whither shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. A man is not a
living man, but by conjunction betwixt God and the soul: God is to the soul,
as the soul is to the body, he puts life into it, and is conjoined to it by
his word when it is thus received. The Word coming as from God, we do that
which is commanded us, because God will have us do it: we do it simply and
sincerely, so that God accepts it. When we receive the Word as the Word of God,
with faith, and full Assurance, then it breeds life within us: and when it
begets life then it comes from God, then it comes in power and in the holy
Ghost, and makes us become followers of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. When we receive
the Word of God, 1 These. 2.13.
as from God himself with full assurance, then it works effectually, then it
begets life in us. To live, is to have sense and motion, to be acting: the
receiving of the word with full assurance, makes us active; the believing of it
sets men on work, 2 Chronicles. 25.5.6.10. When as Amasiah believed that God would
not be with him unless he sent away the Israelites, then he sent them away
and not before. Number. 14.24. Heb: 11.17.18.19*
Caleb and Iosuah did believe, therefore they followed God constantly. Abraham
offered up his son Isaacke, because he believed God; that he could give him
another son, or raise him out of ashes again. Let a man be persuaded that
such a thing will hurt him, or that such a thing will do him good, he does
the one and leaves the other. Receive therefore the Word with full assurance,
consider what is delivered, if it be the Word or no; consider that it which ye
hear, is either the Word or not the Word, it belongs to me or not. Men take
things overly, and are not rooted and grounded in faith, and that makes them
hear unprofitably. See then if your particular actions agree with the Word, so
ye shall be rooted in faith; this makes the Word a Word of life.

fourth ground, in the parable of the seed, in the eight of Luke, the 15.
verse, that is, To receive the Word with honest and good hearts; having heard
the Word to keep i^, and to bring forth fruit with patience. Hear the word
with honest hearts; this is done when as a man is resolved to practice
whatsoever God will reveal; when he has no reservations or exceptions to
himself; when he is resolved to practice what he hears with an humble heart:
being humbled we will do this, and not before.

The fourth ground was humbled; men will not hear this because they are proud:
now pride is an evil disposition in the creature, whereby it exalts its self
above its measure: There is this fault ^n men, they will pick and choose in the
ways of God. The last ground will only part with all for Christ. Act. 9. When
as Paul was humbled, he then cried out, Lord what will thou have me to do? I
will do or suffer any thing for thee, and he was as good as his word. So Act.
2.32. the Jews being humbled cried out, Men and brethren what shall we do?
we will do any thing to be saved. So Act, 16.30. The jailer being humbled
demanded of Paul what he should do to be saved; when as a man is thus
disposed, God will teach him, Psalm. 25.9. God teaches the humble his ways:
man himself will do so; if he see one willing to learn, he will teach him:
Psalm. 25.1 4.
The secrets of the Lord are revealed to those that fear him; to those that
stand in awe of him, and dare do nothing against him: he reveals his
peculiar truths in a peculiar manner to men, those things that are effectual
to their salvation: Bring therefore humble hearts, ready to obey.

Object.
But you will say; we do obey and practice what we hear.

Answ.
I answer, that ye may be deceived as they, in the fifth of Deuteronomy. They said they
would obey, but God saw that there was another heart in them than what they
said: therefore God said; O that there were such an heart in them, that they
would fear me, Duet. 5.29.
and keep my commandments always, that it might go well with them and their
children for ever. So Iohanan and the other Captains, Ier. 42.20. desired
Ieremia, to go to God, to know his will, and they would do whatsoever he
should say, whether it were good or evil. But Jeremiah tells them that they did
but dissemble in their hearts; he knew they would not do it. Look to this in
the acts and effects: what have you done when the Word crosses you in your
aims, estates, names, friends? If you have disobeyed it, then Eze. 14.4. the
Word is made a stumbling block, and your iniquities are before your face, and
the Lord will answer you according to the multitude of your Idols. God will
answer such men according to their coming, as they come with false hearts,
they shall be dealt withal accordingly. Come then with hearts resolved to
practice whatsoever is spoken, and desire God to make it effectual to
salvation.

Ioh. 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what
ye will, and it shall be done unto you: When ye attend to the Word, if ye are
affected with it but for the time, it is nothing; except it continue with you
it will not profit you; you must do as Mary did; she laid up all the sayings
that she heard of Christ, and pondered them in her heart, Luke 2.51. The
Disciples often questioned of Christ: which proves, that they pondered his
Words in their hearts: So the Nobles of Berea, they searched the Scripture:
Act. 17 11. Genesis 37.11.
so Jacob he noted the saying of Joseph and laid it up. Ye do not hear thus
if you do but lend your ears for the time, if ye work it not upon your
affections, ye profit not. The reason why there is so much preaching, and so
little profit, is for want of this. There are two kinds of ill hearers: the
first are such as hear as Swine, and trample all they hear under feet; the
second, such as hear as Dogs, snarling at the doctrine* if ye offend in
either of these, ye hear amiss. Of all the four grounds that was worst
which received not the Word. When men hear the Word there is more than a
natural forgetfulness in them, the Devil helps it. Iam. 1.23.24. He that
hears the Word, and recals it not, or practices it not; is like one that
beholds his face in a glass, for he beholds himself and goes away, and
straight way forgets what manner of man he was: ye must recall it before
ye can practice it, else ye will be like to those that behold their face in a
glass, and wipe not away their spots.

Be not therefore forgetful hearers: and for this, first recall and repeat
what ye have heard when ye are gone: Secondly, practice it afterward; there
is a blessing promised to mindful hearers, there is a curse denounced against
those that are forgetful, Ioh. 13.15. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if you do them, but there is a curse for you if you do not profit; God will
make you to hear, and will not give you his Spirit. Regard to prize the Word
if ye will not be forgetful. Romans 1.28. those that did not like to retain God
in their knowledge, those that did hear the Word and not regard it, God gave
them up to a reprobate sense, to an Injudiciousnesse to do those things that
were not convenient, not being able to profit by it. The ancient Fathers much
pressed the repetition of Sermons, and one of them uses this similitude: A man
that comes into a pleasant garden, will not content himself with the present
sent only, but he will carry some of the flowers home with him; So in a cold
day, a man will not be content to heat himself at another man fire, but he
will carry away some fire with him to keep him hot at home. So do ye when ye
come to hear the Word; carry home some flowers of it with you, carry some fire
home with you, to heat and warm your hearts. God regards not flashes and
moodes, and such negligence in performing of holy duties as will not warm your
hearts. Men are like a Sive in the water: it is full whiles it is in the water,
but being taken out of it, it has nothing; it is not the hearing of the Word
of God, or the doing of it negligently that will profit, if ye hear it only
pro forma, and negligently, it does you no good, but it brings Gods curse upon
you. Gods curse is on many, they grow not in knowledge or grace for want of
diligence; wherefore in the 2 Pet. 3, 17. the Apostle bids us beware least
being led away with the error of the wicked, we fall from our own
steadfastness: to prevent this, grow in grace, and for this purpose grow in
knowledge, for then ye grow in grace.

great sheapheard of the flock that must feed you. It is the Spirit that must
teach you. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Therefore when as you come to hear, pray earnestly to God to speak unto you
by his Spirit. It is the Spirit that quickneth. Ioh. 6.63. the Word is
spiritual, and we are carnal* therefore we must pray for the Spirit to
help us for to hear: the Spirit is not bestowed without prayer. Act. 1.14.15.
God promised to give his Spirit to his Apostles, yet they continued long in
prayers ere he gave it them. Luke 11.13. God gives not his Spirit but to such
as ask it, to such as continue praying, asking and knocking. David prays to
God; to open his eyes that he might see the wonders of his Law: Psalm. 119.
Men may hear the Word, yet God opens not their eyes without seeking to him.
God speaks unto you by his Ministers. Paul and Apollos are yours; we are the
Ministers of God, 1 Cor 3.21.
for your sakes, for your service. If God open the door of utterance, it is not
for our sakes but yours, that you might seek the Word at our mouths and
believe. Act. 14.1. a great company of Jews and Gentiles believed by hearing
the Word preached, and receiving of it: The world receives not the Spirit,
because they seek it not, Ioh. 14 17. We in preaching, can do nothing; it is
the Spirit that must do it. 2 Cor. 3.18. we can show you the Image of God, but
it is nothing to you if ye be not transformed into the same image from glory to
glory: and it is the Spirit that must thus transform you. Conclude therefore
with God in prayer, let not him deny you; one Word from him is more than a
thousand from us. God fastening his Word upon your hearts, it changes you;
without him we preach in vain.

else we sow but amongst thorns, Ier. 4.4. we speak to men prepossessed: the
seed falls on fallow ground; we speak to men, whose hearts are full of lusts,
they have a noise of business within them; and so they hear us not, because
their hearts are forepossessed. The arrows head being in the wound, it is in
vain to lay plasters upon it: therefore, Iam. 1.24. when as we come to hear
the Word, we are commanded, to lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, and
to receive with meekness, the ingrafted Word, which is able to save our
souls. D^e in hearing the Word as men do in grafting; cut off all superfluous
branches; come with empty minds; attend to the matters of grace. Men who have
full stomachs God feeds not; He feeds the hungry, others are sent empty away,
Luke 1.53.
they are always hearing, but never profiting. I should speak now to
Ministers and people: to Ministers, that they speak in the voice of Christ,
that they speak as he did; not in wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 2.14.
but in the evidence of the Spirit; To the people; that they must hear them by
whom Christ speaks: those who have Livings to bestow, ought to bestow them on
such as speak the Words of Christ; they that want his voice ought to procure
such. Now if ye will not be at cost for a good Minister, it is a sign you
love your profit above Christ. Those that dwell where Christ's voice is not, let
them remove, for they sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, Esaias. 9.2.
If your dwelling be pleasant, if you have bitter waters or no waters at all,
you will remove: Have not your dwelling then where the water of life is not. If
the voice of Christ be the only means to beget life, let men come to it. It
is a great fault, men come not to this voice: he that came not to the
Sacrament, must be cut off: What shall be done to him that comes not to the
Word? Want of the Word preached is a great misery; therefore David complains
much of this case, when he was not able to come to the Word. Psalm. 120.5.
O that I am constrained to dwell in Meshech, and to have my habitation amongst
the tents of Kedar. The daily sacrifice being taken away, it was the greatest
desolation that could be; Dan. 9.27.
and can men live there with comfort where the Word is wanting? Is it a duty to
come to hear the Word, or is it Arbitrary, to come or not to come? If it be
arbitrary, then ye perform but a will worship, when ye hear it; if a duty,
then ye must hear it constantly, and enquire where it is to be had.

Object.
But you have excuses.

Answ.
To this I answer, see how ye can excuse your selves to God: How angry was
Christ with those that came not to the marriage: Math. 22.
that is principally meant of coming to hear the Gospel. It is a despysing
of God and his ordinances not to come; it is a contempt which brings forth a
curse, which brings a judgment that is like the sin. Those that despise you,
despise me, says Christ; Luke 10.16. Romans 1.16.
the word is the power of God to salvation: there is no salvation without
faith, and there is no faith but by hearing. Romans 10.11.
Faith comes by hearing: He that hears not you, hears not me, says Christ.
Therefore if you hear not this voice of the Son of God take heed lest he
hear not you at last.

FINIS.
THE DOCTRINE OF SELF-DENIAL.
LVK. 9.23. And he said unto them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.


We have formerly propounded three things unto you; the first was, to show you
what we are out of CHRIST; and that is, we are dead men: the second is, what
we gain by CHRIST: and that is, Life eternal, with all things belonging to
it; and these two we have finished* the third is, what we must do for
CHRIST; And that is, We must deny our selves, take up Christ's Cross and
follow him: and for this end I have chosen this Text. And he said unto them
all, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross daily, and follow me. As if he should have said, all expecting any
benefit from me now, I look for this from them again, to deny themselves, to
take up my daily cross, and follow me.

The occasion of these words, was this. CHRIST told them before, that the Son
of man must suffer many things, go through many troubles and drink this Cup:
now from this, he makes this consectary: He that will be mine, must do the
same things that I do, though not in the same measure; He must deny himself,
he must take up his daily cross, as I do dye on the Cross, and follow me.
The maine Poinct intended is this: Who ever will have benefit by me, must
follow me. Now there are two maine impediments that hinder men from following
me; The first is Pleasures, or any thing that a man lusts after; therefore he
that comes to me must deny himself. The second is crosses; he that follows
me meets with many troubles, crosses and afflictions from the Devil and the
world; now he must not bauke the way or decline them, when as he meets with
them, but he must go thorough with them, and every day bear them; therefore
he adds, that he that will come after him, must not only deny himself, but
likewise take up his Cross daily and follow him.

The first point of Doctrine that arises from the words is this.

That whosoever looks for any interest in Christ, Doct. 1.
must deny himself. He that comes after me, that is, he that will be saved
by me, united to me, made one with me, must deny himself; that is, though
there be no precedent condition required of those that come to Christ, (we
Preach, that if any man will come in, he shall be saved, what ever he has
been; there is no antecedent condition required but to desire CHRIST, Rev.
22.17. Let him that is athirst come, let whosoever will come and taste of the
waters of life freely. That is, none will take him, none will come in but such
as thirst: there is nothing required before hand but to take him:) yet ye must
know, that when ye have taken him, you must be his; he must be your Lord,
and you must be conformable to him: this none can do without denying
himself. PAVL followed Christ, because he denied himself: but DEMAS did not
deny himself. therefore 2 Timothy 4.10. He embraced the present world, and
forsook Christ. Numb. 14.24. Josh. 14.8. CALEB and IOSHVA followed God
constantly, they went through all and denied themselves; the other heads of the
Tribes did not. Take ABRAHAM for example of Self denial. Gen 12.1. GOD bids
him go out of his Country to an unknown Land, and he does it; He refused
not to offer up his only Son when he was commanded to do it; he served
God constantly. If our wills and Christ's will were unisons and coincident, then
there were no need to deny our selves; but because they are contrary one to the
other, therefore we must deny our selves.

Quest.
But what is it to deny our selves?

Answ.
I answer, it is nothing else, but not to make our selves our aim and end; but
to make God our end and aim, and to deny our selves as we are contrary to
him: To deny that dullness and averseness of Nature, that the Scripture calls,
Col 3.9. R^m. 8.1.3.5.8.9.
the old man, and the flesh; to give this the denial is to deny a man's self;
because this is reckoned a man's self. Flesh and corruption of nature, is
called a man's self. 2 Corinthians. 4.5. We preach not our selves, but Christ:
That is, we preach not for our own credit and ends, but for Christ and his
glory. The corruption of Nature is reckoned a man's self. 2 Corinthians. 12.5. PAVL
says that he knew a man that was caught up into Paradise, etc. Of such a one
I will glory, yet of my self I will not glory: That is, I will not rejoice of
my corruption, but of the regenerate part of my self. I am a lump^ (...) of
sin.

But why is this reckoned a man's self? Quest.


Answ.
I answer, because it is spread over the Soul and all the faculties, as the
form is over the matter; for a man cherishes it as himself; that which
fights against it fights against himself.

But how can a man possibly deny himself? Quest.
For there must be a request before there can be a denial, and this cannot be
done but where there are two; one to request, another to deny; now man is but
one, how then can this be?

Answ.
I answer, there are two selfs, two men in every man; one requests, the other
denies. Romans 7.20. It is no longer I that do it; but sin that dwells in me:
that is, there are two in me, the flesh and the spirit; by the one I will the
thing, by the other I resist it; In every Regenerate man, there are three
things; 1. Common Nature, which is neither morally good nor evil: this has an
entity in it, and so is good. Secondly, to this is added the flesh, the
corruption of Nature, on the one side, bya^^ing it the wrong way; on the other
side of it there is the spirit, turning it the right way and rectifying it.
This common nature as it is guided by the spirit, denies it self in the things
propounded, according to the flesh: the understanding and the will in this
competitition (...) the flesh: when as your wills and (...) desire riches,
pleasures, wealth, life, in an ^^ordinate manner; deny your selves, the spirit
reqvesting the contrary. Without this Selfe-denyall a man cannot be saved;
there is a necessity of it, and there is much equity in it, Reasons of Self
denial
(as there is in all Gods Commandments) if we could but see it.

Galath. 6.8. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption;
that is, by satisfying of it we reap Destruction: he that sows to the
flesh reapes destruction; that is, destruction comes not presently, it is as
seed that is sown, it comes for the most part afterward. And this answers an
objection that might be made, that we see the contrary. Ezekiel. 18.31. God says,
Why will ye dye O ye house of Israel? That is, though you see not present
death, yet your sins will bring death. As it is said of uncleannes, Prove. 2.18.
That it leads to the Chambers of death: so may it be said of any other sin, it
leads to death. But now to deny your selves, is life, because by so doing ye
sow to the spirit. And he that sowes to the spirit; shall of the spirit reap
life everlasting. Gal. 6.8.

God there is good reason that we should deny our selves. For what is it to
have a God, without worshipping him as God? If we do not deny our selves, we
set not God above our selves. Look upon the nature of things, and you shall
find, that God has none above himself. GOD may do all things for his own
ends; but look to your selves, you are made for another end; keep the order
of nature, do as the order of things requires, you must be subject to him,
your desires coming in competition with what GOD requires, you must deny your
selves.

But how is it possible for a man in his projects, and the thoughts of his
heart, Quest.
not to seek himself?

Answ.
To this I answer, first, that in every man there is a natural self-love,
therefore we do not destroy it, but say, that a man may seek himself,
because God has planted it in Nature; and the plants which he has planted we
must not root out; we have Gardens in our hearts, and we must weed them: grace
destroys not nature but elevates it. Nature is the Work of GOD: ( Opus
Naturae est opus Authoris.)

and to love our neighbors as our selves; which show that a man may love
himself. Math. 19.19.


Repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand: and Fear not him that can kill the
body and do no more, Math. 3.2. Math. 20.28.
but fear him that is able to cast both soul and body into Hell: show that a
man may love himself. Wherefore we do not take away this self-love but
rectify it; we do not dry up this stream, but turn it into it is right
Channel: we extirpate not this plant, but guide it into the right way; as
Musicians break not the strings, but rectify and tune them. Wherefore we
affirm, that a man may and must seek himself so far as it is good for
himself, and no farther: This religion does, it rectifies our love, teaches
us to deny inordinate affections, and to serve God with a perfect heart. Before
regeneration, a man seeks himself by doing things that are pleasant according
to the flesh, he does the thing he sees and handles. But a man that is
sanctified, seeks his happiness in God, though he loses his goods, his life,
and all that he has, his happiness is in God, he is resolved to do or
suffer any thing for God.

If none can have any interest in CHRIST without denying himself, Use. 1.
then join not both together: make no conjunction whereas God has made an
absolute disjunction; deny all that is in you, the whole body of sin, all it
can desire; deny every request of the flesh, every desire of it without all
exception: Christ says not, deny your Covetousness, every such particular
sin, but your selves, every sin, stock and branch, both cannot be joined:
if there be any pleasure, any thing that ye delight in, have ye any commodity
in such a thing, ye cannot be saved without a Divorce from it, when it comes
in competition with GOD. So if there be any Cross that ye will not suffer for
GOD, ye cannot be saved. Put case a man will not endure Obloquie; if he will
endure this, yet he will not loose his estate: if this, yet he will not loose
his liberty and life, such a man as this denies not himself. Those who would
follow CHRIST, must do as the Apostles did, Mark. 10.28. Forsake all and
follow him: GOD will try us all one time or other, whether we will forsake all
and follow him. Mark. 6.22. He that will follow CHRIST, must have a single
Eye: that is, if the eye be fixed only on God, without joining any thing with
him, then it is single; it is said to be single, in regard of the object; when
as that is single. When we can be content with GOD though we have nothing
else, then is our eye single, and we are light: but if our eye be wicked, that
is, eyeing of our credit and estate and the like, all the body is dark; that
is, we are Unregenerate. James, 1.8. A double-minded man, GOD hates: the mind
is double when it has an eye to GOD and our selves too; such a man as this, is
unstable in all his ways, he will follow GOD but in some things. Iereboham
will follow GOD, but not in the matter of the Kingdom: without a single eye,
we are unstable in our ways. This joining of both together, makes many
thousands loose their Souls. Many that live in the Church will not abandon
all, they will do many things to satisfy natural Considerations; this does
destroy many, having eyes to GOD and themselves too.

But consider.

If BAAL be GOD, follow him altogether. 1 King. 18.21




Chronic. 25.2. AMAZIAH served GOD uprightly, but not with a perfect heart; he
did much, but not with a perfect heart; therefore it was nothing worth. Why do
you hear and pray, and are just in many things, and not in all? Ye loose your
labor while thus you halt between GOD and Baal.





Secondly, if all thar come to CHRIST must deny themselves, Use 2.
then learn to make account of this before hand, to deny your selves: Cast
with your selves, if you will be saved and follow CHRIST, not to provide for
pleasures and estate: say not I will be rich, I will have such content; you
must deny your selves, withstand your selves: see what your thoughts and
intentions are; do you not think how to satisfy your selves in your earthly
things? these be your thoughts, but suffer the^ not to run out: put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14.
and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Every man
till he be another man, will seek himself, but do you renounce your selves.
Consider what your morning thoughts are, consider that the flesh is lusting and
running; think therefore every morning how to cross it the day following, you
must daily deny your selves, you must go up the Hill of holy duties, when as
the flesh would go down; be careful in crossing the flesh when it would be
busy: be painful in your callings, when as the flesh would be lasie; fear
not to have shame in the world for CHRIST and Righteousness sake, though the
flesh brooks it not: nothing troubles men more than being crossed; we having
preconceived a thing, it vexes us for to loose it; if we will be Christians,
we must cross our selves, not please our selves; please the spirit, let not
the affections run out; part with all that is sweet, and taste those things
that are bitter; and not only thus much (my Brethren) but think you have a
good bargain too: he that takes Christ for his Lord, must deny himself, and
hate Father and Mother for his sake, else he is not worthy of him, Matthew.
14.26. That is, except ye think me worthy of all this, let me alone; ye
will not be saved: The Merchant gave all that he had for the Pearl, Math.
13.45.46.
and thought that he had a good Bargain: ye must not complain, if ye do,
ye continue not: think what Heaven is worth: Is GOD the governor of all? See
what ye have by him: If ye deny your selves, Revl. 1.6.
ye are Kings and Priests; ye have all if ye take him: therefore see whether
ye take him thus or no: ye must not think ye have a hard bargain.

Object.
But you will say, this is a hard saying, who can bear it?

Answ.
To this I answer, that there is reason for it, there is enough in CHRIST if ye
saw it; there is reason to persuade you to it.

Suppositio nihil ponit.) yet suppose that a man could cast himself into hell
for Gods sake, he would be a gainer by it. Our good is in our GOD more than in
our selves, even as the beam is more in the Sun, than in its self. The
perfection of every thing is the end of it. Take all Creatures, mixed bodies and
the rest, let them have their end, and they are perfect: God is the end of
every man, we are made, redeemed, and live for this purpose, that we might be
his alone: We cannot then be miserable whiles we have our end. Romans 9.3. PAVL
could wish himself separated from God, for the love which he had to his
Countrymen the Jews, he could be content to be accursed, that CHRIST ^ight
have glory by their Salvation. Lose ye (...), credit, or your lives for Christ
his sake; ye are happy in it: ye have a Command to love God above your selves;
because your good is more in him than in your selves. If it were not so, GOD
should contradict himself, in bidding us love him above our selves: Therefore
our good and happiness is more in GOD, than in our selves. Let a man therefore
deny and lose himself, for Christ and the Gospel he gets by it.

Sam. 12.21. Turn not away from following the LORD, for then should you seek
after vain things, which will not profit; for they are vain. Go through all
things: Men, women, riches, honors, any delights pleasing the fancy, there is
nothing but vanity in them: that is, there is an inability in them, to give
that satisfaction that is expected. From this we say, a Well is empty, because
we look for waters in it, and find none. What needs there a change and
vicissitude of things, if there were not an emptiness in the Creature? What
needed there such a multitude of them if they were not empty? Besides, consider
that GOD can make you happy without them. If ye have the Sun, no matter for
the Stars: though ye have them without the Sun, yet it is night. It were
an easy thing to deny our selves, if we were persuaded of this. Were we in
SALOMONS case (who saw all that is under the Sun, and had abundance of
outward things himself, yet in Eccles. 1.2.3. he says, They are all but
vanity:) it were an easy matter to persuade us to deny our selves. If a chaste
wife were persuaded, that there is no worth in him that solicites her to
uncleannes, it were easy for her to deny him. Now add this to the rest, that
all we have said persuades not, but when God sends a light into the heart;
and that is the reason that many speak of this, but few practice it.

Christ has redeemed and bought you of your selves. Suppose a man sell
himself to be a Servant; it is injustice in him to be any more for himself.
1 Corinthians. 6.19.20. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price: Servants
are not their own but their Masters. Romans 8.12. Ye are no longer debtors to
the Flesh, to live after the Flesh; but to the Spirit, to live after the
Spirit: ye wrong God much, if the flesh knock and ye answer it. Consider
the price, and the greatness of it, that was paid for you. 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye
are not redeemed with Corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain
Conversation, but with the precious Blood of CHRIST, as a Lamb without spot.
Paul considered that Christ gave himself for him, so that he stood upon
nothing, but denied himself in all things, that he might live to him. 2 Corinthians. 5.15. We thus judge, that one dyed for all, that they which live,
should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him, which dyed for them and
rose again. Consider this ye that come to the Sacrament; ye must not do all
for your selves, but for CHRIST, and what advantage will this bring to Christ?
Let men examine themselves and ye shall find, that few live to Christ, most
to themselves: Otherwise, why are not men more affected to Gods glory, and the
Churches good? Consider CHRIST will have his end; ye must live in him, else
ye shall have no interest in him.

your selves; When as ye yield to your selves, ye strengthen the flesh: denying
your selves, you strengthen your selves, and the inward man: the more ye yield
to the Spirit, the more beauty ye have; the more ye yield to the flesh, the
more deformity. Gal. 5.19. The fruits of the flesh, are adultery, fornication,
uncleannes, and the like, which bring death: but the fruits of the Spirit, are
joy, peace, long-suffrings, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance; against which there is no law. Look to your selves; the fruits of
the flesh, are shame, misery, corruption, death; the fruits of the Spirit, are
life, grace, and glory: yielding to the flesh ye strengthen the disease: the
wisest way is to strengthen that which will stick by us. Ye must maintain
the Spirit, crucify the flesh, which is as the sea; having gotten ground, it
is hardly to be recovered: therefore snib not the Spirit, quench it not, lest
it speak less and less, till it speak not at all: yield to the whisperings
of the Spirit, and quench it not: deny not any request the Spirit makes.

Thirdly, If all that will have any interest in Christ, must deny themselves,
Use. 3.
you see how prone our nature is to evil, else we needed not this
exhortation. We sink down to sin, as a stone does to the Center, the flesh
is still drawing and byassing us the wrong way; therefore let us not have too
good an opinion of our selves* let us be jealous with a holy jealousy;
remember the Flesh is prone to evil continually.

Quest.
But how shall we know it?

Answ.
I answer, that it is plain in many things.

Quest.
But how shall we know whether the desire be from the Spirit, or from the Flesh?

Answ.
A man desires a place, he says it is to do good with it; he desires honors
for the good of others.

Quest.
But how shall we know if he does so?

Answ.
I answer, that in these generals no exact signs can be given, yet we will
guess at some, whereby ye may know it.









John was zealous for God; but it was with an eye and respect to the Kingdom.
So Hosea, 7.14. The people fasted and assembled themselves together, but it was
but for Corn and Wine: take away our respects, we are cold; these are desires
that should be denied.

Use. 4,
Fourthly, if all that have interest in Christ must deny themselves; then try
whether you have interest in Christ or no: are ye willing to deny the flesh?
Are ye willing to undergo the cross? To crucify the flesh for Christ? Else
ye are not in him. He must deny himself that is in Christ: all are ready to
say, that they deny themselves, when as it is spoken in general; but if ye
will know whether you deny your selves or no, consider but these three things.

Number. 22.20. Balaam would not go upon any terms to curse Israel, at the
first and second request; he had a secret light within him that told him that
he should not go, though God bade him go; but yet God who knows the ways
of the flesh and Spirit, saw that he lingered after Balacks wages; and
therefore he bids him go, and he went: he did not satisfy his conscience. So
SAVL carried it fairly, when as he offered Sacrifice before SAMVEL came; so he
did when h^ ^^ared AGAG and the best things; pretendi^g Sacrifice to be made
with them: yet his conscience told him that it was a sin, he did not satisfy
it^ Examine things to the full, else ye deny not your selves. We preach to
you, that you must do thus and thus; peradventure ye deceive your selves and
reason against it, yet your Consciences are convinced. 2 Corinthians. 4.2. We
speak to your Consciences, and approve our selves to them; we preach not to
the wits and humors of men, but to their consciences, in the sight of GOD and
men. You must love the light: Ioh. 3.12. He that does truth comes to the
light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought of GOD. Do
ye choose the light, without seeking any ^istinctions, or evasions? If a man
seek evasions, it is a sign he is not of the truth. He that loves the
truth, is of the light: approves things that are excellent; Phil. 1.10.
he is willing to hold up his actions to the Sun, as one does a vessel, to
see if there be ever a flaw in it. Ye may call sanctifying the Sabbath,
Iudaisme; ye may call strictness of life, Hypocrisy and Preciseness; Zeal,
indiscretion; But what say your consciences of them? If that which we do be
but hypocrisy, why do you not it in reality?

Object.
Yea, but you are more strict than the rule.

Answ.
Why, then try whether it be so or no, take not the word upon trust. 1 Corinthians.
3.5. We are the Ministers by whom ye believe, and not what ye believe: If
ye are not willing to search what the good (...) of GOD is, ye deny not your
selves. In those things that are in question, see that you satisfy your
Consciences and that light which is within. If there be a question about
sanctifying of the Sabbath, and gayning; do as your Consciences bid you, see
if there be not a reluctance within.

would not leave off Prayer, though it should cost him his life, Dan. 6.10: will
ye not commit any sin, though you gain never so much by it; as BALAAM did,
and as those that have the persons of men in admiration, because of advantage,
do? Try what ye do in such cases as these. If some trouble follow such a
duty, what do ye? Mark. 8.38. He that is ashamed to profess CHRIST, though
it brings a Cross to him, he that will not profess him in time of trial; of
him will the Son of man also be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of
his Father. Has Christ need of the same thing, that you your selves have need
of; will ye bestow it on him? Suppose it be a box of ointment, or ten times
more; the trial is, how we do deny our selves, when as we shall injure our
selves.

and he resists them, 1. Pet. 5.5. They are full of murmurings and disquiet;
The broken hearts make no account of themselves, care not for any condition,
are contented with the lowest room, as the Prodig^ll was; so they have grace
it is enough; If ye have this disposition, it shows you are men denying your
selves: Apply these rules, and try if ye deny your selves or not: if ye do
not, know your condition, and labor to bring your hearts to it, to deny your
selves: The ways to do it are these.

Means to deny our selves.
reckon the inward man your self; if ye reckon the Flesh your self; riches,
honors, credit and wealth that perfect the flesh, your self; then ye will
lose all for it, ye will not deny your selves: Such a one will leave Religion,
wound his Conscience, rather than lose his estate: But if we reckon the
regenerate part our selves, it has friends and a Kingdom; and reckoning it
our self, we will suffer any thing rather than hurt it: we will lose our life
and liberty, and yet are well because this is safe. After a man is regenerate,
he reckons another thing himself, than he did before; the Spirit is now
predominant, he is himself: doing Spiritual things, the Spirit is Lord of the
house; the flesh may come in as a thief, but there is a great difference, when
as it comes thus, and when as it comes as a Lord: When as the Spirit is a man's
self, his hold is in heaven. Let us judge of our selves, and we shall be able
to deny our selves.

Matthew. 16.25. He that will save his life, shall lose it; he that will save
his credit and pleasure, shall lose it; the more ye deny your selves, and part
with these things, the more ye shall have, Even an hundred for one in this
life, and in the world to come life everlasting, Mark. 10.30. Ye shall be
gainers by it.

Object.
Yea, but we see the contrary, the Saints are imprisoned, and persecuted, they
have many crosses and losses.

Answ.
It is true, and therefore the Text says; That they shall have a hundred fold
with Persecution; that is, God will multiply comforts to them with Persecution:
One may have more comfort in a Prison, than others have in a Palace. Comfort
consists not in the bulk of outward things. David was wise to take opportunity
when as he had any thing to do for God: though it were costly, yet he did it:
he bought his Oxen that he offered, he would not offer that to God, which cost
him nothing: 2 Samuel 24.24. The water that cost men's lives, that which he
thirsted so much for, he powered out as an oblation to God, and would not
drink of it: for he knew that whatsoever it cost him, he should be a gainer
by it. Act. 5.41, The Apostles being whipped, went away rejoicing: None rejoice
but such as think they are gainers by it. Paul accounted it a great favor, to
suffer for Christ: So the Apostle, Iam. 1.2. bids us count it exceeding much
joy, when as we fall into diverse tribulations: and James, 1 12. Blessed is the
man that indureth temptation: for when ^ee is tried he shall receive the Crown
of life. It is for your advantage, when as you lose an estate, or a friend, or
suffer any thing for GOD; ye shall get by it. If ye can say with Peter, Lord,
we have forsaken all and followed thee; Mark. 10.28. ye shall have an hundred
fold; that is, ye shall have GOD.

Object.
But is it not best to have other things with GOD?

Answ.
I answer, that God is best; trust him, leave the keeping of other things to
him: if ye are to lose a friend to keep a good Conscience, commit it to Gods
keeping; so if ye are to lose an estate. Besides, if ye have not these things
from his favor, what is it to you? Ye may have them by his Providence, and
not out of his favor, and then they will be a snare unto you, ye will set
your minds too much on them, and they will lead you to hell; or else they
will be a cross unto you: What comfort can you have in them, if God be
absent? If God bid such a thing comfort us, we have comfort: but if he bids it
not to comfort us, though we have it, yet we want comfort; Therefore reckon
these things but as dross and dung, as PAVL did, Phil. 3.8. add not to them,
but to Gods favor; forsake them if they come in Competition with him, and his
laws.

Corinth. 1.13. Paul reasons thus with the Corinthians; Is Christ divided? Was
Paul Crucified for you? Or, were you Baptized in the name of Paul? If Christ
does all for us, we must deny our selves for him. Look on all that he has
done for you, and what privileges you have by him; learn to believe, it will
make you to deny your selves. Paul went through many things, because he trusted
in the living God, 1 Timothy 4.10. Moses cared not for the wrath or favor of
Pharaoh, because he believed, Hebrews, 11. Believe and know, that there is a
realitie in the things we have by Christ: let them not be as things only in
the fancy, but be affected with them. We rejoice in an estate which we
possess, and in honors we enjoy; because we have them. By Christ we are
Kings, and Priests, and heirs of all, Revel. 1.5, 6. If you believe this, then
Faith begets Love in us, which makes us willing to part with all. Philip. 2.21.
Paul complains, That every man seeks his own, and not the things of Jesus
Christ; that was for want of of love: 1 Corinthians. 13.5. Love seeks not his
own; you may see this in Paul, Act. 20.24. I count not (says he) my life
dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course with Joy, and the Ministry
which I have received of the Lord Jesus. Learn to believe in Christ, love him,
then you will deny your selves for him: What ever men thought of Paul, though
he was taken to be a mad man, Act. 26.24. yet the love of Christ did
constrain him, 2 Corinthians. 5.14. So as we love Christ, it is no matter what
we suffer.

Ioab would have persuaded David to slay Abner, David gives him a peremptory
denial; saying, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Servia? So Christ
gave Peter a peremptory denial, when he would dissuade him from his Passion;
he says to him, Get thee behind me Satan. Math. 16.23.
The flesh is of your old acquaintance, that has bin borne and bred with you,
and therefore is ready to deceive you; wherefore look to it. Act. 21. Paul
says to them that would dissuade him from going up to Jerusalem. What do ye
weeping and breaking my heart? their expostulation with him weakened the sinews
of his intention, and softened his purpose. Bring these means to particulars,
having occasion, let them not remain in general: You that hear me now,
examine your selves; none that hear me this day but had need particularly to
deny himself: some humors he has that he must deny; give not over till thou
have done it. This will scowre out the stains out of your Souls, labor
therefore for to do it: Put case, that satisfying such a desire is pleasant,
yet denying of it will bring you more pleasure and profit; there are none that
gain by sinning, and none lose by serving God: You are gainers while you lose
your credit for God, or your riches; he will either give you more, or else he
will give you more comfort in the little which you have. Are you restrained?
God will give you longer and larger liberty from the yoke of Sin: lose you a
momentany delight? God will give you a stronger delight. A lust being removed,
there is a blemish wiped away, every lust is a spot on the soul; If ye suffer
a lust to continue, that ye are indulgent to, it defiles you, it makes you
indigent: Lusts cause want. Being brought under the power of a lust, ye are
under a Tyrant. Again, what ever your hearts are set on, and you will not deny
your selves in it; if ye belong to God ye shall be crossed in it: your
strong affections will be your strong afflictions. David was crossed in his
Absolon; Absolon, in his Kingdom; Amnon in his Tamar. Again, if you will
satisfy your lusts, there is no end of it, ye must be always adding fuel to
them, which increases the fire. Consider, that in this, our heart is
deceitful: we being minded to continue in things, though it be but for a
time, we will not easily be brought to judge aright of them afterward, we
judge not then without a bribe: and our judgments being bribed, they are then
easily corrupted. Take heed therefore of Custom: this is hard to be resisted:
the flesh will expect the same entertainment from us at the last, as it had the
second or third time. Custom does prejudice us much; it intends the original
Corruption; it leads us captive with violence: being accustomed to any lust,
know that it is hard to renounce it, because custom adds unto its strength*
When we have judged already of a thing, we are loath to judge again. But now
my Brethren, consider, if ye erred once, that will not excuse the second
error: Custom is, but Vetustas erroris, the antiquity of error; Gods Spirit
must be the rule of our lives: Custom is an engagement to us, to continue in
those things wherein we should deny our selves: So the opinion of men, is a
hinderance to Self-denial; having used such a course we will not alter it; if
we do, men wonder at it; this keeps men off from self-denial. Wherefore
that your hearts deceive you not, remember this caution; Take heed of Custom.

La^^ly, Use 5.
if no man has any interest in Christ unless he deny himself; then see the
way of drawing near to CHRIST: The more we deny our selves, the less
distance is betwixt him and us; the nearer our wills are brought together, the
nearer we come to him; the more fully we empty us of our selves, the more
perfectly we deny our selves, and the nearer we come to him. And thus much
for the first Point; that who ever looks for any interest in Christ, must deny
himself. The second follows which is this.

That the ways of God are full of Crosses; Doct. 2.
they have much difficulty in them: Christ tells men, They must deny themselves,
take up their daily Cross: they must go through crosses, and look for them:
the ways therefore of God are full of crosses. And this must needs be so, for
three reasons.



Corinth. 11.19. Heresies must needs come, that those who are faithful may be
tried; that the good may be distinguished from the counterf^^^ Afflictions and
crosses are the best touchstones; therefore they are called trials, because
they try and prove men.

John Baptist did, and then it may cost him his life. It may cost us our lives
and loss of favor, (as it did Moses, Hebr. 11. Who endured Pharaohs wrath,)
for standing out in good causes. In many actions we may and shall be censured;
for we must be just to men, and upright to GOD, and not be biased a wrong
way; and for this we may be opposed. The Sabboths must be kept though some
losses may come by it; many other actions must be done, we must speak for
Christ, as Paul and Daniel did, which cost them Imprisonment, and so it may do
us.

John 15.19. The world loves her own, and hates them who are Christ's; they are
resisted, and cannot resist again. The world puts crosses upon the Saints, and
as if they were not forward enough of themselves, the Devil helps them
forwards: He sets their tongues on work, James, 3.6. Their tongues are set on
fire of Hell; he sets their hands on work, Revel. 2.10. The Devil shall cast
some of you into Prison; that is, men by the Devils instigation shall do it.

Fifthly, it must needs be so, in regard of men's conditions and themselves; they
must have crosses to prevent sin: Christ the good Shepherd sets Dogs on his
sheep sometimes to bark at them, and if that will not serve the turn, to
bite them too: Partly, for sins present which they contract. And partly to
prevent future sins. Prosperity makes them rust sometimes; therefore God sets
scullio^s to rub them over and makes them bright, though they make themselves
black. God sends afflictions on the good to make them better; Threshing makes
the corn though it were good before, to be much better: the fire though the
gold be good before, yet it makes it much purer: health though it be good, yet
exercise makes it better.

Now as the ways of God are full of crosses, so they have much difficulty in
them; and that for these reasons.

difficult for a man to deny himself: it is a hard thing to deny a stranger
being importunate; it is harder to deny a friend, a wife, or a son: but it is
hardest to deny a man's self, to deny a strong lust, a natural inclination,
which is ever begging and asking, that is like a continual dropping, this is
difficult.

Romans 7.14.
the Law is spiritual, we are carnal, sold under sin, and yet must be
squared by it.







Phil. 4.21. We must want and abound, bear good report, and bad report; It is
hard to bear prosperity; as hard as it is to drink much wine, and not be
giddy: It is hard to bear adversity and not to stoop; hard to bear scorches
without shrinking; some can bear want, but abundance makes them leave God:
many can bear good report, and cannot away with bad report: some can do both,
but yet they will not loose their wealth: some can endure that, but not
imprisonment: to go through thick and thin is hard and difficult.

But now you may ask me two questions. Quest. 1.
If this be so, how comes Christ to tell men; Matthew 11.30. That his yoke is
easy and his burden light? how is that true, Prover. 3.17. That all the ways
of wisdom are ways of pleasure? Why promise ye so much joy and peace in
Religion, if there be so many crosses following it?

Answ. 1
To this I answer, First, that the ways of God are pleasant to any man that is
right, to one that is renewed. 1 Corinthians. 2.6. We preach wisdom to them that
are perfect; that is, to them that are upright. So the ways of God are
pleasant to those that are upright, and able to judge of them: yet they are not
so to others. If I say that good meat and drink are pleasant, it is true, and
you will all agree to it: yet it is not so to a Sick man: So the light is very
comfortable, yet to sore eyes it is burdensome: So Gods ways are pleasant,
yet to men having sore Eyes, sick Consciences, and distempered affections,
they are difficult.

is but for a season, Hebr. 11.25. and by occasion of satisfying the lust; but
a good Conscience is a continual feast; Prove. 15 15,
at all times Gods ways are a burden and yoke to the flesh, but to the Spirit
they are easy.

Object.
But you will object, If the ways of God are difficult and full of crosses, it
will discourage men to be religious; how shall we run the ways of Gods
Commandments with cheerefulnes, seeing they are so full of crosses?

I answer, that though the ways of God are in themselves difficult, yet they
are easy to those that come after Christ, and that in these regards.

Paul, Romans 7.22. To delight in the Law of God concerning the inward man. I
will say of this as Christ answered Peter, when as he asked him, who should be
saved if rich men were not: this is impossible (says Christ) with men, but it
is possible with God; Matthew. 19.26. That is, such a man cannot change his own
heart, but God can, and then the ways of God will be pleasant: God can give
you another nature, and they will be easy.

Finis dat amabilitatem medijs, The end sweetens the means: the hope of
harvest makes the husbandmans labor pleasant. So it is with Christ; he is
pleasant if you put all together; if you look to the joy and reward as well as
to the cross: look on them as on weights in the balance: if the weights be
equal, they stir not; but put more weight into one scale, then the other
though it seemed heavy before, yet now it is bu^ light. So it is with these
crosses; in themselves they are heavy, but compare them with the issue, the end
and reward, they are but light; Our afflictions, which are but for a moment,
purchase us a far more exceeding weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.



Psalm. 39.6. they are but as flowers: our eyes being opened to see that these
things are so, it is an easy thing to disesteeme them; to one that is humbled
this is easy; he that has felt the burden of sin to be heavy, will find
Christ's yoke to be light; the Devils yoke is a hard and heavy yoke, he that
has felt the bitterness of sin will think Gods ways to be pleasant.

as David said to Micol. 2 Samuel 6.21. We do it to the Lord: this makes all
easy: this made all easy to Paul, Acts 21. When as Agabus told him, that he
should be bound at Jerusalem, he tells them, that he is not only ready to be
bound, but likewise to dye at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus. A
soldier does much more, when as he sees his General looking upon him; a good
servant will work out of his heart, when as his masters eye is upon him,
especially if his master has a good eye: consider then that we do all for
Christ, and this will sweeten all.

If this be so, Use. 1.
that the ways of God are full of crosses and difficulty, then learn from
hence, to account of so much beforehand, and prepare for it, before ye enter
into those ways of God: take heed of Baruchs fault, Ierem. 45.5. Look not for
great matters for your selves: in the world ye shall have affliction; John
16.33. but in Christ ye shall have peace* look therefore for all in heaven.
Remember ye must not take Christ only as a Savior, but you must take him as a
Lord, as a husband; you must have a wedding garment, a conjugall affection, and
be divorced from all other things, that so you may take him thus: ye must take
him as your husband, for better, for worse, with losses, and crosses; your will
must be subject to him in all things. If to be Christ's Servant were only to
give him a cap and a knee, he would have many that would serve him; but you
must obey him* His servants you are to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. There are
servants which you call Retainers; which do their own work on the week
days, peradventure on the Sabbath they come to their Master and serve him;
thus most are Christ's Servants; they will serve him on the Sabbath perchance,
but at no time else; but as on the Sabbath, so at all times else you must deny
your selves. In other marriages error personae, does nullify the marriage; so
does it when we take Christ: it is an error in our judgments, not to know
what he is; and that is the reason why we so quickly fall away from him:
wherefore every one that looks for any interest in Christ, must consider with
himself before hand, and cast his eyes on all his comforts, on that which is
pleasant to him, and resolve to part with it for him; yea, he must look on
bitter things, on the sufferings of others, and make account of disgraces and
persecutions if he will follow Christ: If better come, do you reputare in
^ucrum, count it overplus. Caesar, when as he was goeing to fight, would
usually tell his Soldiers, that the enemies were as many more as they were,
that so he might make them more resolute and audacious; If you mean to follow
Christ, look for a rainy day. It may be it is a fair morning, but yet we
know not what the evening will be: Nescis quid serus vesper vehat. Shall a man
go to sea, and not look for storms? Shall a Soldier go into the wars,
and not look for enemies? Forecast this therefore, lest going with 2000. you
are met with 20000. and overcome, your resolutions being too weak.

per diverticula, a by, a narrow way which few men follow. If we find our
ways full of jollity, we have cause to suspect them, Luke 6.21. Woe unto you
that laugh now, for ye shall weep hereafter: ye that are full here, shall
hunger hereafter: This looseness in following Christ is not the way. My
brethren, if ye are going to any City, and ye are told before hand, that in
the way to it, there are many narrow bridges, many brakes to go thorough; that
there are many vagrants to devour you, many sirens to allure you; if ye find
no such thing, ye may well suspect that ye are out of the way; So if ye find
no such opposition, no such crosses and difficulties, no such strong lusts in
the way to heaven, it is a sign ye are out of the way: Whoever will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: 2 Timothy 3.12.
Paul tells Timothy here, that he has known his persecutions and afflictions;
and then he concludes, that Whoever in this present time, or in succeeding
generations will live a holy life, must suffer for it: A man may suffer and do
much for Christ; but Paul tells him, he must go further, and suffer
persecution, for Christ's sake and the Gospel.

Object.
But you will object, why should any man suffer for the Gospel, seeing that the
Gospel brings glad tidings of peace?

Answ.
I answer, that there are two parts of the Gospel: the first is, that if ye
take Christ, ye shall be saved: the second is, that if ye take him not, ye are
damned: it is not the first part, the offering of Christ, but the subsequent
condition, that does breed persecution. Math. 21.33. When as the master of the
vineyard sent his servants to the husbandmen, all his servants were abused,
because they called for fruit, which the husbandmen were unwilling to give.
When holy men call for fruit and amendment of life, this stirs up men against
them. If in the way ye go, ye find not these crosses, this opposition, it is
the broad way, not the way that leads to life.

Thirdly, Use 3.
if the ways of God are full of crosses, then be not discouraged from doing
good actions for the crosses that follow them; that is a necessary concomitant,
and cannot be severed. Many would be willing to do much, but it may cost them
their estates: then they favor themselves, and will sleep in a whole skin:
But if a case comes, that ye must stand against Popery, and for justice
against indirect courses, stand to it though persecution and imprisonment come;
turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left hand: that is, there are many
stops and lets in the way which God has chalked out unto us; yet though there
be Lions in it, ye must not step out of it; ye must go on, ye must grapple
with the cross and not go out of the way: if ye balke those crosses or if
ye sit still and do nothing, ye provoke God against you, as much as for your
evil deeds. Rev. 2.19. I know thy works and sufferings, (says Christ.) Christ
takes notice, if ye suffer for him, so he does if ye decline the cross:
Cowardlinesse may lose your souls, as well as rebellion your bodies. If ye
have good cards, yet if you play them ill you loose; so when you have a prize
in your hands and not use it; you loose by it: so when as you have opportunity
to do good, and do not stand out, God will call you to an account for it: ye
shall receive judgment for sinful silence, as well as for corrupt speech.
Judges 5.23. Meroz was cursed, because they came not out, to help the people
of God, as well as the enemies that fought against them. Luke 13.6. The barren
Trees that did bear no fruit, were cut up, as well as the briers* so shall
men that have places, in which others would have done good. Revel. 21.8. the
fearful, are put first in the catalogue, of those, which shall have their
portion in the lake of Brimstone, which burns with fire for ever: those that
are afraid to do good shall have their portion there. Take heed therefore of
missing opportunities through fear or cowardice: deny your selves, take up the
cross and follow Christ, whiles you may. Many are much to blame, so that we
may take up Ieremies complaint against them. Ierem. 9.3. That there is no man
that has courage for the truth: We may say of most men, as of Hearts and
Stagges, they have strength and great horns, yet they do nothing with them,
quia deest animus; because they want courage. Some good Christians have fire in
them, but yet they want blowing. Now what arguments shall I use to make men
follow the truth, notwithstanding these crosses and difficulties? We magnify
valor in any man, and the valor which we do so magnify, it is but as the
swelling of a wall, before the breach: it is nothing to this fortitude to
suffer for Christ, and a good cause, being called thereunto; the doing of
things without difficulties, is no trial: excellent things are difficult: this
obedience which you owe to Christ is not simple obedience, but passive
obedience, and has more difficulty and excellency. To what end is the Spirit
and regeneration given you, if it stir you not up to do more than others can
or will do? Luther was glad of his opposition, that brought advantage to him:
so Paul says, that his sufferings will further his reckoning. Soldiers out of
vain glory strive who shall be first to scale the walls, and to enter the
breach; that which they do for a shadow, let us do for true realities: let our
affections run out in this. Consider, that in Gods cause if ye suffer not for
well doing, ye shall suffer for ill doing; else there were an inconsequence in
that of Peter, 1 Pet. 3.17. It is better to suffer for well doing, than for
evil doing. If ye suffer not evil with men for well doing, ye shall suffer
of God for evil doing. Consider all those Martyrs and Worthies of the Lord
which have go before us, who have acted their parts, and are now departed off
the stage; they might have escaped if they would: John Baptist, if he would
have been silent; Mordecay, if he would have bowed the knee: Those who wandered
about in sheep skins, and goats skins, Heb. 11. might have bin clad in silks
and velvets as well as others, if they would not have stood for the truth.
Moses might have enjoyed the pleasures of Egypt, he might have bin accounted
the son of Pharaoh his daughter, but he would not. Consider, if one ask you
this question, Will ye be as a pibble or a precious stone? would ye be worth
1000. others? then resolve to suffer for the truth: Consider what a person ye
take upon you: and that ye must do nothing unbeseeming your selves? then you
will say with Nehemiah, shall such a man as I flee? and who is there that being
a man as I am, will flee to the temple to save his life? Nehemiah 6.11. Paul
considered himself, and therefore would not yield an inch to the false
Apostles, Gal. 2.5. Consider what God expects from you. A mud wall may be made
up of any thing, but the wall of a palace must be made up with other
materials: if ye will be Temples of the holy Ghost ye must have other
actions. Let those who are watchmen, both for Church and commonwealth, let
others who are in great place, consider this; if you turn false, ye betray
both your selves and others: resolve therefore to deny your selves, having such
a person and such a charge.

Object.
But some will object, I would do thus and thus, but I can do no good in it.

Answ.
I answer, that it is more than you know: but however, thou shall be sure to
have thy reward if thou do what thou may: The Physician has his praise,
though his patient dies: The Lawyer has his fee, though his clients cause
miscarry: God often sends messengers, though they prevail not, that men might
bear witness to the truth.

Object.
Yea, but the times are bad, and worse than ever they were.

Answ.
To this I answer, that the worser the times are, the better the Saints should
be: the stars are most needed in the darkest night: Mark. 8.38. He that is
ashamed of me, says Christ, even in an adulterous and sinful generation, of
him will I be ashamed when I sit in my Glory.

Object.
Yea, but I am alone, and therefore can do nothing.

Answ.
But what if thou art alone? Eliah was alone for ought he knew; yet he withstood
all Baals prophets, and overcame them. Luther was alone, so that one says of
him; Vnus homo solus, totius orbis impetum sustinuit, that one man withstood
the force of the whole world: And what if thou art alone, yet one cole may
kindle another, and that another; and so may thou. Men are incendiaries to
make one another wicked: be thou so to make others good: however, though thou
art alone, yet thou shall take away that reproach from a nation, which God
speaks of Ezec. 22.30. that he sought for a man among them that should make up
the hedge, and stand in the gap before him, for the land, that he should not
destroy it, but he found none; There will be a man, that is, a man of authority
to oppose the stream.

Fourthly, Use. 4,
if the ways of God are full of difficulty, then we should learn from hence
to proportion our labor to the work: we tell you of this not to deter you
from coming to Christ, but to excite men to take pains answearable to the
work. Christ told his Auditors, they must deny themselves, that they must take
pains if they will follow him; and this we tell you in his name: we would
have ye know the worst before hand: many thousands lose their souls, because
they think that less will serve the turn, that there needs no such
strictness: no fallacy of Satan deceives men more than this. If a man come to
buy a Jewel that is worth 500 l. if he bids but 400 l. for it; he goes without
it, as well as if he had bid nothing at all, because he comes not to the full
price of it: So he that will purchase heaven, he must bid the full price of it,
else he goes without it: as good never a whit as never the better (as we say.)
If a man be to lift a burden which is as much as he can do with his whole
strength, if he put but part of his strength to it, he cannot stir it, he were
as good never to touch it: so it is here. It were better for you to do
nothing, than not to do enough; for if ye lived still in wickedness, it might
parhaps humble you; but when as men do but a little, but yet not enough, they
see not their misery: better not to do at all, than to do things thus by
halves. Satan deals with men, as men with children: they take away gold and
silver from them, and stop their mouths with rattles and counters, so Satan,
because men's consciences must have something to satisfy them, suffers them to
do something, but yet not so much, as they should. Pity it is to see so many
lose their labors: they come very near, within a step or two to heaven, and
yet miss it: many there are which do much, like the young man: yet some thing
is wanting, that also must be had, else there is no Salvation. Why is there so
little change in men, but because they think that less will serve the turn?
This cold, overly and customary performance of holy duties marres all;
therefore consider but this.

Laodiceans luke-warmnes do them: they had as good bin cold: yea, God wishes,
that they were either hot or cold: Rev. 3.15. What good did all that Amafiah
did to him; seeing that he did it not with a sincere and perfect heart? These
dowbaked services (as I may so style them,) these carkases without life; these
slight services profit not: therefore there are conditions added to them in the
Word: prayer prevails, If it be fervent: Iam. 5.16. If thou beleevest with all
thine heart, Act. 8. Effectual faith; diligent hope, and fruitful love: 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
It is a good observation of Divines, that God loves adverbs, better than
verbes; well doing, above doing: those that came to the wedding, not having
wedding garments, were shut out, Math. 22.11.12.13. as well as those that came
not: those that offered strange fire, as Nadab and Abihu, and their company,
were consumed, as well as they that did not offer at all.

That is spiritual, we are carnal: Romans 7. Consider the distemper of your
affections and know your selves; all that we have in us is either common or
corrupt nature. Gods graces are beyond the one, and contrary to the other: must
we make these duties of religion to be only in the by? Prayer, keeping of the
Sabboths, are to most men but as things in the by, the stream of their
affections runs in an other channel. There is another thing required of us
than this; we must love the Lord with all our hearts, and strength, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
This is it which all must do; they must love God with all their strength, else
they are not worthy of him. There is a qualification required of all that are
saved, he is not worthy of Grace or Heaven, that seeks them not with his
utmost endeavor. The difference twixt Cains and Abels sacrifice was this, Genesis
4.3, 4.5. The one did it negligently: brought the worst of his fruits; the
other brought the best he had. Ier. 48.10.
Cursed is every one that does the work of the Lord negligently; that is,
contenting himself with the outward performance of it, doing it as a task,
and being glad when it is done and over: to do it diligently, is to work with
an eye to that which it tends to, and to obtain the end. The end of prayer, is
to quicken you to perform holy duties; when you obtain this end, then is your
prayer diligent. To do things only for show is nothing, the effect and end is
all: you esteem not your servants works unless they obtain their end: there
is nothing that you esteem, the end of it being not done: What is it to pray,
the end being not done, men not being built up by it? Jude 20. We must build up
our selves in our most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. A cold formal
performance does but hurt us, breeds more coldness and deadness in us. In
habits, the more imperfect the acts are, the more they weaken the habits: the
duties of religion coldly performed, weaken grace. Let a man accustom himself
to write carelessly and crookedly, it marreth his hand. Let us therefore do all
we do to God with diligence and fervency: consider that those whom you think
least needed for to do it, did so: their diligence should stir you up. You know
that Jacob wrestled with God all night; Genesis 32.24. and so should you wrestle
with him with strong prayers: Christ himself spent many nights in prayer: Luke
6.12.
look upon the prayers of David, the fastings of Daniel; above all others,
look upon Paul, you may see him in watching, in prayers and in fastings often;
2 Cor. 11.27.
he had a continual strife with his heart, to bring his body, that is, the
deeds of his body, into subjection, I keep under my body (says he) and bring
it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.17. My body, that is, the sinful lusts of my
body, must be brought down; I must go through fighting till I have the
victory, else I shall be a castaway; I shall else have only an outward show,
but yet be nothing accounted of with God. Consider this, if a little diligence
will not serve the turn, add more; if prayer will not do it, add fasting to
it. Matthew. 17.21.
As there are some devils that will not be cast out without fasting and prayer;
so also are there some sins. Make the plaster fit to the disease. Complain
not with the sluggard, who puts his hands in his bosom, and does nothing at
all; or does not proportion his labor to the work. Less labor would serve
the turn, if our souls were as dry wood, but they are as greenwood; there
must be much blowing ere they will be kindled. It is hard to get our souls to
good duties, hard to keep them on the wing; we must continue in prayer, and
that instantly too. Men are ready to give over, Romans 12.12.
and to sit down, but you must continue. Ephesians. 6. We must watch thereunto with
perseverance; there must every day be a new winding up of the soul; there is a
spring of sin in us, so there must be a spring of holy duties, we must do them
constantly: you have daily new crosses, and impediments, therefore you must
mend your pace in the way to heaven, and be more diligent; you must be fervent
in spirit, serving the Lord, and not slothful. Romans 12.11. Do your own
work, up and be doing, and the Lord shall be with you, 1 Chr. 22.16. God will
deal with you as he did with the Eunuch, he was reading of the Scripture, and
God sent Phillip to him for to teach him, Act. 8.26. etc. So Cornelius, he was
praying, and God sent his Angel to him first, and afterward Peter, Act. 10. So
the Apostles, when as they rowed all night as Christ bade them, he at last
joins himself to them and helps them, Matthew. 14.24. etc. The worst natures
with his help can do any thing, the best without him can do nothing.

Fifthly, Use 5.
if the ways of God are so full of crosses and difficultyes, then learn from
hence to justify the wisdom of the Word of God, and the Religion in the
Scriptures. It is an argument that it comes from heaven, because it is not a
whit agreeable with our natures. It is a pure and no leaden Lesbian rule; it is
a strait rule opposite to us in all our obliquityes: It is not from the policy
of men, for if it were, what end should they have in it? There is no content in
it, a man must deny himself, mortify every member, and he must have crosses
too. Again, a man must not think to have many following him, not to be
Captain of Companies; here is nothing that will draw men after him. If Christ
had done as Cyrus did, who proclaimed, that if any man would follow him, if he
were a husbandman he would make him a Gentleman; if a Gentleman, he would make
him a Nobleman; then men would have flocked to him. This justifies Religion
against the dunghill gods of the heathen; against the Mahometane religion, that
tells men, what women, and what pleasures and rewards they shall have if they
follow it: this argument therefore is a mark of the holiness and purity of
our religion. Miracles they do but excite us, they do but as the Bells that call
us to the Sermon, they cannot work faith within us; Romans 10.14.17: That comes
only by hearing and reading this Word; there is nothing in this that does suit
with our nature: these inherent marks are they by which we know it to be the
Word of God. We propound only the object, we do not propound sillogismes:
we tell you only what it is. Moses in the beginning of Genesis propounds only
what God has done, he propounds no arguments to make men believe it: so the
Apostles come with a naked message; He that believes shall be saved, he that
believes not, Mark 16* 16
shall be damned. In other sciences, and so in all things else, there must be
principles else we should run into infinites. If one should ask you, how know
you color? You answer by the light: but how know you the light? You answer
by it self: and then you go no further. So if one ask you, how know you
whether such a weight be true, you answer, by the standard: but how know you
the standard to be true? Only by it self. But this is an argument that the
Scripture comes from Heaven, because there is nothing in it, that pleases men.
Nihil hic humani, there is nothing that is tempered, and modificated to our
dispositions.

Sixthly, Use. 4,
if the ways of God are full of difficulty, then labor for a full
mortification of sinful lusts: do it not by halves. Whence is it that
religion is so hard? All difficulty is from some disproportion and
disagreement; and this difficulty here, is from the disproportion between the
Law and us: we cannot bend the Law to us, but we must wind up our minds to
it. As we say of grief, that it is a reluctance of the will; so there is a
reluctance here, between the corruption of our nature, and the Law; and this
breeds the difficulty: One of them must needs yield. If you put fire and water
together, there is no quiet but a continual strife, till one of them get the
victory; then all is quiet: So it is in sicknesses; Let a man have a strong
disease, and a strong body, he shall never have any rest, as long as they both
continue in their strength: But let one of them get the victory, then there is
rest and ease: If nature get the victory, then we have our perfect health: If
the disease get the victory, yet we are at quiet: and hence are those, lucida
intervalla, before death. So it is here; if lusts get the victory, then there
is peace indeed, such a peace as it is; men have rest and content in their
forlorn estate: but if grace get the victory, then there is a perfect peace.
To have quietness and sweetness in religion, is to come to an agreement; and
without this agreeing, there will be no facility: the way to make it easy, is
to heal your natures. Religion is not difficult in its self; it is as light
that is pleasant to good eyes, but yet to bad eyes nothing is more offensive;
it is like good meat, that is pleasant to a good stomach, but yet to a bad,
nothing is more odious. Heal your natures, and get perfect health, then these
ways of God will be easy to you.

Object.
But you will say; Who is there that can come to perfect health?

Answ.
I answer, that though you cannot attain to perfect health, it is no matter,
so as you can come to such a condition as to be at rest: the body may be at
rest and quiet, though there be distempers in some particular part of it. If
you would have joy in the holy Ghost, peace of conscience which passes
understanding, labor to make an agreement: you cannot bend the Law, but you
must cleanse your hearts, you must wind them up to the peg of holiness, and get
Evangelicall holiness which is required and accepted.

Lastly, if the ways of God be so full of difficulty, Use. 7.
then we had need to humble our selves: if the Law be so holy and so good, and
we so averse from it, it must be rebellion, when as you see your selves so
backward to do good, so contrary to it. Let this open a crevis of light, to see
your corruption: this is very needful; men complain of the Law, they say that
it is hard and written in blood, as Draco his Laws were: they are but flesh
and blood, and what can they do? Beloved, this we should not do, but let us
reflect on our selves, as Paul did, and say with him, Romans 7.14. The Law is
spiritual, but we are carnal, sold under sin. Let us be humbled more for
this badnesse of our nature, than for our actual sins: the worser your
natures are, the greater and more sinful are your sins* for the more nature
there is, the greater is the sin: the worser your natures are, the more hatred
is there to the Law: therefore abhor your natures, reflect upon your selves,
justify God, and give him glory, and his Law. Psalm. 19.8. The Statutes of the
Lord are right, and the commandments of the Lord are pure: quarrel not then
with the Law, hate it not, as all unregenerate men do. And thus much for the
second Doctrine. We come now to the last, which is this.

That all who look for any interest in Christ, Doct. 3.
all that will receive benefit by him, must follow him. They must deny
themselves, take up Christ's cross, and follow him: they must tread his steps,
be obedient to him in all things, To. 8.24. Whom he did foreknow, them also he
did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be
the first borne among many brethren: that is, all that God has chosen, he
will have them to be like their elder Brother Christ Jesus: we must go all in
one livery, we must be conformable to him in all things, be ready to do like
him, as Gideon said to his soldiers; Judges 7.17. What you see me do, that do
ye. So Christ who is our Captain and General, says to us, All ye that will
be saved by me, must be like me, ready at a watch word to turn which way I
will have you. There are all the relations that may be, between Christ and us,
which may cause us for to follow him: He is our King, our Father, and our
Master, therefore we must follow him. There are two sorts of men in the world;
the first are straglers, such as straggle abroad like sheep without a
sheapheard; lawless men, that follow their lusts; these men are privileged
men, and may go whither they will: The second sort of men, are they that give
themselves to serve Christ, looking for Salvation from him: these must resolve
to follow Christ.

Object.
But here may be some objections raised: you will say, that the Law is the rule
of a man's life, how then is Christ the rule?

Answ.
I answer, that Christ is the example of the rule: as in Grammar and Logic;
after the rule, you have an example put; and Christ by his example gives you
more facility to perform it.

Object.
Yea but this rule is too high for us, who is there that can reach it? Take away
hope, you take away endeavor.

Answ.
I answer, that it is true, that none can reach it; yet we must go as nigh it
as we may. First, therefore consider that it is for our advantage to have such
a rule: in other things, men labor for the best copies and samplers* It is
absurd for a man to say, I cannot follow the strait rule: Therefore will I
have a crooked one. I cannot hit the mark, therefore I will have a false one
set up.

Phil. 3.13.14. We must forget that which is behind, and look to that which
is before.

Peter say to him, Luke 5.8. Depart from us, we are sinful men. So Job seeing
God, abhorres himself and repents in dust and ashes, Job 42.6.

Object.
But you will say; If Christ lived with us and we saw him; if he would (as it
were) lead us by the hand, it were something; but he is gone.

Answ.
I answer, that though he be gone, yet he has left guides to lead us in his
stead: he has left the holy Ghost, and his Spirit with us; who, John 16.13,
shall lead us into all truth, necessary for Salvation; he has left us his
Spirit to tell you that this is the false way, this the true; and this Spirit
he sends into every regenerate man's heart. Gal. 4.6. As soon as you are
sons, he sends his Sons Spirit into your hearts, whereby you cry, Abba
Father.

Object.
But you will say, how shall we know when the Spirit speaks?

Answ.
I answer, by the Word; what the Word says, the Spirit says.

Object.
But these are but remote guides.

Answ.
Therefore you have the Saints that went all in one path: First, the Saints that
are dead and gone, and then those that now live: You have the Spirit, the Word,
and the Saints to teach you; only remember this caution, that the Saints are a
rule to you, yet not a perfect one; they go in and out; eye them; but yet eye
Christ beyond them, who is the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. In
all other things and arts, Non est eiusdem invenire and perficere; one man
begins, and an other finisheth: but Christ, as he is the author, so he is the
finisher of our faith: he has begun the Doctrine, and the thing, and he will
finish it. For the better understanding of the point, I will show you these two
things.





to do or suffer with all our hearts, or willingly, what ever he commands, at
all times, and all manner of ways. Thete are four things in this definition,
which express what it is to follow Christ.

What is it to follow Christ, and how we must follow him.
we must except nothing; we must resolve to obey and do all righteousness,
and to abstain from all unrighteousnes: we must resolve to go through thick
and thin, rough and smooth; we must do as the Romans did, Romans 6.17. Obey that
form of Doctrine that is delivered to us; not one part only, but every
particular, from the very heart. The reason for which we were delivered by our
Savior from the hands of our enemies, was, that we might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives,
Luke 1.75. Let the passage be what it will, safe or dangerous, pleasant or
difficult, by poverty or abundance; let Christ lead us thorough good report
and bad report, we must follow him. I put in the definition, to do or suffer;
suffering is but an higher kind of action, to do, though you suffer for it:
Suffering of it self, (as the Philosopher well observes) is not commendable;
but to suffer in doing Gods will in simple obedience, is to obey without any
difficulty.

Deuteronomy. 6.5. to love, serve or follow God with all your mind, with all your
soul, and with all your strength. I chose this Word, with all your hearts, the
rather, because it comprehends all the rest.

Cephas, others that follow Paul; addicting themselves to their opinions: there
are diverse opinions of men; Some think this good, others that, without
looking to Gods will: this is not to follow Christ with all our mind: When we
submit our minds to his, and make his mind to be ours, then we follow him.





I add, to follow him willingly: it is not enough to do the action commanded,
but we must follow him, as the sheep does the bough, with readiness and
willingness. Being right, it comes from the regenerate part, every regenerate
man finds a disposition to Christ, longing after him, inclining to him as the
iron does to the loadstone, or the stone to the Center: Many there are that
follow Christ, and hold not out, because the Principle is not good.

Object.
But the Saints themselves find reluctance, the spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak.

Answ.
I answer, that oftentimes, the flesh follows obtorto collo, like the Bear
going to the stake, yet the spirit brings it into subjection. I cannot better
express it than by that of Peter; Christ tells him, that when he was old he
should be carried whither he would not: John 21.18. True it is, that he went to
the stake willingly, else his death whereby he glorified God had bin no
Martyrdom; true it was, his flesh was unwilling for to do it, yet his spirit
overcame it; remember this, that you must do it cheerfully*

to the Jews, that if any man's heart fainted, he might go back, and return
to his own house again; (Deuteronomy. 20.8. Judge. 7.3.) So Christ deals with us;
he tells us the worst before hand; to see whether we will go back or no.
Christ deals with us, as Naomi did with Ruth; when she had entreated and
persuaded her to leave her, and go back to her own Country again, Ruth^
1.28. When all would not do, and when she saw that she was steadfastly minded
to go with her, then she left speaking. Christ tells his followers what they
must look for: If they are willing to undergo it, then he takes them, else
he takes them not.



There is a difficulty to serve him in the spirit; many an action comes, that
if it were to be done in the outward appearance only, it might be well put
off: but to do it in secret, this is hard: when as the Conscience says, such
a thing must not be got; such a thing must be done, such a lust must be
subdued; such a duty must not be omitted, this is not enough; but you must
profess Christ, wear his livery, and show whose you are: In many things it is
easier to do the spiritual, than the outward Act: As Mark. 8.38. Whosoever is
ashamed of me, says Christ, even in this adulterous and sinful generation, of
him shall I be ashamed when I shall fit in my glory. To profess what a man is
in such company, in such a place, is not much; but you must profess Christ at
all times, in all places: In the midst of an adulterous Generation. You must
thus follow Christ, else all is nothing. And thus much for the first thing;
what it is to follow Christ.

We come now to the object and example which we must follow, and that is
Christ. And here; first, we must follow his Example. Secondly, we must follow
his precepts.

First, you must follow his example; do as he did, set him up as a pattern of
Imitation. It would be infinite to show you all his graces: yet I will name
some particulars wherein you must follow him, that so we may not be all in the
general.

Act. 20.35.) He says, It is more blessed to give than to receive. For his
love in forgiving, he forgave those that did him the greatest wrong, he had
compassion on the souls of men, and on their bodies too; For their souls, he
groaned to see them as Sheep without a Shepherd: (Math. 9.36.) So for their
bodies he fed many thousands of them often times.

Secondly, For the glory that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and
despised the shame. (Heb. 12.2.) that is, he saw God and his glory, and then
the good and evil speeches of men were nothing to him: he eyed the glory of
God, and despised the glory and shame of men: as you may see, ( Luke 23.8.11.)
by comparing them both together. When as Pilate sent him to Herod, Herod was
exceeding glad when he saw him, for he was desirous to see him of a long
time; because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped to have seen
some Miracle done by him; (Luke 23.7. to 12.) But Christ despised that glory
which he might have gotten, he would neither do nor speak any thing before
Herod; Therefore Herod and his men mocked him: Here he despised the glory, and
the shame too: when as much was expected from him, he neglected all; and so
must we.

Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; Mat. 11.29.
This his humility appears in this: First, that he excluded none, no not the
meanest. Secondly, he did not render rebuke for rebuke; 1 Pet. 2.23. He
endured all. Thirdly, in that he was ready to part with his right and his
life. Fourthly, in that he washed his Disciples feet.

upon all public and private occasions, ready to take all opportunities to do
good: he takes occasion to comfort the woman of Samaria at the Well; (John.
4.) so when as he saw them striving for the upper place at the Table, he
takes occasion to discourse of humility: (Luke 14.) He did consider the end,
wherefore he came. This was the end of all his coming to do good. It was his
delight to do Gods will: all he did, it was Gods Work, he did it to
glorify him: and for the good of men, which was an other end wherefore he did
it.

Mat. 11.25.) I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and Earth, because thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
Babes and Sucklings, even so Father; for so it seems good in thy fight. It
had been more for Christ's honor, to have had wise and great men to follow
him, but he rejoices in this; that God had hid him from those, and revealed
him unto Babes, for that was his Fathers will. So we must rest contented with
any thing, if it be Gods will.

fulfilled all Righteousness; (Math. 3.15.) he was full of zeal for his
Fathers glory; follow therefore his example in all these. And not only his
example, but his precepts too. First, believe in him; this is the great Work
of God, this is the work he accepts, (Ioh. 6.29.) To believe on him whom the
Father has sent. This is the first precept. The second precept is, Repent for
the Kingdom of God is at hand: (Math. 3.2.) The third is, to abound in love
unto one another: Follow Christ then in these his precepts, and in his examples.

If then all that look for any interest in Christ, Use. 1.
must follow him; then in the first place, learn from hence not to be
auricular but real Disciples; do not make a profession, get not knowledge in
the brain only but act it too. This is the difference 'twixt Christ's and
other men's Disciples; if a man follow Aristotle or any others, it is enough to
know and hold his tenets: but he that will follow Christ, must follow and do
his precepts, must imitate him. The difference between Divinity and other
Sciences, is this: in other Sciences if you understand them it is enough; but
in this it is not enough to know it, you must do it. This is like lessons of
Music, it is not enough to know them, but you must practice them: it is like
a Copy of writing; you must not only read it, but you must act it, and learn
to write after it. We must not only know what temperance, patience, and love
are, and the like; but you must act and practice them: we must believe and
undergo the Cross, if we will belong to Christ: John 6.45. Every man that
has heard and has learned of the Father, comes to me. God makes us fit to
follow Christ, he declares the truth, and bows the will: he teaches the
Creatures, the Be, and the Storke to do thus and thus; he puts a secret
instinct into them, which makes them do that they do; and so he does with
his Children: he makes them of Wolves, to become Lambs; he makes a through
change in them: It is doing, that makes you Christ's Disciples; if it were but
to know, it was nothing. Consider what ye practice, and how far ye do Gods
will: we look not only for the knowledge, the remembrance, and repetition of
what we preach, (though it be good to repeat what we hear, and it is ill to
omit it;) but we look you should practice what you hear; we would see the
Milk, and the Fleece, not the Hay again: we would see your defects and
weaknesses amended, and those duties performed that you neglect.

Object.
Yea but you will say, you do practice what you hear?

Answ.
But I say unto you, as Samuel did to Saul, when he told him he had kept the
Commandments of the Lord; What then, says he, mean these Bleatings of the
Sheep in mine ears? (1. Sam. 15.14.) If you are Christians, if you practice
what you hear, what mean those oaths we hear; what means this
Drunkenness, this Idleness, this vanity and pride in apparel, this greedy
seeking of profit, this profaning of the Sabbath which we see? What mean all
these if you keep the commandments? Those that follow Christ do acknowledge
him, they practice what they hear, and no more.

Use. 2,
Secondly, if all that look for any interest in Christ must follow him, this
excludes all those, who say they are Jews and are not, (Rev. 2.9.) Such as
profess themselves to be Christ's and are not: they wear his livery and badge,
but yet are false hearted. We follow Christ, you say, but if you do, let me
put you to some Interrogatories.

Christ your self? To deny your pleasures and your profits, like James and
John, Matthew 4, Who left Fathers, Nets, and Ships; and like the Apostles, Who
forsook all and followed him? Will you part with every thing, with every sin
and vanity for Christ? Mat. 19.
The young Man must sell all, if he will follow Christ, and this he was loath
to do.

you able to be baptized with his Baptism, and to drink of his Cup? Math.
20.22
Are you content to be despised and hated as he was? You must do it in your
measure, though not in that degree that he did. 2. Tim. 3.12. Thou know
(says Paul to Timothy) what persecutions I endured: yea, and not I only, but
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, It is this
living godly that brings persecution; the being downeright and bawking
nothing; because the Devil is then our enemy, and will stir up men against
us; he will nibble at our heel* If we live not godly, we are not then his
enemies, he will let us go. If there be war betwixt two Nations, suppose
Dutch and Spanish, either of them meddling with English, or French that are but
indifferent, they let them alone, because they are indifferent men and not
their Enemies; So does the Devil, he lets men alone who are but indifferent;
but the Saints who are enemies, they are sure to smart for it if he meet with
them.

Christ, is the same mind in you as was in Christ, (Phil. 2.5.) Are you
affected as he was? David was a man after Gods own heart, Act. 13.22. So
every Christian must be affected as Christ was. Do you hate those things that
he hates? Do you not only abstain from them, but also hate them? Are you
zealous for Gods Glory? Are your Souls vexed for the unclean conversation of
others? Then it is a sign that you follow Christ.

David? Acts 13.22. Are you men after Gods own heart, which will fulfill all
his will; or are you of your father the Devil, and fulfill his lusts? John
8.49. Christ uses this argument, to prove that the Jews were of their father
the Devil, because his lineaments were in them, as the fathers are in the
child's; you are murderers and Liars as he was, John 8.49. Therefore you are
his. So I would have you consider what you do; see whether you are holy in
your conversation: if you are not, Christ will discard such servants, and all
the world shall know it, that you are none of his, if you are not ready to do
any thing for him. His life must be in all those that are his, his Image must
shine in them, they must have his graces.

Chro. 25.2. Amaziah did much, but yet he did it not with a perfect heart. Some
follow Christ in the fair, but forsake him in the rugged ways, as the 2.
grownd did: Some follow him for themselves out of a self-love: Some for a
Kingdom, as Iehu. Some follow him, but yet at a pinch they will start aside
like a broaken Bow, as the Israelites did, Psalm. 78.57. Some follow him and
afterward fall away, as Jeroboam and Reoboam; 2 Chronicles. 10.11.12. But now how
shall we distinguish these? Do these interruptions hinder us from Christ? What
shall we say? All sheep are not of the same strength; Some are Lambs and can
go but softly; and Christ is a merciful Shepherd that casts off none; now
how shall we distinguish? The Saints go off and on, and so do wicked men, what
is the difference between them? This is necessary to be known, because men
are apt to deceive themselves: they say there is a similitude between Saints
virtues and sins, and theirs; look on the outside, and there is little
difference. David and Peter, they sinned foulely; their sins in outward
appearance were like to other men's: So for their virtues; Differences between
the falls of the Saints and other men's.
stupidity does often times act the part of true virtue. Take one that is
ignorant, he dies patiently; because he knows no danger, as well as a godly
man that is sure of Heaven* both may be abstemious and patient in show, but now
we will distinguish them.

never any way of wickedness found in them: Psalm. 139.24.
there may be infirmities in them, but there is never any constant continuance
in any sins of omission or commission: A holy man may forget himself, but
yet ye cannot say, that he is a covetous man, or a wicked man; holy men sin,
but it is out of an incogitance, do but put him in mind, they mend all; put
another man in mind never so often; tell him of his swearing and drinking, yet
he does it again.

The sins of holy men proceed from passions, and passions last not long but
quickly vanish. David was transported with Passion, and Peter with fear; The
Saints sin not out of deliberation, they recover quickly again, there is no
course of sin found in them; if their sins proceed from either of these
two, incogitancy or passion, they are quickly at an end. I speak not now of
sins that are not revealed, for in such they may continue all their lives, as
the Patriachs did in their poligamy: but as for other sins that are revealed,
Psalm. 139.24.
the Godly never stand in the way of sinners: They may perhaps cross the ways
of sin, as thieves do the high way, yet they walk not in the ways of sin,
They sit not down in the seat of the scorners.

Psalm. 1.1.
Secondly, the Saints, as well as others may be subject to sinful lusts, that
may prevail and carry them away: but the matter is not so much, what
affections we have, but how we stand affected to those affections. A holy man
may have a months mind to an old sin, he may delight in it, and incline to
it, because there is flesh in him: but yet he dislikes that liking, and
disaffects that affection, and disapproveth of this approving: and this he
does not from checkes of conscience, but he does grieve for that love; and
sorrow for that delight, as being contrary to the will of God.

you must know, that after regeneration there is another self. Romans 7.17. It
is no more I that does it, but sin that dwells in me. I am another man now
I am regenerate; sin is but an inmate. In a wicked man, good is but an
inmate, he may say it is not I, but the good that is in me does this. Wicked
men they have no thorough change wrought in them, therefore they do good only
by fits; a godly man being every way himself, not being transported with
Passion, let him stand on equal terms with sin, let not sin get the hill
and the wind, let him remember himself; being freed from violent passions,
he sins not: Regenerate men sin, yet the Peace is not broken between God
and them, because their minds never yield to sin. As it is betwixt Princes
that are at Peace, though Pirates of either nation rob the others subjects, yet
it breaks not the peace; it being done without the will of the King: So it is
with sin in Gods Children, it breaks not the peace betwixt God and them,
because it is but a rebel, and they agree not to it. There is a difference
between the entertaining of sins as thieves and robbers, and as guests;
Wicked men entertain sin as a guest; the godly man himself never sins,
and he entertaines sin but as a robber.

fall off, they can do nothing: many unclean persons and Drundards often
resolve to leave their courses; but because their hearts are not changed, it is
but a purpose, they fall back again. Because purposes arising from the flesh
are mutable, they are as the flowers of grass, they quickly perish: so are all
the thoughts of civil men; they are flowers indeed, and the best flowers that
the flesh can afford; yet they quickly perish, because they are from the
flesh, because they are far from grace, and come not from an inward change:
but the purposes of Gods children, they come from a change within, which makes
them able to perform them. If you find your selves unconstant that you cannot
command your selves, you are not right. Christ finds this fault in you, and so
does James, Iam. 1.8. You are double minded men and unstable in all your ways;
that is, you partly look on God, partly on sin, and know not which way to
go* you are in an aequilibrio, nothing preponderates you one way or other; you
are in the ways of God, and in the ways of sin, and this makes you unstable.
Opposite to this, is a single minded man, who looks only to God; other things
being put in, yet he still looks to God: such may be subject to ebbings and
flowings in and out; yet this is the difference, though they are shaken, yet
they are like to Trees that have a good root, that holds them up that they do
not fall: they are like a ship that is tied to an Anchor, they wagge up and
down, but yet they remoove not: other men, and wicked men are blown away like
chafe, they continue not, Psalm. 1.4.
they are driven with the wind like waves, because they have no root.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
if every one that will have any interest in Christ must follow him, then
learn from hence not to stand at a stay, set no limits to your holiness:
Look to Christ, he is our pattern; Heb. 12.2, grow up to full holiness, be
still mending, and mending according to the Copy: there is no man that does
follow Christ rightly, but does this. Let men set limits to themselves, to have
as much as will bring them to Heaven, there is only a self-love and a
sel^e-seeking in them: but if you do it for God, you will endeavor the utmost.
When men find fault with holiness and exactnes, and secretly limit themselves,
and say with him, Deum colo ut par est, we will do that which shall be
fitting and no more, it is a sign they do not follow Christ, that it comes
not from God: if it came from God and love to him, you could not but endeavor
perfection. I would but ask this question of you; do you make God your utmost
end or no? If you do, then appetitus finis est infinitus, you would never
stint your selves: if you do not make him your utmost end* then you will limit
your selves. If a man desires money for such an end, when he has the end the
desire cease: so if a man desire Physic for health, he desires only so
much as shall gain his health: but if a man make money his utmost end, he
sets no limits to it. Thus it is with every holy man that desires grace, and
makes it his utmost end; he sets himself no limits: you must not set your
selves any bounds in grace. When you find this disposition in you, that you
are not ready to complain for want of Grace, but to justify your selves; when
as you do not see your lamenesse, and that corruption which is in you, you have
not the Spirit; for that convinces men of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment: John 16.8. You would be then complaining of your selves: if you had
the Spirit: if you follow Christ, you must cleanse your selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1. Let that mind then be in you that was in Christ, Phil. 2.5. follow
him to the very utmost.

in high or low places; he is the great Symposiarch, he places you were he
pleases: and you must rest contented: So for your works and calling, he gives
you your work to do; Christ is the Master, and good reason is there that he
should appoint the work: So for suffering, if he who is the General commands
it, ye must do it. So for Physic and corrections we would rather have other
than that he appoints us; yet we must resign all to him: we are subject to
preconceptions. James complains of this, ( Iam. 4.13.) Go to now ye that
say, to morrow we will go to such a City and continue there a year, and buy
and sell and get gain; whereas you ought to say, if the Lord will: you go
before and do not depend on Christ by resigning your selves to his providence.
Remember then that you are but Creatures, and must follow Christ in every thing
as servants to him; A servant does not say, I will go to such and such a place
to morrow, because he says, that he knows not his Masters will: so a child
that is under Tutors, cannot go whither he will: say not then to morrow we
will do thus and thus, boast not of it, preconceive not of such an estate; if
you do, it is sinful; for then you are your own guides, and follow your own
ways and not Christ.

Lastly, learn from hence to do what you do from an inward principle: we
must not be drawn after Christ as beasts, but we must go on our own legs.
Many do follow Christ, but other respects do carry them: some men's company
carries them; and these are but carried in the stream. Some are set on with
other respects, some other wheels set them on work, as the spring does the
clock: such as these do not follow Christ.

Now the means to follow Christ are these.

None can come to me, except the Father draw him, John 6.44.

Canticles, follow him in all places, Cant. 3.

yoke will then be easy; Math. 11. vlt.

He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of
all such as seek him* Heb. 11.6. There are promises that you shall have a
hundred for one even in this life: if you follow Christ; beeleeve them
therefore* and then you will follow him.

possess your Souls with it, without this you continue not, as the fourth
ground did which brought forth fruit through patience. And thus much for this
Text.

FINIS.
THREE SERMONS UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
1 John 5.14. And this is the assurance which we have in him, that if we ask
any thing according to his will, he hears us.


THe scope of the holy Apostle in this Chapter, is to set forth some of those
principal privileges we have by Jesus Christ. One maine and principal (which
is the greatest of all the rest) is, that through him we have eternal life;
And therefore (says he) know this, that when you have the Son once, you
have life in the 12. verse, He that has the Son has life, and he that has
not the Son, has not life. Therefore (says he) have I written this Epistle
to you for this purpose, that you might consider well what gain you have by
Christ Jesus. These things have I written, (says he) in the verses before this
that I have now read unto you, to you that believe in the Name of the Son of
God, that you may know that you have eternal life. After this he names another
great privilege, that we have by Christ; mentioned in this verse, that I have
now read unto you. This (says he) is the assurance we have in him, that
whatsoever we ask according to his will, he hears us. This is the second
great privilege we have by Christ, we shall be heard in all our requests: it
is no more but ask and have (...) up what petition you will, if you be (...)
once, you have this assurance, that he (...) you: but he delivers it with this
(...) must first be in him: We have (...) him (says he) that if we ask any
(...) to his will, he hears us. So that (...) are two plain points lying
(...) us.

Doct. 1.
1 That except a man be in Christ, he (...) he ought not to apply to himself
any (...) spiritual privileges, that we have by him: if we be in Christ, this
and all other are ours; if you be in Christ, (says he) then you have this
assurance, for we have that assurance in him. The second point that the verse
affords us, is,

Doct. 2.
2 That whosoever is in Christ, whatsoever he asks he shall have it. Now my
full intention was, only to have handled that which is mainely aimed at in the
verse (for the other you see is but touched by the way) which is this great
privilege that belongs to all Christians, that whatsoever they ask in prayer
according to the will of God, they shall be heard in it: But because I
understand you had a Sacrament appointed for this day, I have altered a little
that course; the hearing of that has somewhat diverted me, and caused me at
this time to pitch upon the other point which I named to you; That except a man
he in Christ, he ought not to apply any privilege to himself; if he be, I
say, all belongs to him.

When you come to receive the Sacrament it (...) great privilege to meddle
with those (...), to have those simboles given to (...) love and favor of God
in Christ; but (...) must remember this that except you be (...), you have
nothing to do with him, and (...) it is a fit and necessary point for this
(...) For when the Apostle would give directi^^^ to the Corinth. what they
should do, to prepare themselves to the Sacrament, that they may be worthy
receivers; he gives it in this short precept: Let every man (says he) examine
himself, and so let him eat this bread and drink this cup. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Now what is a man to examine himself of? Surely every one that comes to the
Lords Table, is to examine himself concerning these two things.



2 Though he be in Christ, yet he must examine himself, whether he be
particularly prepared, quickened, and fitted; whether his heart be put into such
a trance of grace, or fashioned so as it ought to be, when he comes to the
immediate performance of such a duty as that is. Now because I handle this
point, but only for this particular occasion, I will not enter into such a
manner of handling of it, as I was wont to do at other times, but only take up
so much of it as may serve for the present occasion; Therefore because I say
this to you: That except a man be in Christ, he ought not to take any
privilege to himself: we will, First exhort every man to consider whether he
be in Christ: for this is the present question which any (...) heart would
ask, when he hears this (...); Why, if all the privileges be (...) upon my
being in Christ, my maine (...) to examine whether I be in Christ or no. (...)
because a man may be in Christ and yet (...) by some interveniall sin, by
(...) disposition of mind and heart, that may (...) on him, from the actual
enjoying of the present fruit and benefit of that privilege which belongs to
him: therefore we will first give you rules to examine your selves whether you
be in Christ or no. It is very useful to all that now are to receive, or at any
other time; its useful you know too, not only upon such an occasion as this,
but upon all occasions; and therefore a point, (...) that men magnify so much,
I say, there was a time when they were exceeding good: but sin has blowed
upon them, it has blasted the beauty and vigor of them, so that now when the
Lord looks upon them, this is the sentence that is pronounced of them, you
know, in Eccl. 1.14. They are all vanity and vexation of spirit. Consider if
thou be able to look on al these things (even the best things the world has)
as things being but mere vanity; things wherein the Lord sowed not men's
happiness, and therefore thou can not think to reap it there. If you mark
but the expression the wise man uses in (...) says he; All things under the
Sun are but (...) there is a reason contained in those (...) are but vanity;
for waters you (...) not higher than the (...) carry not any thing higher than
(...); so all the creatures that be (...) be but under the Sun, (...) ascend
to that happiness (...) the Sun, nor carry you to that (...) is above, for
happiness is (...), laid up in Heaven. Therefore (...), all things under the
Sun if they be considered to make a man happy, they are but vanity: Now
consider whether thy judgment be so of them or no, whether it be conformable
to the holy Ghost, whether thou have this conceit of all other things, but the
quite contrary conceit of Jesus Christ; whether thou can think of him, as of
one that is most excellent and thy chiefest treasure, as one that is far
beyond all these, as one upon whom thy heart is pitched, as one in whom thy
happiness is contained.

4 Again, a man's treasure is that which he will be at any cost to get, he
will be at any pains to attain it. It is that, on which his (...) is
bestowed, and affections are occupied (...). Is it so with thee when thou (...)
to Christ Jesus? art thou willing to (...) more cost and pains to get him,
than any (...) besides? Is thy heart and affections (...) upon him? For where a
man's treasu^^ (...) there his heart is. Math. 6.21.
I do not ask whether (...) bestowest more time upon the matters of grace,
than the duties of thy calling; but, whether thou do them with more
intention, whether thou bestowest thy time and pains upon them, as upon that
which thou reckonest thy treasure, far exceeding all other?

5 Fifthly, consider whether thou art willing to part with any thing rather than
with Christ Jesus. for whatsoever is a man's treasure, you know a man will part
with any thing rather than it. Is it so with thee? had thou rather part with
any thing than with Christ? than to part with a good conscience; with the
graces of the Spirit, or with any thing that tends to holiness to build thee
up further in the work of Gods grace? I say, consider whether thy heart be
willing to part with any thing rather than with Christ; for thou shall find
this, that Satan and the world will cheapen Christ, and when they come to
bidding, they will bid well. Consider whether thy heart can give a peremptory
answer to the world, and say thus; I will not sell (...) I will not sell a good
conscience for any (...) when Satan and the world bid (...) tell thee as he
did Christ, that he (...) all the riches, Math. 4.8, 9.
and all the glory in the (...) wilt part with Christ; Consider (...) be ready
to deny whatsoever (...), (as he will be sure to offer that (...) most suitable
to thy disposition) (...) heart has taken this resolution to (...) Christ is
my chiefest treasure, I will (...) with all therefore, I will part with
liberty, with life, with goods, with credit, with pleasures with profits, with
whatsoever is near and dear unto me, rather than I will part with the Lord
Jesus. If this be thy hearts resolution and mind, then Christ is thy chief
treasure; that is the second thing.

3 Thirdly, consider what is thy chief joy and delight, what is thy life; (I
put them together, for that which is a man's chief joy indeed, is his life.)
For we know life is nothing else but that joy which the heart has, whereby it
is nourished and fed as it were; for life is not to have body and soul joined
together, to be a living man, in that sense we usually take life; for if that
were life, then those in hell should not be said to dye the death; for you
know in hell there is a conjunction of soul and body, and yet men are not said
to live there; for it is death which is the punishment of sin: and indeed you
shall find that there is something a man's heart cleaves unto, wherein he
rejoices, which is the same with his life. Therefore look as the Soul
enlivens the body, so the conjunction of the present things which he reckons
his joy, that is, his life, enliven his soul, he cannot live without them. Now
if Christ be thy chief joy, thou will find this, that thou can not live
without him, as men are wont to say of their delights; Such a man cannot live
without such a thing; so it is true of every man that has taken Christ, he is
not able to live without him. This life is no life, and therefore if there be
but a separation between thee and Christ, if a man's conscience be as it were
clouded for a time, he finds no rest, he does as the Spouse in the Canticles;
She seeks from one place to another, Cant. 5.6.
and gives her self no rest, till she find him; and why? because it was he
whom her soul loved. So you shall find, Beloved, whatsoever it is that your
souls love, whatsoever you make your chief joy, you will take no rest, but as
far as you love and enjoy it. Therefore for the finding of this, whether
Christ be thy life and thy chief joy, consider what it is that thy thoughts
feed upon; every wicked man, every man that is out of Christ, there is
something that his thoughts feed upon, some things there are, in contemplation
of which the soul solaceth it self; some pleasures that are past, present, or
to come; the very thinking of these are the greatest joy of his heart, he
roules them under his tongue; even as a Servant that has got some dainty bit
out of his Masters presence, and ^ates it in a corner, so the soul of a man
has out of Christ some secret, some stolen, some unlawful delights, that it
feeds upon and delights in: Consider therefore well with thy self, what
breakfast thy morning thoughts have (that I may so say) what breakefast they
have every morning, what is that Pabulum, that food of thy soul, wherewith thy
thoughts and affections are nourished and refreshed from day to day; whether it
be some carnal pleasure, some reflecting on thy state, upon thy wealth, upon
thy friends, or whether it be on Christ. See (as David exercised it) whether be
they thy songs in the night time? All carnal men have something past whereby
they comfort themselves, Psalm. 42.8.
something present where by they cheer up their hearts, something to come,
something in hope. So every man that is in Christ, he has the comforts of the
Spirit, the meditation of the privileges that he has in Christ, the hope of
Gods favor; These are his appointed food, these are the things that his soul
feeds on in secret; yea the very works that he does, that seems to be the
hardest part of a Christians life, the very works that he does in serving the
Lord from day to day, even that is his meat and his drink; that is, it is as
sweet and acceptable to his soul, as meat and drink is to the hunger and
thirst of his body. Now consider with thy self whether it be so with thee;
whether that which is thy continual feast, without which thou can not live,
be Christ; or the assurance thou have, that he is thine and thou art his;
whether it be the privileges thou have in him; and the things that belong to
the kingdom of God; See whether these be thy life, the things without which
thou could not live; or whether it be some thing else, some stolen
delights, some unlawful pleasures, some thing else that thy soul and
affections are set upon. This is the next thing by which thou may try thy
self whether thou belong to Christ or no, to consider whether he be thy
chief joy, whether thy soul be most filled and satisfied with him. And this
is the third thing.

4 The fourth is; to know whether he be thy chief Refuge; If thou be one that
has took him and received him, I say, he is thy chief refuge. For every man
has some refuge, some castle or other to which his soul retires in all
difficult and doubtful cases, by reason of that indigency, that insufficiency
to which the nature of man is subject* There is something that he must have to
lean unto, (mark it) for mankind is like that generation which the Wiseman
speaks of: You know it is said of the Connyes, They are a generation not
strong* and what then, Prove. 30.26.
and therefore they have their burrowes to hide themselves in. I say such is
the generation of mankind, he is a weak creature, a generation not strong,
therefore there is something that he must lean to, something out of himself,
some sufficiency besides himself, some strong hold, some refuge every man
has; I say every man has some refuge or other, whither he thinks his soul
may go, and there he may have succor in cases dangerous and in troubles.
Now consider what is thy refuge, whither thy heart runs in all such cases, to
what wing, to what strong hold: In dangerous cases, you see every creature
has some refuge or other: The Child runs to his Mother. The Chickens run
to the hen. The Fox to his earth, the Connyes to their burrowes; so every
creature to their several corners and receptacles proper to them: I say so it
is with every man, so has every one of you to whom I speak, there is somewhat
that is a secret refuge to which your hearts fly. Now consider whether that be
Christ or somewhat else. A covetous man (or rather a man of this world) he has
wealth for his strong hold, in which his heart comforts it self; well, says
he, what change of time so ever come, yet I have an estate to hold me up; and
when he is ill spoken of abroad, yet he applaudes himself with that he has
at home; The Courtiers, they have the Princes favor, that is their refuge
wherein they comfort themselves; Those that are given to Company they have good
fellows, such as they, that are their compa^ions* and so long as they speak
well of them, they ^are not who speak ill of them; Some have a refuge of this
kind, some of another, every man has his refuge. If you will look into the
Scriptures, you shall see David's refuge, in any distress, upon any occasion;
At Ziglag he comfort himself in the Lord, 1 Samuel 30.6.
his heart did fly to him, as the chickens fly to the hen, there he comforted
himself, there he shrouded himself, there he encouraged himself in the Lord.
When he fled from his son Absolon, was not the Lord his refuge? Yet (says he)
he is my buckler and my strong hold, Psalm. 3, which was made upon that
occasion. What was Jacobs refuge when he fled from his brother Esau? Did not he
go to the Lord, and seek to him by Prayer? Genesis 32.12,
Lord thou have said thou will do me good, now I fly unto thee, I beseech thee
perform thy promise, thou art my refuge. Consider others now, what was their
refuge. Judas* when he had betrayed his Master Christ, and his conscience was
upon him for it; he goes to the high priests and brings the silver to them,
why, says he, you set me a work, you are the authors of it, and I hope to
find some comfort from you; you see he found little comfort in his mind, yet
that was his refuge. The Kings of Israel and Judah when they were distressed,
they fled to Egypt and to Ashur, to this or that help, which (the Lord said)
were broken reeds to them, but yet that was their refuge. This is the manner of
every man being out of Christ, of every unregenerate man, that is in his
natural estate, some refuge he has; friends, or wealth, or credit, or the
favor of the Prince, something or other it is* and if he be destitute and
have no refuge (as sometimes it so falls out) then his heart is shaken as the
leaves of the forest, Their hearts were shaken even for fear of the king of
Aram, Isaiah 7* 2.
as the leaves are shaken in the forest; and why? Because they knew not how to
defend themselves: they had no refuge to fly to. So you see it was with
Belshazars heart; so Achitophel; and so Saul; when he sees that he must die
the next day, and that there was no refuge for him: then I say their hearts
sanke and dyed within them. And now consider how it is with thee, what is the
refuge to which thy heart flies, and which thy heart makes most account of
(for every man thinks with himself, change of time may come, and what shall be
my comfort what shall be my strong hold at that time.) Do thou fly to Jesus
Christ? is he thy succor when thy heart is dejected at any time and faints
within thee? from which fountain do thou fetch thy comfort? Do thou fly to
Christ, to comfort thy self in him, when thou art in a doubtful case, that
concerns thee as much as thy life? whither do thou go for counsel and
direction? is it to Christ, to beseech him to guide thee, to direct thee, when
thou art pressed hard? whither does thy heart go for succor and for help to
keep thy self safe? Is it to Christ, or to some what else? My beloved, I
assure you this, that a carnal man that is not in Christ, in these times of
distress knows not whither to go; he dares not go to Christ, for he fears
that it shall be asked him, upon what acquaintance? for he has been a stranger
to the Lord, he was never acquainted with him: but a carnal man that is out of
Christ, he goes to his muses, he goes to his farms, he goes to his bushes,
as the hunted hare was wont to do, to go to the places that she used when
she lived quiet, thither she flies when she knows not how to escape: so in
that fasho^i it is with men, look what things they were wont, to which their
hearts had recourse in time of prosperity, and what their haunts have been; to
those bushes they fly: But alas! they are but bushes, such as will not defend
them. But now the Christian on the other side, the muse, the farm as it were
(it is but to express it to you) that his soul is acquainted with, the strong
hold that he was wont to fly unto, upon every several evil, upon every
ordinary doubt, upon every dejection, discouragement and fainting of heart; he
was wont to fly to Christ, and there he was wont to find comfort, and thither
he goes in time of greatest difficulty in the day of death, and there he
finds comfort. Consider if he be thy chief refuge, for if thy heart has
taken him as he is thy chief excellency, thy chief joy, thy chief treasure;
so he will be thy chiefest refuge, yea when all things else are taken away, yet
that cover remains safe: Suppose thou be in prison, suppose thy credit be
taken away, (I mean) thy worldly credit (for the other credit cannot be taken
away from any man that has Christ:) suppose thy life be taken away, suppose
thou be stripped of all that thou have; yet thou have Christ for thy chief
refuge, and thou think so, and thy heart is satisfied with it. As Paul
says, when he was a prisoner, when he was naked, when he was destitute, when
he was stripped of all, 2 Timothy 2.12.
yet (says he) I know whom I have trusted; As if he should say, yet I have him
safe, yet my cover is over my head, yet I am safe in my castle, I have chosen
him, I have him in death, yea then Christ he is advantage, he is a cover, a
castle, and a refuge.

Answ.
5 Last of all: consider whom thou set up for thy chiefest Commander, who it
is to whom thou give the chief command in thine heart. You will say how
shall I know that? Why (my beloved) he whom a man fears most, Quest.
and loves most, that is he whose friendship above all others he would least
loose, and whose dislike and separation he does most fear* certainly he will
be most obedient to him, he will be most observant of him. Art thou so to
Christ? take all the things in the world, if thou set up him, as him whom thou
most fear and love, thou will most obey him: So again, he whom thou
think can do thee the greatest good, and the greatest hurt, him thou will
most obey; if thou think in good earnest that Christ is able to do it,
certainly then thou will most obey him. As for example, if thou look to any
man in the world, a man that is out of Christ, he thinks that the favor or
the wealth of the King, can do him more good and more hurt, than the favor,
or the loss of the favor of Christ; He thinks that wealth, or credit, or
something else, (many things there are that he thinks) can do him more good
and more hurt; therefore he more respects their command, than the command of
Christ; but a man that sets up him for his chief Commander, he regards
nothing else when it comes to cross it, when it comes to thwart any command of
Christ, because he says thus to himself in his heart in secret: It is the
Lord that can do the greatest good, and the greatest hurt, therefore I care
for no more. So Naboth he cared not for Ahabs wrath. So Mordecay cared not for
Hamans displeasure: Hest. 3.2.
so did the Apostles, they cared not for the High Priests, nor what they could
do, Act. 4. So did the 3 children (as you call them) they cared not for the
fiery furnace of Nabucadnezar, Dan. 3.16.17.18.
nor for all that he was able to do; and why? because they thought that
Christ, that God was able to do them more hurt, and more good. Now take any
Commander in the world, when you regard not the punishment, nor the reward that
he is able to inflict or to give you, his authority is gone; Now when you set
up Christ, and think so of Christ, you are ready to obey him, and obey him
rather than any other. Therefore consider with thy self this, and consider
seriously: ask thy heart the question, what is that thou set up to be thy
chiefest Commander? For there are three great Co^manders in the world, that
divide all mankind between them almost: And that is wealth, and estate;
worldly credit and honor, to live in esteem; pleasures, and delight. Now
think with thy self when any of these three great Commanders come with any
command, contrary to that which Christ commands, think with thy self what
thou will do in such a case, what wast thou wont to do, look to past
experience; look back to thy former ways, see what thou wast wont to do;
think with thy self when such a Command comes, what thy heart reasons upon;
if concupiscence, if a strong lust, if a strong impetuous desire come, and bid
thee to do something, which is contrary to that which Christ would have thee
to do, what art thou ready to do in such a case? If thy profit, the
mainetenance of thy estate, thy liberty, thy wealth, thy convenience in this
world come and command thee to do one thing, and thy conscience (which is
Christ's vicegerent) come in his stead, and command thee another thing, what art
thou ready to do in that case? So when thy credit, thy honor, and reputation,
thy vain glory shall come and bid thee do one thing, and Christ shall bid thee
do another, what is thy resolution, what art thou wont to do? By this thou
shall know whether thou set up Christ, as the chief Commander in thy heart
or no, whether thou give him thy chief throne, whether thou exaltest him for
God in thy heart; you know when you exalt him for God, every thing then yields,
if in truth he be set up for God in thy heart: Therefore consider what it is
that thy heart sets highest, whether thou exaltest him most, whether (when any
of these threatening, crying commands come) thou can give them an absolute
denial, and say with thy self, I will not obey you; and if they threaten
imprisonment, or disgrace, and loss of life, and if I do not obey such a
lust, I shall be wrung and pincht for it, I shall lose such delights: well, I
am resolved to bear all this. On the other side, when they shall come with
fair proffers, you shall have this honor, and this advancement, and this
convenience: If thy heart can say now, I will have none of you, for I see it is
a command contrary to his that is above, whom I have set up for my chief
Commander, whom I resolve to obey, whom I take to be greater than all the
friendship in the world, than all the profits, pleasures, and credits in the
world; I say thus examine thy self what thy heart is toward Christ, what it is
to his command; and (let me touch that by the way) thou must also show thy
obedience to Christ, in thy obedience to others. My beloved there are
indifferent things, that are in themselves not of moment one way or other,
whether we do them or not do them; and though the omission of them in
themselves be nothing, yet when it shall be of contempt, and neglect of those
that are set in superior place over you, in such a case you ought not to do
it: this is a rule, and a true rule in divinity, that indifferent things may be
omitted except in two cases, in case of scandal, and in case of neglect, and
contempt of authority: therefore when there is neglect, when men show contempt,
for that cause it is to be done, though for the other it is not to be done.
This I touch but by the way, that you may consider it in your particular
occasion.

Now my beloved, you see these five things, by which you may know if you have
took Christ, or no: ye know when a man comes to examine himself whether he
be a fit man, a man that has any right to come to the Lords table, he must
consider whether he be in Christ, otherwise he has nothing to do either
with this privilege, or with any other. Now to be in Christ, there must (as I
said) go a double act, there must be one on thy own side, there must be one
act on thy part to take him; and there must be an act on his part, there goes
out a strength and a virtue from him by which he takes thee and comprehends
thee. The time is past, and I cannot proceed further; only remember this that
has been said to you, and examine your selves by it, whether you be in the
truth, whether you make Christ your chief Excellency, your chief Treasure,
your chief Joy, your chief Refuge, your chief Commander; if thou find that
thou have done this, if thou find thy heart wrought to such an act as this, to
take Christ in such a manner, then thou have Christ, thou art in him, then thou
have a right in him, and may come with comfort: but if thou have it not, then
I must charge every one of you in the name of Christ Jesus (in whose authority
we come) that you meddle not with such holy mysteries. My Beloved you know what
I have often told you, there is a necessity laid on men to come to the
Sacrament: you know he that neglected the Passover was to be cut off from the
people. Levit. 23.29.
It was a very great sin: so it is to omit the Sacrament: you have diverse
Sacraments every Term, and if your business hinder you from one, you may
come to another; yea there is a necessity lies upon you to come, but yet we
must give you a double charge, one that you omit it not; and another that you
come not hither unless you be in Christ; What have thou to do that art a
profane person, thou have nothing to do with Christ, thou that art yet a
stranger to him, that thou should thrust in to the Lords table? thou
ought not to do it, if thou do, thou eatest and drinkest thine own
damnation, in stead of thy salvation. 1 Cor. 11.29.


The Second Sermon.
AND so now we come to the Use, Use.
and that is, that there is an Act of Christ to make an union betwixt us, that
we may be his, and he ours: there is an act of his, that is, there is a
certain power or virtue comes from him, even as there does from the Lodestone
to the iron, that draws thee to him; there goes out a virtue and power from
him as to the woman that touched the hemme of his garment, that healed her
bloody issue; such a power goes out from Christ to every man, that is in him.
And as you must examine it by your own act, so in the second place you are to
examine it by this; consider whether there has gone out any such power from
Christ to take and comprehend thee: For you must know this, that when once we
are in Christ, then there goes forth an effectual almighty power from him,
which does not make a little light alteration on the superficies of the heart,
but it alters the very frame of it, it turns the very rudder of the heart, so
that a man's course is to a quite contrary point of the compass; it is such an
alteration as does breed in us, not some good conception only of purposes and
desires which many have, which when they come to the birth, there is no
strength to bring them forth: but he gives to us a power and strength to
perform them: That is, he does not put upon us a washy color of profession,
but he dies us in grain with grace and holiness. And therefore consider
whet^^^ thou have found any experience of such a power going out from Christ to
thy heart; This my beloved, differs from common graces, from the common form
of godliness which is in the world, as much as the life differs from the
picture, or the substance from the shadow; as a through performance differs
from a proffer, or an offer: or as that which has sinews and vigor, differs
from that which is weak and powerles. Therefore this power of Christ which he
puts forth and diffuseth into the heart of every man that is in him, is called
the Kingdom. And the Kingdom of Christ is not in word, 1 Cor. 4.20.
but in power: That is, when once he rules but as a King, he exercises a
Kingdom there, and he says not only to us; I will have such a thing done,
they are not weak and powerless commands that he gives to the heart of a man
that he dwells it; but says he, The Kingdom of God is not in word but in
power; that is, there goes an efficacy with those commands, there goes a great
strength with them, that brings every thought, and every rebellious affection
into subjection to it; and therefore consider I say, if thou would have
these virtues, whether thou be in Christ, whether any such power has gone out
from Christ to thy heart.

But you will say, Quest.
what is this power and virtue, and in what manner is it infused into the heart
of man, for this seems to be a narration of a thing a far off?

Answ.
My beloved, we will explain it as well as we can to you; even as you see an
Artificer working with his instrument, there goes a certain virtue out from
that art which is in his mind, and guides the instrument to make this or that,
the which without it could not be done, when he makes any artificial thing,
as a knife, or a sword; or when the Potter fashions the pot, his hand is set
on work, and there is a certain invisible passage, a certain secret
influence of the art that goes along with his hand, that brings forth such an
artificial thing; or even as you see the members move; a man moving his arm,
or his hand, or any part of his body, there goes a certain virtue from his
will, a certain secret power, efficacy, and command that stirs them this way
or that way; the thing we see not, yet we see it in the effect; or as you see
it in the creature, you see the creatures that God has made, they have all the
several instincts, by which they are instigated to do this or that; you see
the birds are instigated to make their nests in such a fashion, at such a
season; so every creature according to his several kind. There goes out from
God who is the author of nature to these works of nature, a certain virtue
that puts them on, and instigates them to this or that: and as you see an arrow
that is shot by the Archer: there goes a virtue together with it, that directs
it just to such ^ mark, so far, and no further. So after this manner there
comes a power from Christ to his members; as soon as a man is in him, there
comes such a secret divine, unexpressable efficacy that works upon the heart
of him in whom he dwells. And therefore the conjunction between him and us, is
compared to that which is between the soul and the body, that acts and
stirs us to and fro, according to its will and pleasure: such an efficacy
shall thou find, if thou belong unto him, and therefore consider if there be
such a thing in thee or no.

Quest.
But you will say, to what purpose is this efficacy, and what does it in my
heart when it comes there?

Answ.
Why, I will tell thee what it does; it is expressed in plain terms 2 Cor.
5.17. Whosoever is in Christ is made a new creature; That is the work it
effects; it is such a power and efficacy as makes thee a new creature; That is,
it breaks in pieces the old building, it quite takes away the first print* As
when a man comes to make a new stamp, the first must be removed. So that this
efficacy that goes out from Christ, it has a double virtue in thy soul, to
wear out the old stamp, to breed a death of the old nature, of the old man,
to ruin and break down the old building, and to set up a new one; and that
the Scripture calls a new creature: and therefore consider with thy self,
whether thou find such a virtue as has put thy heart into such a new frame, as
has molded it all together, and has put it into another fashion than it was,
consider whether all in thee be new.

You will say, this is strange, must all be new? Quest.


Answ.
My beloved, you know the words they are clear; Old things are passed away, 2
Cor. 5.17.
all things are become new. (In the same place which I quoted before) that as
the command was in the offering of the Passover, not a jot of old leaven, but
we must part with it; Now this is the nature of leaven, it is always purging
out, and it will be purging out while we are here, only the efficacy and
strength thereof remains not. Then think with thy self, is all new in me?
look what natural disposition I have had: look what natural lusts and desires
I have had, see what acts I was wont to do, what old haunts and customs I
have had, look what old company I kept, what old courses I took, what my
tract has been, is all this altered and every thing become new? (for, Cor.
5.17.
says he, it must be a new creature, a new nature:) That is, it is not enough
for a man to have a new course for a fit, to have new purposes and a new change
that comes like flashes, I say, that is not enough; you may have many new
things in you, that may be in old hearts, like pieces of new cloth in old
garments, that will do thee no good at al; Math. 9, 16.17.
the Lord regards not that: like new wine in old vessels, so it is where there
are some new things, that are good things in themselves; in a carnal and old
heart, they are not fit for the heart, and therefore they never stay long
there: So says the text, Put a new piece into an old garment, and it makes the
rent greater.

Answ.
Therefore all must be new; I say there must be a new nature, that these new
things may be there: even as the several creatures are in their several
elements, as the elements are in their own place, as the plants are in their
proper soil, as the branches are upon their own root. For then they flourish,
then they hold out, then they continue; Therefore see whether this vigor, this
efficacy, this virtue has gone out from Christ into thy heart; whether it has
not only renewed al in thee, but also has given thee a new nature; That is,
whether it has wrought such a change in thee, that all the ways of godliness
and new obedience, become in a measure natural to thee, so that thou can do
them cheerfully, even as we hear, and see, and do natural actions, and that
thou do them without weariness: for you know, things that are natural we
are not weary of them; And so thou will do them constantly, for what is
natural, stays and abides by us, that it out-growes and out-wearies what ever
is in us beside; Now has there a virtue gone out from Christ, that has
wrought all this in you, that has made all new, has not only done so, but
has made it natural to thee? But you will say, must it needs be so, Quest.
cannot Christ take and comprehend me, but there must be this wonderful change
wrought, who can be saved then? I have then but little hope, when I am upon my
deathbed, and then shall look upon my old nature, and find no such work as
this wrought upon me. Beloved, I beseech you consider this, that there is a
necessity of it: It is so, and it must be so, and except you have it, you
cannot be saved; you see the words in the Scriptures are most clear, Whosoever
is in Christ is a new creature: 2 Cor* 5.
Do but consider whether it be so or no; there must be a new-heaven, and a
new earth; You see that was the great promise that was to be fulfilled in our
times of the Gospel. 2 Pet. 3.13,
Is there not a new priesthood; is there not a new covenant, and has not the
Lord said, there must be a new heaven and a new earth? That is, new graces from
heaven, and a new company of men wrought on, and changed by those graces? Shall
those that are borne of old Adam, receive a power from him, to make them like
to him, to carry his Image, to be corrupt, carnal, and sinful as he is: And
do you not think that the New Adam, the Second Adam, shall have as much
efficacy in him to make those new creatures, that are in him, that come to him?
Certainly there is as much power, life, and vigor in the new Adam, to change
every man that is in him, that comes to him, to make them new creatures, as in
the old Adam, to make them like to him: Besides, has not Christ said plainly,
I came not into the world to save souls only, that is not my business alone
(though that was a great part of the business and errand for which he came
into the world: Tit. 2.14.
) but (says he) I came to purify a people to my self, zealous of good
works: in the 2 Tit. Now if that were the end of Christ's coming, do thou
think that he will loose his end? Wherefore its impossible, that any man
should be saved, or have part in Christ, that he should be in Christ and
Christ in him, except his heart be purified so, as to be zealous of good
works. If Christ dwell in thy heart, thou may easily know it; for do thou
think, that Christ will dwell in a foul and unclean place? has he not pure
eyes? And therefore it is certain wheresoever he dwells, Hab 1.13.
that place must be a fit Temple for him to dwell in; Wherefore of necessity
he must cleanse thy heart, he must fashion it, and keep it pure, clean, and
sweet, so as it may be a fit Temple for him and his Spirit to dwell and
delight in. Besides, does he not look to his glory in all those that belong
to him? he has many eyes to look upon them as it were, there are many
spectators men and Angels, to see what they are, 1 Cor. 4.9.
and how they behave themselves: If he should have a company of men to belong
unto him that are carnal, perverse, and worldly minded, that have crooked
ways like other men, would this be for his honor? would it not be said, Like
men, like Master? would it not reflect upon him? Certainly it would; and
therefore the Lord so orders it, that those whom he has redeemed, shall be
holy in all manner of conversation: Says he, you must be as I am, else it will
be for my dishonor, As I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.16.
so every one of you must be holy, in all manner of conversation. Therefore let
no man deceive himself, to think he can go away and yet be in Christ, and
be saved through Christ and the mercies of God in Christ, when there goes out
no such virtue and power from Christ to change him, to work on him, to alter
him, to make him another creature. And therefore I beseech you in the examining
of this, (for its a matter of great moment) to consider with your selves, if
this be wrought in you or no; whether you find any experiment and effect of
this mighty power, efficacy, and virtue: and let me bring you a little to
particulars, Has there gone out a virtue from him to enable thee to believe?
There is a faith required in the Deity, there is a faith required in the
promises of God, and there is a faith required in the providence of God, to
think that every particular thing is ordered by it; There is also a faith in
all the threatenings of God: Now for the manner of propounding; when the
Scripture comes to propound any thing, it propounds it thus, and no more: as
you see in Moses, he writes nothing but, Genesis 1.1^
In the beginning God made heaven and earth, etc. And so the Apostles write;
Such a thing was done, Math. 1. Luke 1.2.
Jesus Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary: Thus and thus he did. Now when the
naked object is propounded, other writers wht they deliver or write is
rational; They use Reasons and arguments to convince men of those things which
thy deliver; but when the Scripture sets down any propositions of faith, it
does but barely propound them, for there is the Majesty and authority of God in
them, to confirm them.

Quest.
But now here you will demand, (the proposition being but nakedly laid down in
the Scriptures) what will enable a man to believe it?

Answ.
I answer: that certainly there is a mighty power that goes out from God and
Christ, that enables thee to believe with efficacy; so that when the object is
set before thee, there goes out a power from Christ to work faith in thy
heart, whereby thou truly beleevest it, and so it appears in thy life: We
think we believe those things, but our lives do manifest the contrary; namely,
That there is not a powerful faith wrought in us; for all the errors of our
lives (though we observe them not) arise from hence, that these Principles are
not thoroughly believed: if they were, it could not be, that there should be
such inconsequences in the lives of men. Therefore consider if this faith be
wrought in thee, whether such a power has gone out, to work such a faith,
that has changed thy whole course, as it will do, if it be once wrought in
thee, by the power of Christ: So also consider, whether there has a virtue
gone out from him to work love in thy heart to the Lord; for otherwise it is
certain that there is no man in the world that is able to love God, or to come
near him, for all love rises from Similitude, there must be an agreement and
similitude between those two that love. Now every man by nature is as contrary
to Gods pure nature, as fire is to water, and without an almighty power to
change his nature, and to work a particular affection of love in him, he can
never be able to love God: therefore its the baptism of the holy Ghost; which
works this, Math. 3.11.
He will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire, that is, with the holy
Ghost which is fire: I will multiply thy sorrows and thy conceptions, That is,
Genesis 3.6.1
the sorrows of thy conceptions. Now love is as fire in the heart, and one
fire must beget another; And therefore you have it in the common proverb, Love
is a thing that cannot be bought with mountains of gold and silver; yet if
thou be in Christ, there goes out a virtue from him, that stampes upon thy
heart this holy affection, that breeds in thee this holy fire of love, so that
thy heart cleaves to him, thou love him with as true, with as genuine, as
natural, and as sensible love, as thou love any friend; as thou love any
creature in the world. Consider if this be wrought in thee or no. And so for
thy knowledge; there is also a power in it, consider whether any such virtue
has gone out from Christ to make the knowledge which thou have, powerful.

You will say, what is that?

Answ.
Quest.
That is, to bring on these truths which thy heart assents unto, to bring them
with that evidence, and fullness of demonstration, that thou shall yield unto
them, and practice them according to thy knowledge. Beloved, there is much
knowledge among us, but who practices according to his knowledge? We know God,
but we glorify him not as God; Romans 1.21,
and the reason is, because there has not gone a power with that knowledge, to
make it lively and effectual, to pass through all the faculties of the soul,
and to overrule them; for if there were such knowledge, it would always draw
affection and practice with it. So likewise consider, whether there has gone a
power from him to mortify thy lusts, ( Whosoever is in Christ has crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts; Gal. 5.24.
) not to lay them asleep only, but to mortify and subdue them. See likewise
whether there has a power gone out from Christ, to help thee to overcome the
world, The lusts of thine eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life;
1 Ioh. 2.16.
for whosoever is in Christ overcomes the world, and all that is in the world.
The world has many things to work upon us, and to resist and oppose us: It
has persecutions, it has disgraces, it has slanders and reproaches, which it
casts upon holy men, and upon the holy ways of God. And the men that are
actours in this, are the devils factours, though they think not so, as the
Apostle James expresses it; Their tongues are set on fire of hell, Iam. 3.6.
to devise slanders and false reports, and to fasten them upon holy men,
especially upon the Ministers of the Gospel, and so upon all the ways of God:
I say they are the devils factours, though they think not so: and those that
believe them are the devils receivers; the one has the devil in his tongue,
the other in his ear. But the Lord has appointed this. This is one thing
whereby the world fights against the ways of God, to discourage men and to
hinder them, that they might be stumbling blocks to them. So it was with
Christ; he was the falling of many in Israel by reason of this; so was Paul,
as a deceiver, Luke 2.34.
and yet true, etc. Consider if thou have this efficacy put into thy heart,
that thou art able to overcome this, that thou art able to overcome all the
offenses, and persecutions, all the slanders and reproaches that are cast upon
the ways of God; and notwithstanding that, to think well of them, and to
walk in them, and practice the^. Likewise, as it has these things on the one
hand so it has pleasures, preferments, glory, riche^ credit, and all things of
that nature on the other art thou able to overcome all these? So to shut up
this point and prosecute it no further, thus you shall know whether you be in
Christ: for that is the point; We have assurance in him; that if we ask any
thing, we shall be heard, but first we must be in him; now (...) know whether
we be in him (as you have heard) there must be an act of ours, and secondly an
act of his, which is this power that goes out from him, to change, to take and
comprehend us. So much for the first thing.

Now for the second; if a man will apply or take to himself the privileges
we have by Christ, as this particular privilege of being heard in our
prayers, of coming to the Sacrament, or any other; know this, that it is not
enough to be in Christ only, but there must be a certain qualification, a
certain immediate fashioning, and preparation of the heart, or else though
thou have a right to the privileges, though they belong to thee: yet thou art
suspended from the use, benefit, and comfort of them. And this is considered in
these Five things. (I will but name them very briefly.) First, when a man
comes to receive the Sacrament, it is not enough for him to be in Christ, no nor
when he is come to do some other duties, but moreover there must be this also;
those grace thou have, this change, this new creature that is wrought in thee,
which is but a heap of particular graces these must be acted and stirred up
upon such an occasion: It is true, no man ought to come except he have the
graces of Gods Spirit wrought in his heart, that they may lie there in the
habits, that they may be in the heart as fire raked in the ashes. But if a man
will come to receive the Sacrament, and suffer these habits, these graces he
has to lie still there, he comes not as a worthy receiver; (there are indeed
degrees of unworthiness) he comes not as a worthy receiver except he stirs
them up, except they be acted at that very time: as for example; when we come
to receive the Sacrament, we ought then to have an especial humiliation and
sorrow for our sins; we ought then to have an especial love to Jesus Christ;
we ought then to have a special rejoicing in him, and in all the Privileges
we have by him; we ought then to have a special love to our brethren, the men
with whom we converse, and among whom we live: now if a man come and receive,
and do not stir up and act these graces, he receivs unworthyly, and my ground
for it, is this; You see in the feast of Reconciliation, the Tenth day of the
Seventh month, the Lord tells them there, you shall come, and you shall keep
it, and you shall not do work, etc. But is this enough? no, He that does not
actually afflict his soul (says he) that day, he shall be cut off from his
people, Levit 23.27, 28.29.30.
Levit. 23.27. This is, though they had a habitual disposition, and their
hearts were prepared to sorrow for their sins, and to take them to heart and
bewail them, this is not enough, (says he) at this time you must afflict
your souls, that is, there must be a stirring up of that sorrow. So likewise
you find this in the feasts, in more places than one, that when they come to
keep the feasts, at that time they shall eat and drink, and refresh
themselves, but in any case rejoice, Deuteronomy. 12, and Deuteronomy. 16. I will not stand
to repeat the places: That is, it is not enough for you to have thankful
hearts, to have hearts prepared for these things in the habit, but you must
then rejoice, for it is the season of it, Eccles. 3.11.
(for every thing is good in it is season) and the Lord requires it at such a
time. Therefore thus think with thy self whenever thou come to receive
the Sacrament, this is the time that the graces I have, the habitual graces,
must be new pointed as it were, they must be new whetted, new scowred, that
they may be bright and shining upon such an occasion, when the Lord calls for
it, you must then quicken and stir them up, that they may be all acted in your
hearts.

And this is one thing, that it is not enough for a man to be in Christ, to
take the privileges that belong to him, but there is a certain qualification
required that must be done at that time, when the Covenant is renewed: And this
is one, to have the graces thus acted.

Reconciliation. For the Saints, those that are within the covenant, those that
are regenerate men, (you must mark it well, for it is a point of much use) when
they commit sins against God, the guilt of their sins is retained: though
they are within the covenant, and are not cut off from Christ, but are in him;
yet (I say) when they have sinned, the guilt of that sin continues, and is
continued till they be reconciled and renewed by faith and repentance; as you
see it was with David: 2 Samuel 12* 13.
Nathan would not have said when he came to him, Thy sins are forgiven thee,
if there had not been a new thing, if there had not been a thing done at that
time; and therefore it intimates so much, that before his sin was not forgiven:
that is, the Lord was angry with him. You must know therefore this, that when a
regenerate man sins, there is only a particular guilt; the universal guilt
of sins returns not, (for that would cut him quite off, that would put him
absolutely into the state of damnation,) but it is a particular guilt, for every
particular sin; that is, even as a father is pleased well with his son, and
knows him to be his son, he is affected to him as to his son, yet he
has done such a particular action that has offended him, and for that
particular offense, he withdrawes himself from him, he carries not himself
to him as he was wont to do, being offended with him for such a fault; now till
the son has reconciled and humbled himself for that particular action,
though the father has an hundred gifts to bestow on him, yet he shall have
none of them, till he has reconciled himself; So think with thy self (if
any sin lie in the way) when thou come to partake of this privilege to
receive the Sacrament, or when thou come to call on God for any particular
mercy, or to have any request granted; think then with thy self, such a sin
I committed, I must humble my self for it, I must labor to make
reconciliation, labor to have this taken away, that my Father may be
reconciled to me; then come and take the privilege, for now it belongs unto
me; therefore there is a necessity of renewing our repentance and
reconciliation most exactly, and to take a very particular examination of our
ways when we come to receive the Sacrament, or when we draw near to God upon
such special occasions, least our Father, (though he be a Father to us) have
some particular quarrel against us; for even he whom we call Father, 1 Pet.
1.17, judges every man, (even his own sons) without respect of persons,
that is, he did not bear any ill in them: thus you see did he with Moses,
with David, and others, and the like he does with all the Saints. This is the
second qualification that is required before you can have any part in any of
the privileges, before you can attain unto this assurance, to ask and have;
therefore it is not without use, and that not in the Sacrament only, but also
in that which we have to deliver.

what distance is grown between the Lord and him ever since the time, that he
has in a more particular manner been reconciled to him. This is another thing
than what we named before, to consider what rust has grown upon his soul,
what soil his heart has contracted, by conversing in the world, and by
meddling with worldly and earthly things; for the soul gathers soil with
meddling with them, even as the hands do; now thou must think with thy self,
when thou come to the Lord; and drawest near to him in this, or any other
duty, thou must recover that distance again, and bring thy heart nearer to the
Lord, thou must draw nearer to him, thou must get thy heart to a more close, a
more near, and inward conjunction with him; thou must labor to have that
hardness that thou have contracted (as it will be in a little continuance of
time) thou must labor I say, to have that took away and removed; to have thy
heart softened, to have the rust rubbed off; thou must labor to have all these
things done. For thou must know this, That though there be not a particular
sin committed, yet as we see, the outward man is subject to a wasting, though
there be no wounds, though there be no sickness; though a man be in perfect
health, and all is well with him, and he observe all the rules of diet, yet (I
say) you see the outward man is subject to wasting, to fainting, to weakness,
and decay; and therefore there must be a renewing of diet, and of strength, or
else it cannot be able to hold out: So it is with the inward man; though there
be no particular sin, though a man did keep some good course in the ways
of godliness, without running out eminently or evidently, yet he is subject to
a secret decay, so that sometimes he must have some special meat, some
special feast, which the Lord has appointed for that purpose, (for he does
nothing in vain:) And if this Sacrament could be spared, that a man might
keep the strength of the inward man without it, the Lord would not have put
you to this trouble; but he sees it necessary, and therefore he has appointed
it to be received, and that often, that you might feed upon the body and blood
of Christ, that you might eat his flesh and drink his blood, and gather new
strength from it; that when there is a decay of grace in your hearts, you may
go to this Fountain, and fill the Cisternes again to recover strength. For
when a man comes to the Sacrament as he ought, he gathers a new strength, as
a man does from a feast; his heart is cheered up as it is with Flagons of wine,
he is refreshed, his hunger and thirst is satisfied; That is, the desires of
his soul that long after Christ, after righteousness, and assurance, are
quickened and refreshed. And this is the third thing.

Intention, a particular increase of thy will, in taking Christ, of thy desire
to Christ, and of every grace that knits thee and Christ together; For there
are certain cementing graces, certain glewing graces, that join Christ and
thy soul together, as Faith and Love; these are the two maine graces; there
are a great train of graces that follow them, but these are the chief, and
these I say must be intended, For what is the end of the Sacrament? Is it not
to knit the knot stronger between Christ and us, to make the union more full
and perfect? is it not to increase our willingness to take and receive Christ?
for you know all the acts of the soul may be intended. Put the case there be a
resolved act in the heart and soul of any man, whereby he says thus with
himself: I am resolved to take Christ, and to serve and love him for the time
of my life, yet this resolution of his, though it be perfect and sincere, may
receive intention; when a man is willing to do any thing truly, there may be
degrees added to that will; when there is light in a room (when thou bring
in more candles) that light may be increased: so it may in this, so may your
faith and love; (by faith I mean nothing but the resolution of the heart to
take Christ; I mean not the believing part, but the taking part, the act of
the will taking Christ, or receiving him, which is nothing else but the choice
of the will that resolves to take him.) I do but touch this by the way, because
it is a point I have handled already at large; the thing I aim at is this; I
say the glewing graces are these two; Faith and love, whereby you thus take
Christ for your Lord and Savior; Faith is like the part of the compass that
goes about and does the work; and love is that cementing grace whereby we are
more knit unto the Lord; they have both their office and their place; You know
love is an uniting affection, therefore this is the definition of it* It is a
desire of union with that it loves. Now when thou come to receive the
Sacrament, or to pray, or put up any special request, when thou come to have
to do with God, to make use of any privilege thou have in Christ, thy chief
business is to intend this faith and love, at such a time to draw thee nearer,
to make the union perfect.

You will say, how is this increased and how is it intended? Quest.


Answ.
I answer; Two ways in the Sacrament, one way is the very repetition, the very
renewing the covenant, the very doing it over again, the resolution of taking
him, (for there is a mutual covenant, you know, between Christ and us,) it is
confirmed to us in the Sacrament, he confirms his, and we confirm ours, as
the friendship between Jonathan and David was increased by the renewing of the
covenant, or else why was it repeated? The very repetition of the act intends
the habit, the habit is increased by the repetition of the act, though it were
no more; so the renewing of the covenant exercises thy faith, it sets a work
thy faith and thy love, when thou come to receive the Sacrament, the very
intention is increased* but this is not all. There is another thing in the
Sacrament that much increases it, and that is a thing I would have you
chiefly to take notice of; That is the very Sacrament it self, the elements
of bread and wine delivered to thee, with the very words of the minister, Take
and eat, this is my body, 1 Cor. 11, 24, 25.
that was broken for thee; Take and drink, this is my blood, that was shed,
etc. For when these words are spoken to us, if we did consider well of them,
and think thus with our selves; These words that the Lord himself has
appointed the Minister to speak (for therein is the force of them that they
are of the Lords own institution) therefore the strength of every Sacrament
lies in the institution; That is a rule in Divinity: the Papists themselves,
who have added five other Sacraments, cannot deny, but that every Sacrament
must have an immediate institution from Christ himself, even from his own
mouth, or else there is no strength in it; so that even as it is with all
things that are symbols of other things, (as take marks in feilds that stand
for the division of several men's rights; take counters th^^ stand for
Thousands and Hundreds; the very essence of these things stands in the very
institution of them;) So in the Sacrament, except these words were from the
Lords own mouth that delivered it, this very delivering of the bread and wine,
being a sign to you of the forgivenes of your sins, except the Lord had thus
instituted it, there had been no force in it. I say consider, they are words
that the Minister speaks not in an ordinary course, but he is appointed by the
Lord himself to speak them; and now when these words make a new impression
upon thy heart, it adds an intention to thy faith and love. For example, (to
make it a little more clear to you, that you may understand it distinctly.)
The Lord has said this, he will forgive the sins of all those that come unto
him, he will forgive them that forsake their sins, and take Christ Jesus,
and love and fear him for the time to come. The Lord might have suffered it to
go thus in general, that he has delivered it unto you and no more; But he
thought good to go further and say thus to mankind: Its true, I have said it,
but I will not content my self with that, but will add certain seals and
symbolls, certain external signs, that thou shall see and look on; and I
say to thee, this covenant have I made with thee, and when thou see the bread
and wine delivered by the Minister, know this, that the thing that thou see
is a witness between thee and me: That as it was said by Laban and Jacob when
they made a covenant, This stone be witness between us: Genesis 31.48.
And God said to Noah, when I look upon the rainebowe, Genesis 9.13.14, 15,
it shall be a sign that I will destroy the earth no more after this manner*
when the Lord has said it and has appointed this outward Symboll that thine
eyes look upon, I remember the covenant and this as a sign between us, this
shall bind me to it and him likewise. Now when this is done anew, (it may be
every month) this is a wondrous great mercy, this is a mavelous great help
(if it be rightly understood) to strengthen our faith. Does it not help us,
when we see the Rainebowe which the Lord has appointed to put him in mind of
his covenant? Genesis 9, 14, 15,
I will remember my covenant, when I look on the Bow in the Cloud it shall
confirm me, and I will not break my covenant to destroy the world with a
flood; So this administration of the Sacrament, when the Lord looks upon it,
he cannot but remember his promise and his covenant, of pardoning our sins;
And when thou look on it, thou art assured of it, for he has said it; it
shall be a sign and a witness between us; Now I say that new impression
that these words (thus contrived and understood, and delivered by the Minister)
make upon the heart, intends our faith and love; as indeed it is a great matter
to have it spoken to us by a Minister of the Gospel, sent from Christ, from
his own mouth; Take and eat, this is my body that is broken for you: 1 Cor.
11 24.25.
and this is my blood that was shed for you and for many, for the remission of
sins. This is the fourth qualification that is required, that our faith and
love be intended, and our union increased; that the will, resolution, and
purpose of taking Christ for our Lord, receive more degrees; that so we may be
more fast and firmly united and knit to him; which I say is done partly by the
repetition on both sides (for the very repetition does it;) and partly by a new
impression that these words, ( take, eat, etc) make on the soul. Now I add
the last thing which is required, (still remember the maine thing we are upon,
that it is not enough for thee to be in Christ, but if thou will be a worthy
receiver, thou must have these four qualifications in thee, that I have named
already, Thou must reconcile thy self anew, thou must rub off the rust from
thy soul which it has gathered, thou must recover the distance that is grown
between God and thee; Thou must add an intending and an increase; Thou must
add more degrees to thy faith and love, and after all these.)



You will say, what is the Covenant?

It Is a Covenant that consists of these three things or points; Justification,
Ier. 31.34.
I will forgive thy sins; Sanctification, I will make you new hearts and new
spirits; and the third, All things are ours; Ezech. 36.26* 1 Cor 3.
that is, I have made you heirs of the world, heirs of all things, you have
all the promises belonging to you, that belong to this life, and that which is
to come; this is the Covenant which the Lord has made. Now thou art bound when
thou come to receive the Sacrament, not only to remember this Covenant, Do
this (says he) in remembrance of Me, and not barely of me, and of my being
crucified for thee, and of all the love that I have showed unto thee, but also
in remembrance of the Covenant, and of those gracious promises, which are the
particulars of which that Covenant is the sum: and therefore, thus a man is
to do. What? has the Lord vouchsafed me this favor, that I may come to his
Table, I may come and renew the nuptials and my covenant with him? Surely, then
I will look about and consider what I want, what request* I shall put up unto
him; for there is nothing that is wanting, but it is within this Covenant; and
thou art to put up thy request in a special manner, whatsoever it be, be it
concerning things belonging to thy soul, to have a strong lust mortified, to
have thy hard heart softened, to have some sin that lies upon thy conscience
forgiven, and to have that forgivenes assured to thee: be it any thing that
concerns thy particular estate, if it be to be delivered from a potent enemy,
or whatsoever it be, put up thy request, and that largely, open thy mouth wide,
that is, make thy request full, fear it not. Put the case (again) it be
somewhat that does not concern thee, but that it concerns the Church abroad,
or the Church at home, it is a case that much concerns any of these in the
Church, put it up to him, and put it up with confidence. For this is a marriage
day (as it were) it is the time when he reaches out his scepter (as you know
the things I allude to) and thou may come to his presence: You know, Ester.
5, 3,
when Hester was admitted to the presence of the King, then said he, What
request have thou? when thou art admitted to the familiarity and presence o^
the Lord, he looks for it, he asks what request you have to put up to him? and
the promises are large enough: I will give it, whatsoever it be, if you ask
according to my will; and therefore, do in this case as Moses used to do: you
shall find when Moses drew near unto the Lord, when he was admitted into his
presence, and saw him face to face (for that was the great privilege Moses
had) when there was any special apparition of the Lord to him, Moses makes this
argument: (says he) It is a great mercy that thou would show me this,
that such a poor man as I am, should have this privilege, and give me leave
to make use of it: Lord, if I have found favor in thy sight, that is, Exodus,
33.13,
since thou have vouchsafed me such a favor in thy sight, do thus and thus
for me: you see he made this request for the whole Church of God and saved
them, or else they had been destroyed. If thou have not any particular
argument in this case, say, If I have found favor in thy sight, do this: so I
say, when thou have this promise confirmed, that Christ has given himself to
thee, and the symboll of that promise is the bread and wine which he has given
to thee, put up thy request: O Lord, if thou have vouchsafed to give me
Christ, will thou not with him give me all things else? Lord, Romans 8, 32,
if I have found favor in thy sight, to do so great a thing for me, deny me
not this particular request. Thus we ought to do, especially when we come to
things that are beyond nature: when we come, let us consider with our selves;
Indeed I have a natural disposition that carries me strongly to evil, I shall
never be able to overcome it, there are such duties to do, I shall never be
able to perform them: In such a case thou must do it the more earnestly, thou
must sigh and groan to the Lord. Elishah when he comes to do a thing so much
above the course of nature, 2 King* 4.34.
as to raise a dead child to life, he sighed unto the Lord, that is, he prayed
earnestly. Iam, 5.15.
Eliah, when he would have Rain, he cried, he took much pains, he prayed.
So must thou do in this case: and know this for thy comfort, that though thou
think thou shall never be able to do these things, to overcome such lusts,
such hereditary diseases, yet the Lord is able to help thee: though these are
past natural help, yet they are not past the help of grace; Iam. 4.6.
though the spirit in us lust after envy; yet as the Apostle James says, The
Scriptures offer more grace, that is, the Scriptures offer grace and ability to
do more than nature can do; nature cannot heal a spirit that lusts after
envy; or any other thing; a spirit that lusts after credit, after money, after
the sin of uncleanenesse, or whatsoever is presented: now the Scriptures
offer that grace, that will overcome any of these sins, be they never so
strong, or so old; Christ healed hereditary diseases, he healed those that were
borne lame and blind: so though thou be borne with such lusts, Christ is able
to heal thee; you see a Prophet could heal Naaman of his Leprosy, when there
was no other that could do it; so says Christ; Come unto me all ye, and I
will heal you. Math, 11.28.
So that you see we must put up our requests to God.

The third Sermon.
WE have already made some entrance upon the words: I told you what the
Apostles scope is in them, which is, to make known to all Christians to whom
he wrote, another great privilege, besides that which he named before: that
is, That he that has the Son, has life; this (says he) is another
privilege, that whatsoever you ask, you shall have; only remember that you
have this assurance in him, that is, in Christ Jesus; That point (what it is to
be in him, that it may be the ground of all the benefits and privileges we
enjoy) we handled the last day. Now we come to the privilege it self, If we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. The words are so plain, I
shall not need to spend any time in opening of them, but deliver you the point
that lies so evidently before us: Doct.
which is this, [ That all the prayers of the Saints made upon earth, are
assuredly heard in heaven] whatsoever we ask, (says he) according to his
will he hears us, only the conditions must be observed. When you hear such
a general as this, it must be limited, there are certain bounds set to it,
which we will name unto you: which are these four conditions. First, all the
prayers that are made upon earth shall be heard in heaven; Cond.
if they be the prayers of a righteous man, and are faithful and fervent. The
person must be righteous, that must first be remembered: because, although the
prayer be never so good, yet except the person be accepted from whom it comes,
the Lord regards it not: you know in the old Law, the blood of Swine was
reckoned an abominable Sacrifice, Esaias. 66.3*
yet if you take the blood of sheep, and compare them together, you shall find
no difference; It may be the Swines blood is the better: then what is the reason
the Swines blood is not accepted? even because of the subject of it, it was the
blood of Swine, and therefore you see it was put down, that it was an
abominable Sacrifice. So it is with prayer; Take the prayer of a Saint, and the
prayer of a wicked man; it may be, if you look upon the petition, or
whatsoever is in the prayer it self, you shall find some time the prayers of
a godly man more cold, and less fervent: the petitions are not so well framed
as the wicked man's: yet because this comes from such a person, the Lord regards
it not; you know the condition is mentioned James fifth: The prayer of the
righteous man avails much, if it be fervent. Now as this is required in the
person, so there is somewhat required in the prayer also, that is, that it be
fervent and faithful; that it be fervent, you have it in the same place, The
prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent; that is, it must be a
prayer made from the sense of the misery that is in us, and from the mercy of
God, when a man takes a thing to heart, that he prays for, and comes with
confidence to be heard, for that makes him fervent. This the Lord will have,
and also he will have it faithful: James the first, when the Apostle exhorts
them to prayer, if any man want wisdom (says he) let him ask it of God.
James 1, 5.6,
but then mark, he carefully puts in this condition, see that He pray in
faith, that is, believe that it shall be done unto him: now this faith includes
repentance, for no man can believe that he shall be heard, except he make his
heart perfect with God: If he allow any sin in himself, he cannot believe upon
any good ground: therefore when I say it must be faithful, that also is
included, we must regard no wickedness in our hearts, for in such a case, the
Lord hears not, he hears not sinners. Psalm. 66, ^8,
So that this you must remember; First, John 9, 31,
the person must be righteous, and the prayer must be fervent and faithful,

Secondly, 2 Cond.
the other Condition you shall hear in the Text, it must be according to his
will; you must not think, whatsoever you ask, if you ask it loosely at Gods
hands, that it shall presently be granted you: No (says he) it must be
according to his will, if you ask fire from heaven, Luke 9.54.55.
that is not according to his will, and therefore you see, they that ask it,
were denied it, with this reason, you know not what you ask. Likewise to ^it
at his right hand, and at his left in heaven, which was another request of the
Disciples, Matthew. 20, 21.22.
he puts them by with this; You understand not what you ask of the Father, and
therefore it must be according to his will. And that is the second.

3. Cond.
Thirdly, we must ask it in time, in due season: so the promise is true, Knock
and it shall be opened to you; but you know the foolish Virgins knocked and it
was not opened to the^; what was the reason of it? because they asked when the
time was past; for there is a certain acceptable time when the Lord will be
found: 2: Cor, 6.2.
and when that opportunity is past, he is found no more. It is true, that this
life is the time of grace, but God in his secret counsel has appointed a
certain time to every man, which is the acceptable time, the day of grace;
therefore he says unto them, This day if you will hear: this day if you will
come and seek unto me, if you will pray unto me, I will hear you: when it is
past, the Lord suffers not the doors to stand open always, his ears are not
always open: therefore that condition must be carefully remembered, you must
ask in time; It is a condition that should be carefully thought on by us. For,
for the most part, we fly to prayer as Ioab did to the Altar, he went not to
it for devotion (for then he would have done it before) but when he was in
distress, when he was in extremity, then he fled to it, and therefore you
know what success he had by it, it saved not his life. So we go not to
prayer for devotion, that is, out of love to God, to do him that service; but
(for the most part) we do it out of self love, when we are in extremity or
distress, we pass the acceptable times he requires, and we go to him in a
time of our own: For there is Gods time, and there is our own time; Gods time
is to come to him when we may do him service in our youth, in our strength in
the flower of our graces: Our time is to go to him when we need him: Will not
a friend say (when we never come to him, but when we have extreme need of him)
why do you come now? you were not wont to visit me before, this is not out of
love to me: Even the very same answer the Lord gives; Judge. 10.14.
Go to your Idols (says he) those that you served in the time of peace, and
see if they can help you.

The fourth and last condition is, That we refer the time, the manner, 4
Cond.
the measure of granting our petitions to the Lord. That is, we must not think
to be our own carvers, to think if it be not granted in such a manner, such a
measure, or such a time, presently the Lord has rejected our petitions; no, he
that believes makes no haste: That is, he waits upon God, Esaias. 28.16*
he stays himself upon God, he is content to have it in that time, in that
manner and measure, as best pleases the Lord: For the truth is, we know not
our selves what is meet for us, we are unto the Lord just as the Patient is to
the Physician. The patient is importunate with him, for such things to refresh
and ease him; But the Physician knows what best belongs to him, and when to
give him such things, in what manner, and in what measure: So the Lord knows
best what to do: Many times he does the same things that we desire, though he
do it not in the same manner: Even as the physitia he quenches often the
thirst with Berberries, or with such kind of conserves; what though it be not
with drink, is it not all one so the thirst be quenched? Is it not all one
whether a man be hindered from striking me, or if I have a helmet to defend the
blow? sometimes the Lord keeps not off the enemy; but then he gives us a
helmet to keep off those blows, to bear those injuries and evils that are
done to us: he is a wise physician, he knows what manner, what measure, and
what time is best, therefore that must be referred to him: now these conditions
being observed, you must know that this great privilege belongs to every
Christian, That whatsoever prayers he makes on earth, he is sure to be heard
in heaven, it is a wondrous privilege, that which we have all cause to stand
amazed at, that the Lord should so far regard the sons of men, to grant
them such a Charter as this; no more but ask and have, and what so ever you
pray for, it shall be done to you. But a man is ready to say secretly in his
heart when he hears it, This is too good to be true, That whatsoever I ask, I
shall have. My Beloved, I confess, it is a hard thing to believe it as we
ought to do: and therefore before we come to apply this, we will spend a
little time in endeavoring to convince you of the truth of it, that you may not
doubt of it, that what prayers you make to the Lord he is ready to hear them.

Ephesians. 6. He is in all, and through all, and over all, That is, the Lord is in
every man, he passes through every thing, his eyes run through the earth,
and he is over all, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm. 44.^1.
looking what secrets are in man's heart, what thoughts; yea before he thinks
them he knows them, Psalm. 139.23.
because he sees them in their causes: He that is in a man, that looks in
all the secret corners of the heart, he must needs see what thoughts he has,
what petitions he puts up secretly, even then when his mouth speaks not.
And lest that should not be enough, says he, He is over all, you know one
that stands on high, and looks over all that is below, he easily can see
whatsoever is done; So the Lord, he is in all, he is through all, he is over
al. But this is enough for that; only I would have you remember, that he takes
notice of all, he knows thy prayers.

But you will say; I doubt not of that, I make no question but he hears me,
Quest.
and understands me well enough: but how shall I know that he is willing to
grant the thing I pray for?

Answ.
You shall see these 2 Reasons, in the 7. Mat. where our Savior urges this
very point, that we have now in hand, from the 7. verse downward; Ask (says
he) and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you; here is the promise* For (he backs it with these 2. Reasons)
Every one that asks receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened unto him: As if he should say; ye have this reason
for it, why you should believe it, that it is no more but ask and have; for
(says he) all that ever asked have obtained; all that ever have sought, have
found; all that ever have knocked, it has been opened unto them. That is,
look through the whole book of God, and see what prayers ever have been made
to him, and you shall find, that there is not a prayer mentioned in all the
Scriptures. but it has been heard. Now when we have such a cloud of
witnesses, it is a strong reason, when it is said to us that there were never
any prayed but were heard.

Why, you will say, There were many prayed that were not heard; Quest.
Did not David pray for his Child, and was not heard? Did not Paul pray to be
delivered from such a temptation, and was not heard?

Answ.
My Beloved, Its true, they were not heard for the particular, but yet I dare be
bold to say, that David was heard at that time, though (I say) not in the
particular; for though his Child was taken away, yet you may see the Lord gave
him a Child of the same woman, with much more advantage; he gave him a Child
that was legitimate, which this was not: he gave him a Child that exceeded for
wisdom, Solomon was the Child that he had: So that the Lord did hear him,
and gave him this answer, as if he had said to him, David I have heard thee, I
know that thou art exceeding importunate; thou shall not have this, but thou
shall have another Child which shall be better. And so he says unto Paul 2
Cor. 12. Christ reveals this unto him; Paul (says he) though I grant thee not
this particular request, in the manner that thou would have me, ( To take
away the prick of the flesh which thou art troubled with) thou shall be a
greater gainer by it, thou had better have it than want it; when Paul
understood that it was a medicine, and not a poison as he took it to be, he
was content and resolved in it; And a man resolves not except he be a gainer.
He saw that Gods power was manifest in his weakness, and he saw himself
humbled by it; and when he saw that God gained glory and himself humiliation
by it, he was content to be denied in it; So I say, whosoever asks finds,
you shall never find any example but that whosoever sought to the Lord as he
ought, he was certainly heard, or else he had somewhat that was better granted
to him instead of it. And this is the first reason that is used here. Math.
7.9.10.11.
The second reason is this; What man among you, if his Son ask bread, will
give him a stone; or if he ask a fish, will give him a serpent? if you then
that are evil, know how to give good things to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give good things to them which ask him? (says he)
you be not able to persuade your selves of this truth, because you know not
the Father, for he dwells in light inaccessable, you are not acquainted with
him, says our Savior: I will help you out with an argument that you better
understand; even upon earth (says he) take but a father here, a father that is
ill (but the Lord is full of goodness; fathers have but a drop, but a spark of
mercy in them, whereas the Lord is full of mercy, as the Lord is full of light,
he is the God of all comfort;) Yet, (says he) this father (when his son
comes to ask him bread) he is ready to give it him, he is full of compassion
and tenderness toward him; do you not think that our heavenly Father is as
true a father as he, that he loves you as well as he whose compassion and
pity is much greater? do you not think he is ready to hear his Children
when they call upon him? O this is a strong and unanswerable Reason, and this
you see is backed in 16 Ioh. 27. you see there the love of the Father how it is
expressed to us; I say not unto you that I will ask the father (says he) the
father himself loves you; Mark, as if he should have said, let this be one
ground to you to think your petitions shall be granted, and that they are not
only granted for my sake, for (says he) the Father himself loves you, and
has a great affection to you, that is in natural parents, there is a natural
affection to their Children; So if I were not immediately to present your
petitions (though that be not excluded) yet (says he) the Father has such an
affection to you, that he cannot choose but hear you; I say not (says he)
that I will ask the father, for the father himself loves you. So that this is
the second reason which this promise is there backed with, the love of the
father, That he cannot find in his heart to deny us, even for that affection
that he bears to us. We will add a third Reason that we meet here in the
same Chap. 16. John, 23. In that day you shall ask in my name* verily, verily,
I say unto you, ye shall ask the father in my name, and he will give it you;
It is brought in upon this occasion, when our Savior Christ was to go from
his Disciples, they were ready to complain, as we see in the verses before,
they were ready to say with themselves, alas, what shall we do when our
Master shall be took from our head? Our Savior answers them, you shall do
well enough, doubt you not, for though I be not with you; yet (says he) go to
the father in my name, and whatsoever you ask of him, you shall have it: So
that he answers that objection, when a man is ready to say:

Its true, I know that a father is exceeding loving to his Children: Quest.
But it may be, my carriage has not been such, I am full of infirmities, I
have much in me that may turn the love and affection of my Father from me.

Answ.
Put the case you have, yet Christ adds this for your comfort; If (says he) the
Father will not do it for your sake, yet doubt you not, if you ask in my
name, he will do it; do we not see it usual among men, That one that is a
mere stranger to another, if he get a letter from a friend, he thinks to
prevail; and he does so, because though it be not done for his sake (it may
be he is a stranger, one that deserved nothing at his hands) yet such a friend
may deserve much: And when we go to God in the name of Christ, this answers
all the objections whatsoever you can say against your selves, it is all
satis^ied in this: I go in his name, I am sure he has supply, I am sure he
is no stranger, I know he has deserved it, etc. Last of all, as he loves us,
and because we ask in the name of Christ, is ready to hear us: we will add
this, that he is ready to hear us for his own sake, he is a God hearing
prayer, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 65, 2.
that al flesh might come to him, even for this cause he hears, that men may
be encouraged to come and seek to him; for if the Lord should not hear, then
no flesh would come unto him; that is, men would have no encouragement, no
help; therefore he says, he is a God hearing prayer, doubt ye not, he will
do it for this purpose, that he might have men to worship him, that men might
come and seek unto him. Besides that, he shall be glorified, Thou shall call
upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me;
Psalm, 50* 15,
now the Lord is desirous of glory; it was the end for which he made the world.
But in not hearing our prayer, he loses this glory; by hearing our requests,
the more we are heard, the more glory and praise we render unto him. Like wise
he does it for the Spectators sake; Moses often presents that Reason, Lord
do it, What will the Heathen say? Exodus, 32.12.13.
and lest thy name be polluted among them, they will say thou have brought out
a people, and wast not able to deliver them. So David often, there are many
instances in that; I say, for the lookers on sake he is ready to do it. All
this is enough to persuade our hearts, that he is ready to hear us, that when
prayers are made to him on earth, (So the conditions be observed) they are
surely heard in heaven.

Use. 1.
Now to apply this: First, if the Lord be so ready to hear, then this should
teach us to be more fervent in this duty of prayer than commonly we are; for
to what end are such promises as this, but to encourage us to do our duties?
when we hear that prayer is of so much efficacy, that it prevails with the
Lord for any thing, shall we suffer it to lie by (as it were) and not make use
of it? If a drug, or a precious balm were commended to us, and it were told
us, that if we made use of it, it would heal any wound, it will heal any
sickness, and this and this virtue it has: Will a wise man suffer it to lie by
him, will he not use it, and see what virtue it has? And when it is said unto
us, that prayer is thus prevalent with the Lord, that it is thus potent, that
it is thus able to prevail with him for any thing, shall we not make use of
it, when we are in any distress, when we need any thing: when we have any
disease, either of soul or body to heal? Let us fly to this refuge that
himself has appointed. If a King of the earth should say to a man, I will be
ready to do thee a good turn, make use of me when thou have occasion; he
would be ready enough to do it. Now when the Lord of heaven says, ask what
you will at my hands, and I will do it; shall we not seek to him, and make
use of such a promise as this? Beloved we are too backward in this; we should
be more abundant in this duty than we are, we should make more account of it.
For whatsoever the case be, if you do but seek to the Lord, if thou do but
set down thy resolution with thy self: Well, I see it is a thing (if I look
upon the creature and the means) I have little hope of, but the Lord is able
to do it; and therefore I will go to him, I will weary him, and I will not
give him over, I will not give him nor my self any rest, till I have obtained
it: I say it is impossible thou should fail in such a case. Only remember
to be importunate, for an importunate suitor he cannot deny. You know the
parable of the unjust Judge. Luke 18, 2, 3, 4. Luke 11.7.
You know also the parable of the man that is in bed with his children; when
the widow was importunate, when she knocked and would give him no rest, he
gives her redress; the other rises and gives his friend as many loves as he
will, says the Text; yea though she were not his friend, (for this is the
meaning of it:) If, says he, the Lord had not much love to you, if he had not
such an affection, if you did not come to him in the name of Christ whom he
loves, in whom he is ready to grant whatsoever you ask, if he were not a
friend to you; yet for your very importunity, he is ready to do it. As the
unjust Judge (for that is the scope of the parable) he had no mind to grant
the widows request, he had no Justice in him to move him, he had no mercy
nor compassion, yet for very importunity he granted it. Remember and observe
the condition, for this is commonly a fault among us; when we go to prayer, we
think that the very putting up of the prayer will do it. No, there is more
required than so. As it is the error of the Country people, when they hear
say, that such an herb is good for such a disease, they are ready to think,
that (howsoever it be took or applied) it will heal the disease; No, it must
be applied in such a manner, it must be used in such a fashion. So it is with
prayer, you must not only do the duty (and therefore when we exhort you to
it, not only to call upon God, for men are ready enough to do that,
especially in the time of distress,) but with these conditions I have named. 2
King. 4, 29.31
You know Gehazi when he had got the staff of Elisha, he went to the Child,
but it was not the staff that could raise the child from death to life, there
was something more required. So in prayer, it is not mere prayer that will do
it, there is something else, there must be other conditions that must be
observed. For we are wont to do with it, as those Conjurers were wont to do
with the name of Jesus; they thought if they used the name of Jesus, it was
enough: but ye know what answer the Spirit gives them, Jesus we know, and Paul
we know, Act. 19, 15.
but who are ye? So I say, we are wont to do in this case, we think it is
enough to make our request, and that is all. No, there is somewhat more
required, you must make your request in such a manner as ye ought. Then I add
this further, that when thou make them in such a manner, yet thou must not
think to be heard for thy prayers sake: that is another thing we are apt to
fail in. When we have made fervent prayers, and have been importunate with
the Lord, we think now surely we shall not fail. No, you must know this, the
promise is not made to the prayer, but to the person praying. You shall not
find throughout the whole scripture, that any promise is made thus, because
we pray fervently we shall be heard: but it is made to the person praying,
the prayer is but the instrument, but the means by which the blessing is
conveyed to us, is a means without which the Lord will not do it, for the
promise is made to the party. A cold prayer (so there be no neglect in it, so a
man seek the Lord, and pray as well as he can,) it will prevail sometimes as
well as a fervent prayer: Who indites the petition, who makes the prayer
fervent? Surely not thy self, but the Holy Ghost: he makes request in us, Romans
8, 26.27.
sometimes he makes thee more fervent, he enlarges the heart more: sometimes
again the heart is more straightened in the performance of this duty: but both
may come from the same Spirit. Not but that we have cause of much comfort,
when we are able to pray fervently, for this is a ground of our comfort, that
when we pray fervently, it is an argument that the Holy Ghost dwells in our
hearts, and that our prayers are dictated by him; it is an argument, that our
prayers come from a holy fire within. And therefore fervent prayer may give us
hope of being heard, but yet it is not merely the prayer, but because it is an
evidence that it comes from a right principle, that it comes from the
regenerate part, and is made by the assistance of the Holy Ghost it is not the
very fervency that prevails. And therefore when you hear this, that the Lord
is ready to hear, I say make that use of it, be fervent in this duty,
remember the conditions: and yet withal know, that you are not heard for the
very prayers sake, but for Jesus Christ his sake. He makes every prayer
acceptable, he mingles them with his sweet odours.

Object.
And if you object, O but I am a man full of infirmities.

Answ
You know how it is answered in the Fifth of James, (says he) Eliah when he was
heard, he was a man, Iam. 5.17.
and a man subject to passions, and to the like passions that we are: As if he
should say, do not think that Eliah was therefore heard, because he was an
extraordinary Prophet, for it was because the Lord had made a promise to him,
and he comes and urges that promise to the Lord, and therefore the Lord heard
him. So (says he) should every one of you, if you have the promise, you may
go and urge it, as well as Eliah did: though you be subject to many
infirmities, Eliah was even so. You know there are infirmities and passions
expressed in the Scriptures that he was subject to. And this is the first use
we are to make of it, to be frequent and fervent in this duty, since we have
such a promise.

Secondly, if we have such a promise, then we should learn hence (when we
have put up our prayers at any time) to make more account of them than we do:
for the truth is, Use. 2.
that we pray for the most part for fashion sake, many a man says thus with
himself: I will seek the Lord, if it do me no good, it will do no hurt; but
if we made that account of our prayers as we should, we would perform this
duty in another manner; but we do not make that account of them as we ought.
We think not with our selves that the prayers that we make are surely heard*
there be many evidences of it; what is the reason, that when we seek the Lord,
we do it so remisly that we have scarce leisure to make an end of our
prayers: we are so ready to hasten and go about other business, we are ready
to turn every stone, to use all means to seek the creatures with all
diligence: but who prays to the Lord as he ought, to work his heart to such a
fervent performance of that duty as he should? men have scarcely leisure, for
it is usual with them when they have business to do, and enterprises to
bring to pass, they are exceeding diligent to use all means; and yet are
remiss in the chief: what is the reason else, that we see the doors of
Princes and great men so full of suitors, though there be porters set on
purpose to drive them away; but the gates of heaven are so empty? It is indeed
because we do not believe our prayers are heard, we do but make our prayers
for fashion. What is the reason likewise, that we use prayer in the time of
distress (if it will be an effectual means to help us, when all other
means fail,) why use we it not before? But that is an argument that we trust
not to it, seeing we use it, only in the time of extremity: for if it be not
effectual, why do we use it then? If it be effectual, why do not we use it
till that accident? Therefore this use we must further make, when we hear
that the Lord hears our prayers, to make more account of them than we do, to
think that our prayers when they are put up to the Lord shall be heard. Say
thus with thy self, Well, now I have prayed, and I expect that the thing
should be granted that I have prayer for, when I seek to the Lord. It Is true,
I deny not but we must use the means too, we must lay the hands upon the
plough, and yet pray; both ought to be done, as sometimes we use two friends,
but we trust one; we use two Physicians, but we put confidence in one of them:
In like manner we must both pray and use the means, but so as we put our
chief trust in prayer, it is not means that will do it. But the truth is,
we do the quite contrary: It may be, we pray and use the means, but we
trust the means, and not the prayer: that is a common and a great fault among
us, it is a piece of Atheism, for men to think the Lord regards their
prayers, no more than he regards the bleating of sheep or the lowing of oxen,
to think he heeds them not. And its a great part of faith to think that the
Lord harkens to them and regards them, as certainly he does.

Object.
But you will say, I have prayed, and am not heard, and have sought to the Lord,
and have found no answer.

Answ.
Well, it may be thou have not for the present, but have thou stayed the Lords
leisure? (for that is to be considered in this case,) sometimes the Lord comes
quickly, he gives a quick answer to our requests; sometimes he stays longer:
But this is our comfort, that when the return is longer, the gain is the
greater: ^s we see in trades, some trades have their return very quick, it
may be the tradesmens money is returned every week, but then their gain is so
much the lighter; but when their return is flower, as is your great merchants,
when it stays three or four years, we see the ships come home laden,
bringing so much the more: So (for the most part) when our prayers do stay
long, they return with the greater blessings, they return laden with rich
commodities. Let this be an encouragement to us Though I stay, the Lord will
grant it; and think not with thy self, I made such a prayer long ago, I
found no fruit of it; for be sure, the Lord remembers thy prayer, though thou
have forgotten it, the prayers that thou made a good many years ago, may
do thee good many years hence. May not a man pray to have his Child
sanctified, to have him brought to better order? It may be he lives many
years, and sees no such thing, yet in the end, the prayer may be effectual:
So likewise it may be in many cases, you see there are many examples for it:
Abraham prayed, he stayed long; but you see it was a great blessing that he
had, when he prayed for a Son, you know what a Son he was, he was a Son
of the promise, in whom all the nations of the earth were blessed. So David
when the Lord promised him a kingdom, he stayed long for it: Many such
examples there are. Therefore comfort thy self with this: though I stay long,
this is my hope, this is my encouragement, that sustaines me, If I seek the
Lord, and wait upon him, He will come with a great blessing, the gain shall
be heavier and greater, though the return be not so quick and sudden.

Use 3.
Last of all, when you hear such a promise as this, That whatsoever you ask
you shall be heard in it; you shall hence learn, to spend some time in the
meditation of this great privilege that the Saints have, and none but they;
This I propound to every man's consideration; that those that are not
Christians, that is, those that are not regenerate, may know what they lose by
it; and those that are, may understand the happiness of their condition, that
they may learn to magnify it, and to bless themselves in that condition, that
they have such a great privilege as this: It is no more but ask and have,
therefore that which in the third place I exhort you to, is this, namely to
spend time in the meditation of it, to consider what a great advantage it is;
David cannot satisfy himself enough in it: In 18. and 116. Psalms; Lord I
love thee dearly: he cannot praise enough, and why? I sought to thee in
distress, and thou heardest me; I called upon thee, and thou inclinedst thine
ear to my prayer. I say, consider this mercy as you ought to do, it is part
of the thanks we owe to the Lord for so an exceeding privilege, That
whatsoever our case be, it is no more, but put up our requests, and we shall
be heard. When there was a speech among some holy men (as you know that man
that was named in the story;) what was the best trade, he answered, Beggerie;
It is the hardest, and it is the richest trade. Now he understands it not, of
common beggary (for this is the poorest and easiest trade, that condition he
puts in) but (says he) I understand it of a prayer to God, that kind of
beggary I mean; which as it is the hardest, nothing more hard than to pray to
God as we ought, so withal there is this comfort in it, it is the richest
trade of all others; there is no way to enrich our selves so much, with all the
promises that belong either to this life, or to that which is to come: Even as
you see among men, a Courtier, a Favorite in the Court, get^ more by one suite,
(it may be,) than a Tradesman, or Merchant, or husband man gets with twenty
years labor, though he takes much pains; for one request may bring more
profit, may make a Courtier richer than so many years labor and pains: So in
like case a faithful prayer, put up to God, may more prevail with him, we
may obtain more at his hands by it, than by many years labor, or using many
means; and therefore it is a rich trade, and great privilege, a privilege
that we cannot think enough of, that we cannot esteem enough. You have heard
of a noble man in this Kingdom, that had a Ring given him by the Queen, with
this promise: that if he sent that Ring to her, at any time when he was in
distres, she would remember him and deliver him; This was a great privilege
from a Prince, and yet you see, what that was subject unto; he might be in such
a distress, when neither King not Queen could be able to help him; or though
they were able, (as she was in that case) yet it might be sent, and not
delivered: Now then consider what the Lord does to us. He has given us this
privilege, he has given us prayer, as it were this Ring, he has given us
that to use, and tells us whatsoever our case is, whatsoever we are,
whatsoever we stand in need of, whatsoever distress we are in, do but send
this up to me, (says he) do but deliver that message up to me of prayer, and
I will be sure to relieve you. Now certainly what case soever we are in,
when we send up this, it is sure to be conveyed, whersoever we are: Again,
whatsoever our case is, we send it to one that is able to help us, which a
Prince many times is not able to do. This benefit we have by prayer: That
whatsoever we ask at the Lord hands, we shall have it. Now consider this
great advantage which you have; It is expressed 4 Phil. in these words, Be in
nothing careful (says the Apostle:) And that you may see we have ground for
this generality, In nothing be careful, but in all things make your requests
known unto God. That is, whatsoever your case be, I make no exception at all,
but whatsoever you stand in need of, whether it concerns your souls or your
bodies, your name or your estate; yet be in nothing careful. This is a great
matter: There is none amongst you that hears me now, but sometime or other he
is careful of something or other, for which he is solicitous: Now when a man
hears such a voice from heaven, that the Lord himself says to us, Be
careful for nothing, do no more but make your request known, it is well
enough, I will surely hear in heaven, and grant it; It is a great comfort.
Beloved, comfort your selves with these words, and think this with your
selves, that this is that Charter, and great Grant that the Lord has given
you, and to none but you, that what prayers you make to him, he hears you.

Quest.
But it will be objected, why is this said so generally? That we must in
nothing be careful, but in all things make our request knowns? For then if a
man were but a poor man, it is but going to the Lord, and asking riches, and
he shall have them; If a man were sick of an incurable disease, it were no
more but going to the Lord, and he should be sure to be recovered; If a man
has an enterprise to bring to pass, it is no more but go to him, and it
shall be done: what is the reason then, that godly and holy men have not these
things granted to them?

Answ.
To this I answer, you must understand it with this condition, even as it is
with a Father (I will prove it to you by that,) suppose he should say to his
son, I will deny thee nothing, whatsoever I have, I will deny thee nothing
but thou shall have part in it; Though he say no more, yet we understand it
with these conditions.

may be excused, that he might be freed from it; In this Case, the father will
not hear him, for he knows the Child is but mistaken. On the other side; if
the Child ask something that is very hurtful, if he ask for wine in a
fever, the Father denies it him; No, (says he) you are mistaken, I know your
desire is that you might have health and recover, and this I know will hurt
you, though you know it not; This the Father understands, and therefore he puts
in that condition. So when the Lord says, In nothing be careful, but in all
things make your requests known: If you mistake the matter at any time, and
your prayer shall not be the dictate of the Spirit, (so that ye always make
request according to his will) but the dictate of your own hearts, and shall
be the expression of your natural Spirit, and not the Lords Spirit: In this
case there is no promise of being heard, and yet the Lord makes his Word good,
Be in nothing careful, but in all things make your requests known.

Father withholds the blessing that he will bestow upon his Child; not because
he is unwilling to bestow it, but because he would thus nurture his Child, he
uses it as a means to bring him to order: Numb. 20.21. Psalm. 106.32, 33.
So the Lord says to Moses, That because he had spoken unadvisedly, because
he had not honored him before the people, at those waters, the waters of
strife, therefore the Lord tells him by the Prophet, he should not go into the
good land: 2 Samuel 12.14
And so he tells David, that because he had sinned against him, he would not
give him the life of the Child: So the Lord says to us sometimes; I will not
grant you this request; for though I be willing to grant it, yet this is one
part of the discipline and nurture that I use to my Children, That such a
particular request, I will deny you for such an offense; as worshipping of
Idols, etc. Beloved this is not a general denial, and this is not for our
disadvantage, but it is a help to us, it makes us better, that sometime we
should be denied: knowing hereby that it is denied to us for our sin, that we
may learn to come to the Lord, and renew our repentance, and to take that
away, that we may come to prevail in our prayers with him.

and come in an unreverent manner, in such a case the Lord hears not.) Or
again, he will say to his child; I am ready to hear you, but you must not
ask in a negligent manner, as if you cared not whether you had it or no: So
the Lord says to us; I will have you to pray fervently, you shall ask it, as
that which you prize. Again he will say to his child: I am willing to bestow
this upon you, but I do not give you this money, to spend it amiss, to play it
away, to spend it in trifles, and geugawes, that will do you no good: So says
the Lord, I am willing to give you riches, but not to bestow upon your lusts.
Iam. 4.3.
Thus speaks the father to his child, when he comes to ask, he tells him he
must come in such a manner as becomes a child, he must speak to him as to a
Father, he must sp^^ke with confidence to receive it: So also the Lord tells us,
Iam. 1.6.
we must come in faith; So that (in a word) this is to be remembered; That
though the Lord promise, that he will give whatsoever we ask, and bids us, In
nothing be careful, but make our requests known; yet notwithstanding this,
he would have us to understand that our requests be made in such a manner as
they ought to be. Last of all, it may be the Father is willing to do it; but
he makes a little pause, he will not give it presently, and suddenly to his
child, though he purpose to bestow it upon him, that he may come by it with
difficulty; So the Lord uses to withold his blessings many times, that his


