A godly and holsom preseruatyue against disperacio^ at al times necessary for
the soul: but then chiefelye to be used and ministered when the devil does
assault us most fiercely, and death approaches nieste.

Be sobre, and watch, for your aduersarye the deuell as a roaring lion: walks
about, seking whom he may devour, whom resyste, steadfast in the faith 1 Pet.
5. M.D.L.I.

The preface.
This preservative (gentle reader) is prepared for thy profit: yt thou reding
it at leisure may chose out such comfortable sentences as may both stay
thy own conscience in ye time of te^ptacion: and also quiet othe^s when ye
Devil shall be busy with them. 2. Cor. 2
For we be not ignoraunte of ye thoughts of satan, how he continually
furnishes him self to bend his ordinance against man. And now with the
consideration of ye greatness and multitude of syn Now with the terror of death
and dampnacio^. Ephe. 6
do labor to beat ye buck let of faith out of our hands, 1. Tess. 5
to strike ye helmet of hope from our head. Ephr. 6
And to wrest from us the swerd of the spriit, which is gods word

But here christyan reader is thy swerd and buckeler delivered unto the, here
is thy helmete put upon thy head here thou shalt find such armoure and
weapon, wherbi thou shall both be able to withstand the force of our commen
enemy the Deuell: and also (by the counsel) to rescue others that they perysh
not, Yea hear you shall find choice of most comfortable sentences, whereby man's
conscience may be stayed from dampnable desperacion.

1. Cor. 16.
Watch therefore, stand steadfast in faith, play the man, and be of good
comfort. Jacob. 4.
Resist the deuell, and he will flee from the Not for fear of thy own power
strength or holiness: but for fear of Christ: in whom by faith thou art
ingraffed,. For it is crist through whom god has given ^. Cor. 15.
us vyctory against sin, death hell, and the devil. Acto. 4.
Nether is there any other name under heaven given unto man wherein we may be
saved, but the name of Jesus Christ our lord. To whom with the father, and
holy ghost, be all honor and glory. AMEN

A prseruatiue
FOrsomuche as ye diseases of the body and corporal death, does so trouble
man's mind, that we commonly trimble and quake at the only mencyon of them:
How much ought we to fear the sickness of the soul and death of the same, then
which, there can no greater nor more fearful calamity chance unto man.

And saying that every man does avoid (so much as in him lyethe) the pain,
myseryes, dyseases, and death of the body: how much more ought we to decline
and eschew, the causes of these euilles, which be sins and offenses, and
fear the ire of god, which we so (by our enormities) do provoke. If we be
never so little sick in our body, by and by we send for the phisycion, we spare
no cost we sike for medecines and remedy, though they be never so chargable,
and al to patch and clout up this earthen v^ssell of our body. which do we
never so much can not last long. And why use we not like dylygence in desiring
and seking remedies against the diseases of the soul which like as they be
more grievous eue^ so they bring with them (without comparison) infinitely more
danger. For what can it profit a man though he have all the riches in the
world, though he live a thousand year, and that in such health and pleasure,
that he is not ones touched with sickness or gryefe: his soul in the mean
time being poisoned with sin being captive to satan, having God displeased with
him, and dampnacion ready for him after this life. For truly this life must
once have an end nether know we when, where, after what manner, Math. 25.
or how sone.

Therefore says Christ watch for ye nether know the day nor hour when the son
of man will come And lest we this shorttime of our abode (omitting things
most waightye and profitable) should follow trifulles, and things of small
price: he has vouchesafe to prescribe us an order and as it were a breue,
certain and sure way: to come unto true felicite saying. Seek first for ye
kingdom of god and righteousness thereof: Math. 6.
and all things shall be added unto you. Care for living, care for riches, care
for worldly dignytie, worldly favor, worldly estimacion and such like
transitory things which in deed does little profitte but many times be cause
both of filthy vices and also of grievous calameties (does besy, does vex does
trouble, does eue^ defatigat us both day and night but in seking for and
procuring of godly and heavenly things: we be most negligent, most slack,
most dull most forgetful. And I pray you what can be a greter blindness or a
more dangerous madness? whiles we be lustye, whiles we be in health, whiles we
be in prosperity we scaselye think upon any life to come we remember not once
yt we shall dye, But when we be in perell, and danger by syckenes, and death
begins to knock at our door. Even at that same hour when we should play
the men and fight agnynst our enemy, being sufficiently armed and weponed
before) the^ begin we first to think upon our armoure to think upon our
wepon, to think upon mending of our life. These things declare us to be
smallye exercised soudiers to be me^ of preposterous judgment, and very
weaklings in faith. God be merciful unto us. Amen

But yet though a man be never so old though the day be never so far past, so
he amend whiles he is here, ear it be night, his repe^ta^ce comes not out of
season, Nevertheless it were to be wished, ye no man should differ his repentance
to his last and most dangerous conflict For eue^ they shall have much ado to
stand and to defend the^ selves from the assaults, ye guiles, and invasions of
the enemy which in ye time of their health prepared and armed them selves, what
then shall come of them which not fearing god neither minding once repentance
has led a dissolute filthy and naughty life? how shall they fight? how shall
they be able to wythstand the force of satan?

Saying therefore the multitude of people is great, and the ministers of the
gospel very few nether able to be every where to do their office to every man:
I having a will to help al men: have gathered to gether, and written out of
scriptur, a certain brief form how to admonish, instruct, and comfort such
as be sick, that they either reding these things, or hearing them red by
others: may conceive certain hope and perfect consolacio^, lest in this most
dau^gerus conflict they faint, give over like cowards, and so be ouercomed and
perysh: For this is certain, when soever a man is taken with extreme sickness and
is in danger of death, he is assauted with diverse many, and grievous tentacions.
First it is a grievous and vehemente tentacyon, when he sees the most terrible
image of death before his eyes, when he sees he must leave this light, leave
this life, leave friends, leave lands, goods, kynfolkes father, mother, wife,
childern, all things wherein he had here either pleasure or comfort. Then such
sins as be against the will and pleasure of god has committed shall show
and present them selves, and shall appear more in nu^bre, and more grievous then
ever they seemed before, and so shall wonderously vex and torment the conscience.
Then death, judgment, hell, dampnacyon as it were in a plumpe, shall assault
and lay sege with diverse dangerous engens against the old man of ours.

In these Agonies, except a man be armed with a sure and constant faith: it is
to be feared, lest he be weried, tired and at last ouercommed. For these
tentacious which chance unto men lyeng in extremes: appear most houge fearful
and daungerouse, and that for because our faith is very slender, and
waueringe, nyether yet able to see, perceive or apprehend, the incomprehe^syble
and inestimable riches of the children of god, which be remission of sins
through Christ, resurreccion of the flesh, communion of saynctes, everlasting
life and all these given unto us in Christ and for Christ.

In these articles of our faith we must daily exercise our selves.

These we must diligentli reuolue and earnestly expend in our minds. For
though all the artycles of our faith are diligently to be remembered and
without al waueringe believed: yet in the Agonye and point of death these
four (that is) the communion of saynctes, remission of sin, by ye blood of
Christ, the resurrection of the flesh, and everlasting life: are chiefly to
be minded expended, and inculcated.

For like as death is the pain and stipend of sin: Romans 6.
even so for sin God does commenly punish us with diverse diseases and
plages, As it is to be seen i^ diverse places of scryptur. Io. v. Psa. 88. Deuteronomy
xxviii.ii. Reg. xxiiii

Nevertheless afflictions be many times laid upon us that our faith may be
tried: For than is it easy to be perceived how much we love GOD, what faith
we have in him, how we trust him, when we be pressed and greuyd with aduersytie.
In this case therefore we must bewail and acknowledge our sins for the which
we have iustlye incured Gods displeasure, and deserved most grievous pain, We
must turn to god with true repentance in all our heart and mind without all
faynynge and conterfating, we must have recourse unto the Gospel where we
shall find most bountiful co^solacio^. i, absolucio^ or remissio of our sins
which christ has instituted i^ ye church Io. xx, Receive (says Christ) the
holy ghooste whose si^nes ye forgive they ar for given. This inestimable
treasur is daily opened and offered unto us When remission of sins is thus
desire, and optayned: undoubtedly the^ ye pain of sin which is the disease or
affliccion shall sone cease and leave us, or else according to the most
beneficial will of our heavenly father: shall turn to the profit and soul
health of him that is diseased or afflicted, For this may we be sure of, that
the pain and affliccion in the body in this world (seem it n^uer so grievous a
bourden or heavy yoke to the flesh) as comenlye nothing else but a fatherly
rod, wherwyth god does draw us his children from sin, Psalm. 88.
and call us home to him, Truly our heuynly father does love us most
feruentlye, he bears us good mind, Heb. xii.
and does all things, for our amendmente and profit for whom GOD louethe,
him he chastisethe, and correctythe us temporally here: ^. Cor. 11.
that we should not be punished in hell everlastingly. Though he semith angry:
he louith singulerlye. Nether is his Ire the Ire of a tiraunt or torme^tour
desirynge our perdycion: but of a father ^eking our ame^dement and sauftly
First therefore we must cry God mercy desire pardon and forgeuenes of our
sins (but by Christ, but with a heart truly penetente) that we may be at one
with God and have him merciful unto us This done we may then desire GOD to
deliver us from ye Imminente and present affliction and disease For so teaches
ecclesiast. Ecclesi. ^.
Son in thy infermitye neglecte not thy self, but pray to the lord: and he
shall deliver the. Also in the Ps. Psalm. 70
remember not o lord god our old iniquites but let thy mercy spedely prevent
us: for we be very miserable, help us God our savior. Lord God of power
turn us how long will thou be angry? show thy face and we shall be saved,
Here we be taught first to desire remyssion of sin that we may so be at one
with God: and after that to have his wrath, and the tokens of ye same taken
away. But when so ever we desire to be delivered or to be eased of ye cross
that presses us we must always annexe this addicion. Mar. vi
Thy will (o heuenlye father) be fulfilled. Neither know we so well what is
profitable unto us. Nether ca^ we so well provide for our selves as our most
loving heavenly father Which is both of infinite power and also of
incomprihensible wisdom which never turns his eyes from us, which carries
continually for us which knows the number of our years, which does quicken,
norish, feed, keep, defend provide for all his creatures much beter then they
can wish or desire. But to draw to the more particular temptacions, and to
show what things do most fierlly ^ daungerously at the time of death assault
us. And how we shall wtsta^d the^.

There be three things, which at the hour of death does wonderously vex
trouble, and fear our minds (that is to say) sin, death hell or dampnacion.
Syne
WHerten we have ungodly myspent our life, whereby we have greuosly offended
God and our neighbor: This coming to our remembrance when we lie upon our
death bed, does drive us to a wondrous fear, Romans ii
pensiuenes, and anxiety. As saint paul says, wrath indignacion to trouble
and anguishe against every loule of man that does evil.

A medicine against sin vexing and troublynge our conscience.
LEt us call earnestly to remembrance that the son of god came down from
heaven, became man, took up on his back the sins of the world, died for them
upon ye cross, there making satisfaction for us and paing our dettes. This
most precious blod of christ was shed also for us, and of this death we be
also partakers so we right lie believe in Christ Nether need we to doubt but
Christ died as well for us, as for Peter and Paul: Romans 6.
For we be baptized also (as saynct Paul says) in the death of christ. This
ought to comfort, us this ought to erect and stay our minds. For saying we be
baptized in the death of christ, Chistes death bryngethe also unto us health
and salvation. By Chrysts death we be also dead to sin: by Christ's death we
have also certain and sure remission of our sins, by christ's death we be
raised also to a new and everlasting life. For baptyme is a couenand betwixt
god and us. And a sign of his grace and favor toward us wherein we be
reconciled and made at one with god again, so that we may now have a joyful
and quiet conscience, for so much as our sins be forgiven us through the
resurrection of Jesus christ, yea christ also in the institucion of the most
blesed sacrament of his last supper speaks also to us saying, yt his blood is
shed for the remission of sin. Now although we have not lived always
innocentlye nether led such a life as we ought to have done: Yet we may not
despair, but without delay resort unto god, by true repentance, call
faithfully upon his name, and we shall be saved. Romans x
Ye let every one of us with a meke heart burst out into these, or like words
and say O most mercyful god, father of al mercy, father of our LORD Jesus
Christ, be merciful unto me a wretched sinner, make speed to deliver me, for
the most bitter (but most precious) death, and passion of Jesus Christ thy
only begotten son, our redemer, and only savior: Amen. Enter not (o lord)
into judgment with thy servant, handle me not according to my deseruyng,
neither do unto me after my iniquities: but according to thy infinite and
botomles goodness and mercy take me unto the. I a miserable and wretched
creature am in thy hand I am in thy debt and danger thou may do with me what
it please the. O most merciful father forsake me not, nor cast me of. I am
thine all that I am, There can no man comfort, no man help no man deliver me,
but you alone. Thou art the true comfort, the most present help the surest
bulwark in all necessite. Thou god art my refuge, my strength, my help in all
troubl^. Thou art my Lord in thy hands rests al my chance and affairs.
Show thy louinge and merciful face upon thy servant, save me in thy mercy O
lord: but many ways in our extreme sickness and affliction let us beware we
look not to earnestly nether to long upon our sins. But rather let us have
the image of Christ's most helthfull and precious death before our eyes. Let us
fix that in our mind and be full persuaded that Christ is now bourdened with
his sins, that he has now taken them upon his own shoulders and so has
satisfied for them and washed them away that he will never charge us with the^
but frelye for geaue us them as we profess in our Creed, when we sai Credimus
remissione^ peccatorum, we believe the remission of sins.

Here it shall be mete that in our syckenes we call to remembrance such places
of holy scripture as testifies of remission of sin purchased by Christ of
the which some be here subscribed.
Ioh. i.
BEhold ye la^be of God which takith away the sin of the world.

We are bought with no gold nor silver, i. Pet. i
nether any corruptible price, but with the precious blood of the unspotted and
undefiled lamb Jesus Christ.

So god has loved the world that he gave his only begotten son to the end
that we so beleuynge in him does not peryshe but have life everlasting Io. iii


I come not to call the righteous but the sinners to repentance. Mat. ix
Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden and I shall refresh you, Lo he
calls all, Mat. xi
he refuses he excludes none, we must includ also our selves within his words

All we must resort to him, and he will receive and reffeshe us,

God sets forth his love toward us: For Christ died for us, Romans v
when we were yet sinners, much more now therefore we being justified by his
blood shall be sauffe from wrath by him.

i. Cor. i
Christ Jesus is be commed unto us wisdom, righteousness, holiness and redempcio^.
Here let us confort our selves yt though we have be never so great sinners, let
us confess and knowledge our sin let us call for mercy and pardon, let us
unfeignedly believe christ to be our only health Justice, and rede^pt on: and
straight way he is so, he will by and by cover and put away our sins in such
sort yt we shall need fere no peril nor danger

ii. Cor. v
Him that knew no sin, has god made sin.i. a payment of sin for us, that
we should beco^e the righteousness of god by him. Gal. i


Christ gave him self for our sins that he might deliver us fro this
present wicked world acording to the will of god our father

In Christ we have redemption through his blood, Ephe. ^
even the remession of sins according to ye riches of his grace.

Christ Jesus is come in to this world to save sinners i. Tit. i


Christ Jesus has given him self a redempcio^ for all me^. i. Tit, ii
This let us constantly believe undoubted we be of ye nombre of those yt shall be
saved. For when he is come a redemption for all, these things ye he has
suffered pertayneth no less to the and me and every one of us (so we believe)
than to Peter or Paul Christ has borne our sins in his body upon the
cross. i. Pet. ii


Christ died ones for our sins ye ryghteous for ye unrighteous. i. Pe.. ii.
The blood of Jesus christ cleanses us from all sin. i. Joan. i


If any man does sin we have a advocate with the father eue^ Jesus i. Joan ^i
Christ the ryghteouse and he is ye attonemente for our sins: Not for ours
only: but for the sins of the whole world.

By these places and such like we may se how god the father (which will not
the death of a sinner, but that we should turn and live) for that most
feruente burning love that he bears toward us has eased us of the burden of
our sin, and has laid it upon ye back of his most dear beloved son. which
his son has so taken, borne and suffered for them: that they can never
condemn us. For god takes and reputeth the death of his son for a full
satisfactyon and payment for all our sins, so that we truly believe in him: For
seeing that our sins thus laid upon Christ could not overcome him, retain him
in death, nor da^pne him (for why he rose again) undoubtedly a full
satisfaccion is alredye made for them, the justice of god is fully answered,
and they be utterly hid and forgeuen. Let us believe this and we shall not
perysh everlastingly. For christ is now become ours, with all that he has with
his death, with his resurrection, with his assencion into heaven, with his
life, Qui proprio filio suo non sepercit.
his merits his glory. As saint Paul witness. Romans viii. wherefore Satan
has now no title to us, he can not meddle with us, he has no power to hurt
us. For So Much as we be justified by christ purged from our sins and made the
children of god by Christ who has reconcyled us and wrought our peace, we must
therefore be of good comfort. For saying we be in the hands of god, that is
omnipotent, who is now our best most loui^g and trusty father we be in a
sureporte, we be without danger, there ca^ no incommodity nor adversity hurt us
for we be environed with the custodi of god and the guard of angels, out of the
hands of this heavenly father can no creature by force pluck us When we be at
an end by death of this cross and corporal afliction then have we ended our
journey, then have we fynyshed our war: Christ has borne the same cross
Christ has passed the same way, he has suffered like death, he is our
head we must be like to him we m^st suffer with hi^ if we intend to raygn with
him we must leave this corporal life ere that we can enjoy life everlasting.
Let not our sins trouble us: let them not tormente our conscience, as
though they could not be forgeuen. They are already forgeuen, if we repent and
believe: Christ is al ours as much as he is. He by his innocence has covered
and taken away our sins. As Christ can not be dampened, even so we can not be
dampened, if with a right faith, we cleave unto him. As sin, death, and hell,
had no power against Christ so have they no power against us so we be in
Christ, and Christ in us. If the matter had be left and committed to us to
have borne our own sins and to have satisfied for them, they would have be
to heavy for us, we had not be able to stand under them they would have pressed
and sunk us down to hell. But christ both god and man has (of his own
free will) offered him self for us. he has taken our turn, he has played
our part, and paid for us all that we ought. As it is in the Psalm spoken in
the person of christ, I paid that I ought not, We had trespased, we were ye
detters, so far behind hand, that all that was in us, was not able to pay ye
lest so^me we ought. Christ became our suerty, paid for us acquitted us, and set
us at liberty yea, made us coheires with him of everlasting glory

If it were possible for one man to commit the sins of the whole world, so
he truly repent and cleave by true faith to Christ he can not be dampened,
his sins be sufficiently and abunda^tly by Christ satisfied for. For Christ
(as touching his godhead one in substance with the heavenly father As touching
his man head our very flesh and blood (has purchased and truly boughte
grace and pardon for us. For Christ be came man for us, was borne for us died
upon ye cross for us, rose from death for us, ascended into heaven for us, and
has accomplyshed and performed all things mete for our salvation for us. If
therefore we believe in christ we are beco^e partakers of Gods favor we are eased
of the pack and bourde^ of sin, we are made the heirs of god and coheiris
with Christ for ever, and that by christ and for christ. For without Christ
there is no consolacion on health no hope no help. In Christ alone is all
comfort, all health, all hope, all succoure* all refuge all grace and mercy
more habundant more ple^teous, more excele^t than any man is able either to
comprehend or to wish. God grant us therefore a true and a constant faith. In
this form or in like sort we most comfort our selves in our sickness or
calamitye, and our brother being visited. But in any wais and with all
dilygence it is to be foreseen, yt we wythdrawe our mind from the fearful
and terryble contemplacyon of sin, death, and damnacyon. And that we fix
these of our mind and whole thought upon christ only, ye we cleue unto him,
that we call upon him, yt we commit our self wholly to him. For in christ we
shall epsy nothng but innocence, justice, life, salvation which al be derived
from Christ into us, so that we will acknowledge him, and receive him for ye
author of our salvation and only redemer, if we have christ crucified before our
eyes: if we imprinte him in our heart, if we flee to him with out fath: if we
wholly clyue to him Then shall hell gates nothing prevail against us, then shall
we be able to wythsta^d all the forcible assaults of Satan, though they be
never so sore, never so fierce, never so terrible.

Let us call to remembrance with what lenity, what ge^tilnes, what humanity,
what clemency Christ (as it is in ye evangelical history) has called unto him
and receued al such sinners as has repented them and desired his help. We
shall find Mary Magdalen, the sinner that honge upon the right hand of christ
crucified, the publicane, zache, with other mo who^e Christ most louyngly
receiuinge pronounced clear from sin, (though they had sinned greatly) and
the chyldern of salvation, christ is very grace, mercy, help, comfort, life,
joy, and salvation to al those which look for these things at his hands: and
put their trust in him And all these things has God (who is truethe it self
and can not lie nor will not deceive) promised unto us for christ's sake.

Fynallye when death approaches we must do as Christ did upon the cross, Mat.
vi
we must pray for our enemies and forgeaue them with our heart. If we have
offended any man we must be heartily sorry for it, we must desire forgeuenes. if
we have injured any man, we must make him amends, or take such order that
amends may he made unto him, if ^t passes our power to make restytucyon and
amends: it shall be enough that we desire forgeuenes. And with our hearts
forgeaue others which has hurt us either 11. name, body sub^^ance or
estimacion. For if we truly forgive: god has promised we shall be fyrgeuen as
it is in the syxt of Matthew.

It is very necessary also and profitable for the confirmacion and
strengthening of our faith to receive the most blessed sacrament of the body
and blood of our savior christ which we are comanded to receive in
remembrance of his benefytes, that hereby, we may be truly sertyfied in our
conscience his body to be given for us, and his blood to be shed for remission
of our sins.

Death
OF our flesh and fraill nature is so ferd and abhorted yt when he approaches,
man's heart is filled and laden with such sorrows, panges, and anxieties as tongue
is not able to express.

A medicine against the fear of death.
WE must call to our remembrance death to be ouercomed and abolyshed by
Christ. So that now the souls of so many as trust in Christ, ca^ not die nor
peryshe: but departing from the body goes straight to Christ For thus was it
said to the thief at his hour of death. This day shall thou be with me in
paradise The body though it rest and pause for a while yet we be in certain
hope that at the last day it shall be raised again to immortal and everlasting
life. And therefore scripture calls the death of the body but a sleep, for yt
this same frail, weke, vile, mortal and corruptible body, which we carry
about, which lies sick and sore diseased, which shortly shall be put into the
earth, burn to ashes, devoured with bestes or fools, drowned in water, ye same
self bodi (I say) shall be raised again incorruptible, glorious, bewtifull,
strong, pure immortal to possess a new and everlasting life: i. Cor. xv
where there shall neither be hunger, thirst, heat cold, sin, death nor any
kind of calamity, but justice, innocencye, life, joy bless, world without
end. For as the body of Christ laid in the grave rose again the third day
never more to dye, eue^ so shall the bodies of al ye believe in christ at the
latter day be resuscitate to a life, after which shall follow no death. God
who is of infinite power and infallible truth has promised these things, they
must therefore needs be so. And here it shall be profitable to call to
remembrance such places of scripture as treats of the ressurection of the
flesh, which be the words not of man but of god, who is able and will certeynly
fulfill what soever he has spoken. No man can change his will, no man can
alter his purpose. No creature can frustrate let or tarry his sentence. He is
omnipote^t, he is true, he is faithful, his goodness and mercy is inexpicable.
Let no man therefore doubt of the truth of his words let no man doubt of the
performau^ce of this promise.

Here after follows certain places of scripture witnessing the resurrection
of the dead according to the article of our faith wherein we say we believe
that this flesh shall rise again.
Joan, vi
THis is the will of my father which sent me, yt who soever seith ye son and
believes in hi^ shall have life ever lasting and I will raise him up again in
the last day. Johan. v


The hour comes wherein all they that be i^ the graves shall here the voice of
the son of god and shall go forth they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life. For if so be that the spirit of him which raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you: Romans vi.i.
even he that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies because of his spirit that dwells in you. i. Cor. vi


God has both raised up our Lord Jesus Christ and shall also raise us up by
his power. Johan. xi


Christ says Lazarus was but a sleep where in very deed he was dead and
buried. But Christ is the resurrection and life (as it is in the same place) so
that he that believes on him thought he were dead he shall live, In verefienge
whereof he raised strayghte way Lazarus being four days dead and stynkynge.
And because we be naturallye in the agonye of death virye fearful, weak and
faintherted: to the end yt we might be the easelier persuaded in the article of
resurrection: Scripture makes mention of many which in the time of the
prophets Christ and thappostles were called from death to life.

Luc. vii Luc. i.
Christ raised the widows son

He raised the ruler of the sinagoge his daughter.

Johan. xi Act. ix
He raised Lazarus.

Peter restored to life Tabitha.

Act. xx 4. Reg. iiii.
Paul raised again Eutichus

Elizeus the prophet called again to life his hosts son

4, Re. xvii.
Helias raised the babe of ye woman of Sareptanie.

God took also unto him out of this frail and transitory life, Genesis v. 4. Reg.
ii.
these two excellent and holy men enoch and Helias quick both body and
soul, to give us (as it were) a taste and representation of the true life to
come, lest after the opinion of ye ethnickes and epicures we should think
there were no world, nor being after this wretched and miserable life. Let us
not forget what christ Jesus lord of life, and death, says in ye.viii. of
Luke, weep not the maid is not dead but a sleep. Reason not co^prehe^ding ye
misteryes of god, nether perceiving his pooer does laugh this sai^g to scorn,
but crist proves his sai^g true, he raises by and by ye dead maid to life.
The.xv. chapter of ye first epistle to the Corin. is replenished with most godly
pleasant and pithy consolations. Truly it is more precious than any gold.
For in that Chapit. saint Paul does so annexe and couple our resurreccion
to the resurrection of christ as though they could in no wise be separate or
divided after this form. Christ is risen from death (which thing is certain)
ergo (...) also shall undoubtedly rise. For christ is our head and we his
members: This head is nether without, nether will forsake his members. The^ it
follows that where christ is, there shall we be. For why, we are the members
of his body and even of his flesh and bone, Ephe. v
what tongue, what pen, what wit is able to set forth (as it is worthy)
this ineffable, and inestimable glory of the mercy and grace of god, ye God
has vouchsafe so low to humble himself as to become mortal man that this
feeble and frail nature or man united and knit to the divine nature by the
power and ^fficacie of the godhead, might be in haunced and promoted to
immortality. For truly the nature of al faithful men which, either were
before christ has be sens, at now or shall be to the worlds end: undoubtedly
in christ very god and man has optained immortallity The consolacion therefore
ye rises of christ's resurrection is of great efficacitie. As when saint
Paul says to the Corinthians: i. Cor. xv.
Christ is risen again from dead, and is the first fruictes of them yt sleep
for by one man truly came death and by one man comes the resurrection of ye
dead. And as al die in Adame even so shall all be made alive in christ but
every one in his order. The first is christ. The^ they which are christ's which
has believed in his coming. And saint Paul does add a similitude taken of
natural things whereby he does set forth and declare the resurrection of
bodies. The symilitude is taken of sede which is cast into the earth by the
husbandman dies as it were and rotteth. Never the less it is not utterly
lost but at lenght spryngeth and comes forth of ye earth, goodlye,
beautyful and pleasant. So our bodies shall rise again not feeble, vile,
corruptyble, mortal: but strong glorious incorruptible, immortal never to die
again but ever to live

The wai into true and everlasting life to our long home, as they call it,
and country is by corporal death. Flesh and blood being corruptible and
mortal cannot inherit ye kydgdo^ of god where nothing is but life. Therefore
this corruptible bodi must put on i^corrupcio^, Oze. xiiii. Esa. xxv,
and this mortal must put on immortality. Than shall the saing that is written
be fulfilled, Death is swalowed up in victory. They that believe in Christ has
now ouercommed sin, death, and hell. Therefore not fearinge death but
strong, hold, and well hearted in Christ: they may say death where is thy
sting? death where is thy victory? The stinge of death is sin, and the power
of sin is the law. But thanks be unto God which has geauen us the
victory through our lord Jesus Christ.

Let us hear also more sentences full of godly and mighty consolacion.

He that has raised up Jesus shall raise us up also with Jesus ii. Cor iiii
Our conuer^acion is in heaven from whence we do look for the savior our lord
Jesus christ which shall change our vile body yt it may be like fashioned unto
his glorious body according to the workynge of his power, Philli. iiii
by the which also he is able to subdue al things unto him self.

Ye are dead and your life is hid with christ in god, Col. iii.
but when christ your life shall appear then shall ye also appear in glory with
him.

We would not brethern) that ye should be ignorant concerning them that sleep,
i. Tess. iiii
that ye sorrow not also as other do which have no hope. For if we believe that
Jesus christ died and rose again: even the^ also which are a sleep through
Jesus shall god bring with him.

Saynct Paul also does comfort Timoth ii. Tim. ii.
with the article of resurrection sayng. R^membre ye the lord Jesus Christ
being ^he sede of David rose again from ye dead according to my gospel. And if
we be dead with him we shall also live with him. If we suffer pacie^tly we shall
also reign with him.

It was written also to ye hebrus Heb. ii
that Christ tasted death for all men, and that he was partaker of flesh and
blood.i. became very man ye he might destroy him which had the rule of death
(that is) the deuell, and that he might deliver them which were in bondage al
their life time by the reason of the fear of death.

God has delivered us, ii. Tim. i
and called us with an holy calling not according to our works but according to
his purpose and grace which is geauen us in Christ Jesus before the time of
the world but is now made manifest by the apperinge of our savior Jesus
Christ which truly has destroyed death and has brought life and immortalite
to light, by the gospel.

i. Ioh. iii
We know that we are translated from life to death because we love the
brethren.

John. 41
In this has the love of god appeared in us, because god sent his only
begotten son into the world yt we might live through him.

Job. xix
I know that my redem er does live, and in the last day I shall rise again,
and again be wrapped in my own skine. And in my own flesh shall see God,
whom I my self shall se and these my eyes shall behold and none othere

These places of holy scripture and such like, if we diligently remember and
faithfully embrace: we shall perceive greaet consolacion and conforte And even
with sayncte Paul rejoice, Phil. iii.
that we know Christ and the power of his ressurection, whereby death is
ouercomed. Nether is there now (to these that believe in Christ) any thing in
death terrible or to be feared, sauinge only the Image and outward form,
hurt it can not. Like as a deed serpente keapeth still his old fearful shape
and form: but to stynge or do harm he has no power at al. And like as by
the brasin serpente which Moses by gods commandment set up in deserte
when it was looked upon through the power of gods word men were delivered
from^ danger of the lyuelye and venyme serpents so our death is made harmles
and we delivered from the fear and danger of it, so often as with the eyes of
our faith we do behold the helthefull and medycynable death of Christ. In
conclusion death is now become but a Image and shadow of death, yea the
entrau^ce and gate to life. For Christ who is truth it self says, If any man
keep my word, Job. viii.
he shall never see death, For a man trusting to the mercy of God, through
faith, which he conceauith by herynge of Christ's gospel: is so unite and
knyt to christ his lord and master, that he can not be plucked nor separate
from him.

The body in deed for a time is separate from the soul but in certain hope
of risinge again to everlasting life. And so he that beleuethe in Christ does
not see nor feel the everlasting death of body and soul, which is everlasting
dampnacion, For the death of good men is nothing else but a departure from this
transitory and mortal life: to immortality to christ, to his angels and
saints.

Hell and dampnacion.
Does offer it self at ye hour of death, so that many times man does greatli
fear lest he be abiecte from the favor of god and appointed to everlasting
pain The devil (which seeks by all means how to devour us) sterynge up in
your minds many dangerous and troubellous thoughts concerning our electyon
and predestinacion.

A medicine against the fear of hell and dampnacion.
WHen the devil goes about to cause us to dyspaire or to doubt of our
election: whether we be of the number of them that are appointed to everlasting
life or no, In any ways let us not be to boulde in copynge with him, let us
not enter dysputacyon against him (for he is to subtyle and expert for us) but
say shortly unto him. Away Satan with sorrow, it is written, thou shalt not
tempt the lord thy God. For seeing that god as a most loving father has not
only geauen us life. fed and preseruyd us, to this hour: but also has
endued and even laden us from time to time with his singular benefits, what
madness were it contrary to our former experyence, now to doubt of his mercy?
He has receauyd us into his flock by baptime. He has sent us the Gospel
of his grace, wherein he has promised to become our father. We have he fed
with the flesh and blood of his son our savior CHRIST in remembrance
that our debtes be paid and we acquyted, why should we now then doubt of
the good will of GOD toward us? let us not therefore admytte the doutfull and
dangerous Imagynacyons of our predestinacion which the deuell like a crafty
and malicious merchant does labor to iusti^l. But let us think upon such
sentences as God would have our minds occupied with all, which Christ him
self has prescribed, as John. iii, where he sayethe. GOD has so loved the
woorlde, that he has given his only begotten Son that who so ever
believes in him shall nor perish, but have life everlasting. Loo here we see
that he which believes in Christ, which faithfully acknowlegeth christ to be
his sanctificacyon, justice redempcyon and satisfaccion: can not be dampened,
but is assured of everlasting life. So many as conceive faith by bearing of
Gods lord: and so trust steadfastly upon the mercy of christ Undoubtedly
they be of the number of those which be chosen to everlastyng bliss, known
before in CHRIST predestinate. and written long sith in the book of life.
These things be most certain and most true, God can neither deceive nor be
deceived. Romans viii.
Such is his good will, so has he purposed and decreed before the world
began, what things so ever therefore our ennemy the deuell (spytinge our
salvation, and seeking our destructyon) shall put in our mind contrary to this
doctrine. Let them not move us, let them not make us afraid, but let us
trust truly in christ: and so shall he be come ours, and we become his, who
being our good LORD, we can mot perish nor be dampened. Io. x
For he will lose none of those that his father has given him, we must fyxe
our eyes upon Christ, we must flee to him, we must cleave to him. He is
our only and true sauyoure, who must be apprehended and embraced by faith,
if we look to be saved. For they that believe rightly in Christ they are
predestinate to everlasting life. Here we must diligently remember and
earnestelye expende the godly exhortacion of saint Paul which he writes in
the.xii. to the Hebrews, whose words be these Let us run by pacyence unto
the battle that is set before us, He. xii.
lokynge unto Jesus, the auctore and finisher of faith, which when the joy
was set before him, suffered the cross, and despised the shame, and sits at
the right hand of the seat of God.

Furthermore all the grievous temtacyons and afflictyons that Ch^yste suffered,
he suffered them for our sakes. Heb. iiii
As saint Paul says also in the.iiii. to the hebrus we have not a high
priest yt is not able to have compassyon on our weakness: but such one was
prouyd in all points without sin let us therefore with bouldnes go unto the
seat of his grace, that we may o^tayne mercy and find grace to help in time
of need Let us in any ways consider and deplye imprinte i^ our hearts, christ to
be geuin unto us, not only to thend yt we might be redemid, reconciled and
made partakers of everlasting salvation: but also yt i^ him we might have an
example, both how to live, and also how to end our life. Nether can any man
live, suffe^r or dye well: unless he look upon and follow the life, suff^rynge
and death of Christ, if therefore we desire to end this life well and godly:
let us consider and remember how Christ behaved him self in that bitter and
smarte agonye, when hangyng upon the cross, he was assaulted with diverse
fyersse and most grievous temtacyons, and pray that we may have grace to follow
his example.

FIrst he was temptyd with syn when being hanged betwixt two thieves as a notable
and heinous sinner: it was said unto hi^ if thou beist the son of God, ^at.
xxvii.
come down from the cross. By this co^tumelious voice what do they signifye
else, but that they judged him a noughtie and ungodly person, such one as by
craft subtiltye, falsheade, sosserye, and other unlawful means had deceived
the people, had blinded the world, and to be nothing less then the son
of GOD.

Even in like manner at the hour of death does the devil tempte man, what
soever man has committed against god, all the sins that ever he did, he
shows unto him, he does exaggerate them to the vttermoste, to the end that the
multitude and hainousnes of the^ considered and perceived manne should doubt
of the mercy and favor of god, and, so fall into desperacion. Here we had
need to stand sure. And every one of us had need to answer our enemy, thus
temptinge us after this manner I knowledge mi self to have sins above all
number, and measure but Christ, who never sinned in whose mouth was found no
guile, who is that very innocent lamb, has suffered death for my sins,
he has washed them away, he has satysfied aboundantlye for them, Esaias.
iiii.
how many and how great so ever they were, Christ's death partayneth also
to me he was wounded also for my iniquities, he was bruised for my
vngracyousenes, by his strypes I am also healed. All my sins has Christ
taken to him self, so that now I have none (thanks be to CHRIST) who has
satysfyed for them in his own body.

CHRIST was tempted also with death, when it was said unto him: Math. ^7.
he has saved other, but he can not save himself. (As thought it should
be said he) is now at appoynte, he must dye, there is no remedy, he can not
escape. Thus does our old and erreconcyble ennemy labor to fear us with
death but let us hold out the buckeler of faith in Christ against him Let us
remember that Christ our Lord, king of glory, and prince of life, could not
be over commed nor holden of death, but though he once tasted of death: he
now lives and raygneth for ever. This lord of ours will not leave us, nor
suffer death to execute any tyranny against us, that after he has suffered us
to be tempted a while he will also that we dye corporally: all that is wholly for
our wealth.

Neither could we other ways come to everlasting life but by temporal
death. We must therefore leave this present life ere we can inherit the
eternal life. Also this corporal death bringethe this comoditie that by
tastynge the bitterness and sowernes of it: we have experyence and know the
exceeding love that Christ bare toward us, and the inestyma^le benefit yt he
did for us in clensyng our sins, in abolysshynge of death, in breakinge up of
hell gates, and al by his death.

Other ways we could never have known the power of christ in abolishing of
death, we could never have justly esteemed the excellency of these benefit, we
could never have seen how just cause we have to give thanks to christ our
Lord and redeamer. Christ living truly, we shall also live. and this corporal
death to us shall be nothing else but a sweet and wholesome sleep, an intraunce
and gate into the true and blessed life. For after this transitory life the^
begin we first truly to live.

THirdli christ was tempted with hell, or everlasting damnation, wha^ it was said
unto him he has trusted in GOD let him, now deliver him if he will. As though
they should say. Now it appearethe yt he has hoped in God in vain. For god
will none of him, he has forsaken him, he likethe him not, he does abhor
him, he will cast him down to hell and perpetually co^dempne him. When
therefore the temptor shall lasche at us with ly^e temptacyons, we may not
shrink, we may not be afraid, w^ may not be dyscoraged but commend our self,
wholly to CHRIST, hang upon him who is wholye ours, who has given him self
wholly to us, so that sin, death, nor hell, has no thing to do with us.
Christ with a inestimable price, his own blood has deliueryd us from the
tyranny of the devil, and everlasting dampnacio^, he is become our innocence,
our life, and our justice. Let us take heed in any ways that we turn not our
hearts from CHRIST, crucified. If we cleue to him, we are set upon a sure and
inexpugnable rock, against the which all the power of hell is able to do
nothing. So that we may boldli exclame, and every one say ^^th CHRIST I
provided the lord before my eyes all way, Psalm. xvi
for he is at my right elbowe, that I should not be mouyd, therefore my heart
has be glad and my tongue has reioysed, moreover my flesh shall rest in
hope. By faith in CHRIST we become the sons of GOD, the brethren and
coheires of Christ, and partakers of everlasting life, by this faith departing
hence we shall go to the kingdom preparyd for the elect, before the beginnynge
of the world. And if in the feruentnes of these te^ptacyo^s our faith begine
to waver if we do not bear pacyentlye the will of our heuinlye Father, if our
love toward god wax faint and cold if o^^^ hope begin to be feeble and
weak: and therefore we begin to fear, less god and we be not all at a full
point, but that he is yet desplesed with us (which tentacion surely is very
grievous painful, dangerous, and hard to overcome) we must call to remembrance
Christ to have suffered for us so intolerable and invincible tentacions: that
there apered no help, no confort, no refuge, wherein GOD and the whole world:
semyd to have for saken him, and to be against him: In so mouche that he
exclamed, O mi god, o mi GOD why haste thou forsaken me. Oh here was a grievous
tentacion. A sharp and a bitter death that CHRSTE suffered for us, and all to
make the way of the cross and death easy unto us. Therefore seeing that,
CHRIST of his own free will, cast him self in to the feeling of
intolerable pain, calam^ty, and anxeity (GOD our most loving Father being
therewith content) undoubtedly he knows and considers our enfirmite,
undoubtedly he will not deal with us according to the rigor of the law, but
will bear much with us and pardon many things to our infirmity. Does not
CHRIST speak to all men? does he not call men, when he says: Come unto me all
you that do labor and are laden and I shall refresh you? how can there be any
greater consolacyon? how could CHRIST speak more merciful to us. There be
many things that pynche* vex, and trouble man grievously: but what thing is it
that can trouble the conscience of a sinner, more the^ when he doubts of the
mercy of god, then when he fears lest God will cast him of then when he ca^
not persuad him self to conceive any trust of gods m^rci but Imagine that us
withered member he shall cut of and cast away. Here we had need of christ's
present help, here we had need of spedi comfort, lest this violente tempest
ouerwhelme and drown us. But let us not fear. CHRIST is no decembler, he
will stand by his word, he will perform his promise, He will help and
refreshe Therefore when we begin to trimble and fear in our conscience, when
we begin to doubt of gods mercy, when we perceive our faith to be feable.
Let us forthwith call upon GOD, and that feruentlye, and that indesinantlye,
even from the bottom of our heart, that he turn not his face from us.

Let us power before him all that does trouble us. Let us disclose to him
our meserye, our imbecillitye, our incredulity. Let us cry with the
disciples, Lord increase our faith. And with the Father of the Lunatycke,
Luc. xvii.
Lord we believe, help our incredulyte. And with the prophet. Marci. i
Lord make haste to help us. For thy mercy is above all thy works. O most
loving, O most mercyful father lord god of our health, Psa. lxi
our only help and refuge. Enter not into judgment with thy servants.
Christ is our justice our redeption, and innocency, he for us has suffered
most bitter and cruel death.

Let these things move the o father of mercy. For this thy son our savior
chryst^s sake have mercy upon us, confirm and strength our heart in faith
comfort us with the consolations of thy holy spr^t, that we may finally obtain
Joy everlasting, through Jesus christ Amen,

After this sort if we (laboryng wresting and stryuinge with our imbecillyty,
accusing before god, and lamentinge our pusilianitye and incredulity) do catch
hold of christ and clean fast to him, earnestlye and fervently desiryng his
help, that he will vouchsafe to take our place and to supplye that is lackyng in
us. These things if we do, surely all things shall be well, we shall avoid and
escape easly al danger and peril, we shall be safe enough For these two, to
believe in Christ and with heart to desire faith, does not much differ the one
from the other. For though we feel yet great weakness and imperfection in our
self yet this ought to comfort us that god wills and commands that he
should be called upon, yt he has promised to here and help these, that call
ryghtly upon him. Now as nothing is more iustli or necessarily desired the^
true faith, even so god hearyth no prayer sooner or more gladly the^ when man
findyng no goodness in him self, does acknowledge his own infyrmity, his own
mysery, his own beggerlines, does accuse and lament his own increduliti, and
with deep sighs, and harti des^res calls for faith. These sighs, these
desires, these p^ayers, this litil spark of faith is the very sede of God,
wrought in us by him which says of christ by the Prophet Esaias, yt he shall
not quench the smoking filaxe, nor break the brusyd read, Therefore let us
steadfastly believe, or at the least earnestelye and heartily pray that we may
believe, bewayling before god our lack of faith, which things if we do, we
need not doubt bot we be acceptid of god, we be taken for his children For it
is not for naught, nor in vain that he has laid our imbecillitie and
sins upon his only begoten sons back.

In Matthew Math. v.
it is said blessed be those that mourn, for they shall be comforted, blessed be
those that ho^ger after righteousness, for ^hey shall be satisfi^d. These words
ar spok^n also to us, they may justly be applied to us, we mourn and are sorye
in our hearts ye we have mispendid our life past. We wish and desire, yea we
even honger and thirst after righteousness. Let us be of good chere, we shall
o^tain our desire, we shall be comforted we shall be counted just before god for
Christ our savior his sake. Finally let us after this example of Christ and
saint Steven commend our souls into the hands of god your heavenly father,
sayng every one after this manner.

O Most merciful father I commend into thy holy hands my spirit, yea thy
spirit, for thou have creat it, thou haste committed it for a time to the body,
thou have given it thy own Image and simylitude. Thou have sent for the
redemption of it, thy own most derely beloved son to shed his blood. This
the spirit, I resign into thy hands, O GOD of all mercy, I am thine all that
I am, I beseech the refuse not thy own, but receive, keep and place me in
everlasting glory for the sake of Jesus Christ, thy only begotten son Amen.

A prayer to be said at the hour of death.
O Lord Jesus, which art the only health of al men living and the
everlasting life of them which dye in thy faith: I wretched sinner give and
submit my self wholly unto thy most blessed will. And I being sure yt the
thing cannot peryshe which is committed unto thy mercy: wyllyngly now I leave
this frail and wicked flesh, in hope of the resurreccion, which in better
wise shall restore it to me again. I beseech the most mercyful lord Jesus
Christ that thou will by thy grace: make strong my soul against all
temptacyons and that thou will cover and defend me with the buckler of thy
mercy against al ye assaults of the devil I se and knowledge that there is in
my self no help of salvation, but al my confidence hope, and trust is in thy
most mercyful goodness. (...) have no merytes nor good works which I may
all^ge before the: Of sins and evil works alas and see a great heap: but
through thy mercy, I trust to be in the number of the^, to whom^ thou wylt
not impute their sins, but take and accept me for ryghteous and just, and to
be thinheritour of everlasting life. Thou mercyful Lord werte borne for my
sak^, you dyddest suff^e both hungre and trust for my sake, ye dydest preach
and teach thou did pray and fast for my sake thou did all good works
and deeds for my sake, you sufferedest most grievous pains and torments for my
sake: And finally thou gave thy most precious body to dy^, and thy blood to
be shed on the cross for my ^ake. Now^ most merciful savior, let all these
things profit me, which thou freely, haste given me, that haste given thy
self for me: let thy blood cle^^e, and wash away the spots and foulness
of my sins, Let thy righteousness hyde and cover mine unrighteousness.
Let the merytes of thy passion and blood, be the satisfaccion of my sins.
Give me Lord thy grace, that my faith and salvation in thy blood, waver not in
me, but ever be fyrme and constante, that the hope of thy mercy, and life
everlasting, never decay in me, that charytye ware not cold in me: fynallye,
that the weakness of my flesh be not overcome with the fear of death.
Grant me merciful savior, that when death has shut up the eyes of my
body, yet that the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee,
that when death has taken away the use of my tongue and speech, yet that my
heart may cry and say unto the In man^s tuas domine commendo spiritum meum:
that is to s^y: O lord into thy hands I g^ue and commytte my soul. Domine
Jesus accipe spiritu^ meum. Lord Jesus receive my soul unto thee Amen.

Imprynted at London by Wyllyam Copland, for Rychard Kele.


