THE IVDGEMENT OF A MOST REVEREND AND LEARNED MAN FROM BEYOND THE SEAS,
CONCERNING A THREEFOLD ORDER OF BISHOPS, WITH A DECLARATION OF CERTAIN OTHER
WEIGHTY POINTS, CONCERNING THE DISCIPLINE AND GOVERNMENT OF THE CHVRCH.

THE IVDGMENT OF A MOST REVEREND AND LEARNED MAN FROM BEyond the seas,
concerning a threefolde order of Bishops: with a declaration of certain other
weighty points, concercerning the discipline and government of the church.
We must needs make three bishops.

1 Of God. 2 Of man. 3 Of the devil.
A Bishop ordained of God, or set up by the law of God, does declare nothing
else but their calling, which by an other more special name, are called
Pastoures, whom (says Luke) the holy Ghost has appointed Etheto episcopon
poykanein ten ecclesian tou theou.
Bishops to feed the Church of GOD. And either of these names of Pastor or of
Bishop, is proper to them in the new Testament, whereby the Apostle does
distinguish them from Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, which were callings
to endure for a time, Ephesians. 4. 11. and from Deacons, 1. Tim. 3. and Phil. 1.
1. for otherwise they are every where called Elders, and Paul does call his
Apostleship a Deaconship. Romans 11. 13. But they are called Bishops in regard of
the sheep committed unto them, as though a man should call them watchmen of
overseers.

These now were one alone, as where any church had but one Pastor, or more if
the Church had more then one. And the meeting of them together jointly with
their Elders, whom Paul calls governors, of the other common name ^eureuses
Presbyte^ion.
called, was the Eldership. Their duty was to attend on the word and prayer,
both publicly and privately, and in common to govern the Church, as appears
by many places of Scripture.

That the same were subject to magistrates, though profane, appears not
only by the example of Christ the high Priest, and of the Apostles, but also
by the express words of Paul, 1. Timoth. 2. and Luke 12. 13.

OF THE BISHOP THAT is of man.
THe Bishop that is of man, that is to say, brought into the Church by the
alone wisdom of man, besides the express word of God, is a certain power
given to one certain Pastor above his other fellows, yet limited with
certain orders or rules provided against tyranny. They which did bear this
office of bishop, are called bishops in regard of their fellow Elders and the
whole clergy, as watchmen set over the clergy.

That this calling was not brought in by the word, it is manifest by that, that
there is not to be found in the new Testament, so much as one syllable, whereby
there may be the least surmise of any such thing. For although we doubt not,
but all things ought to be done orderly in the lords house, and therefore that
some one should be president in every assembly, whom John in the Revelation
seems to call the Angel of the Churches. And Austen calls the moderator
Proestota, yet this moderator of actions of the Church, saving this one thing,
that he was the first in order in the company; had no authority over his
felows, neither did he exercise any higher office. Therefore the author of the
epistle to the Hebrews, as Hierome notes, does call the whole company of the
elders, Egoumenous. Hebr. 13.
governors; not any one certain man. Such a one was Peter many times in the
very assembly of the Apostles, of a great authority surely amongst the
Apostles, who were all otherwise equal, and yet he himself one of the company
of the Apostles, sent by his companions to Samaria with John, Act. 8. 14. and
in the assembly giving an account of his ministry, to those which were of the
Circumcision, Acts 11. 2. But if any such bishoplike authority of any one
above the rest, as there was afterward, had bin then, surely the apostles
would have set down their names even at that time, in their letters which they
sent from one to another, especially seeing Paul in his epistle to the Philip.
does name bishops in the plural number, and Deacons: or there should have been
at least some peculiar mention made of them. Which, seeing it is not done, it
appears that amongst these gouerners, there was none in degree above their
companions and fellow bishops: but as occasion served, the Churches were
governed by a fellowlike and equal authority, among the fellow-elders in their
elderships, he only going before the rest, whose godliness and authority, the
company did most allow of.

Epiphanius against the Arrians, defending the contrary opinion: namely, the
bishop ordained by man, as ordained by God, does bring forth three reasons to
the contrary. Two as it were out of the word of God: the third out of the
history of those times. The first place is, 1. Tim. 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder,
Presbyteron me ^peplexen^
etc. whereby he gathers, that Timothy had some authority over the Elders,
that is, the Pastors of the church of Ephesus. But (be it spoken with the
favor of so worthy a man) he should have marked, that here an elder is
called, he that is such by age, not he that is a Pastor, which is declared by
the opposition next following of young men. (...) reote^.


An other place is out of the same Epistle, Receive not an accusation against
an Elder, the first of Timothy 5. 19. Whereby he gathers, that the Elders
were subject to the Bishops and tribunal seat. But who will grant him that
Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus. For the history will easily re^ell that, which
the fathers do report as certain. For no man can deny that Timothy was one
that accompanied Paul, and therefore no bishop assigned to any one certain
place, who was sent one while to this place, an other to that, for the
establishing of the Churches: and finally, that he was an Evangelist, and not a
bishop of any one certain flock. I have desired thee (says he) to abide at
Ephesus, whilst I went into Macedonia. And why so? namely, to look to the
Church which he had begun to establish, until he were called for again,
which he does in the other epistle. What? and did the Apostle rob the
Ephesians of their Bishop, without asking their church at the least? Surely,
when he went last to Jerusalem, never mindyng to return to Ephesus, either he
would have restored Timothy unto them, or the Ephesians would have required
him again of the Apostle, when he put them in mind of so great danger at
hand: or if another were to be put into his room, he would have made express
mention in that his divine Sermon. But he is said to have sent for the Elders
only, and to have warned them of the duty belongyng to them all. Yet it need
not seem strange to any, that the Evangelist Timothy, a man endued with so
many and so great gifts remainyng at Ephesus, did govern all things by his
direction, as one in degree above the Elders, and by the Apostles authority
appointed there for a time.

But let us grant Epiphanius more then this, that Timothy had the authority
of the laying on of hands out of these words of the Apostle, Lay not hands
suddenly upon any: Let us grant this too, that these duties belo^ged to the
governors, yet we deny that Timothy could have had any authority therefore,
over the Elders of Ephesus, except he had bin an Evangelist. For Paul himself
Tim. 4. 14. does show sufficiently that the laying on of the hands was done, in
the name of the Eldership it self, not by the authority of any superior. Now
the reasons of the same Epiphanius are these: Bishops (says he) begette the
fathers of the Church, but Elders the sons, in as much as bishops and not
Elders ordained bishops. But what is this else, then to ask to have that which
is in question: for it may be and ought to be answered, that the bishops took
that authority upon them, without warrant of the word of God, and that the
rule is false, which concerning this matter, does attribute it to the Apostles,
which may be showed by the ordaining of Timothy by the Eldership. Again,
forasmuch as election is the chief ground of church-offices, which depends
of the voices of the whole company, and not of the laying on of hands, which
made not bishops, but sent them into their possession after they had made them:
we may more truly affirm with the Apostle, that the holy Ghost by the voices
of the children themselves, made the fathers, and not the bishops.

An other of his reasons is, a deprauing of places alleged out of Paul, that
the Church being newborn, bishops could not be so established euerywhere at
the first, as is to be seen in the election of Deacons. Whom yet can
Epiphanius persuade, that it was for want of fit men only, that there were
many bishops in every Church? For that which not only Hierome, but Epiphanius
against the Miletians also reports, concerning them of Alexandria: that is,
Alexandria never had two bishops, as the other cities, upon what ground Oupote^
lexandr^ duo epis^ pous eich^ os kai al^ poleis.
the men of Alexandria did it, and followed not the examples of other churches,
let them see to it.

Finally, that this kind of bishop, which who so bears it, is not the first
in order amongst his fellow elders, but in degree above them, being the only
man in his diocese, is not ordained by the word of God, but by custom amongst
the fathers Hierome witnesses, as very many others long since have observed:
For these are his words in his epistle to Euagrius.

The Apostle (says he) does teach plainly, that Elders and Bishops are all
one, etc. And where as one after was chosen to be set over the rest, that
(says he) was a remedy found out for remedy of schism, that every one drawyng
Christ unto himself, might not rend the Church in sunder. For at Alexandria
also from the time of Mark the Evangelist, to the time of Heraclea and
Dionysius the Bishop, the Elders placed one in a high degree or place, chosen
by themselves, whom they called a bishop. Moreover, upon the first to Titus.
An Elder and a Bishop (says he) is all one, and before by the instigation of
the devil, there was pertakyng in religion, it was said amongst the people: I
am of Paul, of Apollos, and of Caephas: the Churches were governed by the
common advise of the Elders. But after that every one imagined, that those
whom he baptized were his own, and not Christ's: it was decreed throughout
the whole world, that one chosen of the Elders, should be set above the rest;
unto whom all the care of the church might appertain, to the taking away of
the seeds of contentions. And a little after, As the Elders know that they
ate subject by the custom of the Church to the Bishop that is set over them:
so let the Bishops know, that they are greater then the Elders, rather by
custom, then by any virtue of the Lords appointment. Yea and Augustine also
in his 19. epistle says, that according to the titles of honor, which the use
of the Church has gotten, the office of a bishop is greater then the office of
an Elder.

Chrysostom also witnesses, upon the first to Timothy and the 3. chapter,
That the Bishops differ from the Elders only in ordinatio^; that is (as
Theophilact speaks more plainly) in the only ceremony of consecration.
Theodoret writing upon the same place, says, That in old time they called the
same men Elders and Bishops, as though forsooth the thing it self had then
been only called by another name, and goes about to prove that, because
Paul calls Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians. This is of no weight
at all. The names which are given of fellow labourer, and fellow soldier, do
declare that he was no bishop in this kind of bishop, but an Evangelist tied to
no one city, much less to a diocese, of the number of those, whom the
Apostles did keep, to send to and fro, at the motion of the spirit of God. The
council of Nice also, disputing about the degrees of bishops, alleges
ancient customs, whereof we mind to speak anon. And where as Cyprian not in
one place, calls the bishops successors of the Apostles, whose authority is
from God; and if we take it so, as though by the very commandment of God,
these bishops are the same, that in time past the Apostles, the thing it self
does refute that, seeing there was always a certain portion assigned to every
bishop. But the Apostles, by the direction of the spirit rite of God, though
not confusedly, did exercise their ministry throughout the whole world. But
if this be true, there should have been more bishops, in the Church of Rome it
self: namely Peter and Paul, which yet afterward was counted peculiar to one.
And surely, there cannot be mo, the chief in one and the same company at one
time. And whereas the name of Bishops, is said of the Apostleship. Act. 1. 20.
It makes nothing to the matter, except a man by a like reason would have the
Deacons to have bin Apostles, because Paul calls his Apostleship a Deaconship
or ministry. But we are to look Did^^nian
into that also, that Hierome might seem to be of the mind, that this kind
of Bishop begun the^, when as schisms arose up in the Church. That this is not
so, we may gather out of Paul him self, who of purpose writing to the
Corinthians about the same matter, does not only pass over this remedy: but
also as foreseeing such a matter, does in the title of the epistle, join unto
him self Sosthenes, to teach by his example how carefully this Primacie is to
be avoided in assemblies of the Church, who (it is evident were not only the
first in order next unto Christ, but also highest in degree) did execute their
ministry in common. Wherefore, no not the same Paul alone would
excommunicate the incestuous persons by his Apostolical authority, but by the
authority of the whole Eldership, neither does Peter doubt to call himself
fellow elder. Sunprosbuteron.


Nay this is so far off from being any good remedy, from staying of schisms,
that contrary wise there was never more bitter contention in the Church, then
about this primacie which had never come to pass, if this pre-eminence above
their fellows had been forbidden, or rather, if men had never brought it in.
Whereupon we conclude, that this kind of bishop which is not of order, but of
superiority, was brought in of man, and as Hierome says Tit. 1. by little and
little, and that so as he is in deed thought, that the planets of dissentions
might be thereby plucked up, all the care was committed to one man.

And whereas he says in the same place, that it was decreed thoroughout all
the world: We are to understand it no otherwise, then of a privy custom,
brought in by little and little. And what soever is found in Ignatius, or other
ancient Writers, when the bishop of Satan was not yet found out, touching the
authority of the bishops or overseers (as Justin speaks) is to be
vnderderstood of this kind of Bishop.

THE BISHOP OF THE Devil.
THus also we describe the bishop of the devil: that even as that kind of
bishop ordained of God, degenerated by little and little, into an humane
ordinance, whereof we entreated in the second place: so this of the devil,
against which we now labor, is sprouted forth of the corruption of the bishop
brought in by man. Of this intolerable corruption there are foul, most
manifest, and undoubted marks. Some of this kind of bishops have wholly
singled themselves from the Elderships, so that they have nothing to do with
them: Some have wholly abolished them. And that they have challenged unto
themselves, and I know not to what Officials the whole guidance of the church,
and chiefly the authority to elect, to depose, and to excommunicate: so as
they not only are above others, but as it were alone do exercise Lordship over
Gods heritage, contrary to the express inhibition of Peter.

That also they have invaded upon temporal dominions, contrary to the flat
commandment of Christ. And that they will not only be present, but also
President in causes of this life, and affairs of the Common wealth, the
commandment of the Apostle to the contrary notwithstanding, 2. Tim. 2. 1. Cor.
6. yea and that of Christ himself, Luke 13. 14.

That also they waste in riot and stateliness against conscience and al shame,
the goods consecrate to holy uses.

That also they have tied the spirit of God to certain places and persons, as
though the bishop of the more noble place, must needs have necessary gifts
above the rest: or as though he, who now is most fit, must needs be so alwais.

And last of all, that they are the image of that beast which is described,
Apoc. 13. as Pope Anacletus himself witnesses, epist. 2. in as much as they
are distinguished among themselves, by those their thrones and degrees,
according to the pattern of the Roman Empire. The Apostle, Act. 20. 19.
foretold of this Hierarchy, as they term it, of the false bishop, which in
time became an Antichristian primacie. And in the 3. John 9. it is most
manifest, that Satan begun even then to lay the foundation of this mystery.

Now out of the history of the Nicene Council, which otherwise touching
doctrine was every where received, it is clear how foul dissentions were even
then, of orderyng the bonds between the bishops, the fountains whereof they
were so far from dammyng vg, that pretending ancient customs, they
confirmed the Patriarkship, and made a way for the horrible Papacy of Rome
then slidyng on, and vnderlayd the seat for the harlot that sits upon seven
mountains. But far be it of, that these things, although they have their
ancient and great authority, should be prejudicial to the divine and
Apostolical writings, according to the rule, whereof there is no wise man will
doubt, that the Councels themselves are to be squared.

And to what purpose should I confute that agreement between the priesthood of
the Levites, and of Christ, which some old writers allege to prove this
devilish oligarche, and at the length eue^ plain tyranny. In deed it is
evident, that the high priest was a figure of Christ himself, whose second
image if we grant that the bishops are, it will follow, that there are as many
images of Christ, as there be bishops, in as much as there is none above him.
But contrariwise, no bishop has been the image of Christ. Besides, bishops are
not heds of the universal Church, but of their own particular: Nay, no heads
at all, in as much as the Bishops are under Archbishops, the Archb. under
Patriarchs, and they again under the Pope, that is not under the true figure,
but the counterfeit figure of Christ. Now seeing that our only head is taken up
into heaven, a successor for whom living for ever, we are not to seek: who
sees not that the elders ordained by the law of God, come in the room of the
priests of the law, and the Deacons to answer to the Levites?

The first question.
Seeing that there are ordained in several Churches, several pastors and
ministers, and the authority of all Christ's ministers in the Church seem to
be equal: Whether the office of the bishops be necessary in the church to
procure meetings when occasion serves, admission to the ministry, and
remoouyng from the place upon just causes: or whether all the ministers having
equal authority, and not under the authority of any superior bishop, ought
to choose fit men with the consent of the Patron who enjoys the benefice, and
the people themselves, as also to correct and remove from the charge. And the
manners of the people themselves, who can hardly or not at all be kept in
obedience without the bridle of the bishops authority, which may run through
in visityng of the Churches of the province, may put us in mind to retain such
bishops. Again, so often as there shall be dealing in matters touching the
safety of the common wealth in the solemn assemblies of the land, according
to the laws which the kingdom has of a long use and custom received, there
can be nothing established without the bishops, who have the third room and
place in the kingdom, which to take away, or wholly to put down, would be
very dangerous to the Common wealth.

The answer to the first question.
Where as Satan's bishop has been the overthrow of the Church and all
Christian kingdoms, whose head is the Roman Antichrist, it is to be looked
unto of all hands, especially of all godly princes, that they at once abolish
it, if they mind the reformation of the Church, and their own safety. As for
the bishop ordained by man, and brought into the Church by little and little,
whereby Satan made him a way for greater things, it had been tolerable, so
that with all the ancient good laws prouidyng for the resisting of the
gouernyng by some few, had been in their former force again. But besides, that
the state of the world being quite changed, experience of so many ages does
teach us too well, that unless this root also be plucked up, it will come to
pass, that the same fruit will sprout and bud forth again. Finally, seeing the
Lord has so often decided this controversy of superiority among his own
disciples, that he shut it clean out, seeing the rule both for doctrine and
good order of the Church, is to be sought for out of the very writings of the
apostles: and it is manifested, the churches the^ prospered, when all this
authority of one man over the rest, yet was not, but as that grew up, so al
things fell to decay. Finally, seeing where the remnants of this government by
a few, are not clean taken away, the work of the Lord, is openly hindered:
Our judgment is, that after the chasing away of this devise of man, the
churches shall be well provided for, if they may be repaired according to the
writings of the Apostles. And the reformation as it seems to us, consists
herein, that first the whole kingdom is to be divided into regions. Again,
the regions into parishes, either of Cities or country towns: that in places
most fit, and of greatest assembly, be placed pastors, being lawfully
propounded by the company of their own elders, to the kings christian
majesty, or the deputies thereof, and allowed of all. Lastly, being received of
their own people, over who^ they are to be set, they be placed, promulgation
having gone before: and that in every parish the pastor may have with him fit
men to assist him, who also may, being watchful, salve up the offenses not so
weighty, leauyng the other of greater importance, to the whole eldership. Also,
that eldership made of the pastors of parishes, both of city and cuntry, and a
sufficient number of men approved for their godliness and wisdom, lawfully
also chosen, as is aforesaid, be placed in most fit places, who assemblyng
at a certain time and place, may determine of the Church-affayres, of their
own government, according to the prescript laws, first set down in a
general council, and afterward confirmed by the authority of the sovereign
majesty.

In this company let there be chosen by common voices, one first in order not
superior in authority, who shall be thought most fit, and that without making
choice of any certain place, and but for a certain time. After the expiryng
whereof, either let another be chosen, or else the same man is to be
established again for another time by a new consent: whose office is to make
report of the common affairs to the company, to demand their judgments, and
to give sentence by the judgment of the eldership, having no authority given
him over his felows, to who^ rather he is most subject. In this assembly let
nothing be debated of besides matters of conscience, and that by the word of
god, and the laws of church discipline established, drawn out of the word of
God, not one whit meddling with the authority of the civil magistrate. And let
the soueraign majesty and the lawful magistrate thereby appointed, be keepers
of this order, and the punisher of those that seditiously rage against it. But
if any shall imagine that this sudden abolishing of both these bishops will
minister occasion of new stirs, although we see not with what conscience the
bish. may so challenge to themselves the goods of the church, or else call
themselves bishops, and live like princes of this world: yet for to keep the
common peace, the sovereign majesty may leave unto the^, which are now
bishops, their revenues whole for their life time, so they trouble not the well
made order of the Church, with providing there be none chosen into their place,
when they be dead. As for the frowardnes of the people, it may be kept down
better a great deal by other reins, then by the authority of a false named
bishop; as by preaching of the word of God, by censures of the church, and the
authority of the magistrate of the cuntry, against the open troubles of the
public state, either ecclesiastical or civil. The Churches may very well be
visited at set times without any great cost and bishoplike pride, by the^ who^
every eldership has chosen under the K. majesty's authority which will not be
alwais necessary, if the elders do rightly execute their office. This sitting
of the bish. with the authority of the voice in the public estates of the
kingdom, came in with a manifest abuse, contrary to the word, and therefore in
our mind is to be utterly abolished. For the bish. has nothing to do in
ordring of mere civil affairs: yet forasmuch as in such assemblies, especially
some things many times happen, belonging to the establishing of the estate, and
order of the churches: the kepers whereof the godly magistrates ought to be, and
not the over turners, as we are taught by the example of holy kings. It is very
necessary, that as often as the meetinges of the land are proclaimed,
intelligence thereof be given to the chief elders, who may be present in the
behalf of their seignories, yet not sittyng as judges, but dealing about
matters of the church only with the estates of the land, as their elderships
have given them in charge, except the states think good upon extraordinary
occasion, that they ask counsel of God about some other affairs also. If
also the kings Majesty think good to admit into counsel amongst the
pastors or elders, one, who shall be thought to be wise and experienced in
things, he may admit him, though not as a pastor or elder, yet as a citizen.
And it were injurious to remove from their office in the Church, the pastors,
and much less the Elders and Deacons, otherwise laymen from that degree, which
they hold as citizens, either in the common wealth, or in the assemblies. But
the kings majesty, and all the Princes and Lords, are to be exceedyng wary,
that they make not courtlike governors of their pastors, to the great
endamagyng of the Church, as we have a fair example in Eusebius of Nicomedia
in the court of Constantine. As for the right of the patronage, least some man
should say, that it was gotten for himself. Our judgment is, that it may be
concealed, but not without some conditions: namely, that he which shall be
chosen by the free voices of the eldership, should be offered by the Patron to
the kings majesty, being also to set upon his charge, after the consenting of
his flock.

The second question.
After that religion is reformed, it has been a received custom that the
bishops, and of the ministers, pastors and elders, so many as should be sent of
the bishops, should assemble themselves, that they together with the chief
Barons and nobles which profess the true religion, might make inquiry after
the doctrine and manners of every one. But seeing the prince himself is a lover
of the true religion, it is a question whether there may be such an assembly
with out the consent or commandment of the prince. Whether the ministers alone
may meet as often as they will. Last of all, whether the nobles and other
godly men and elders, (which are yearly chosen with us out of the people and
nobility together) may lawfully or expediently come without the commandment
of the king to such assemblies. Which assembly of the nobles and people,
seems to some altogether needles under a godly prince, either because it has
not long since ben received by a mere custom without any law, and that under
a prince, who then resisted the religion, whereby such assemblies might have
the greater authority: or else because it may seem dangerous, if so many
nobles assemble so often, without the consent of the king, they may sometimes
consult of some thing else besides religion.

Others think that this assembly is in no case to be refused, but rather
that it is very needful that the Nobles and other religious men be present as
helpers to their ministers in the assembly, bearyng witness of their life and
the peoples behavior, otherwise it will after come to pass, that if an
impious prince reign afterward, that neither ministers may safely assemble,
neither can the determination be put in execution without the consent, help
and aid of the nobles.

To the second question.
Councels are necessary in the Church for many causes, both to the retayning
of agreement, and also to the seeking of remedies by common advise for the
dangers which fall out. And last of all, to take order for those that rest not
in the judgment of particular seignories, if they think they have any injury
done them. And these Councels are either of a whole nation, or of some one
Region or Province (or Diocese as they have begun to speak after the
description of the Provinces of Rome) divided into many Seigniories.

It is necessary that the Councels of the provinces be divided for many causes,
and except there be other urgent causes, they would be appointed rather every
half year then quarterly, least in discoursing of matters, they spend the
time in vain. And it will be best for the avoiding of ambition, that the
Council be not always assembled in the same place of every province: but as
soon as one half years Synod is discussed, it may be determined by common
consent, where shall be the place of the next followyng. It will be very well
that two of every seignorie of the province, chosen by common voices, and sent
with some commission, be present at these councels: one a pastor, and the other
an Elder or a Deacon. Neither would we have any strife about sitting, who
should sit first or last, but every one to sit, as it shall fall out without
any contention, and the judgment to be given as any one shall sit.

Now, he that shall govern the whole action, who was chosen for this one thing
by common consent of voice, the chief pastor of the place, being in the
beginning President, which office shall end, when the Council shall be ended.
There are no matters in question to be propounded to these Councels to take
knowledge of, but such as are more spiritual and belong to that province, where
they are to be decided without appeal by the word of God, and the rules there
set down, without any brabling or disturbance of the company. Yet if any great
private controversy shall fall out in the provincial Synod, where some may
think that he has cause to complain of injury done unto him, he may put up
his complaint to be decided in a general council, when it shall be thought good
to assemble it.

Furthermore it is chiefly required, that if all the laws of the Church be
established of the kings christian majesty: it follows, that the Councels are
to be assembled by his commandment and direction, and not otherwise. Neither
yet is there a new commission every time to be sought for of the king for that
purpose, seeing his majesty has once established a law touching the set times
of ordinary Synodes. But yet if there arise just cause of suspicion of ha^dling
in these metings, other matters besides mere ecclesiastical, it shall be safe
for the kings majesty to send one of his subjects who^ he will, to disgrace by
his presence the meeting of the Synodes: where yet he is not to be as a judge,
except some thing fall out where it is necessary that the authority of the
civil magistrate be put between.

A general council of the land is not to be assembled but upon great causes,
which seeing they agree not with set times, it follows, that they are not to
be standing neither: but as often as some thing shall seem to fall out of so
great weight, either in doctrine or in government of the church, as cannot well
be decided but in a general meeting, that province is to be careful, to put
other provinces in mind concerning that matter, in these half years Synodes:
that with the consent of all, or the greater part, they go unto the kings
majesty, who (as being a christian prince, is to desire nothing more, then the
peace of the churches) ought without any stay or doubting, at the suite of the
Churches, to appoint a place and time for a general meeting, as the need of the
churches shall require. And the same order may seem to be kept in the general
Councels, which is in the prouincial, whether before the kings majesty
himself, as in some general councels, the emperors of Rome have been present,
or before the honorable lords of the kings majesty. And last of all,
whatsoever shall be allowed by the common consent of the Synod, shall be
confirmed by the kings majesty's express authority, after the example of the
godly Emperors.

The third question.
Whether the king or the bishops are to call the assembly of the Church, and as
concerning what matters they may make laws.

To the third question.
We have answered the first part of this question already. To the second we
answer. First it is not lawful, no not for the angels themselves, to make any
laws for the conscience, but the church is to be vpholden by those which the
Lord has enacted, seeing we are now to look for no new revelation, the whole
counsel of God touching our salvation, being fully and perfectly made
manifest. Our judgment also is, that the discipline or good order is to be
sought for out of the word of God, and to be kept inviolable, as the second
part of christian doctrine. Yet there remains two things, whereof there may,
yea and there ought to be laws set down in the Church. For first of all,
where as every thing is not expressly and in so many words set down in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles: therefore in controversies both
concerning doctrine and the substance of Church discipline, the Council ought
to comprehend the decidyng of them in infallible and plain heads, as by
certain rules, like as it was done profitably in those right approved
Councels both Oecumenie and perticulars, against the blasphemy of the
heretics, and the malipertnesse of the disordered. And where as there come
many questions in the seignories, especially when there is dealing about
marriages, though there cannot be certain rules set down touching them out of
the word of God: yet so near as may be, rules drawn out of the comparing of
the scriptures, are to be set down, after which they may be decided: yet is
neither any thing taken from the word of God, by the puttyng to of this, so it
be rightly done. But this is rather an interpretation of the word of God, and
a declaring how one follows upon another. Again, where the substance both of
doctrine and ecclesiastical discipline abides whole and unchangeable: yet
must the outward circumstances of the order needs be changed, for the same
reason of the person and places, abides not always. For we see the Apostles
love feasts taken away, and the decrees touching blood, and that which was
strangled. The governors of the church are to provide also, that all may have
intelligence, at what time and place it is expedient for any thing to be done
in the Church: yet so as the doctrine it self, under which we also comprehend
the ordaining of the sacraments, abide whole as God has set it down. Further,
that in setting down the laws of this order, there be set down nothing foolish
or unprofitable, much less any of the old customs retained, which either is
already stained with superstition, or which may easily make a way to
superstition. Lastly, that in all these, there be a great regard of
simplicity, and that the church be not loaded with a multitude of rules.

And for the avoiding of the diversity of rites, it is necessary that these
Canons, as in old time they called them, be set down in their general
counsels, that any thing in the same land may be changed according to the
time. But whatsoever shall be set down in those counsels, is to be established
by the authority of the kings Christian majesty, as next after God, the keeper
and defender of the churches.

The fourth question.
Whether the papists are to be excommunicate as Apostates, or utter fallers
away, or to be punished with some smaller punishment.

To the fourth question.
We see not what sword of excommunication may be drawn out against those men,
who though they were set into the church by no vain baptism: yet never entered
into the fellowship of the pure church. Yea the doors are always to stand
open that they may come to hear the word of God, and they are carefully to be
allured thither, if at any time (as the Apostle says) they may repent and get
out of the snare of the devil, of whom they are holden captive. But if any
shall be thought to sin in an open contempt, our judgment is, that it ought
wholly to be put over to the christian magistrate. We think that it beseems
a Christian magistrate to deal much by lenity in the matter of religion
toward his subjects, not being troublesome sectaries, and such as of knowledge
blaspheme.

The fifth question.
For what cause may any be excommunicated. As put case one kill a man, saying,
he did it by chance, or of some necessity for his own safety, and is ready
to be judged about that matter, not yet accused either of the king or of the
neighbors of him that is killed: Whether may the Church make inquiry of the
fact, whether it were done of treachery, or by chance, or of necessity, and
compel the manslear to profess repentance openly in the church, or to
excommunicate him if he refuse.

To the fifth question.
No man earnestly repenting, is to be excommunicate, but after repentance,
rather ought to be received. And the cause of excommunication ought to be most
weighty and a public offense, seeing that only the extremity of the diseases
must have extreme remedies. Yet may such men after the thing be known, be
suspended from receiuyng the Lords supper (they were wont to call such me^
restrained) for whom this is thought to be a necessary remedy, that for the
great nes of their offense, they may be an example to others, or that their
repentance does stand in need of trial. As for the present question. If the
magistrate put in mind of his duty, do wink at such faults, and yet it be
probable, that none is rashly accused: We think that the Eldership may call
him forth, and there as the matter shall require, to exhort him to the
acknowledging of the offense: which if ye shall deny, he is to be left to the
judgment of God, neither are the Elders to proceed any further in the hearing
of witnesses.

The sixth question.
Where as in the former age much wealth has been given by princes and many
other, to the bishops, monasteries etc. under the name of alms, and so great
riches seem rather to hurt the bishops, then to do them good: and monasteries
in the church and common wealth are unprofitable: what yet should become of
such goods which were once consecrate to the church? For seeing the Bishops and
ministers have sufficient of their tithes, whereof they may live well and
honestly, can the prince with the consent of the states of the kingdom, turn
the residue either to his private use, or the good of the common wealth,
especially seeing such goods do consist not only in tithes, but of
possessions, both in the country and the city. Which question, seeing it
seems to be rather civil then ecclesiastical, I purposed not to trouble you
in this point. But whereas many both learned and godly amongst us, are of this
mind, that those things which have been once vowed to holy uses, cannot be
given to profane uses, though they be public, I could not but mention the
matter unto you.

To the sixth question.
Concerning the goods of the church. First of all we suppose great heed ought
to be taken, that none do stain himself with handling the church goods. For if
God has taken revenge of such sacrileges, even amongst the very idolaters:
what trow we will his judgment be against the^ which have spoiled his
churches, and have profaned the things which were set a part for his true
worship.

Moreover it is evident, that this turns greatly to the reproach of the name
of God and of his holy gospel, as though forsooth papistry has been abandoned,
not for the love of the truth, but to rob the church of her goods, and as
though new thieves have entered in the room of the old. Now, even as
abundance does ouerwhelme the Church, so it is to be feared, least she be
brought into great straights by want, whilst many now a days are no less
sparyng and niggardly in upholding the true ministry, then heretofore kings
and princes themselves have been ouerlauishyng: we think it needful to
keep a mean in this point, which so we take will be the best, if first a
view be taken of the daily expenses which are necessary to be made: then if
somewhat be laid up for many things extraordinary, whereas no just reckoning can
be made, and both of these be accounted not sparingly or slenderly, but
bountifully and liberally, seeing that the Church by the goodness of God has
plenty. Therefore that number is to be made of parishes and pastors which may
very well suffice the people, and every one is to have an honest living
allowed. Order also is to be taken for the elders, who are to assist the
pastors that they may conveniently discharge their duty. It would be also
injurious, that the widows and children of the pastors which are dead, should
be brought to beggary, who in a care of their calling, were constrained to lay
aside the care of providing for their family. Schools also and universities,
seeing they are the Seminary of the church are not the least part of the care
thereof. Care also is to be had of alms houses and hospitals, and of
churches, that they be kept in reparations, and new builded if need require.
Last of all (as I say before) seeing the churches have plenty, order must be
taken, what shall be brought into the Church treasury yearly, from whence may
be fetched that which may suffice in time of war or famine, least then it be
to seek when it should be in a readiness. When all these things shall
faithfully and frankly be brought by supputation into one sum still yearly:
Good and sufficient men are to take order for their collecting, such a way as
shall be without trouble or strife. That which shall be found to be overplus,
is not to be lauished out with other public revenues, but to be laid up by it
self (for these are of an other nature, though not always gotten after the
honestest sort by the covetous priests) and we think that it may be taken and
bestowed for the service of the kingdom, when the public necessity thereof
does require it, especially if the people be so much the more eased.


