(...) To the honorable and most virtuous, Mistrisse Francis Smith.
I Do here offer up unto your virtue (which does yet make you more worthy
then the worth of your most Honorable birth) these vn-Frenched Prayers, which
the religious zeal of that reverend man, Beza of Geneua, has in his private
Exercises povvred out unto GOD. To commend their excellency unto you, by my
judgment, were to commend them to little; and therefore, let your own
judgment (as it can best) conceive their worth; and your godly devotion, in
making use of them, supply whatsoever want of grace is come unto them, by my
changing their language, in the weight and life which your utterance shall give
them. To none could they be addressed by me, so fitly, both in respect of your
virtue (prone to affect such religious exercises) and for the respect and
service I owe your worthy Husband, (whose favor toward me does justly
challenge a most grateful acknowlegement;) And therefore if you will be pleased
graciously to receive these Prayers at my hands, you shall add to their number
this one, That God (to whom they are sent) will, both here on Earth, and in
Heaven, bless you with unspeakable felicity.

At your commandment most humbly I. B.

A Table of the Prayers contained in this Book.
1 A prayer upon the Lords prayer. 2 A prayer upon the Belief. 3 A prayer
upon the ten Commandments. 4 A prayer to one only God in Trinity of
persons. 5 A prayer to know God in Jesus Christ. 6 A prayer for obtaining of
the gift of the Holyghost. 7 A prayer to God for the light of his word. 8 A
prayer that we may not depart from the holy Church. 9 A prayer to obtain the
efficacy of holy Baptism. 10 A prayer for the Communion of the holy
Eucharist. 11 A prayer to give thanks after the Communion. 12 A prayer to
obtain the gift of Faith. 13 A prayer to obtain the virtue of Hope. 14 A
prayer to obtain the virtue of Charity. 15 A prayer for the well using of
afflictions. 16 A prayer to obtain the virtue of patience 17 A prayer for the
well using of man's life. 18 A prayer upon temporal death. 19 A prayer upon
heavenly life. 20 A prayer upon eternal death. 21 A morning prayer. 22 A
prayer among a Family. 23 A Prayer before meat. 24 A Prayer to give thanks
after meat. 25 An evening prayer among a family. 26 A Prayer for him that
suffers much by sickness. 27 A prayer in the Visitation of the sick. 28 A
prayer for him that feels him self to be near death.
The end of the Table.
(...) To al Christians, zealous in holy Prayers.
Luke 21. The Kingdom of God is at hand, watch therefore, praying at all times.


IF we are endued with the true knowledge of our estate, and condition, as
also, the efficacy of holy prayers, we should not need to be advertised
often, to present our selves before God, to offer unto him our vows, and to
beseech his fatherly love, or dilection, for guiding us, by his good spirit,
unto the light of his truth, to increase in our hearts, faith, love,
constancy, humility, and other his heavenly gifts, to forgive us our debts,
to mortify the corruptions of our nature, to clothe us with his spiritual
armor, against the assaults of the devil, the world and the flesh, to provide
for our necessities, to preserve us from infinite dangers, which compass us
round about: to be short, to grant us his holy spirit, to guide the whole
course of our life, to the glory of his name, and the peace and salvation of
our own souls. For, he who has not a feeling of the great want of all these
graces, or blessings, and consequently, the necessity of prayers unto God, for
obtaining the same, knows not himself, but is senseless and void of all
feeling. By prayer we bless God for his goodness, power, wisdom, justice,
and mercy toward us: because of our prayers, he blesses us, in doing us
good, and distributing his benefits amongst us: it is unto us, as the soul
of our souls: for that prayer quickens our affections, and lifts up our
hearts unto heaven; which otherwise would be dead in sins and trespasses, by
following the vanities of this wicked world. Prayer is as it were the key which
opens unto us the treasury of our heavenly Father, as faith is the hand,
laying hold upon those sure and permanent possessions of eternal life, the
desire whereof, should cause us continually to pray unto, and fervently to love
God. Prayer makes, that in the miseries of this life, we comfort our selves,
by looking for the benefits of the kingdom of God. Prayer refreshes us
through the remembrance of his gracious promises, which confirm us in the
same, and of the blessings already received at his hands, which move us in our
necessities, to hope for the like, and wait for it, with all patience. It
augmenteth in us, a desire to be conjoined with him, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom all our good does consist. It cheereth us in those works,
which the holy ghost works in us, and by us, yielding a sweet smell to our
souls, and is moreover unto us, as a strong Tower, and most assured fortress,
against all that might astonish us, in this our earthly habitation: yea which
is more, prayer does sometimes stand us insteede, to obtain of Almighty God,
most evident testimonies of his glory, in matters supernatural, which our
reason should judge impossible, as it befell unto Moses, praying for the
victory of the Israelites, against the Amalekites: to Ioshuah when at his
prayer, the course of the Sun was stayed: to Elias, bringing fire down from
heaven, and to Ezechias restored to health after sentence given of his death:
not that we should simply attribute so great and profitable effects to the
work of prayer: but to the goodness, love, power, and counsel of God, who
works so, and by such means as he pleases in his creatures: and of his
free mercy, crowns the prayers of his elect with rewards, and with grace
for grace. These therefore are the fruits and benefits we are to look for
from our good god and father, when reposing our selves upon his love in Christ,
and with humble and penitent hearts, we do prostrate our selves before his
face, to sanctify his name, craving his mercy, and beseeching him to bless
us, teach and guide us as his children, to believe his word, even as he whom we
call upon, does desire our good, because he loves us, may give unto us that we
ask, because he is almighty: and is willing to hear us, for his Sons sake,
because he has so promised. But it is also most true, that acording to his
wisdom, he knows the time and convenient means, to let us fully enjoy the
efficacy of our prayers. Let us persevere, only asking those things which are
to his glory, and he will not fail to help us in all our necessities. We
are moreover to note, that it is not the sound of the lips which the Lord
requires of us, unless the same be also guided with the holy affections of
the soul: for he harkneth rather to the heart than to the voice, and gives to
us openly that which he sees us in secret to desire with our affections
mortified in his sight. Therefore we must (praying carefully) lift up our
hearts with a true zeal to GOD, banishing out all other thoughts, abandoning
Satan with all his baits, opening our hearts, that our Heavenly Father may
thereinto infuse and power down his blessings. Neither ought our prayer to be
bare or naked, but conjoined with reading, and meditation of Gods holy word,
as also fruitful in all goodness.

But alas, if it be most true, that in all our exercises of piety we be never
able to separate our selves from our selves, but that our corruption will still
evidently appear, it is sure, the same will especially befall us, when we
prepare our selves to pray unto God, and frame our petitions, according to his
will: for besides that the devil does at al times lie in wait, to seduce us,
so does he, especially, at such times, seek to creep into our minds, to
divert our thoughts elsewhere, that they may be polluted with many blemishes:
notwithstanding, that they of themselves, sufficiently go astray: yea our
vanity, imperfection, and coldness, does many ways bewray it self, that we
may well say, in one word: no man prays rightly, but he, whose mouth and
mind Christ does direct with his spirit. And therefore has he delivered unto
us, a sacred form, for all holy prayers, in that prayer which is usually
termed, The Lords Prayer, wherein, he has set down, the perfect rule,
whereby, we may rightly form our petitions, and keep them within their
bounds: that is, the glory of God, and our salvation. And this are we
dilligently to note, as being assured, that so we shall be heard, albeit our
frailty do hinder us, from praying with that zeal, feeling, and feruency of
faith, which true prayer does require. Let us win from our selves so much as
we may, calling to mind, for our comfort, that we do offer our prayers, to
the father, in the name of his wel-beloued son, and by his own mouth, covered
with his righteousness: who therefore will accept of them, according to his
promise, but withal, let us also remember, that such, who use many times to
say, O Lord help us, do not, notwithstanding, thereby obtain salvation: but
they, who do his will, and to that end, does he command us, that we have his
word dwelling peaceably in our hearts, that we may be ready to perform every
good work.

These things, therefore, being by God conjoined unto prayer, let us take great
heed, that we separate them not, considering, that by the same, we converse
with our father which is in heaven, and so enjoy, the fullness of his
blessings: for whenever we apply our eyes, or our ears, to those things,
which he declares unto us, in the holy scriptures, he speaks unto us, and
calling upon his name, we speak unto him.

Moreover, in as much as, naturally we are but little inclined, or rather
utterly careless, of these spiritual exercises, it will not be amiss, if we
restrain our selves, to prayer, at certain hours of the day: not for
superstition, but to withstand our sloth, slackenesse, and other worldly
matters, which otherwise might induce us, to ouerslippe diverse days, without
any practice of this duty. David bearing upon his shoulders the burden of a
great Kingdom, prayed, morning, at noone, and at night: yea seven times a
day, did he sing praises to God, day and night meditating in his Law. Now
therefore (gentle Readers) feeling my self toward the declining evening of my
days, with a taste of so many solid, and permanent joys, as are daily to be
found in prayer: and withal, being inflamed with a desire, to finish the rest
of my course, in this sweet labor, which I find to be accompanied, with so
large a recompense, I have here formed for my self, and for any other, that
list to read it, this small mannell, of holy, short, and familiar prayers,
grounded upon the texts of scriptures, such as are indeed, to instruct,
comfort, and make us perfect, in faith, love, constancy, and to be short, in
all christian life. Be of good cheer then, (all godly souls) and let us unite
all our petitions, in this so devout, and profitable an exercise, of all true
faithful people. Let us pray, and meditate, if not incessantly, yet at the
least, daily at certain set hours, and as often as we may, as well in the
congregation, as in our families, morning, and evening amongst our household, as
also in our secret chambers. Thus shall we with our lips, upon the Altars of
our hearts, offer up, many acceptable sacrifices of sweet savor before his
presence, whereof, the benefit will redound to our selves, in that God will
bless us, in our vocations, works, and labors. Oh, how happy shall these men
then be, whom the Lord shall find thus watching, and praying! for they shall
depart unto him in peace, in the contemplation of his glory; which grace, God
grant unto us all. Amen.

Royal seal E R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Holy Prayers of a faithful Soul.
For the Consolation and Perfection of a christian life.
The first Prayer, Upon the Lords Prayer.
When you pray, use no vain repetitions, as the Heathen: for they think to be
heard for their much babbling. Be ye not like them therefore: for your Father
knows whereof ye have need before ye ask of him. After this manner
therefore pray ye:

Mat. 6. Our Father which art in Heaven:


O Lord God almighty, the knowledge of whom is life, whom to serve, is to
reign, and unto whom to pray, is the joy and peace of the soul, we cannot
know thee, but in thine own image Jesus Christ, and that by the operation of
thy spirit: neither serve thee, except we follow thy word: neither call upon
thee, but in the name of the same Christ, and according to that form, which
himself has prescribed us. Thus every faithful creature says unto thee.
Our Father, give unto us, forgive us. For thus has thy son, the head of that
union, which is among al christians, commanded, that our prayers should be
common for all thy people; as being all one body, which thou gouernest by one
only spirit: and forasmuch as our being depends upon thee only, and being
in our birth corrupted by sin, thou make us to be renewed unto
righteousness, through the same eternal word, where by thou have created us, we
do rightly call thee, even by a double right, Our Father. A happy, and loving
beginning of prayer, wherein the new man, reconciled unto thee, in Jesus Christ,
thus speaks to thee his father: I do believe that I am of the number of thy
children, through thy mercy, which it has pleased thee to vouchsafe me; and
therefore (O my God) I cannot see doubt hereof, but that thou do lovingly
hear me, and art inclined to help me, and to relieve me in all my
necessities, considering thou art in heaven, even according as being in all
places, thou art as it were in no place, for thou art wholly an infinite
spirit, and inaccessible light, whose name is (I am) namely of a sole, true
essence, eternal, immutable and incomprehensible, and from whom, all nature,
whether celestial, or terrestrial, does, through grace, borrowe his essence
and subsistence. Thus art thou above, in such wise, that being out of every
place, thou art above all this great universal world, in the seat of thine
own glory, from whence, thou do embrace both heaven and earth, and with thy
providence, sustain them. As also, in some sort thou art above al things,
because they do all depend, and bear themselves upon thee, who likewise,
do by thy subtilitie pierce into them, more nearly unto every creature then
the same is to it self. Howbeit, thou art in heaven, so far forth, as that the
exquisite works of thy hands, do the better appear therein. And thou do in
an especial manner inhabit the high heaven: for there does thy Majesty shine
with open countenance: beside, thou art with thy gracious presence in the
souls of the righteous, which do harbor thee as a Father in their hearts.

[Hallowed be thy name.]
FOr, O Lord, since thou art my father, reason requires, that above all things,
I should desire thy honor. But everlastingly, for ever and ever, thy name is
holy, and the glory thereof infinite. My prayer then brings nothing to thy
greatness and excellencies: but yet I may here desire, that thy name, both of
it self, and by it self, most holy, may be sanctified, and exalted in me, and
in all men, and in all places: whereby my self do also obtain that holiness,
which is convenient for the true child of such a father, unto whom all
uncleanness is displeasing.

[Thy kingdom come.]
But who can impeach thy Kingdom, O eternal God, who have created al things,
for thy service? Thou raignest over al; for the heaven is thy throne, and the
earth thy foote-stoole: Yet I beseech thee, be unto me, as a father in mercy,
not as a Judge in thy justice: thou raignest in thy word, which thou have
revealed, and inspired, and I beseech thee, even for thy glory sake, that this
thy book of life, may be opened to all people, that thereby all nations may
worship thee: thou raignest in thy Church, and I pray, that the number of thy
elect may be shortly fulfilled. Thy kingdom is thy grace, and I beseech thee
to make me as capable thereof, as thou art liberal.

[Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
MY will, O Lord, is altogether peruers and depraved, except it be formed by
thine, wherein rests and consists all my good: create in me this holy will,
and give me grace to fulfill it, in all my thoghts and works: (for what can I
have, but what thou give me?) To the end that in obedience of faith, I may
do that which shall be acceptable in thy sight, even as the Angels in heaven
do obey thy voice.

[Giue us this day our daily bread.
FOR Christ our Lord and Doctor, has so contrived the petitions which we make
unto thee, that in seeking first the glory of thy name, he will, that with all, we should have experience, of the riches of thy goodness, in all things
necessary for this life. Thus will thou (O merciful Father) recompense with
infinite benefits, even our simple cogitations of the brightness of thy glory,
and crown thy gifts in us with grace for grace. We do therefore daily crave
our bread, and thou do also give it us, that is to say, even all that is
necessary for our maintaynance here beneathe: yet do thou present us with
one bread far more excellent and profitabl, even the bread of angels, and of
the blessed spirits: give me therefore (O Lord) Jesus Christ, God and man,
that of him I may live for ever, that my understanding may be enlightened with
his truth, and my heart kindled with the fire of his love, that I perish not.

And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.
Our sins as debts do bind us to death (which is their reward) and to hell
(which is their grave) they are as a strong bar, to keep us from coming to
thee (O most holy God) yea which is more, they are as a cloud that shadoweth
thine eyes, from looking favorably upon us. And therefore the most convenient
preparation to prayer, is with an humble, and truly penitent heart, to feel
and confess our sins: for so thou will vouchsafe to grant us remission of
the same, in the name of thy son our Savior, in imputing unto us his
righteousness. Yet herein (O Lord) is thy free mercy very great, that thou
also give us power to pardon those that do offend us, and by so doing, to
obtain thy grace: for what offense can any man commit against us, (poor worms
of the earth) considering that we do so often, and so grievously offend (O King
of glory) and in such sort, that if every creature should arm it self to hurt
us, yet would not the least injury that we commit against thee be sufficiently
revenged. Yet do thou vouchsafe thus to testify thy infinite goodness,
accepting as a sweet sacrifice, the oblation of our hearts reconciled, and
fully united with our neighbors, like as contrariwise no part of a hateful and
perverse heart can delight thee.

And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
FOr, as through thy mercy, thou suffer not Satan (the author of all
temptations) to seduce thy children, neither sin to overcome them, so when
thou will punish man in thy justice, they remain deprived of thy protection,
and under the power of the devil to be subject to his tyrany, and to live in a
reprobate sense, hereof do we therefore reap this singular consolation, that
this great adversary of our salvation can do nothing against us, unless thou
give him leave: and whereas sometimes thou causest us to be tempted, thou do
it as a father, to chastise us for our transgressions, or to make us more
triumphant and victorious in the trial, which it pleases thee to make of our
faith, and hope, for thy glory, and our own good, or for the edification of
our neighbors.

For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever.
LIke as (O my God and father) I began my prayer, by the hallowing of thy name,
so is it meet and just that I should end it, by the exaltation of the same: as
thy children, who bounding their vows, with the only care of thy honor may
assure themselves to obtain the fulfilling of the same in the sole perfection
of thy glory. So be it.

The second Prayer, Upon the Symbol or Articles of Belief.
I believe in God the Father Almighty: etc.
1. Cor. 15. Before all things I have delivered unto you, that which I have
received, namely that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures,
and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day.


O Lord God governor of the whole world, immortal, invisible, and only wise,
for whose glory al things are. It has pleased thee, according to the decree of
thy unsearchable counsel, that man, formed after thy image, and falling through
mistrust and curiosity, should, by faith, be restored to the excellency of his
nature; and as he sought knowledge above thy commandment, and so strayed from
thee, and wandered out of thy kingdom, so he should be reunited, and reduced
into the path of salvation, by believing thy only word in the promised
Messiah, bending the power of his soul, to the knowledge of thee, in embracing
the preaching of the cross, which the world would account folly. But because
we al are borne blind, and corrupt in our understanding and will, it therefore
follows, that all the imaginations and thoughts of our hearts are at all
times nothing but evil, our knowledge but vanity, our learning but ignorance,
our judgment but error, our virtue but pride, our wisdom but folly, the
viuacitie of our spirit but the instrument of ruin, our delight but
filthiness, our faith but incredulity; our hope but fancy, our charity but
coldness, to be brief, our piety but hypocrisy or superstition; and our
righteousness but covetousness or ambition. So (O Lord) we of our selves are
not capable, so much as of any good thought, until thou that know how to
draw light out of darkness do return to recreate'vs, and by thy spirit
to shine in the firmament of our souls, to the end to frame us to every
faithful disposition, and obedience, and so to make us believe in the gospel
of thy grace, and in the mysteries of our salvation. I do therefore beseech
thee (my God) according to the'fficacy of thy virtue, to change in me all that
I have of my self, even my rockie and stony heart, and to make it pliable, and
flexible, unto the voice of my Redeemer, who is come according to thy promise,
to the end, that with a full and lively faith I may cleave to his eternal
truth, for to comprehend, according to the measure of the gift of thy grace,
the sum and perfection of al spiritual wisdom, which is taught us in the
articles of the true faith and sound principles of religion. Surely my soul is
overmuch inclined to incredulity and mistrust, neither is it any way able to
pierce into these high and profound secrets of piety, where we have a full
declaration of all the figures, and prophesies of the Law, with a most pure
and perfect doctrine of four points, which are the end of all religion, and
in regard whereof it is called Catholic. For we find thee there (thou only and
true God) the Father, author and governor of all things by thy almighty
power, goodness, and providence. Next is our Lord Jesus Christ (thy word and
eternal wisdom) therein taught unto us, together with the holy history of
our redemption. Thirdly, we there find the Holy Ghost (the infinite virtue of
thee the father, and of the son) three persons, of one sole, and simple
essence, and in equality of glory. And finally therein is showed unto us, the
Church, with a description of these celestial graces, which thou pourest upon
her, whereof the forgiveness of sins is the sum, and life everlasting the
only scope. Give therefore unto me (O merciful father) of this thy spirit of
revelation, of grace, and of mercy; to the end that the brightness and
operation thereof may make my soul capable of these great mysteries of thy
Kingdom, so far forth as may be expedient for me to know, for the service of
thy glory, and my own salvation, that I may obtain the only true and sound
knowledge, whose subject and end is the only true, solid; and soueraign good,
both of men and angels, namely to know thee, to glorify thee, and him whom
thou have sent, the Savior of the world. So that with my heart I do believe
before thee, and before al men, I do with my words and works, confess this
acceptable message of the Messiah come, borne in the City of DAVID, which is
CHRIST the lord God, manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
the Angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed by the elect, and exalted into
glory, for our righteousness, holiness, and glorification: And further also
(O Almighty Lord) print in my heart the feeling and knowledge of this thy
unspeakable goodness and love, extended unto us miserable sinners, in that
thou have given unto us in sacrifice, thy only Son, saving us by the only
merits of his death, to the end, that as the efficacy of thy love has
redounded unto me wretched creature, so I may also sufficiently meditate upon
thy great mercy, incessantly yield thanks unto thee, and feel thy eternal
consolation, until that I departing in peace toward thee my Father, which art
in Heaven, may obtain full knowledge of those things that thou have given me
to believe, and in the perfect contemplation of the same, the sovereign good
of Angels and Saints. So be it.

The third Prayer. Upon the Decalogue, or ten Commandments.
[God spoke all these words, saying, Hear O Israel: I am the Lord thy god,
that has brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage:
Thou shall have none other Gods before me, etc.

Exodus 20.]
O Lord GOD Almighty, the Author of all righteousness, and perfection of
life; Yea even thou that art essentially Justice, perfection and life. I do
truly know, that man created righteous and perfect, and by cleaving to thee,
blessed (but free and mutable) has, through sin, turned from thee, plunging
himself headlong into the sink of unrighteousness, imperfection and death.
The which has deprived him of all power to obey the Law, and consequently
beereaued him of the reward of eternal blessedness. And albeit of especial
grace thou do call us, by the Gospel, to the free righteousness of Christ, to
the end, that believing in him, we might confess him, for the obtaining of
salvation; Yet are we nevertheless so much inclined to distrust, corruption,
and disorder, that hardly we are entered into the way of his vocation, but we
retire immediately, straying out of that course which might purchase unto us the
prize; and so through our works, deny our faith, and our profession. Now as
the first and principal manner of thy honor (O only true GOD) consists in
believing, and reposing our whole confidence in thee alone: so the second and
inseparable from true faith, rests in obedience to thy holy and good will.
For we must be doers of that which thy holy word teaches us, and not hearers
only, deceiving our selves. Thou have chosen and adopted us to be thy Children:
but it is upon this condition, that we should be reformed to the Image of
Jesus Christ, the first borne, and inheritour of all things. Thou have chosen
us to be his Temple: now his habitation cannot be but holy: for thy spirit
dwells therein. Thou have redeemed us with the price of his blood, and that
to the end thou may be glorified, both in our bodies and souls. Thou have
freed us from sin, even to the end we might be servants to righteousness.
Thou have given us the Savior of the World, to be our justification: but to
the end also that we possess him in sanctification. Thou would that he
should die for all men, even to make him live in thy elect, and they in him.
And this is the reason wherefore the institution of our faith, together with the
spiritual consolations that support the same, is accompanied with the ten
precepts of thy law, the certain and assured means to honor and serve thee,
in living religiously to thy glory, and uprightly to the profit of our
neighbors. For albeit in the Gospel we be free from the rigor and punishment
of the Law, yet nevertheless, the rule of piety and holy life contained in the
Decalogue, abides with us, as a perpetual pattern, whereby to frame our
temporal course of life. And accordingly we do also consider of it in two
parts, according as it pleased thee, O Lord, to write it with thy finger, and
to deliver it unto Moses, in two tables of stone, for thy people, whereof the
first contains four Commandments, of our duty toward thee, and the
second, six, of that which we owe to our neighbors: Also the sum and
fulfilling of all these holy precepts imports that we love thee, (O only
true GOD) with our whole heart, soul, and thought, and then all other men,
(especially the household of faith) as our selves. But O Lord, such is the
weakness of all flesh, that there is no man able to attain to the perfection
of thy Law: and yet thou willest, that here in, thy children should comfort
themselves, that there is left unto them, some measure to approach thereunto,
and so to be acceptable unto thee; namely when with their whole strength,
prevented by thy grace, they study to attain the end of thy word, walking and
going forward by the steps thereof, and still with sighing for their
infirmities. For all the faithful may so believe, that with thee their Father
there is mercy for them, in thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ. I beseech thee
therefore, O my God, to cast upon me, the eye of thy clemency, and goodness,
thereby through the effects of thy spirit, to restore in my soul, the breaches of
sin, to illuminate my understanding, and to possess my heart with the love of
thy truth, to the end that in all knowledge and obedience of faith, I may
constantly walk in the paths of thy law; so that I may worship, scare, and
love thee, as the Lord, to whom I wholly owe my self: for thou have created
me, and which is more, redeemed me from eternal death, whence I do also
learn to love all men in thee, and for thy sake, because they bear thy image,
so that perseuering thus in the duty of my vocation, I may so much the rather
feel thy peace in my conscience, and thy blessing upon all the works of my
hands; that filled with days, I leave my life, to enjoy rest eternally. Amen.

The fourth prayer. To one only God in Trinity of persons.
God in the beginning created Heaven and earth, The word was with god, and this
word was God: And the spirit of GOD moved upon the waters.

Genesis 1. John. 1.
O Eternal, true, and only God in three persons, coequall and almighty, of
one sole, and simple essence, invisible, and infinite. The Father, the word and
the holy Ghost, who being the soueraign good, sufficient to thy self, needing
no new matter, would not for ever enjoy thy glory alone, but according to
thy unmeasurable and altogether incomprehensible goodness, reveal thy self
at thy good pleasure, in four works altogether divine and singular. (The
creation of the world, and of all nature: the redemption of mankind: the
building thy church, and thy graces the same:) O Lord, who only art in truth,
permanent and stable; through whom every thing is that is, in respect of
whom, all is less then nothing, who giving by thy word being to that that
was not at all, have, out of a confused, void, and dark substance, drawn
light, beauty, and order, stretching forth the heaven as a vault or tent under
the same, the earth, and the inhabitants thereof, who have made al things in
number, weight, and measure: and from whose providence does proceed, the
moderation and government of all that is, whether it lives, feels, or
understands: O holy, thrice holy, admirable, and amiable, who being
righteous, would not suffer man, made after thy image, to go unpunished when
he had sinned, and who, being merciful, have not left him without grace: who,
being good, have not neglected the least of thy works, even to the hair of a
beast, the lightest fether of a fowl, and the least flower or leaf of grass,
in every of these things, grauing certain tokens of thy glory and majesty by
the harmony and agreement of al these small creatures with the greatest of the
world: O Father, and moderator of all things! I beseech thee, let thy eternal
wisdom reach to me even through the light of thy spirit which sees all
things, which sounds all things, which searches into all things, and which,
with his presence of grace, makes his residence, in all peaceable cogitations,
to lift them up by the effects of his gifts, unto the fanctuarie of thy
supercelestiall palace, there to make them see, hear, and worship, in spirit
and truth, the divine maruels of thy Kingdom, and the mysteries of the
adoption of thy elect. So that being thus taught by the most sacred Oracles, I
believe in heart, and with understanding meditate upon the true and eternal
existence of thee (O Father) borne of none, the first Sovereign and Almighty
cause of al things and especially of our salvation through thy love: Of thee (O
Son) eternally begotten by the Father, and by whom he has made all his
works, who art the principal cause, which gives us life and happiness,
according to the fullness and perfection of thy love, and of thee (O Holy
Ghost) from al eternity proceeding from the Father and the Son, and by whom
all creatures do subsist, and salvation is communicated unto us; three
persons, of properties distinct, yet not separate; in unity of essence, and
equality of glory: in thee one, and true God, not created, infinite, and
almighty, and the God of thy people. And that through this healthful
knowledge, I do worship, serve and call upon thee only for ever, without
declining from thy word. Whereupon likewise, through a steadfast faith in thy
promises, depending upon an assured hope, and true love, I do more and more
draw upon my self the savor of thy holy blessings: to the end that as the
Angels above do praise thee, the powers of heaven do bless thee, and all the
spiritual armies do magnify thee, I likewise may here below have this
felicity, to finish my course in singing thy praises, and so leaving this
terrestrial life, to join my self altogether to the celestial, with those
blessed spirits in the full contemplation of thy face, to sing with them without
end this song of perfect joy (Glory be to the Father that has created us;
Glory be to thee Son that has redeemed us; Glory be to the Holy Ghost that
has sanctified us; Glory be to the most high Trinity, one only God and
Lord, whose kingdom is everlasting.

The fifth Prayer, For the obtaining of the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ.
The word was made flesh, and dwelled among us, full of grace and truth, the
Image of the invisible God, which is Christ the Lord; who by himself having
purged our sins, sits at the right hand of the Majesty: in the highest
places.

Ioh. 1. Col. 1. Lu. 2 Heb. 1.
O GOD and Father of our Lord CHRIST JESUS, and of all them whom in thy love
thou have given to him to be his brethren, it has been thy good pleasure, to
settle our true and only felicity in the knowledge of thy holy name, and the
effects of thy grace. But we are unable to know thee, or to feel the efficacy
of thy love toward us, but only in the same Christ, who is the brightness of
thy glory, and the engraven character of thy person, God with thee, and man
with us. By this thy eternal word thou have created all the world, giving unto
us the first testimony of the manifestation of thy wisdom and providence. But
thou give unto us, a more singular benefit in the miraculous work of our
redemption, which does moreover represent unto us, both thy great goodness
and love, and thy Justice, and infinite power. Thy love, in that thou have
vouchsafed freely to redeem man, who proud and unthankful, withdraws
himself from thee his Father and Benefactor, to surrender himself unto Satan
the ennemy to our salvation, and of the honor of thy name. Thy Justice, in that
thou have not spared the blood of thy innocent son, to the end in his
sufferings to justify thy goodness and mercy. Thy power, in that for the
accomplishing of this supernatural work, thy word, which from all eternity
was resident in thy bosom, of one essence and glory with thee was made flesh.
Nevertheless I do very well know, that the depth of these profound mysteries
cannot be discovered to our senses, likewise that the treasures of thy
wisdom, of thy counsel, and of thy judgments, are a very bottomless gulf,
and thy ways impossible to be found out. Also, O Lord I do not rashly enter
into that place, which is forbidden me, neither will I imitate my first Father
Adam, who coveting to know too much stretched forth his hand unto the
forbidden tree, and desiring one only fruit, was deprived of all the rest. I
do only with flexible heart embrace, and carefully in my cogitation,
according to the measure of thy gifts, meditate upon that secret of godliness,
which I have received by the preaching of thy gospel, and do in part know it:
attending, until that being delivered from sin and corruption, I may see
thee face to face, and in presence behold, that which now I see as it were in a
very dark Glass. I beseech thee therefore, my God, vouchsafe, by the light of
thy spirit, to address and guide me to the faithful knowledge of this great
Savior, whom thou (Father) have promised from the beginning, and in the latter
times revealed, in signs and wonders surpassing all miracles, to the end that
being instructed by his doctrine, I may, by him, and in him, know thee to be
the eternal living God, and the God of thy people, that according to his word
I may worship and serve thee in spirit and truth, and in his name call upon
thee only in full confidence of thy mercy, accompting him the only subject
thereof, and the only mediator of my salvation, who died for my sins, and
rose again for my righteousness: even (O Lord) because it pleased thee in
this manner to ordain of the estate of humane nature, the work of thy hand.
For who was thy councellor? and what have we that we have not received?
grant me therefore in the study and meditation of so many mysteries, so high
and so wholesome, that I may humbly condescend to thy divine counsels, in
worshipping them with this resolution of thy Apostle, that I will not know any
thing but Christ, neither possess any thing but him, since that in him, the
treasures of all wisdom do consist, and that they who lodge him in their
hearts, have thee, O God, verily present, and do enjoy thee and thy benefits.
Make me also to feel and confess this necessity common to all the children
of Adam, that for the cancelling of this obligation, which held us bound to
eternal death (the just reward of sin) we were forced to have this great
King of heaven, holy, innocent, and separate from all sinners, to be our high
Priest, our sacrifice and oblation, upon the Altar of the cross, to the end,
O Lord, that according to thy unsearchable decree, grounded upon mercy and
justice, thy well-beloved son having to himself united our nature the
bondslaue of satan, might lead it to the combat, directing it how to
overcome this great adversary: And this has he done, obtaining for us the
victory, when he brake the sting of death, and the bonds of hell, and that he
rose out of the sepulcher, carrying with him this humane nature as the
earnestpeny of our hope, to thy right hand into heaven. Of this so singular a
benefit, let the remembrance be always before my face, that I may offer unto
thee (O my God) the sacrifice of thanksgiving all the days of my life: so that
having my redeemer for a perpetual object, and sure foundation of my Faith, in
the knowledge of thy name, I may thoroughly learn Christ, not only to believe
by his word the sacred history of his conception and birth, with his office of
a sovereign King, great Prophet, and perpetual lawgiver of his church, also
his passion, death, resurrection, and ascension, but also, that in full
assurance in his promises, I may appropriate to my self the gifts and graces
which he purchased for us, by fullfilling that charge that he had received from
thee, O father, to the end, through him, to make us worthy of thy salvation: so
as I may comfort and wholly repose my self upon his obedience and
righteousness, showing forth and sealing this my hope by good works, to thy
glory, O eternal God, and the peace of my conscience. So be it.

The sixth Prayer, For obtaining the gift of the Holy Ghost.
By the eternal Spirit, Christ has offered himself to GOD, the Spirit which
sounds the profound things of God: which also testifies with our spirit,
that we are the children of God.

Heb. 9.1. Cor. 2. Romans 8.
O Lord God almighty, we do learn in thy word (the unchangeable truth) how
without confounding any thing in the three persons of thy most simple Deity,
or separating the only and indivisible substance thereof, each person
retains that which is proper to it self in the works of thy hands,
especially in that which concerns our salvation. So the beginning of all and
every action, is properly attributed unto thee, O Father of the whole world,
and to Jesus Christ, the wisdom, the counsel, and the order, to dispose all
things, and to the Holy Ghost, the virtue and supporter of all thy works.
According whereunto we also do acknowledge from thy love, and from thy
eternal decree, that which thou have provided for us in thy son (very God
made very man) such a mediator and savior, as was necessary for us: and we do
render unto him the honor of the fullness of thy love toward us, and of that
perfect obedience which he has yielded to thy ordinance, even to the death of
the cross for us in most bitter anguish, as also from the virtue of the
Holy Ghost, we do confess the efficacy, and healthful application of this
great and principal worke-manship of our redemption.

But thy wisdom, O Lord, rests wholly in mystery, that is to say, it is
hidden, except unto those to whom thy spirit gives sight. For true it is, that
Christ calls all men unto him by his Gospel, spreading forth to that effect,
his light throughout the whole world. Whosoever follows him, shall not walk in
darkness; for he is the Sun of righteousness, and the way to go to
heaven: But his sheep only do hear his voice, and follow him; as also he
knows them and gives unto them life everlasting: even by the mere efficacy
of his spirit which quickens and lighteneth all thy elect, O God, to make
them in thy word to behold the only lamp of thy kingdom, the knowledge of
salvation, the steadfast good of the soul, and the sure and only means to
obtain the same: all people may read thy sacred writings, only they can
gather the sense to the peace of their souls, whom it pleases thee, as a
Father to illuminate from above. For so may they see how in the cross of
Jesus they do obtain their triumph, in his shame, their glory, in his pain,
their peace, in his tears, their joy, in his sorrow, their comfort, in his
death their life, in his resurrection, the fulness of their hope. I beseech thee
therefore, my God, to power upon me this thy spirit of wisdom, and revelation,
and grace, and mercy, through the force of his beams, to scatter the
darkness of my understanding, and with the property of his fire, to purify
my perverse affections, with his celestial lamp to kindle in my heart the true
zeal of his glory, with his holy ointment, to enbaulme my conscience, with
his sacred oil to rejoice and refresh my bowels, and with his virtue to renew
in me an upright spirit, to the end that my soul thus cleansed from the dead
works of the flesh, may be replenished with faith working all righteousness,
whereby to overcome all the enemies of my peace, (Satan, the flesh, the world,
and my own lusts.) But above al things, O Lord, make that by the efficacy of
thy holy spirit, I may obtain the true and firm consolation of the faithful
soul, the height of his joy, of his quiet and content, and the infallible
direction to his perfection, namely, the assurance that thou, my heavenly
Father, have adopted me into the number of thy children, by that grace that
thou have given us in Christ, who was made our wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. And that being so ouershadowed with the hope of
Christians which never at all confounds, I may be supported, even to the end
of my days, by thy holy spirit, which then especially may help my weakness,
that I may yield unto thee, O my God, my last groans, to thee acceptable, and
to me salutiferous, as being in the throne of thy glory approved capable of
the contemplation thereof in the heavenly Jerusalem, through thy goodness and
mercy in Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with thee, O Father, and the holy
spirit, one only God, be all honor, glory, and dominion for evermore. So be
it.

The seventh Prayer, To crave of God the light of his word.
God having at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoken to our Fathers by
the Prophets. In these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son. All
Scripture is given from above by inspiration, and is profitable to teach, to
convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be accomplished, and perfectly instructed to al good works.

Heb. 1. Tim. 3.
LOrd GOD eternal, who know that every man is but flesh, and that flesh is
but corruption, so that although thou have endued him with a reasonable soul,
which does distinguish him, from other creatures, yet his light is
notwithstanding converted into darkness, when thereby he seeks to penetrate
into the glory of thy kingdom, and the mysteries of thy grace: who know
that this poor blind borne, destitute of thy supernatural light, does in
lieu of his God, forge to him self an idol, and instead of truth, takes lies,
for thy word, his own inventions, for goodness vanity, and for the path to
life, the way to death. And albeit thou have even from the beginning made thy
self as it were visible to man, in the table of the Universal world, that
thou have many times revealed thy self unto him in a lively voice, by thy
eternal word in Heden, Horeb, in the burning bush, and elsewhere, afterward
by thy prophets insinuating thy self by thy spirit into their hearts and
thoghts, to the end by their ministry to instruct thy people: and finally that
thou have also manifested thy self in greater light by thy own word made
flesh for our redemption, and speaking unto us by his mouth: Yea which is more,
that thou have so far graced us, that this thy word of life has been, and
still remains among us, faithfully collected in the sacred registers of the
holy scripture, so to be unto us, the image of thy glory, the Law of thy
Kingdom, the ladder to Heaven, the gate to paradise, the trumpet of salvation:
to be brief, the treasury of piety, virtue, wisdom, consolation, and
perfection: Yet the flesh nevertheless ignorant, rash, and perverse, has
neither eyes to perceive these spiritual riches, nor ears to hear the
wholesome doctrine, but does rather disdain it, as it were some devised
discourse, and unprofitable voice: or howsoever it be, suffering it self to be
carried away with it own and feeble imaginations, takes in this verily, the
thorn for the rose, the leaf for the fruit, and the husk for the kernel.
And thus are we all borne in this error, in this calamity, in this way to
mortal ruin, until that thou, O merciful God, make us to be borne again,
of the spirit, and in will to make our thoughts capaof the light of thy word;
and through true faith, to apprehend the mysteries of thy kingdom, the
covenant of life, the gospel of thy peace, and the assured testimonies of thy
mercies. Unto this grace of inestimable valewe does my timorous soul direct
her vows in searching thee (O great king of Heaven) throughout the course of
thy faithful testimonies, which minister wisdom to the ignorant [the holy
Scriptures] I beseech thee therefore (my God) vouchsafe to direct and guide me
in the understanding of this eternal truth, through the operation of thy
spirit, (the true teacher of our souls) that being by him instructed, I may
accomplish and make my self perfect in these four chief principles of the
doctrine of Salvation, which are fully taught at large. (The knowledge of thee
the true God, and the God of thy people: the knowledge of faith, of piety, and
of righteousness.) Whereby I may obtain the end of my being, and therein even
my Sovereign felicity, which is to know thee, to glorify thee for my GOD, to
believe thee, and in thee, Jesus Christ, and in Jesus Christ, to love, fear,
and serve thee, according as thou do command us, and in all things to
observe equity toward all men. For thus are thy children bound to learn,
according to the measure of the gift of thy grace, thy fatherly love, in thy
well-beloved son, namely by conioyning thereto the fear of thy name; that is
to say, that reverence, that causes us in humility, and obedience, to shun
evil, and do good, and to embrace righteousness, and charity. Walking in this
sort, O Lord, under thy conduct, in the Communion of Saints, I shall want
nothing to my comfort or perfection; and in good time, a depart (my life being
ended) to receive peace and perfect joy, in the eternal habitation of the
blessed souls. So be it.

The eight Prayer, That we may not depart from the Church.
Christ has loved the Church, and given himself for her, to the end he might
sanctify her, after he has purged her by the washing of water, through the
word. She is the house of God, the prop and pillar of truth: the gates of hell
shall not prevail against her.

Ephesians. 5.1. Tim. 3. Ma. 16.
ALmighty God, righteous, and merciful, who in thy justice and wrath, for the
iniquity and disobedience of man did once smite the world with the
ouerflowing of waters, and in thy mercy and love did extend thy singular
favor upon the Arc of thy servant Noah, saving him and his family from the
general inundation, intending in that small flock of the faithful to
preserve and keep thy chosen people that they might for ever serve to thy
glory I learn out of thy word, that thou will no more destroy the earth in that
manner, and therefore thou have left us the rainbow to remain for a sign.
Nevertheless what else is our poor life languishing in the infection of
sin, but a deluge of evils, and running stream of miseries that falls
upon al men, and indifferently leads them unto death? In one only thing
therefore must my soul take comfort, that as Noah was preserved from the
universal shipwreck, in his wodden Mansion by the promise that he kept in his
heart, so that a thousand falling on his right hand, and a thousand on his left
hand, he remained sound and safe under thy wing, even so I hold my self
assured against the assaults of sin, and in the midst of the woeful rocks
of this world, yea even in the straits of the grave, that thou will always
preserve from all calamities and miseries, those who stand fast in the Arc of
thy Church, grounded upon thy word in the gospel of reconciliation to the Lord
Jesus, and depart in his faith. For as likewise, according to thy Justice, thou
did even from the beginning pronounce the sentence of death against our
Fathers, because of their transgressions, even so it pleased thee, even then
also to comfort them in thy mercy, with the promise of life in this great
Redeemer to come, to the end, that embracing him by faith, they and their
children holding this foundation, should erect unto thee a temple of living
stones, holy, and steadfast for ever, for the sanctification of thy name, and
the blessedness of thy elect. And these are they (O Lord) who first in the
time of the Patriarks, then under the law, and lastly, under the gospel,
believed thy word, worshipping thee according to the same, in certain
mysteries of religion, in all places, whither it pleased thee to call, gather
and sanctify them, by the remission of their sins, in the blood of thy
son, regenerating them to every good work, by thy holy spirit, and of the
same grace, giving them from age to age diverse visible signs for sacraments
in thy Church; so indeed she is thy house, and the palace of thy glory, where
thy truth is lodged, which she vpholdeth and aduaunceth by her holy ministry;
preserving it also that it should not fall into decay, and that the remembrance
thereof should not be lost from among men. Whereof likewise proceeds the
stabilitie of the Church, which the endeavors of satan cannot shake, because
the foundation of her faith and doctrine is grounded upon the true, and
immooueable rock, even the pure confession of the name of Christ. I do
therefore beseech thee, my God, inasmuch as thy mercy and goodness has brought
me in, and hitherto held me up, in this mansion house of thy graces, that thou will vouchsafe more and more to illuminate my heart and mind, to make me see
and meditate upon the spiritual magnificence of this thy habitation, to the
end that the sacred porches thereof may be all my love, and the only delight
of my eyes, and her canticles the sole harmony of my ears: and that I may so
affectionate my self to her celestial beauty and riches, that I may hold one
day in thy Church more dear, then a thousand elsewhere. That this so sweet
company, I say, of thee (O our Father) of thy Son our redeemer, of the
holy ghost our comforter, of so many thousands of Angels, and of elect, which
liuedhere beneath in the visible kingdom of thy glory, and by infinite wonders
in the Communion of saints, may be my whole desire, and the sole subject of my
delights, that I may never depart therfrom, notwithstanding whatsoever assaults
and temptations I am to endure according to the condition of the militant
Church, and under this her gallant poesy (To believe, to do well, and to
suffer affliction) since that namely there is not any such mishap, or so much to
be feared, as to be out of this holy Temple, wherein only abides all light,
truth, salvation, and life: and in all other places, darkness, lying,
shipwreck, and death, have their dwelling. For so through thy grace, O my God,
praying and meditating, I shall spend my days in joy, expecting, in peace, my
last hour, to participate in the triumph of the same Church above, and to live
eternally in thy rest, Amen.

The ninth Prayer, For the obtaining of the efficacy of holy Baptism.
Jesus coming to his Disciples, spoke unto them saying: All power is given
unto me both in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations,
Baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, and teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you.

Mat. 28.
O Eternal God, only good, and wise, thou have vouchsafed by thy Son, that
great prophet, to teach us, that whosoever is not borne of water and the
spirit, cannot enter into thy kingdom; and that flesh and blood are not
capable of the sight of thy glory. Thou, O Lord, art essentially holiness and
righteousness. How then can uncleanness, and injustice approach near unto
thee? So it is that we are by our nature corrupted, and by sin polluted,
whereby the Sentence of death, both first and second, has overtaken all men;
howbeit, of thy infinite mercy, thou have vouchsafed to save from a gulf of
miseries, those that in thy unsearchable counsel are predestinate to life,
redeeming them from hell, and making them to be borne again in Jesus Christ,
thy eternal word, by the which thou had first given them being. And
these are they that are borne of water and the spirit into thy church through
the efficacy of the sacred mysteries of thy grace, and specially of holy
Baptism; that being clothed anew in the nature and righteousness of Christ
their Savior, they may become new creatures, pure and precious before thee.
Now through thy great mercy (O my God) I have, in thy holy Temple, received
this sacred pledge of thy covenant, and of our new birth in thy name, and in
the name of thy Son, and of the Holy Ghost, according to thy ordinance, as it
has pleased thee in the renewing of thy Church, by the preaching of the
Gospel, to manifest thy self far more clearly in three persons of thy
deity, then under the figures and shadows of the Law. For in Christ,
replenished with grace and truth, thou have made thy self visible, who has
revealed himself, and the Holy Ghost also, by plentifully spreading the beams
of his glory upon us, through the brightness of his works, altogether divine
and miraculous. We cannot so much as apprehend the virtue and efficacy of the
sacrament of baptism, unless we begin by the meditation of thy free mercy
in thy Son, and so do proceed in the contemplation of him, performing his
office, even so far forth, as to die for us: and with him we do conioyne
the Holy Ghost, through whom Christ does wash us in his blood, regenerateth
us, and makes us partakers of all his benefits. This, O Lord, I know by thy
word, that like as the sacrament of baptism is unto me a certain earnest
penie of my salvation: so must it in my own conscience, and before men, be unto
me a perpetual testimony of my faith and of my hope. So only does this
sacrament obtain his perfection and fulness, namely, when that shadowed in the
washing of my body with the sign of water, is effectually wrought within my
soul, throughout the whole course of my life. For in like manner was the
shadow of the covenant fulfilled, in cutting away the fore-skinne from the
Children of Israel, when by the circumcision of their hearts, they became
careful to walk in the statutes of Gods Law. I beseech thee therefore, O my
God, as I carry in my forehead the holy mark of Christians, so vouchsafe,
with thy finger, to grave in my heart this divine Character, to the end that I
may evermore bear and bring forth such fruit and effects, as may be
acceptable in thy sight, and profitable to my self; that as my Lord Jesus, by
his spirit working in me, washes away my sins and regenerateth my soul,
so I may likewise, by the efficacy of his own virtue, and receiving from him,
grace, persevere in the faith of my Baptism, ready to every good work. And
that as I was baptized into his death, so likewise to be buried with him, by
being dead unto sin, so that I may be grafted with him to the similitude of
his resurrection in glory, living no longer to sin, but to righteousness,
whereby thy name, O eternal God, may be sanctified, and I crowned in my latter
day with the crown of immortality amongst the company of thy blessed ones.
So be it.

The tenth Prayer, For the Communion in the holy Eucharist.
Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to
his disciples and said; Take, eat, this is my body. Then taking the cup, and
giving thanks, he gave it them, saying, Drink ye all, for this is my blood,
the blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many to the remission of
sins.

Ma. 26.
Almighty and everlasting god, according to thy love and infinite goodness,
it has plesaed thee, that not only to redeem us from sin, from death, and
from hell, and in all points to make us blessed, thy only son (the
brightness and fullness of thy glory) should take upon him humane flesh, and
after he had taught us the way to heaven, should die upon the cross, for the
accomplishment of his office, but also that this great benefit might still be
present to our perpetual comfort, and for the increase and support of our
faith, that his body risen again in glory for our righteousness and
perfection, ascended into heaven, and sitting at thy right hand, should also
be communicated unto us here beneath in thy Church, in the mystery of the
Eucharist, to be our food and nourishment unto holy and eternal life. Thus
is there sealed in our hearts that promise that he has made unto us in the
gospel, that he will, at all times, make us partakers of his flesh and of his
blood, and in this Communion give unto us the true and sound food of our
souls, that in him (who is the living bread, descended from heaven) we may
obtain our peace and felicity. O mighty providence of the Lord, who called
us to communicate in his body before his death, to the end to show us, that by
death he should not be destroyed, and that he would never leave his Church; O
what a refreshing is this, in this our earthly pilgrimage, and what a delicious
banquet, in the bread and wine, consecrated by the word of Christ, to eat his
glorious flesh, and to drink his precious blood: when by faith in his
promises, and by the virtue of his holy spirit, having our hearts cleansed and
lifted up on high, his life, together with all his graces and blessings is made
ours! O infinite blessed is that flock that has so liberal a shepherd, that
will norish it with his blood, to the end it may live in him, and of him, free
from all languishing and misery! O what a comfort is it in this valley of
tears, to find means to feed upon such food as will not perish, but rejoice
all our senses, and make us to live eternally! For so and with such efficacy
(O Lord) do we communicate in the body of thy Son crucified and risen
again, and in his blood shed for the washing of our souls, when at his holy
Table the sacred signs are, by his ordinance, delivered unto us, and that we
do receive them as he has commanded, expecting that above in heaven without
any exterior means, we may eat this bread of life, and drink this sweet
drink in the company of the Angels, and of all the blessed, then at the full
inioying of our union with thee, O great God, and the joy of our beatitude
accomplished. O most desired day, wherein we shall be fed and satisfied with
this celestial bread, that we may never die, nor thirst again in this new
life, where thou, O eternal God, shall be wholly in us. Oh happy are we
already, who already in Christ, in the communion of the faithful, do taste the
sweetness of this celestial banquet, wherein we shall see thee, and face to face
contemplate [Father, Word, Spirit] one only and true God, being filled with
thy glory in endless peace. To the end therefore that according to thy
Commandment, O Lord, I may worthily present my self to this holy banquet of
sacred food, which the Angels do admire, and honor, which also thou do
not communicate but to thy flesh, I beseech thee give me grace well to
discern the body of my Savior, in trying my self according to his word, so
as my heart may be cleansed from sin, and uncleanness, and replenished with
thy love, and with every other spiritual virtue, to the end, that even this
day, harboring therein this great King of heaven, I may increase in the faith
and hope of my salvation, by his holiness and righteousness. I have reposed al
my confidence in thy mercy, I neither seek nor hope for any good or grace, but
from thee (my God) and in thy son, and for his sake, I do desire in my
place, with simplicity, to celebrate the remembrance of his death in the holy
church to the glory of thy name, and the peace of my soul. I renounce the
deadworkes of the flesh, and the lusts thereof, I do put off all enmity and
malice, with a good intent to embrace the lively works of the spirit, and to
dwell in love and charity with my neighbors, I do believe in the promises
that Christ (the infallible truth) has pronounced with his own mouth; That at
his holy table, he will truly make me partaker of his body and blood, to the
end I may possess him wholly, and in such sort, that being made flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, he may live in me, aad I in him for ever. Help O
Lord the weakness of my faith, support me in my infirmity, and in that
desire which thou give me, to profit in the sound knowledge of thy mysteries,
and in the practice of the paths of thy kingdom, conioyne unto the same
desire, the performaunce of the deed. For it is only by the virtue of thy
spirit, in sincerity of heart, that I shall this day receive from the same
Jesus, the effect of his word, in participating truly in his new and eternal
testament, the covenant of grace, so to persevere in this blessed society of
his Body, that from him I may incessantly gather strength and life, and united
with him, I may also attain to be one with thee (my Creator.) Grant me
therefore, that in this manner I may, with thy Church, celebrate the most holy
remembrance of our Lord, and of the work of our redemption, to the end, that
so receuing this great sacrament of his body, with a new augmentation in all
heavenly grace, with so much the greater confidence I may again call upon
thee my God, and my Father, and more and more glorify my self in thy mercies.
So be it.

The eleventh Prayer, For thanksgiving after the Communion.
And when they had sung a Psalm, they went out unto the Mount of Olives.

Mat. 26.
O Lord, my God, and my Father, even from the bottom of my heart, and with
all my soul, I yield thee praise and thanks, for that it has pleased thee
to enlarge so great a benefit to me miserable sinner, as to have drawn, and
received me into the sacred Communion of thy son Jesus Christ my savior. The
heaven of heavens are not able to comprehend him, yet does he so far honor
us, as to vouchsafe to communicate with us, yea even to enter into us (poor
worms of the earth.) For such was thy good pleasure, (O Lord) to deliver him
once to the death, for the redemption of thy elect; and as to every one of
them, so do thou this day give him to me, to be my food and spiritual
sustenance, that I may live of him, and in him, blessed both in body and soul
eternally. I beseech thee therefore, O merciful Father, so to bless in me,
this holy and mystical action, that my unworthiness make it not unprofitable
unto me, and that the precious blood of thy son, be not in vain shed for
me, and offered me to drink: but that washed in the same, and cleansed from
my sins, I may obtain that justification, and holiness, that beseems thy
children, who have this most holy one to be their host, and head, and thy
spirit for their light. Let me not be so wretched, as to abuse these sacred
meats, which thou do communicate to thy household of faith only, the
provision whereof cost thy well-beloved son Jesus so dear. Rather (my God) grant
that in true efficacy I may participate in this sacrament of his body to
increase in faith and love, and all other thy gifts, that I may never abandon
thy holy covenant. Alas! whither should I go but to thee, the fountain of
eternal life, by Christ, who is the fulness thereof, and by whom it runs
into us? Cast from me all carnal cogitations and delights, and all these
earthly baits, which turn to gall and corruption, because I have in my bowels
an incorruptible food, more sweeter then honny, the bread of Angels, the bread
of heaven, the bread of life, which with out any sacrament we shall feed on
above, without end; where Christ, according to his promise, shall, with us,
drink the fruit of the new vine, yielding up unto thee, the kingdom, O
eternal God, that thou may be all in all. I do therefore resign my self
into thy hands, and under thy conduct, that I may run my race in joy, and a
good conscience before thy face, and before men: And that I may depart in
peace, when my hour is come because Christ is my life. To thy name therefore,
(O almighty Creator) to thee Redeemer of the elect, to thee Comforter of the
faithful, who by thy secret virtue do work this unspeakable and
miraculous conjunction of our souls with the body of the Lord. To thee Trinity
(Father, Word, Spirit) one only and true God, be all honor and glory. Amen.

The twelfth Prayer, To obtain the gift of Faith.
The law was our schoolmaister, to bring us to Christ, that we might be
justified by faith. Abraham believed in God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness: Ye all are the children of God by the faith that is in Jesus
Christ

Galath. 3. Romans 4.
Almighty and eternal god, it has pleased thee in thy unsearchable counsel,
for a time, to give unto men, the Law, to the end to guide them to JESUS
Christ, under a schoolehouse of figures and shadows, even those whom thou of
thy grace have called into the faith of this promised Savior, to obtain in him
their justification and salvation. And when in the fullness of time he
appeared unto us, clothed in our nature, for the accomplishing of thy great and
precious promises, this justification of thy elect was fully revealed and made
ours, by belief in his Gospel. But, O Lord, thou do well know, and every
man in himselfefeeleth, the incredulity, and weakness of man, who being but
earth, and flesh, cannot climb up into heaven, and to the spirit of life, so
to confess and apprehend these deep mysteries of thy love. And indeed it is
an ancient and common complaint of thy Prophets and Apostles, who many times
have said as much (O Lord who has believed our preaching?) Also there be so
many impostures in the world, so many dreams, so many inventions; yea which
is more, so many assaults, so many snares, and so ordinary miseries that shake
the best: To be brief, so great is the vanity, ignorance, and infirmity of
our nature, that if thou (O most merciful God) workest not that in us, which
thou commaundest us to do, if thou do not teach us that we may know, if
thou do not convert us, that we may cleave to thy word, if thou do not
give us to thy Son, that he may keep us thine, if he bring us not clothed
in his righteousness to the throne of thy grace, and if thy spirit leads us
not in the paths of thy Kingdom, holding us fast in the effects of his gifts,
upon the way of thy truth, we cannot harken to this voice of the shepherd
of our souls, neither in our hearts conceive such and so lively a Faith, that
all uncertainty might be banished, and the same sealed with his own efficacy:
much less can we feel the peace and joy that true faith brings with it. For
that cause, (O Lord,) in thy love have thou promised to pour upon thy children
and servants this spirit of thy strength, light, mercy, and perfection, to
form in their hearts this thy singular gift, which unto us, is a subsistence
of the things that we hope for, and a demonstration of those that we see not.
By this so holy and necessary an ornament of the faithful, we do in all
assurance, cry unto thee, [Abba, Father,] and in our consciences feel, that
we are at peace with thy majesty, through Christ, being justified in his
blood, that we may live religiously and holily according to his word. I do
therefore beseech thee, my GOD, to accomplish, in my soul, these great effects
of thy love, new clothing me with the light and virtue of thy holy spirit,
that after the measure of the gift thereof, I may be able, with a true and
lively faith, to penetrate into the secret of my calling, and to that end,
vouchsafe so to augment in me this faith, that by the degrees of the
perfection thereof, it may appear in all her fruits, causing me to worship,
invoke, and serve thee according as thou command, that my understanding
may be withdrawn from the seduction of error, and my will from carnal
concupiscence, also that my heart may infinitely be comforted with the feeling
of this, that by christ I am reconciled to thee to holiness of life, and
eternal beatitude: so that daily increasing in this all spiritual virtue, I may
attain to some portion of thy Sovereign wisdom, and perfect righteousness,
to the end, that when my soul shall forsake this fleshly habitation, the same
faith may be as wings to transport it into thy bosom, to the celestial rest of
the Angels and Saints, there to possess the fulness of her peace, and of all
joy. So be it.

The thirteenth Prayer. To demand the virtue of hope.
God, by his great mercy, has regenerated us to a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. To the end, that being justified by
his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life,
which hope makes us not ashamed.

1 Pet. 1. Tim. 3. Romans 5.
O GOD, all good and wise, it has pleased thee, by certain means, and
proceedings, to work in thy elect, regeneration necessary for their salvation,
whereby they do in themselves feel the old Adam to die with his lusts, and the
new man to increase in the desires of righteousness, when the Holi-ghost even
this day plucketh out of their hearts, vice, and insteade thereof, planteth
virtue, making it to bring forth fruit, furthering thereby daily, the rooting
out of sin, and increase of the gifts of thy grace. I beseech thee (O Lord)
that as it has pleased thee, freely to justify me by the singular gift of
faith in our Savior Jesus Christ, granting me peace with thy Majesty through
his sacrifice: so thou would vouchsafe to illuminate the eyes of my soul, as
to make me know, to the sanctification of thy name, what the hope of those
is, whom thou have called to the incorruptible inheritance of thy glory.
Grant (my God) that my thoughts may be replenished and contented with this
steadfast hope in thy love, which thou offerest unto us in the gospel, with this
holy desire, I say, supported with an assured expectation one day, and for
ever to obtain the celestial riches, which thou have granted me to believe,
which no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor no understanding has
comprehended: namely, that I may be able to behold thy countenance and live, to
participate without end, thy kingdom above, to enjoy there the society of
the angels, to be there a fellow heir, with the glorified spirits: Finaly,
there to be fully united unto Christ, and by him, to thee, O Father, the
fountain of eternal life, and so to possess the sovereign good eternaly. Let
this holy meditation, and the hope to enjoy that full and perfect contentment,
so occupy my senses, that it may be my thought, my pleasure, my labor, my
habitation, and my most ordinary vacation. Also that all the cares of the
world, and the affections of my flesh, which might divert me from so christian
a resolution, may give place to this spiritual virtue, the anchor where of
rests in heaven, that it may lodge wholly and for ever in the secret of my
heart; since it is very true that it will yield as certainly his solid and
sole good, in fullness of time, as if already I did possess it, uniting me
unto thee, (O Lord) by the holy mysteries of thy grace. Also thou art the
beginning and the end of our hope of eternal life, because thy love is powered
upon us by the Holighost, whom thou have given us, and thy Son Jesus is the
mean and fullness, according as in him does remain all that is beautiful,
delectable, peaceable, rich, permanent, and glorious above in Heaven, which
thou have promised us. Of which treasure of inestimable value, thou do thus
even already grant me the use, by the effects of thy divine virtues, which
make me to pierce through the heavens with my imagination, and to establish my
soul in thy peace, as if in my bosom I kept the full fruit of thy promise,
and did already live there above in like estate as the Angels. For (O
eternal God) thy mercy is upon me, as I do trust in thee. And therefore,
albeit I creep here up and down, through many infirmities; Yet will I in
patience abide the appearing of thy glory in the day of the coming of thy
Son, to judge the quick and the dead, as being thoroughly assured, through thy
grace, in the end of my course, to obtain the diadem wherewith thou crownest
thine; and at the last day, and ever in my flesh, to behold that great Savior
of the elect, who lives with thee and the Holyghost one god eternally Amen.

The fourteenth Prayer, To obtain the virtue of Love.
God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
The end of the Law is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and
faith unfeigned.

1. Ioh. 4. 1. Tim. 1.
O Eternal, who art al love, and who according to the infinite virtue thereof
have loved us before we were, as also since the time that we were thy enemies,
unthankful sinners; adjudged to death, and to the pains of hell, thou have,
I say, freely so loved us, that thou have given thy only son to the world,
to redeem us, with the price of his blood, and for us to purchase
righteousness, and a blessed life. This being so, O Lord, the original and
fountain of love, make it with efficacy and reflection to shine into al
places, whither the knowledge of thy grace shall come; likewise, that where
thou do more nearly communicate thy self, by making the flames of thy love
to be more lively felt, grant also, that there by the effects of thy spirit,
the greater love toward thee may appear. I beseech thee make me more and
more to meditate and comprehend this thy admirable love, that I may accordingly
frame my self, to that love thou requirst of thy children, and truly
faithful, which is also the end of the whole law, and precepts of the gospel:
So that in pureness of heart, with an upright conscience, and with a true and
lively faith, I may attain to the knowledge of thy truth and will, to the end,
in all, and through al, to obey thee with a quiet conscience, the same being
the chiefest, the highest, and the most perfect degree of love, that we can
testify unto thee (O our God) and that which leads us to the perfection of
Christian life, which of mortal men makes us as it were Angels, which albeit
we live upon earth, makes us Citizens of heaven: to be brief, it is that
which in the secret of our hearts, gives us a sweet feeling of thy peace,
which surmounteth all the reason of our understanding. That also thereby I may
learn, that there is none that can love thee perfectly, until he has bin
prevented by the sweetness of thy unmeasurable love, and kindled with the
flame. That we love thee; because thou first louedst us, and like as also
through thy grace thou make thy self and thy benefits known unto us. The
more therefore that we find our selves disposed to love thee, the more should
we believe that thou make thy self to be felt in the inward parts of our
souls, to be our God and our Father, and that therefore we have the greater
cause to confirm and comfort our selves in the love that thou bear us. O
Lord make me also to understand, that as Christian charity does especially
regard and look upon thy holy deity (Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) one only
God, that we may love thee with our whole hearts, minds, and strengths: so
has she a like regard to her neighbor, that in thee, and for thy sake,
because he bears thy image, we may love him as our selves: for in these
conjoined and reciprocal things also Christ teaches us the bond of
perfection, even that we shall indeed be his disciples, if we love one
another, because he so shall fulfill his love in our hearts. But being, O Lord,
very true, that the faith which thou give us does singularly unite thy
family together, grant me the spirit of love, which leading me to do well
to all men, does teach me principally to love the household of thy Church, that
I may with a ready will, yield them all help in their necessities. In as much
also as our redeemer (the perfect pattern of charity) has loved his enemies,
procuring them good for evil, and blessing for injury, I beseech thee, my
GOD, give me grace, to extend my love to those that hate me, that without
hypocrisy, or vain glory, I may, to my power, help forward their good and
salvation. And so that I may bear an upright and lowly heart to all men,
whereby all the faithful may be edefied and comforted; and others, seeing my
good works, rather thine than mine, may be constraind to glorify thee, O our
father which art in heaven. etc.

The fifteenth Prayer, That we may well use afflictions.
If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross
and follow me. By many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. He chastizeth him whom he loves, and scourges every child that he
receives.

Mat. 16. Act. 14. Heb. 12.
O Lord, my GOD and my father, I learn in thy word that none be true
Disciples of Jesus Christ, but they that follow his steps, whereof he has
delivered us a sure mark in these two chief points (the renouncing of our
selves, and the voluntary enduring of the cross.) For naturally we are
inueagled, with a disorderly love to our selves, and do presume too much of
our own persons. It is therefore necessary for us to renounce our own nature
and reason, and to abandon our own affections, to suffer thee and thy love (O
our God) to live and reign in us. Then must we proceed to the other point,
that is, cheerfully to bear out the afflictions and miseries of this life,
wherein it pleases thee especially to exercise thine, upon diverse good
considerations, namely to make them conformeable to the image of thy Son, to
the end, that suffering with him, they may also reign in his glory. For it is
very true, that al men by sin, do eat the fruits of the earth in labor,
and bread in the sweat of their brows: that they all live in a sea, tossed
with many storms, and crossed with many anguishes. But all have not the gift
of thy spirit, to learn by his doctrine, that the bread of affliction does
nourish and strengthen the faithful soul, that the cup of bitterness is
thereunto a sweet and wholesome drink, and all tribulation a spiritual
medecin, to purge it from the leaven of sin, and so to form every true
Christian to godliness and holiness of life.

For indeed the sundry temptations thy Children do endure, are not properly a
punishment for sin, but profitable corrections of thy hand, to make the
trial of their faith to redound to their commendation and profit that their
hope may increase in the expectation of the beatitude to come, that their love
may kindle, through the Fatherly care that thou take of them, in holding them
under the bridle of thy discipline, and that they may be the more pricked
forward to pray unto thee fervently, and more and more to reverence thy power.
But principally that they comfort themselves in this lesson of the Apostle
(that the easy afflictions of thine, which do but even pass over them, do
bring forth an eternal weight of most excellent glory.) True it is, that by
the miseries of this world, the outward man declineth, but on the other side,
the inward man renews himself with grace in the goods of the soul, so long
until by degree he be accomplished and obtain his perfection. So that if our
bodies do languish, our souls do quicken, if we sustain loss of
terrestiall things, thou (O Lord) do present unto us thy Kingdom of heaven;
and if this affliction befall, that any man put us to death, he does but hasten
our passage to the true eternal and blessed being. I beseech thee therefore (O
merciful Father) to give me grace to acknowledge, and well to taste so many
sweet and profitable fruits, as these thy Fatherly corrections do bring with
them: constantly meditating, that the eyes of those that look unto thee in a
christian hope, do never fail, that their expectation has not confounded
them, that the number of thy consolations have surmounted their sorrows: and
that the end of thy visitation has always been profitable and happy unto
them. For thou delightest in mercy, and thy compassion is upon all those that
call upon thee in their distress. Let therefore the invocation of thy name be
unto me a strong tower, to defend me against all fear, and temptation, as
being assured that having reposed my confidence in thy grace which is purchased
for me in Christ, I shall, in my necessity, find thy favorable hand, by thy
virtue to overcome all the enemies of my peace. But especially grant, O Lord,
that I may attain to this reason of true wisdom, always to be content with
thy will, the sovereign and just cause of all things; namely, in that it
pleases thee, that the livery of thy household should consist in carrying their
cross after thy son, to the end, that I should never but be seasoned to drink
the wholesome myrrh which purges the soul from the lusts of the flesh, and
replenisheth the same with the desires of eternal life. Also that I learn in
whatsoever my estate, cherefully to submit my self to the conduct of thy
providence, as being well assured, that whatsoever I suffer, all the crosses of
my life shall be unto me so many blessings and helps from thee my Father, to
make me go the right way into thy kingdom, and increase unto me the price of
glory in the same. For it is very true, that every one shall freely receive his
reward according to the burden that he has borne here below. Amen.

The sixteenth Prayer, For obtaining the Virtue of Patience.
Al things written, are for our learning, that we, through patience and comfort
of the scriptures, might have hope, patient in tribulation, perseuering in
prayer.

Romans 4. and 12.
O GOD of patience, and of all consolation, the just dispencer both of
calamities and benefits, and that all to one end, evermore happy to those whom
thou love in thy eternal son, our Lord Jesus Christ, as there is nothing
in thy word, but serves to our learning, and to the guiding of our temporal
life, as a means to obtain the possession of heavenly joys: so does it
principally insist in this, to lift up our hearts to an earnest meditation,
and firm expectation of eternal life, standing us in steed, in regard of the
same, among the thorns of this world, to the attaining of a constant patience,
and therein confirming us by holy consolations, to the end, that having done
thy will, O Lord, we may reap thy promise. This virtue therefore is the firm
pillar of our hope, and which teaches us, not to love the things of the earth,
as any felicity, but constantly to look up into heaven, where our peace and
joy does remain. But because the effect of so holy a resolution does far
surmount our own forces. I beseech thee, (my God) to grant me this true
patience of the faithful, which is so necessary for me, namely with a meek and
moderate heart, to bear all adversity, also that I may learn to humble the
pride of my nature, which otherwise is excessive, and not to be tamed, that so
I may acknowledge and know how to contemn the vanity of the flesh his
reasoning, which together with the lusts thereof is with sweet and delicate
things nourished unto death: and that contrariwise I may affectionate, and
strengthen my self with goodly meditations of the spirit, which sustain
themselves with hard and sharp things, to a holy and heavenly life. That
going forward, I may rejoice and take comfort in these sacred oracles: That
affliction in the house of the righteous, is a secret mercy which thou give
him, as prosperity with the wicked is a hidden indignation of thy countenance:
That the present sorrow of thy Children, is unto them the watch of some future
joy at hand, and that at all adventures, the last of their most painful
days, is the first of their eternal rest, in the second life. If therefore I
bear any sickness, or other misery in my flesh, let it be borne with
patience, as knowing very well, that the reward of sin is death, and the
sorrows and distemperatures of the body are the heraults, and necessary
forerunners, even acceptable to all true faithful people, because they call
and dispose them to depart from labor to rest, from a mortal estate, to
immortality of life. If I have but few of these goods and vain honors of the
world, that do so vex worldly men, I do live in the greater content, not
subject to their envy, but taking comfort in the true and only goods of the
soul, whereof, O Lord, thou art the liberal giver, as also of grace, to those
that are thine, because thou art their Father. O Lord our Redeemer, if I loose
some of my friends, even of those that are very near me; yet can I take it
peaceably, because their felicity is hastened, in that they depart in Christ,
and that I can loose, neither thee, nor the consolation of thy spirit, for that
I shall soon after follow them into heaven, whereby I shall therefore be the
rather moved to give thee thanks for the time that thy goodness has given
me to enjoy their presence to the comfort of my life, and not as it were by a
certain kind of ingratitude toward, both thee and them, mourn for their joy
and felicity. In all other forrowes and griefs that should less trouble us,
give me grace, my Lord, that I be not moved to bitterness or anger, but that
with a quiet mind, I may bear al, and tread under feet the thorns of my
life, as being assured in the end, to find both the costs, and reward. To the
same end also touch my heart earnestly with the feeling of thy benefits;
namely, of those which thou have liberally granted us, for the necessities of
this life, lest, as an ungrateful wretch I should forget them, after the manner
of carnal men that are never content with thy benefits, but do enjoy them
without any acknowledgement, and which is more, are ready to complain if they
have not all their vanities at a wish: yea which is worst of all, when they
have often eaten at the table of thy Son, do lift up their heel against
him, wherein they are worse then beasts, that do acknowledge those that feed
and dress them, and do humble themselves in their presence. O most mighty
GOD, deliver me from the counsel of these wicked ones and hypocrites, and let
me not sit upon the seat of these scorners, with whom godliness is folly,
and the equity of thy law but a sport. But whether I walk, or stand still,
whether I do, or suffer, grant, O Lord, that I may always walk as in thy
presence, to the glory of thy holy name, and that my soul may take counsel,
and be satisfied in thy righteousness, whilst in all patience I wait for my
deliverance from all pain, and the perfection of my felicity, at my departure
from this carnal habitation, when according to thy promise I shall be received
into thy kingdom, in the company of the Angels and Saints, there to behold thy
glory eternally. So be it.

The seventeenth Prayer, For the good usage of man's life.
Thus says the Lord, let not the wiseman boast of his wisdom, neither the
strong man of his strength, neither the rich man of his riches: but let him
that boasts, do it because he has understanding, and knows me, that I am
the Lord who show mercy, judgment and justice upon the earth.

Jeremy. 9.
O Lord, great and wonderful in thy works, thou in thy wisdom have made and
ordained them all; whereupon the heavens, without speaking do declare thy
glory, and the earth is full of thy riches. But especially upon man have thou
powered forth thy most aboundaunt treasures, in that thou have created him to
thy likeness, excellent in all good things, and established him the possesser
of the world, Lord of all other creatures, the mirror of thy wisdom, the
beams of thy light, the pattern of thy goodness, and the most noble instrument
of the sanctification of thy name: therefore have thou endued man with an
immortal spirit, capable of reason, to the end, I say, that in beholding here
beneath the exquisite works of thy hands, and using them without
interruption, he might know, love, fear, and honor thee as his father and
benefactor; Yea cleave unto thee for ever, using his lif according to the
principal end thereof. True it is, that by original sin we are all fallen
from the most singular qualities, necessary for the holding of our right
course to so great felicity: Yet have we not so put them off as to rest
altogether naked, for all that is re-established in us, and in a far better
condition, by thy grace in our Lord Jesus Christ who cloatheth us anewe with
the new man in a quickening spirit, and furnishes us with his light, to the
end, that in the serious meditation of thy visible works, and in the right use
of the benefits which we taste therein, we might apprehend the celestial
invisible things, and acknowledge thee the author and persection of all that
is. That is, how the heavens appearing to our eyes, and the greatness and the
beauty, and the motions thereof in so many sorts, so well ordered, and so
profitable, do make us, with our inteligence, to penetrate even unto thee, the
admirable creator of all things; and in the excellency of the same, to
meditate upon the height and depth of thy excellency, to the end, to sing unto
thee, Psalms of thanksgiving, and in the self same, to find rest and comfort
for our souls. Also whereas the sun lights and warmeth us, the day rejoices
us, the air quikneth us, the earth feeds us, the water moysteth us, and the
night ministers to us rest from our labors: and which is more (O Father of all
the world) whereas thou maintainest orders and governments, that thou pullest
down the proud, and exaltest the humble, that thou extendest thy punishments
upon the earth, and the inhabitants thereof, that thou visitest them with
mercy exercising thy judgments upon small families, as well as upon great
Monarchies, (according as there is nothing in nature that takes place, more or
less, in respect of thy infinite glory:) surely in all these things, O
invisible GOD, thou make thy self to be seen, and give us cause to sing
to thy name, with a most excellent inducement to pass over our life soberly.
But if we turn unto our selves to consider our own nature, especially the
faculties of the soul, and the reason thereof, which directs the body, and
gives diverse virtues to all the senses, and that we represent to our selves
the admirable conjunction of the immortal essence with the mortal: Indeed
ruminating these works of thy hands, and unable to comprehend the causes and
secrets of the same, we yield our selves overcome, that we may preach forth
the victory of thy sovereign wisdom, and say with the Prophet (Thy knowledge
is too marvelous for us, and so high, that we cannot approach thereto.) But if
proceeding beyond this Book of Nature, we come to read in the Book of the
Lamb slain for our ransom, and to see and meditate upon the husbandry of
thy sheepefold, and the abundance of celestial blessings in the same, O Lord
what height and depth of wisdom, of charity, of mercy of justice, is in the
same? O the greatness of joy and peace to the illuminate hearts, that can
penetrate into all these divine mysteries, when we come to thy church to learn
thy law, to hear the gospel, to worship and call upon thee, and to sound forth
thy praise, we are as it were in the sanctuary of thy kingdom, and before thy
face among the Angels to contemplate and celebrate thy glory.

Also when we do communicate in the sacred signs of thy covenant, we see,
we touch, we taste with our eyes, with our hands, and with the pallat of our
souls the water of washing and regeneration, and the bread of life (the food
of the sanctified spirits) whereof we live, and shall live for ever blessed.
Besides (O heavenly Father) it pleases thee to give us here below in the
following of our course, a convenient leisure, to meditate upon the most
wonderful effects of thy spirit in us, the singular work of our new birth,
the progress of our faith, the fruits of our love, the feeling of our peace
in the hope of our salvation to come, when we shall, by Christ, be wholly
united unto thee alone. I beseech thee therefore, my GOD, to give me grace in
these godly and spiritual considerations, to acknowledge thy great benignity
in the gift and use of this humane life, and to know how I am to cherish and
nourish the same, because it is unto us as a treasure, abounding in all
excellencies, riches, and prerogatives, which it has pleased thee to impart to
our nature, the Image of thy glory. So that remaining constant in my vocation,
in the paths of thy Kingdom, and free from the cares of the world, and all
the vanities thereof, I may so love this life, that it may be wholly dear unto
me, only to know, worship, and serve thee, and my neighbors, according to the
place whereto thou do call me; and carefully to meditate to the same end,
how thou do always minister justice, judgment, and mercy, whereby I may
learn to live content in thee only, and of thy goods, using the same with
acknowledgement and always rejoicing in well doing, always assured that thus
fighting a good fight, and keeping the faith, I shall obtain the crown of
eternal righteousness in the kingdom of glory. So be it.

The eighteenth Prayer, Upon temporal death.
Our life is but a vapor which appears but for a while, and then vanishes
away. For the reward of sin is death, and the sting thereof is sin. But
thanks be to God, who has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Romans 6 1. Cor. 15.
O eternal god, with whom a thousand years are as one day, and one day as a
thousand years, and whose judgments so diverse, are holy, just, and
incomprehensible. Where is the man so gallant or proud, who thinking upon the
vanity and shortness of his life, does not easily assuage his pride and
presumption, even to the end that he extend not his temporal cogitations too
far, but keep them bounded within the limits of thy law, and refer the
event to the good pleasure of thy will?

The virtue of our fairest days is but affliction of mind, and misery of our
flesh, we fall as by a gushing of waters, we pass away as a dream, or a
smoke, our ears do consume like grass, that withers from night unto
morning, and the longest time of our course, (whereof sleep nibleth away a
good part) is but threescore and ten years, or foure-score for the strongest
bodies, whilst in every moment of life, the nearest and sinallest danger
that threatens us, seems to be death, which as our shadow, follows us at
the heels, and laugheth at our goodly devises, until she has scattered them
in the wind, and brought us into ashes. But which is worse, where is the man,
so holy and perfect, that does not tremble and quake, if there be represented
unto him, (O Lord) the tribunal seat of thy sovereign justice, where we all,
after death, must appear? Thy indignation against sinners is manifest (and
there is none righteous) thy vengeance is ready against rebellion (whereof we
be all guilty) which does also cause, that death is unto us, not only as a
temporal ending as concerning the flesh, (whereat nature is moved and
abashed,) but also an interior feeling of the curse fallen upon sin, yea
even an entry into eternal death, unless there be for us with thee our
Father, Redemption in our Lord Jesus Christ. I beseech thee therefore, my God,
to give me grace to know, how to meditate every day of my life upon this
sentence of the holy ghost. (That it is decreed that al men shall die once, and
after that shall the judgment follow,) to the end that while I creep up
and down in this earthly mire, I suffer not my self to be deceived with the
deceiptfull baits of the pleasures of this world, neither with the
allurements of the devil, who still seeks by his suttleties to race out of
our hearts the remembrance of death, so for to detain us in the thoughts of
vanity, and to entangle us in the snares of our Iusts. Grant me rather (O
Lord) to know the vileness and bitterness of this miserable life, to the end
that withdrawing my affection from mortal things, I may be able to direct and
stay my self in things steadfast and eternal. And also that thereby the
remembrance of death, may daily be unto me, as a trumpet to waken and call
me, to the pursuit of my life, in the path of thy truth, and to kindle in me
a holy desire, soon to depart out of the world, wherein, the longer a man
soiournes, the more is he laden with infernal Merchandise (which is the
filthiness of sin) and the more he cutteth him self off from that portion of
soueraign felicity which is in the life to come. Truly he that has most
years has most iniquity, and he that croucheth most in the mire of the
world, rotteth most. And therefore to the Children of darkness, the uncleanness
of the flesh is a pleasant habitation: But to the children of light, to the
immortal spirits, to the regenerate hearts, heaven is much more desiderable.
Grant therefore, my God, that as I daily grow toward my end, so I may live the
more cheerfully, learning in thy school, to prefer thy eternal life, before
the light of the Sun, the glory of heaven, before the vanity of the earth,
the glorious habitation in paradise, before the painful tumults of the
world, the society of Angels, before the fellowshippe of mortal men, the
only blessed and permanent life, before the passing shaddowe of this life,
which is fruitful in anguishes, ryotes, and labors, the triumph before the
combat, the present possession of sovereign good, before the hope of enjoying:
and that attending this haven of health, I may know how to prepare my self by
continual meditation in these excellent Christian consolations, that happy are
they that die in the Lord for they rest from their labors: That death is to
them no death, but a sleep, in regard of their bodies, then freed from the
miseries of life: and that, as for the soul, which finds it self delivered
from the tyranny of sin, it is to her a change to a better life: That this
death is to all faithful, the time of receiving the garlands for their race,
and the crowns of their labors. That to them she is an acceptable issue of a
laborious travel, their delivery from all terror and fear, and the steadfast
accomplishment of their vocation to felicity: which made the Apostle to say,
(Alas! wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ) howbeit if notwithstanding in
the infirmity of my flesh, the fearful Image of death trouble me in the
straites of my departure, If the world that does always too much bewitch us,
makes my thoughts then bow to his will: If Satan pitcheth his assaults, and
snares, and upon the remembrance of my sins, sets hell before my face:
moreover, if my own perturbations keep me from apprehending thy eternal
consolations, in such most necessary extremities, vouchsafe (my good God and
father) in these anguishes, to approach unto me, to save me from the running
and swift stream of such brooks, that they may not carry meaway to
perdition, illuminate my thoughts with thy spirit, waken my soul out of the
sleep of death, renew my heart by the virtue of thy spirit, and put into my
hands, the staff of thy assured conduct, to bring me out from the laborinth
of this sorrowful passage, causing me, with the eyes of my faith, to behold my
righteousness upon the cross of my Savior, the discharge of my debts in his
sacrifice, my victory in his combats, my life in his death, my glory and joy
in his resurrection; that so replenished with peace, I may cheerfully resign
my body to the earth, as assured that it shall rise again, and my soul to
heaven, with these last words of Christ, [Into thy hands, O Father, I commit my
spirit.] So be it.

The nineteenth Prayer, For heavenly life.
He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has life
everlasting, and I will raise him again at the latter day. Father, concerning
those whom thou have given me my desire is, that they may be where I am, that
they may be with me to behold my glory.

John. 5. and. 6. and. 17.
O Soueraign Father of al things, and by a singular privilege, Father of the
children whom it has pleased thee to adopt in our Lord Jesus Christ, to be
coheires with him in the celestial life, I learn in thy word, that this
inheritance and blessed estate is acontemplation of the glory of this great
Savior of the elect, in an unspeakable beatitude, only worthy to be loved,
and to be sought incessantly night and day, with the lamp of thy truth. Which
is to see him as he is (true God, and true Man) and perfectly to enioie his
presence with communicating of all his goodness, to be in the joy of his Lord,
as a loyal servant, and to behold him face to face in his divine essence, one
with the father, and with the holy ghost, one only God in sovereign Majesty
which is to be united and conjoined with him, and by him; unto thee, O eternal
GOD, who art all light and life, of the soul at her departure out of her
earthly habitation, afterward reuested with it flesh in that great day of the
glorious coming of the same Christ, when he shall wholly render up unto thee
the kingdom of thy grace, that thou may be all in all: To be brief, (which
is both in body and soul) to be in him, and to live of his glory. And this
also is the eternal life, a life accomplished in knowledge, in love, in
righteousness, in rest, in honor, in beauty, in constancy, in joy,
felicity, and peace, a life wherein the Angels and Saints incessantly do sound
out and celebrate, O Lord, thy great name, in perfect and rauishing melody,
replenished both with a desire, and a fullness of the celestial bread (Jesus
Christ God and man) without this desire breeding any grief, or this fullness
any molestation. In sum, a life, which by the full view that we shall have
of thy eternal deity (O almighty GOD) shall make us know thee, as thou have
known us, and as thou art in Trinity of persons (Father, Word, Spirit,) and
in unity of essence: likewise to love thee according to the excellency of thy
nature with our whole hearts and thoughts, and our whole strength, and might,
and in this love to obtain our perfect and full contentment. To this heavenly
life, O Lord, my soul directs her flight, this is the mark that she aymeth
at, the end whereto she tends, and the reward that she, by thy grace,
promises her self, for seeking after thy well-beloved Son, in whom it
pleases thee to be my God and my Father. Oh! I shall indeed go and live in
this holy and sacred place of the habitation of thy glory, and there shall
contemplate that which never eye saw under the heaven, neither ear has
heard, nor heart comprehended, of the solid Riches which thou do keep
from all eternity for thy children.

I shall see, I say, these divine wonders in thy sanctuary, in thy light
inaccessible for all flesh, knowing in the brightness of thy countenance thy
infinite power [O Father] thy incomprehensible wisdom (O Son) and thy
incomparable virtue (O Holyghost) one only true God. A knowledge so singular
and precious, that therein rests all the felicity of the Angels and saints,
their only plentiful reward, their scepter, the diadem of their glory, and the
full and perpetual joy that covers their heads as with a crown of victory,
in a peace durable for ever. I beseech thee therefore, O Lord, to give me
grace, that withdrawing my affection more and more from the dark cloisters of
the earth, sprinkled with tears, I may lift up my desires to the lightsome
habitation of thy deity, where the treasures and incomparable joys of thy
paradise do remain in an eternal life. So that I may finishe my course in an
earnest and perpetual meditation of this angelical and divine being, and
comforting my self incessantly night and day, in that the promise is made unto
me through my savior Jesus Christ, to the end, that in my last hour (come
out of my misery and entered into my felicity) I may with a happy flight go
take my rest above in thy peace, O my God, which surmounteth all understanding,
and for to sing Psalms of thanksgiving unto thee without end. So be it.

The twentieth Prayer, Upon eternal death.
Of those that sleep in the dust of the earth, some shall awake to everlasting
life, others to rebuke and shame without end. Their worm shall not die; and
their fire shall not be quenched: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teethe.

Dan. 12. Esaias. 66. Mat. 15.
ALmighty god, for whose glory all nations are created. Thou which art the
mighty and the faithful God, keeping thy covenant, and free mercy with a
thousand generations of those that love thee, and obey thy commandments, and
which give again the very same unto those that hate thee, and rebel against
thee with every of them even to their face, whose will is the just and
sovereign cause of all that is done in heaven, and in earth, whose counsels
are unsearchable, and judgments most profound and admirable. O Father and
governor of all things, thou have even from the beginning of thy unspeakable
good nesse framed man, and reclothed him with such an excellency, as did
sufficiently preach forth the infinite power of thy hand, which had created him
such a one. I will not, neither can I ascend higher then thy word teaches me,
to enquire wherefore thou would not so establish the blessed being of this
the greatest and chiefest of thy visible works, that he might not fall, I have
matter enough to occupy the strength of my soul, to meditate upon, to have in
detestation, yea even before thy Majesty to accuse the pride of our nature,
which thought not it self in honor sufficient, unless it were equal with thy
deity, freeing it self from all fear, and obedience unto thee, and by that
rash ingratitude cast himself headlong from innocence into sin, from life
into temporal and eternal death. To thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness,
and to man confusion and shame, and thou, after thy good pleasure, show
mercy to whom thou will show mercy. The vain Philosophy, and foolish
curiosity, which is not content with the simplicity of Christian faith,
retained within the limits of thy sacred Oracles, shall make much enquiry about
this fall of Adam, to the end (if she could) to penetrate into thy secret
counsel, about the creation and end of thy works; yea even in that which
touches the election and reprobation of mankind she dares in this
bottomless pit to dicourse of thy infinite justice, and the argument of thy
incomprehensible glory, measuring both the one and the other, with her
terrestiall conceits, for to declare in her imaginations, thy grace to the
elect, and thy judgment against the reprobate, daring to plead their cause,
as also she will resolve of their estate after this life, and of the quality
of their punishments. But thy children, O heavenly Father, instructed by thy
doctrine through the light of thy spirit, will in their hearts humbly
reverence thy decrees, which are always just, even in the first condemnation
of al mankind, and will be content to magnify thy goodness, for the grace
that it has pleased thee to bestow upon them in Jesus Christ, adopting them by
him of thy free mercy into thy family. For they have learned in thy school
that the inaccessible brightness of thy judgments, dazleth the best sighted
minds and spirits: yea wastes and consumes them when they presume to
approach to enquire the secret causes. This do I know, (neither will I know
any more) that all things do work for the best in thy elect, because that
having known them before all ages, thou have also predestined them to be made
conformable to the image of thy Son, called and justified them to be glorified.
The vessels of wrath prepared to perdition, do feel none of these free mercies
and celestial riches, whereof it comes, that when they think upon death, they
see nothing but fearful, horrible, damnable, all intolerable pain, without
diminution or end: an infernal devilish, and endless torment, a gnashing of
teeth, with blasphemy and despair, a perpetual disquiet both in body and
soul, an eternity to their woe and damnation; and which is worse, a most
merciful God, whom they shall know to be in heaven, and yet not to be their
God, but their adversary, and sovereign Judge, to be as severe and rigorous to
them, as he shall be gentle and favorable to his children. This is in sum,
all that the reprobate may expect or hope for in death. This also makes, that
when they find they are utterly destitute of the pledge of their fredome, which
thy elect (O Lord) do carry with them, in this sin of nature (namely faith
in Christ) dead for their sins, and risen again for their righteousness;
these miserable men depart this their earthly habitation, with great grief
and trembling, usually at the hour of death casting forth many woeful sobbes,
infallible forerunners of their misery at hand: As in truth they want no more
thereof but the proof that they are going to make, of the eternal torments
with the devils in the burning lake of fire and brimstone, which is never
quenched, given to the soul presently upon the temporal death, and to both
body and soul in the day of the resurrection of all flesh, I say in the second
and eternal death, a death which continues without dying, and without
consuming, or destroying, that which it makes to languish for, ever in a
furnace, always burning, devouring and consuming: amongst which unspeakable
torments (yea such as man's thought is not able to conceive) this pain is not
the least to the damned (but rather an other cruel death) that they never have
any motion of the spirit to repent or convert unto thee the only and true God.
I beseech thee therefore, O Lord, that as thou have given me grace to believe
that by thy grace I am made a vessel of mercy, I may live in the life of the
righteous, sanctified by the spirit of Christ, to depart happily in him, and so
to ascend unto thee into thy new Sion, and there to receive the price of the
victorious crown, which this great Savior of the elect has purchased for the
perfection of their glory. So be it.

The one and twentieth Prayer. For the Morning,
O Lord, even in the morning hear my voice: Early in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. O Lord I cry unto thee, and
early shall my prayer come before thee. Let my help and beginning be in the
name of god (Father, Son and holi-ghost) who has made heaven and earth.

Psalm. 5. and 88.
O Lord my God eternal and almighty, to whom I owe all glory and obedience, I
do humbly prostrate my self before thy face, and lift up my heart and voice
to thee my Father which art in heaven, to sanctify thy name, to crave thy
mercy, and to give thee thanks for thy benefits. I acknowledge of thy
providence and benignity, that having passed this night under thy guard and
protection, I may yet see the light of the day, and in the works of thy hands,
contemplate the greatness of thy power, and here below enjoy those temporal
benefits that thou powrest plentifully or largely upon thy creatures.

But because of thy unmeasurable bounty, thou make earthly things common to
all men, and that the effects of the Son do stand us no steed but for the
life of the body, I beeseech thee (merciful Father) more and more to raise
upon my heart thy eternal light (our Lord Jesus Christ) and by the virtue of
thy spirit, so to scatter the darkness of my understanding, and to break the
hardness of my heart, that so far as it may suffize for my salvation, I may
apprehend the glory of thy Kingdom, and the mysteries of christian faith,
together with the duty of my calling, that I may constantly walk in the same,
in a good conscience and as before thee, the searcher of our hearts with all my
thoughts worshipping and loving thee in spirit and truth according to thy
word: loving also, in thee, my neighbors as my self, to pleasure them so
far forth as I may, by thy grace: but because my ignorance and imperfections,
do carry me far from such wisdom, and fulfilling of righteousness, being
a poor sinner, weak in faith, slow in hope, cold in charity, and polluted
with many offenses that make me worthy of death and of hell. I beseech thee,
my God, in thy fatherly love to bear with these my defects, and to forgive me
my trespasses, in the name of thy Son our Mediator and Savior, accepting his
sacrifice as a full satisfaction for my sins, and imputing unto me his
righteousness, to life everlasting.

Yea and to the same end also, vouchsafe to increase in my soul the gifts of
thy Spirit, so as I may from better to better, prosecute my life in the path
of thine elect, being through thy power freed from the temptations of the
Devil, the world, and my own flesh, and by thy blessing preserved from the
dangers and miseries of this poor life, always notwithstanding content with
whatsoever it shall please thee to bestow on me.

Since thou art my Father, I cannot but expect a happy end of all my estates
having already receued of thy mercy, the assured pledge of salvation
(forgiveness of sins) But Lord, grant especially that this thy grace in
Jesus Christ, may be unto me a comfort, and light all the days of my life,
especially in the darkness of my death, to retain and hold me fast in the
hope of my salvation, that with a lively faith at my last gasp I may speak
these words of my Savior upon the cross, (Into thy hands, (O Father) I
commend my spirit,) whereby my soul also inwardly may hear the same Christ
saying unto me, as unto the poor penitent thief (Son, rejoice, this day
thou shall be with me in Paradise) so that full of peace, by the effects of thy
spirit, I may cheerfully leave my body to the earth, assured of the
resurrection, and that my soul may, by the angels, be guided to the rest of
the blessed, and vouchsafe, O Lord, to do the like favor to all men, even as I
crave these things, in the prayer which thy Son has taught me. [Our father,
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done,
in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the Kingdom, the
power and the glory, world without end. Amen. Likewise (my God) increase in me,
faith working every good work, and give me grace constantly to persevere, and
thereof to make confession even to my last gasp, saying. [I believe in God the
father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ his only Son
our Lord, who was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie,
suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, he descended into
hell, the third day he rose again, from the dead: he ascended into heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God the Father almighty. From thence he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
holy Catholic Church. The communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins. The
resurrection of the flesh, and the life everlasting.] This is my faith O Lord,
wherein I will live and die, as also in the observation of thy holy
commandments, comprised in these two (That we love thee with all our heart,
with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our thoughts, and our
neighbors as our selves. Thus thy grace, O my God and Father, be with me, and
thy blessing upon all the works of my hands. So be it.

The two and twentieth Prayer. Among the Family.
At noone, at night, and in the morning will I cry unto God, and the Eternal
shall deliver me. I will make a noise, and he shall hear my voice (said
David) and Daniel kneeled down three times a day in his house, prayed unto, and
magnified his God.

Psalm. 55. and 18. Dan. 6.
Our help and beginning be in the name of God.
O LORD our GOD, and our Father, only great in glory, and of infinite power.
It has pleased thee so far forth to honor men (poor Worms of the Earth)
that they may in full confidence, in thy love and bounty, present themselves
before thy face, to magnify thy name: to talk of thy beneficence, and to
crave thy mercy. We humbly beseech thee therefore by thy spirit to dispose of
our souls, our hearts, and our lips to glorify thee, and so to call upon
thee, that our vows may be acceptable unto thee, and our prayers heard, we
confess our selves, in thy presence, to be so great sinners, that our
unworthiness will not suffer us to look up unto heaven, without fear that
thou should, in thy just wrath thunder upon us: neither can we cast our
eyes upon the earth, but we shall see as it were hell open for the reward of our
wickedness: for we are, not only as the children of Adam, conceived and borne
in sin, worthy of thy curse, but also, by our own faults, lusts,
uncleanness, bad thoughts, and wicked works, whereinto through our corruption
and frailty, we do daily fall, which also in our consciences are so many
witnesses to condemn us, and as it were heraultes that do denounce unto us
death and hell: But (O Lord) thy mercies do infinitely exceed our malice, and
thy eternal compassions, are upon sinners that convert and turn unto thee.
Thou art that pitiful Father, that gladly received his prodigal and
unthrifty Son. That loving shepherd that carefully seeks the lost sheep;
that charitable physician, that freely comes to the sick to cure them. We
therefore the children of thy love, the sheep of thy fold, and the poor in
spirit, do most humbly beseech thee in the name of thy well-beloved Son our
mediator Jesus Christ, to vouchsafe to take away all our calamities in
pardoning our sins, because thou have given us this great Savior in the
world, to the end, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have life everlasting. We are baptized in his name, we have received his
gospel: and he gives us his body in thy church for spiritual food, that we
may live in him, and of him for ever blessed. Give us grace therefore, O our
God, with a true and lively faith, vphelde by hope, and doing every good work,
to apprehend, to the glory of thy name, and the peace of our souls, these
great benefits that are purchased for us, in the death and passion of the same
our redeemer, that we may incessantly yield praysings unto thee, and live in
holiness, according to thy word. For the performance hereof vouchsafe to
increase the gifts of thy spirit in our hearts, whereby the desires of the
flesh, and vanities of the world, may be mortified, and the pure fire of thy
love so kindled, that we may love, honor and serve thee, with all our souls,
with all our strengths, and with all our minds, and loving our neighbors as
our selves, to pleasure them in all duties of love to our power. Strengthen us
likewise with thy virtue, O almighty God, against the temptations and assaults
of Satan, delivering us victoriously, preserving us also from such dangers and
miseries, as every where follow us at the heels in this life: and above all,
giving us grace, in whatsoever estate we be, still to be content with thy
will, which can never be other than good and just, and to us profitable,
because we are of the number of thy children. So let thy peace be in us, and
upon all the works of our hands, that we may happily pass the rest of our
days, walkeing every of us in his family, in the duty of our vocation, in a
good conscience, as before thy face, to whom nothing is hid: and meditating
diligently, upon the shortness and afflictions of this our life, that so we
may advance thee, and finally end in the wisdom of true christians: whereby
we may principally learn to desire heaven, and patiently to take all humane
crosses, and whatsoever may seem to us most grievous to the flesh, knowing
that all things shall turn to our good; alalwayes provided, that constantly we
persevere in thy service, for so shall we live and die with Christ, that we may
enter into his joys in heaven, there to behold his glory. Furthermore,
howsoever unworthy sinners we are, yet O Lord, in as much as thou have
commanded us to pray one for another, to the advancement of thy Kingdom, we
pray to thee for all men, that it may please thee so to work, that they who as
yet have not the knowledge of thy holy gospel, may, by the preaching thereof,
and the illumination of thy holy spirit, be brought to know thee the only and
true GOD, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, to save the World. Also
that they whom thou have already visited with this grace, as our selves, may
daily increase in thy spiritual blessings: So that altogether we may worship
thee with heart and mouth in one spirit, one faith, and one baptism. And since
thou have also ordained gouernements and callings, that all people may be
governed in the fear of thy name, and to common commodity. We beseech thee to
inspire, guide and bless our Queen, and all Princes, Magistrates and
Superiors, that have the government of thy sword upon earth, that every of
them reigning in godliness and righteousness, may employ their power which
they hold from thee, to cause thee to be served and honored, and to the
tranquillity, peace and relief of their subjects, wholly submitting themselves
and their people, to thy holy word. Likewise for the publishing of thy word in all places, vouchsafe more and more with thy gifts to enrich the Pastors and
Doctors of thy Church, and daily to raise up more to execute in a good
conscience their charge, to the edification and perfection of thy holy Temple,
whereof, in general (O Lord) and of every faithful, vouchsafe to show thy
self the Almighty protector, to the confusion of all the adversaries of the
name of Christ, and of his holy Church.

We also pray thee for all those whom thou visitest with tribulation, whether
it be sickness of body, or anguish of soul, that thou, O merciful Father,
vouchsafe to give them comfort and patience, to the bearing of their
calamities, and deliverance from their afflictions. Asking all these things of
thee in the name of thy Son our Mediator, and as he has taught us to pray
Our Father which art in heaven, etc. We also beseech thee O Lord to increase,
and confirm us in the Catholic Faith of thy Church, to the end it may take
lively root in our souls to fructify, to all righteonsnesse and good works:
and that even to our last gasp, we may make like confession thereof, as we do
now both with heart and mouth. (I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.) And
because the faith of thy children, O Lord, is inseparable from the obedience
due to thy word, especially in the ten commandments of the law, and that
thou do ordain, that we should have them perpetually in our hearts and
mouths, to keep them, and to teach them to our families, give us grace, to
our powers, to conform our selves to the same, even as we understand that
they were delivered from thy mouth, saying.

[ Hear Israel] I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

1 Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, for I am the
Lord thy God, a jealous God, that visits the sins of the fathers upon the
children, to the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands, of them that love me and keep my commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord: In it thou shall do no manner of thing, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, and thy man-seruant, and thy maide-seruant, and the stranger that is
within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the
sea, and all that therein is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy father and mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his manseruant, nor his maide-seruant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is his.

And the sum of all these commandments is this: That we love thee O Lord,
with all our hearts, and with all our minds, and our neighbors as our selves.
Thy blessing therefore, O our GOD and Father, with the peace of our Lord Jesus,
and the comfort of the Holy Ghost, be thus given unto us by thy grace, and
remain with us for ever. Amen.

The three and twentieth Prayer, Before meat, among the Family.
The eyes of all creatures look up unto thee O Lord, thou give them meat in
due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing every living
thing, etc.

Psalm. 145.
O everlasting GOD and Father, we beseech thee to extend thy blessing upon us
thy poor children and servants, and upon the food, which it pleases thee,
of thy goodness, to give unto us for the sustenance of our life, that we may use
the same soberly and with thanksgiving, as thou have commanded. But above all
things, give us grace to desire, and especially to seek the spiritual bread
of thy word, wherewith our souls may be fed eternally in the name, and to the
glory of the Father, Son, and Holyghost, one only and true God, who lives
and reigns world without end. Amen.

The four and twenieth Prayer. After meals among the Family.
Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we must do all to the
glory of God.

1. Cor. 10.
O Eternal God, our Father, we yield thee thanks, for that it has pleased
thee to nourish and feed us, ministering unto us all that is needful for this
life, and making us to enjoy so many temporal benefits as thou do largely
pour upon us thy creatures: we beseech thee of thy goodness, vouchsafe to
continue them the rest of our days. But above al, we praise thee for the
spiritual food, that by thy word thou give to our souls, to the end they
may for ever live in bliss, through Jesus Christ our redeemer: to whom with
the Father, and the Holi-ghost one only and true God, be all honor and glory
for ever. Amen.

The five and twentieth Prayer. Evening Prayer for the Household.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy
name, O most high! to tell of thy truth in the night season. I will lay me
down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that make me
dwell in safety.

Psalm. 92. and 4.
O Lord our god and Father, as thy people of Israel offered unto thee their
evening sacrifice, so do we offer unto thee, the oblation of our humble and
contrite hearts, that we may glorify thy name, and obtain remission of our
sins. We praise thee therefore and yield thee thanks for thy benefits,
namely for that it has pleased thee to let us pass this day, under thy
protection and safeguard, without the which we might have incurred many
miseries and dangers. But, because by our corruption and frailetie we have
diversely offended thee, in thought, word, and deed, and that thy mercy is
upon all those to whom thou vouchsafest to be a Father, in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that call upon thy name, we beseech thee to forgive us our sins,
and to accept of his righteousness, in the merit of his death, in discharge of
our debts: so that as every thing is now hidden from our eyes by the night
which thou give us for the rest of our bodies, so our offenses may be buried
out of thy sight, in the sepulcher of the same Christ, whereby our souls may
have in him their spiritual rest. Alas, we know that Satan the Prince of
darkness, lies always in wait to hurt us, seeking principally to make a
breach into our hearts when we stand least upon our guarde: but (O Almighty
God) in thy presence also are the thousands of Angels, to watch on those whom
thou have called to the inheritance of thy salvation, of which number we do
believe our selves to be, through the mercy which it has pleased thee to
show us. Give us grace therefore to be delivered from the temptations of the
devil, from uncleanness, and troublesome dreams, whereinto our infirmity
does lead us, and also from all other dangers, to the end our bodies
receiving, through thy blessing, a peaceable and quiet sleep for their ease,
our minds may watch more freely unto thee, (who art their rest and their life)
and in the meditation of thy love, that to morrow we may arise so much the
readier, to glorify and serve thee, every one in his vocation. Thus running
our race, in the path of thy elect, we may with joy expect the desired hour
for our flesh to rest in the earth, that our souls may be lodged in heaven,
and at the last day be raised again in glory, with all the Saints, to enjoy the
accomplishment of our felicity. Howbeit in the mean time, whilst we comfort
our selves in this hope, (O heavenly Father) we do recommend unto thee the
peace and preservation of thy church, the estate of this Kingdom, and all such
as be afflicted with sickness or any other tribulation: beseeching thee to give
to thy children and servants, whereof to take comfort, and always to rejoice
in thy goodness. This is it that we do believe in thy word: Yea this is it,
that we do crave of thee, in the name of our mediator Jesus Christ, by that
Prayer which he has taught us. [Our father which art in heaven, etc.] Thy
blessing therefore O our God and Father, the peace of our Lord Jesus, with the
comfort of the holy Ghost be given to us by thy grace, and remain with us for
ever. Amen.

The six and twentieth Prayer, Of him which suffered much by sickness.
When you shall be sick, be not slow to pray to God, and he will heal thee.
He heals those that are broken in heart, and cures their greefes. If they
touched the gates of death, and cry unto the Lord in their distress, he will
deliver them from their troubles.

Eccles. 18. Psalm. 147. and 107.
O Lord, my GOD and father, now it is, that in these griefs and pains that
oppress me, I do better then heretofore I have, acknowledge the corruption
and frailty of my nature, and the justice and goodness of thy hand that
visits me. The original of all flesh is in infection, his temporal
habitation is in dust, continually tossed to and fro with storms: her end is a
prey to the worms, and all her glory is buried with her in the earth. Yet is
man so blind, and depraved, that for a short time, wherein he enjoys any
prosperity and health, he loses the knowledge of his frail condition: he
swells and strayeth from the principal end of his being, and slideth away into
the follies and vanities of the world. Thus might I many times have made ship
wrack among these lamentable rocks, had not thou my GOD, stretched forth
thy rod of tribulation upon me in my most happy prosperities to prevent my
ruin. It is, as even to this day thou do admonish me of thy discipline,
which makes me to humble my self in thy sight, and to feel my misery, that
with heart and voice, I may confess that thou art just (O sovereign judge)
and good (O gentle Father) who wilt thus with one medecin, castize and cure
the ulcer of my sins: Come therefore thou vapor of the earth, thou shadow of
life, thou corruptible flesh, since God for thy instruction and amendment gives
thee travail, put off thy self, and submit thee to his spirit, and thy
spirit to the Father of spirits, and thy affections to his will. Thus with all
thy strength and mind, lift up thy self toward this Fatherly hand from
whence the stripe comes that grieueth thee, toward this arm of the
almighty that has cast the stone that bruseth thee: toward this great God,
who being pitiful, does see and hear thee in thy sufferings, who under his
hand holds both the disease and the cure, the pain and the rest, life and
death, to make the one as profitable and heathfull unto thee as the other. Then
will I say with a contrite heart, yet full of confidence: I have sinned against
thee, O my God, I have grievously offended thee, I deserve to be thoroughly
chastized, and the devils that I do endure, are far less then my offenses,
which only death and hell are able to counterprise. But thy grace and
compassion greater then my sins, are eternal upon all those whom thou have
washed, fructified and justified in thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, of which
number I do believe I am, and that in him, and for his sake thou will make me
blessed: forgive me my debts in his name, and ease me of my anguish wherein I
remain without strength. I beseech thee, from the botome of my thoughts, in
the bitterness of my heart, and with the words of David, (O eternal God hear my
prayer and petition, and let nothing hinder my cry for coming unto thee, hide
not thy face from me, bend down thine ear unto me in the day of my trouble,
make haste and deliver me in the day that I call upon thee, for my days are
vanished like smoke, and my bones are dried like chaf: my heart has bin
smitten, and withered like the grass, that I have forgotten to eat my bread.
O Lord, all my desire is before thee, comfort the soul of thy servant: shall
any man tell of thy mercies in the sepulcher, or thy faithfulness in the
grave. Thus then, O merciful God, bearing my self in thy chastisements, I will
in all patience wait for the seasonable succor of thy hand, as being well
assured, that while it is in coming, thou will not suffer thy spirit of
consolation to forsake me in the midst of my tribulation, that my present
heaviness shall be unto me the watch of some joy at hand: and that at all
adventures, the last of my sorrowefull days, shall be the first of my rest in
eternal life. And therefore I will again say with the Apostle. Behold I am
here, deal with me at thy pleasure, and with thy servant Job, (Albeit God
should slay me, yet will I trust in him, and reprove my ways in his presence)
and with Saint Agustine (O Lord smite here, cut here, burn here, so that
thou do pardon me for ever,) Amen. Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The seven and twentieth Prayer. At the visitation of the sick.
Is there any among you sick, let him call the elders of the Church, and let
them pray for him, and anoint him with oil, in the name of the Lord, and the
prayer of faith shall save the diseased, and the Lord shall raise him up, and
if he have committed any sins, they shall be forgiven him.

James 5.
O LORD our GOD, who art all righteousness and goodness, we know, that among
thy corrections wherewith thou wakenest us to our duties, it pleases thee many
times to tame our flesh with sundry diseases: for thou do, by the pains that
we suffer, aduertize us of the cause of our evils, which is sin, and of the
punishment due to the same, namely death, whereof the infirmities of the body
are the ordinary means: And also thou do withal put us in mind of the
great day of thy Judgment, which after death does ensue to life everlasting,
full of glory and beatitude to the elect, and of reproach and torments to the
rebrobate.

But of these things, the flesh, so long as it feels it self at ease, has
least care to hear: Since therefore it has pleased thee, (O just and merciful
Father) with thy rod to visit this poor sick person here present, afflicting
him for his offenses, as himself does with us confess, we beseech thee that
in pardoning him for the love of thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, thou will
make this chastizement to profit him to his correction: so that he may with
quiet obedience bear thy visitation, submitting himself volunrarie with all
his heart to thy holy will, who strikest him, not as a severe judge, but as a
most merciful Father, whereby he may learn to repose his whole trust and
assurance in thy love, and as in him that art the author of his lif, and can
preserve him, whither it be to abide below here in thy church, or that thou will gather him into thy kingdom of heaven. Thus Lord, on the one side awakning
in his soul by his sickness, on the other, the feeling of humane miseries, make
him, with the eyes of his faith, to behold the eternal blessings thou
reseruest for him in thy Paradise, to live happy for ever: so that he may with
patience, easly digest the bitterness of that potion that thou have powered
forth unto him, bending his principal desire to enjoy thy presence in heaven.
But thou know, O merciful Father, that the spirit of thy children is
willing, but their flesh is always frail, and full of great mistrust,
especially in the bitterness of afflictions.

Assist, therefore this sick person with the plenty and strength of the
gifts of thy spirit, that he may overcome all the enemies of his peace: and
be thou his shield, against the assaults and terrors of death, especially if
his conscience do trouble and accuse him for his inward and hidden sins, which
are open in thy sight. Then let the holy Ghost (the perpetual comforter of all
faithful souls) vouchsafe to represent unto him for his defense the passion
and sacrifice of our Lord Jesus, who has himself borne upon the cross al
our iniquities, that so he might absolve and discharge us, before thy judicial
throne (according to the infinite merit of his righteousness) and open the
gate of thy Kingdom to all that shall believe and be baptized in his name.
Thus this poor patient being comforted in feeling, through a lively and
steadfast faith, the fruit and virtue of that earnest penie of salvation that
Christ has left us in his Church, namely remission of sins for his sake:
also that this hope which is never confounded, does keep his spirit quiet,
that he may call upon thee, O Lord, and sanctify thy name, even to his last
gasp, never fearing the temptations of Satan, of death, or of hell, as being
assured, that Christ has overcome them, and led them in triumph, breaking
their bonds, so that he may, in all Christian confidence, cry out with thy
Apostle, O death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy victory? In this
manner, (O merciful God) let this sick person be, by our prayers, commended
unto thee: and vouchsafe, if it be thy pleasure, to restore him to health, with
increase of thy graces, that he may yet amongst us serve to thy glory. If not,
but that thou have otherwise appointed to bring him into thy rest, thy will be
done, and accepted both by him and us in all quiet obedience. Receive him into
thy heavenly Jerusalem, for he has his whole recourse unto thee by one
only mediator Jesus Christ, and all his confidence is in thy mercy. In
stead of bodily death grant him the life of his soul amongst thy Angels,
until that by the resurrection of all flesh, in the great day of the LORD he
may live a whole man in the contemplation of thy glory. And to us all here
present likewise grant thy grace, that we may as we ought, behold in this
myrror, the shortness and uncertainty of our days, that hereafter we may
not desire any thing so much as to employ them carefully to thy honor and
service. For all these things do we pray unto thee in the name of thy Son,
in that Prayer which himself has taught us; Our father, which art in heaven.
etc.

The eight and twentieth Prayer, For him that feels his death at hand.
We know, that if this earthly tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building
given of God: that is, a house not made with hands but eternal in the heavens.
The body is sown in corruption, it shall rise again in incorruption.

2. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. 15.
O GOD my God and FATHER, justly was man, thy creature, when by sin he had
turned from thee (who art the life) cast headlong into the curse both of
temporal and eternal death: for thy Majesty being infinitely offended, ought
also in justice to require a punishment without end, which begins even in
this life in many miseries, and is perpetuated hell, whereto death is as it
were the gate. O Lord! The cause of so lamentable a mishap is in our nature:
But in thee is pity and compassion, O merciful Father, who after thy
unspeakable goodness, make the temporal death, which to all men is
inevitable, and to the reprobate an entry into hell, to change his quality
concerning the Elect, being unto them a joyful passage to that happiness
which is in heaven: For Jesus Christ thy eternal Son, to purchase us this
benefit, did put on our flesh, and therein healed the wound of sin by his
righteousness: and by his oblation satisfied for our debt, triumphing by his
resurrection, over Death, Satan, and Hell, for the salvation of those to whom
thou give grace to believe in his name. Now then, my God, since it has
pleased thee of thy great love, thus to accomplish the high mystery of our
redemption, I beseech thee, grant me to feel the fruit and efficacy
thereof, through the virtue of thy spirit, even to the last gasp of my life,
that then I may render to thee my soul in peace. For I am baptized in the name
of Christ, I believe his holy gospel, and am fed with his body and blood in the
holy Church. True it is O Lord, that the remembrance of my sins, whereof my
conscience does accuse me does greatly trouble me; for the darkness of my
understanding has kept me from knowing thee aright, and the corruption of my
heart from worshipping thee in spirit, and truth, according to thy word; I have
neglected this precious treasure, even the voice of my Redeemer, and by my
slackenesse, made the seed thereof unfruitful in my soul, many times
preferring the love of my self and the vanities of the world, before the love
that I owe unto thee (my Creator) and my neighbor for thy sake. I have not
affected the cross of thy Son, that I might cheerfully carry mine after
him, in renouncing all my concupiscences: neither have I applied thy
chastizement to an upright amendment of life: I have been weak in faith, slow
in hope, cold in charity, impatient in tribulation, and more stiff in
retaining other men's offenses against me, then ready to pardon them, what more
shall I say, my God? Also many other sins which I cannot express, which being
even at this day hidden from me in my infirmities do ouerwhelme my soul,
were it not for the repentance that thou grauntest me, and the trust that I
have in thy mercy, through the righteousness of my Savior Jesus Christ, which
it pleases thee in thy Fatherly love to make mine; I see nothing but matter of
despair. His sacrifice gives me peace with thee: his blod cleanses me: his
obedience absolueth me: his wounds do cure me: In his torments my soul
finds her rest: for of all these benefits do I feel thy promise sealed in
my heart by thy spirit, which makes me to cry unto thee (Abba Father) and
assures me, that thou will of thy free mercy, in the name of thy Son, and
for his sake, give me remission of my sins, and eternal life, being
illuminated; therefore, by this celestial light, I do with the eyes of my
mind behold the ship that shall carry me over from earth to heaven, no farther
off from the presence of my Redeemer, then was that of his Disciples, when they
rowed against the tempest, to whom he said (fear not, for it is I.) For in
like manner comes he to meet me, to say unto me; Fear not, assure thy
self, be constant; It is I, not the death which thou may peradventure fear,
but he that has broken the sting thereof, that has led it in triumph, that
has broken the bars and bonds even in hell; and who therefore does make
thee to ascend from the grave into the Palace of my glory.

Thus, my God, strengthened by thy grace with Christian hope, which is not
confounded, and covered under the buckler of Faith, which the darts of the
devil cannot wound, I am able with a strong motion to pa^^e in peace from this
prison of nature, with these last words of Jesus Christ upon the cross (Into
thy hands, O LORD, I commend my spirit) and the same Christ saying unto me, as
to the poor thief that was dying; Son rejoice, this day thou shall be with
me in Paradise.

FINIS.

