MOUNT EBAL, OR A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF DIVINE LOVE. Showing the Equity and
Necessity of his being accursed that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ. Together
with the Motives Means Marks
of our love toward him. By that late Faithful and worthy Divine, JOHN
PRESTON, Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of
Emmanuel College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

PSALM. 31. 26. Love the Lord, O all ye his Saints, etc. PSALM. 145. 20. The
Lord preserves all them that love him, and scatters abroad all the ungodly.
LONDON, Printed by M. P for John Safford, and are to be sold at his house in
Black horse Alley in Fleet Street. 1638.

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF Divine Love.
1 CORINTHIANS. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
accursed; yea let him be had in execration even to the death, or let him be
Anathema Maranatha.
THESE words have little or no dependence on the words before going, which are
these; The salutation of me Paul by mine own hand: and the reason why he thus
writes is, because there were many false Apostles, and counterfeit Epistles
went abroad in the world, if not under his name; but hereby (says he) you
shall know me from them all, even by this my salutation, and subscription, as
by mine own hand; for in all my Epistles so I write, The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

Wherefore to consider them in themselves, St. Paul hating those (as we use to
do) who speak evil of them we love, does here pronounce a curse against them
that love not the Lord Jesus Christ; and the reason why he does so, is, because
he cannot endure to hear him evil spoken of by any blasphemous tongue.

So that this then is the scope and drift of the Apostle in this place, namely,
to commend Love unto us, and above all other, the love of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to exhort us by all means thereunto; in which exhortation, let me
desire you to observe with me these two reasons why we should thus love him.
Whereof the first is taken from the Necessity of it, he is accursed that loves
him not. second is taken from the Equity, or object of his love, the Lord Jesus
Christ.


If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be etc.

There is not much difficulty in the words, yet foam there is; for clearing
whereof, I will show you what is meant by these two terms, Anathema,
Maranatha, and so proceed: for the first (Anathema) it is a Greek word, and
it is as much as elevari, and suspendi, to be lift up, or be hanged, and it
signifies accursed, by way of allusion to that opprobrious and cursed kind of
death, which was inflicted upon notorious and heinous Malefactors, who for
their offense were hanged up upon a tree, gibbet, or any such engine, according
as it is said, cursed is every one that hangs Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
etc. which place is again alleged by this our Apostle St. Paul, to prove
that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us, for it is written, cursed is Gal. 3. 13.
etc.

Secondly, for the word (Maranatha) it is an Assyrian word taken from an Hebrew
root, which signifies execration or cursing, (and therefore I so rendered it in
the reading of it unto you) now in that the Apostle uses two words of diverse
Languages, for the fuller expression of this his so fearful a malediction and
curse, as if one word were not enough, or that out of his zealous affection he
could not so content himself with it, we may note that by how much the more
the curse is greater, by so much the more grievous is the duty omitted, from
which premises we may make this conclusion, or draw this point of Doctrine.
viz.

That he is worthy to be cursed, Doct.
(yea to be cursed ^ith all execration) that loves not the Lord Jesus ^^rist.

For the further unfolding and opening whereof, consider with me these three
things following, to wit.

First, what Love is in general.

Secondly, what love to the Lord Jesus Christ is.

Thirdly, some reasons why he is worthy to be accursed that loves him not: of
each of these in their order; and first of the first. What Love is in general,
and for that take this brief description of it, viz.

Love is an inclination of the will, whereby it inclines to some good thing
agreeable to it self.

First, (I say) its an inclination of the will] where we may take notice of two
things, both of the subject or seat, which is not any inferior part or faculty
of the soul, but the will, one of the most supreme and potentest of all the
rest. And what is the nature and property, the quality and condition of it? it
is elicita, non coacta, not forced, but free; inclined, not constrained, for
voluntas (as say the Philosophers) est libera, the will is of a most absolute
and free power, so that though a man may be compelled to do something against
his liking, yet he can never be forced to do any thing against his will, at
lest his will cannot be forced, that like a Queen in her Thrown is always
free.

Secondly, I say its an inclination of the will unto good; aut verum, aut
apparens, either for that it is so indeed, or at least (for the present)
appeare^ and seems so to be unto it, according to (...) trite and true axiom
of the Schools too, bonum est objectum voluntatis, the Adequate object of the
will is only good, yet not every good neither, but bonum sibi conveniens, such
a good as is agreeable to it self, that only is the object of love. Now by
this you conceive the second thing, what love to the Lord Jesus Christ is: and
it is nothing else but an intensive bending of the mind unto Christ, as the
most necessary and suitablest thing for it that may be, the Summum bonum, the
chiefest good of all that it can desire, so that it desires and loves nothing
like him.

Now the properties whereby we shall know, whether our love to the Lord Jesus
Christ be such or not, are especially these three.

First, it always desires to have the thing it loves, cannot be contented with
any thing else but him, as being the proper Center of the soul, which is never
at quiet so long as it is out of his place; agreeable to that of a Father,
Fecistinos Domine ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescit in te,
Thou have made us O Lord, and our heart is never at rest till it rest in thee,
it is his fruition that gives it satisfaction: again, as it desires the
fruition of him, so it desires as much,

Secondly, the conjunction and union with him, to be one with him and he with
us; and therefore it hates whatsoever may hinder it, and seeks whatsoever may
help it therein: and being thus once conjoined, and enjoying it, it finally

Thirdly, seeks and endeavors the protection and preservation of the thing it
loves, as it on the other side shunnes and avoids ought that might endanger the
destruction thereof; and if notwithstanding it meet with it, interposeth it
self betwixt it and that to defend it, as the arm wards the blow from the
head, albeit it be to the wounding of it self.

And when these three concur together, when our love has these three
concommitants, and is attended with these fruits and effects, as you heard
before, that it thus desires the fruition conjunction preservation
of Christ.

Then may we distinguish it from all sensual and carnal love; for there be
many sorts of love in the world, but it is all but worldly love, not spiritual
and Heavenly love.

First, there is a love of pity, as when we bewail a man's case, but hate his
deeds, so are Malefactors beloved.

Secondly, there is a love of desire, as when the stomach desires sweet meats,
the ear delightsome sounds, and the eye fine sights, etc.

Thirdly, there is a love of complusment, when one lusts or longs after a thing
with the whole heart or soul, so as he cannot subsist without it; as a woman
with child lusts and longs after a thing she has a mind to, which she
cannot fafely go without.

Fourthly, there is love of friendship, when one man loves another for some
courtesy or kindness he has received from him.

Fifthly and lastly, there is a love of dependence, when a man loves God more then
himself, more then his life, and depends upon him for all good things
belonging to body or soul. Or to be more brief there is a natural sinful
spiritual
Love. Deuteronomy. 21. 23.


The first, is betwixt parents and children, and in it self is neither good
nor evil. Gal. 3. 13.


The second, arises from evil habits bred in the soul, and it is most
hateful to God, and makes us worse then the brute beasts.

The third, is that divine gift and grace of God which the Holy Ghost puts into
our hearts, whereby we are more then men, and desire Holy things for
themselves; and this is that love which the Apostle here calls for in this
place.

Now if our love to the Lord Jesus Christ be such, we shall further know it by
these two things which always proceed and go before it, as the former
followed after it. viz. humiliation for sin past, and faith in Christ for the
time to come.

First humiliation for sin past; Doct.
for till a man come to have a sight and sense of himself by reason of his
sins, he will never care for Christ; and when he has been thus cast down,
yet

Secondly, without faith in Christ, whereby he applies him to himself, and is
persuaded that he is reconciled unto him, he will not yet love him, but rather
hate him of the twain.

Now the manner or means of getting of both these, and so consequently of love
into our hearts, is by the preaching of the word of God, by prayer, and taking
him when he is offered and given unto us in the same for that end.

But now we must take Christ as an husband takes a wife, or a wife an husband,
out of love to their persons, not to their portions, and then shall we be the
better subject unto him; but except we be first humbled (as was before said)
for our sins, and consider in what need thou stand of him, how that
without him thou must perish; till then (I say) thou can not sufficiently set
by him, nor love him aright: but when thou know how necessary he is for
thee, how alsufficient, and affectionate he is toward thee, then thou
beginnest to look at Christ as a condemned person does at him that brings a
pardon for him whom he loves and longs after, joys and rejoices in.

And yet all this is but a preparative to our love of him; it is faith, that is
the first fountain, whereby we so love him, as that we can cleave unto him,
with purpose of heart to serve and please him in all things, and this love
which thus arises from faith, does not only believe that Christ is merciful,
and will forgive thee thy sins upon thy supplication and repentance unto him
for the same, but also that he is most fit and conformable for thee, so that
thou could find in thy heart to be anathaematized for his sake, and to be
divorced from all things in the world for love of him: And so much for the
second thing also, I come now to the last; to wit,

Thirdly, to the reasons, why he is worthy to be had in execration, and to be
cursed even to the death that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ? and they are
chiefly these five.

First, Reas.
because when Christ shall come and be a Suitor unto us to love him, and we
refuse to do it, and to be reconciled unto him and receive him, then he grows
angry to the death; you may see this in the Parable of the Marriage of the
Kings son, how wroth he was when he heard they had abused and beaten his
servants which he sent to call them to the Mat. 22. 1. 2.
wedding: and therefore the Prophet David bids us kiss the Son lest he be
angry, Psalm. 2. 12.
and so etc. that is, as if he should say, when he offers himself to kiss you
with the kisses of his mouth, be not too coy and curious, but embrace his
offer, return his courtesy with the like kindness, and kiss him again, lest
he take it in great indignation at your hands; and be so angry with you, that
you die for it.

Indeed when we knew not the Gospel, he was content, though we were froward
and fruitless; but now that he sends his Desciples to preach unto all Nations,
then if they bring not forth fruits worthy amendment of life, he tells them,
the axe is laid unto the roots, etc.

Secondly, because he that in old time brake the law, was accursed; now this
was the Lords Commandment, Matthew. 22. 37.
that we love him.

But you will say, we are not able to fulfill the law of our selves; Object.
and how then shall we do it?

I answer, Sol.
there is a twofold obedience, Legal, and Evangelicall, that requires exact
obedience in our own persons; but this requires no more but only our
endeavor, and faith in Christ.

Thirdly, because he loves something else more then God, and so commits
Adultery; now she that in the old law did commit Adultery, had a drink of
bitter water given her, which made her belly swell etc. Numb. 5. 15.
so that she died; how much more worthy of death is he then that thus deals
with God, and going a whoring after it, commits spiritual fornication.

Fourthly, because that commonly belongs to Hypocrites, they are a cursed crew,
to whom Christ shall say at the last day, go ye cursed etc. Now all such as
love him not, are, no better nor worse, but wretched and damnable Hypocrites.

Fifthly, because love governes the whole man, its as the Rudder of a ship,
which turns it any ways; and so which way soever this affection of love goes,
it carries the whole man along with it, and makes him lead his life
accordingly.

Thus much then for the proof of the point, before propounded.

Now for the application of it to our selves, that so we may the better make
some use of it, for the direction and reformation of our lives and
conversations therein: if it be so (as so you have heard it is) that it is such
a sin not to love the Lord Jesus Christ, that he is worthy to be accursed
that loves him not; yea, to be had in execration etc. Then first it may teach
us to look to our selves, Use.
and be sure that we love him; and so look at others, as that out of a godly
zeal thou can sincerely and truly say with Saint Paul here, let him be
accursed, for this is an infallible and sure sign of this love which proceeds
from faith, that when we see Christ trampled under feet, our hearts burn
within us, as his did: there are some (says he) of which I told you before,
and now tell you again with tears or weeping, that they go about to pervert
and turn others from the ways of God: so that we may here see Saint Paul's
disposition, he does not say, cursed be he, but cursed is he; from whence we
may also note the difference betwixt the curses of the Law, and ^f the Gospel:
for the Law faith, cursed is he that continues not in all etc. but the Gospel
says, cursed is he that loves not the Lord, etc.

Now if we love him, we will desire (as was said but a little before) to be
joined unto him, and to have his company, for how can that woman be said to
love her husband that cares not for his company; so how can thou say thou
love the Lord Jesus Christ when thou love not his society?

Again, if we love him, we will be content to have him upon any condition; for
love is impulsive, the love of Christ constraines us (as the Apostle speaks)
to do what it desires; yet, so as not against, but with our wills, which it
inclines thereunto: now if we do not find these things in us, we do not love
the, etc.

And therefore this Doctrine that he that loves him not is etc. it should teach
us to consider our own conditions, how we stand affected toward him, and
whether we love him or not; and we shall know it for certain whether we do,
or do not, by examining our selves by these quaeries.

First whether whatsoever good things we have done, we have done them out
of love to God, and desire of his glory, more then of our own profit, or out
of custom; for otherwise all that we do is nothing vvorth; Christ respects
nothing but what comes from love, and that love from faith, if that be not the
primum mobile, the first moover that sets us on work, if we go not upon
this ground, we were as good do nothing, for all the good we shall get by
it: o that thou, that most of all despisest Religion, and scoffest at the
zealous Professors thereof, would but thoroughly consider of this one thing,
that he is accursed that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, and that all the good
duties of piety, or charity which thou performest, if thou do them not out of
love, but more for custom then conscience sake, are rather abominable then any
whit pleasing unto God; for then would thou no longer content thy self with
the form of godliness, but labor for the power thereof.

But thou will say, how shall I know whether this that I do, Quest.
I do it out of love to his name, rather then out of any hypocrisy, or love
to my self? I answer.

You shall feel it, for love is of a stirring nature, Answ.
and moves all the rest of the affections, as desire and longing after him,
with hope that thou shall obtain him, and fear least thou should fail of
it; but yet still let me give thee this caveat, beware thou love him not more
in regard of his Kingdom, then of his person, for then I tell thee true, thou
love him not aright.

Secondly, consider whether (as was said) thou love his company, and delight in
his presence, to have communion with him, to be talking to him by prayer, or to
have him speaking unto thee by his word; so then do thou pray not by
constraint, but willingly; do thou hear, read, receive the Sacrament etc.
not for fashion sake, but of faith unfeigned, in obedince to his commandment,
then do thou love him, but otherwise thou do not.

Thirdly, do thou love his appearing at the last day, can thou say in the
uprightness of thy soul, come Lord Jesus, come quickly? do thou think it
long first? and art not afraid when thou hear of it, as Felix was, who
trembled when he heard Paul discourse of Temperance, Righteousness, and
Judgment to come; but do rather desire it, and would be glad of it, and the
sooner, the better? then (I say) also may thou resolve upon it, that thou
do assuredly love him, and that when he shall so come, he shall come without
sin unto thy salvation.

Fourthly, whether thou love him as well in health as in sickness, and in
sickness as in health, as well in poverty as in abundance, and in adversity
as in prosperity, for so thou will, if thou love him truly for himself, and
not for these.

Fifthly, mark this with thy self too, whether thy love be bountiful, as was
that woman's that had the box of ointment, which she powered on Jesus head, and
as Abraham's was, who would have offered his Son, his only Son Isaac for
his sake; so (I say) examine thy self hereby, whether thou be content to part
with the best things for his sake, as thy living, thy lusts, thy life; for he
that loves any thing truly, will forgo and give all he has to purchase it.

Sixthly, look whether thou seek to do the Lords will, and what may please
him best; for love seeks not her own, we see it in men who will take any
pains, be at any cost, to get that thing for them whom they love, which they
love to have, and so will we do for Christ, if we love him, we will keep his
Commandments, and they will not be grievous unto us; yea rather it will be our
meat and drink to do his will, and the dearer it costs us, the dearer will
it be unto us.

Seventhly, examine thy self by this rule also, whether thou be content to do
much for him, not some things, and not othersome, but whether thou have an eye
to all his Commandments, and all false ways thou utterly abhor; for faith
(you know) works by love, and love that proceeds from faith is not idle but
operative, so that what is spoken of faith, may as truly be said of love, that
its dead without works, and therefore Saint Paul professes of himself, that
he labored more then they all, which was an argument, that he loved much
because he was in labor much; and so when our Savior asked Peter whether he
loved him, he puts him to work, and sets him his task saying, feed my
sheep; and last of all,

Eighthly, whether thou would not only do, but suffer much for his sake,
as David, when his wife Michal laughed at him for dancing before the Arc, he
was contented to bear it, because he did it to the Lord; and so the Apostles
rejoiced because they were counted worthy to suffer for his name Act. 5. 41.
. And Saint Paul likewise when the people entreated him with tears, not to go
up to Jerusalem, because he should be bound, as Agabus had signified by the
spirit unto him, answered them, Why do ye rent my heart, I am ready not only
to be bound, but also to dye for etc. Act. 21. 13.


But thou will say, Object.
I have no such occasions now adays, if I had, I know not what I should do.

But I answer, Answ.
is it so? have thou no such occasions? yes, thou have occasions enough, as
when he takes away thy wife, thy child, thy friends, thy goods, thy good name
etc. if then (I say) thou can bear it patiently with Job, and say, it is the
Lord gives, and the Lord etc. or with Ely, it is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good: then thou love him, and yet thou must do more then that,
thou must not only bear it patiently, but joyfully too, as you heard before
the Apostles did; lay thy self to these rules then, and try impartially
whether thou love the Lord Jesus Christ or not; and forthy further help and
more infallible notice thereof, to know whether thy love to him be pure and
unfeigned, or whether it be false and counterfeit, take these more particular
proofs of it; for assure thy self if thou love him aright (as we touched
before) that then,

First thou will be content with nothing but love again, so that as Absolon
(though in hypocrisy) said, when as David had fetched him out of banishment,
and confined him to his own house that he might not see the Kings face, what
do I here, seeing I may not see the Kings face 2 Samuel 14. 32.
? so would thou say out of love to the love of God; what do I here, since I
cannot behold the fair beauty of the Lord? Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon me, or else what good will my life do me; but if thou do
so, then thou shall make my heart more joyful and more glad, then they that
have had their Corn and Wine and Oil increased Psalm. 4.
.

Secondly, thou will love the brethren, for they are like him, though he
exceed them in the degrees and measures of goodness, as the Ocean does a drop
of a bucket, this is a pregnant proof hereof, and therefore deal squarely
with thy self herein. And the reason why thou can not love the Lord if thou
love not the Brethren, is because its an easier matter to love man whom thou
have seen, then it is to love God whom thou have not seen; for use (we know)
makes them comlier and hansomer; wherefore Saint John says, If any man say he
loves God, and yet hates his Brother, he is a liar, he deceives himself, and
there is no truth in him 1 Ioh. 4. 20.
.

But thou will say, thou love them well enough. Do thou so? then thou will
love their company; for what we love and delight in, we are never well without
it, nor cannot endure it out of our sight; and therefore when the Psalmist had
said That all his delight was in the Saints, and upon such as excel in virtue
Psalm. 16.
, if you would know, how to know it was so, he afterward tells us, That he was
a companion of them that fear him, etc. Psalm. 119.

But thou will say again, Object.
though thou do not love them, yet God forbid thou should be so bad but
that thou should love the Lord Jesus Christ. Sol.
But I answer thee again to that too; If thou do so, then thou will love his
appearing, for if thou wish in thy heart there were no general judgment, thou
love him not, say what thou will to the contrary; as a loving and loyal wife
cannot love her husband but she will rejoice at his coming home when he is
abroad, and the nearer the time approaches, by so much the more joyful and
glad will she be.

Thirdly, if thou love him thou will speak well of him upon all occasions, and
in every place where thou come, for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks; so that if thou speak well of God, but for fashion sake, not
out of any true affection, but of fear, thou love him not; for he that loves
him will be much in his praise, as we have an instance in David, so that if the
heart be inflamed, the mouth will be open, thou will not be tongue-tied, nor
ashamed of him, no not before Princes.

But thou will say, I am no scholar, Object.
I cannot speak eloquently; if I could, then indeed I should not be so
afraid, nor ashamed to do it, as now I am, because I can do it no better, nor
Rhetorically then now I can.

But let me tell thee for thy comfort, Sol.
let that never trouble thee, speak as well as thou can, and thou needst
care for no more, for that will beget more and more love in thee, and love that
will make thee eloquent; we have a notable presedent for this in the Spouse,
who because she loved Christ, see how she sets him forth, my beloved is all
beautiful etc*. and it is most sure, Cant. 5.
it will be so with thee; if thou love the Lord, thou will show it by thy
speeches, for thou can not well speak well of him whom thou love not; but
if thou have no good thought of him, thy words will bewray thee; yea thou will
not only speak well of him, and of his ways, but thou will also walk in the
same, nor will thou stand pausing upon it, to consider whether thou were best
do it, or no; but if it be about a good duty, as suppose keeping of the Lords
day, hearing of the word etc. thou will do it without any more ado, yea
though there were no promise nor profit to be got by it, for else thou do no
more but as a servant, not as son, in hope of wages, and not out of love,
looking for nothing for thy pains: so did Saint Paul, he would preach the
Gospel, though he had nothing but chains and imprisonment for his labor; and
why will he so? why? because God commands it, and its a good duty; so that if
thou make a question of it, whether thou were best to do this or that good
duty, or wilt do no more then thou must needs, thou love not the Lord, for
he that loves him, will do whatsoever he can for him, and yet think all too
little when he has done too.

Fourthly, as thou will speak well of him thy self, so thou will not endure
to hear others speak ill of him, but thy heart will be moved within thee at
them, and at any thing that might impeach and hurt his glory; as to see his
Church lie wast, his word corrupted etc. so Ely was not moved so much with the
death of his Sons, as to hear that the Ark of God was taken*. 1 Samuel 13.
and indeed they are bastards and not sons that can hear their father
reviled, and railed on, and never be affected, nor offended at it.

Fifthly, if thy love to the Lord Jesus Christ be sincere and sound, thou will
be loath to lose him, for we will rather lose all we have, then lose the favor
and affection of a friend, whom we love entirely; and as thou would be loath
to lose him, so thou would be as loath to offend him, or do any thing
whereby thou might be like so to do; or if so be thou have, thou will never
be at quiet till thou have gained his good will again, whatsoever it cost thee
to get it.

Sixthly, thou will linger and hang after him, as we may see in the woman of
Canaan, she would not be said nay, but let him say or do what he would, she
would not leave him, but she still staid by him till he had granted her suite.

Examine thy self then narrowly by these signs likewise, and when thou have
done so, and find thy self guilty in any, or all of these particulars, then
confess thy sin unto the Lord, and beg the pardon of it at his hands, leave
him not till he has heard thee, and granted thee the request of thy lips, by
saying unto thy soul, I am thy salvation; and witnessing with thy spirit, that
thou art his child by adoption and grace. And so as I have hitherto showed you
some reasons, why he is accursed that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, ought to
love him, and whereby thou may be incited and stirred up thereunto; for as
David said in another case, the Lord is worthy to be praised, so may I say, the
Lord is worthy to be beloved, and that in many respects; as

First, because he has all the glory and beauty in himself that ever thou
saw in any creature, it is in its full perfection in him; whereas it is but
in part in any creature, as the light is in its full luster and strength in the
Sun; whereas the Stars and Planets have but a glimpse or beam of it, and
tha by participation, and not in it self, as in a fountain; and therefore the
Spouse in the Canticles says, that he is all glorious, or that all glory is in
him; and this is the reason why some love him, and others love him not, because
he has manifested and revealed himself and his glory to some, and not to
others, as unto Moses, Abraham, etc.

Secondly, he is unchangeable, there is no man but that thou shall at some time
or other, see that in him, which might make thee not to love him, but in God we
cannot find any such matter, for he is Jehovah, semper idem, yesterday, to
day, James 1. 17.
etc. there is no variableness nor shadow, etc.

Thirdly, because he is Almighty, he can do whatsover he will; there is
nothing impossible to him; and as he is able to do all he will, so he will do
all that he is able, so far forth as it may make for his own glory and thy
good.

But thou will say, Object.
why? is this such a loadstone of love?

Yes verily that it is, for by his omnipotency are understood all the
excellency and glory, all the grace and virtues that are in God.

But thou will say, Object.
I have often offended him, will he then yet hear me, or accept of my love for
all that?

Yes that he will, Solu.
for he is gracious and merciful.

Oh, Object.
but I have nothing in me, but am ready to offend him again.

What if thou be, Sol.
yet he is long suffering, so that he will not cast thee off, if so be thou will cleave to him?

Oh, Object.
but how shall I know that?

I answer, Sol.
thou shall know it by his word; and that is truth it self; search the
Scriptures therefore, and there thou shall hear him say as much in plain
terms, he that comes to me, Ioh. 6. 37.
I will in no wise etc.

Oh, Object.
but my sins are such strange ones, as no bodies are.

Suppose they were, Sol.
yet his mercy is infinite, and far more then thy sins are, or can be: but
yet that is not so as thou say, for there have bin as great sinners as thou,
whatsoever thou art, which yet nevertheless upon their faith and repentance,
have been received into grace and favor again; as were, Mary Magdalen,
Peter, David, and diverse others besides them.

Oh, Object.
but for all that I am not worthy of his love, and it will be a disparagement
for him to set his love upon such a one as I am.

But what is that to thee? Sol.
if he think thee worthy; as so he does, for he sues unto thee, what needst
thou stand upon that, why should thou care for any more? now this is all the
dowry and duty he asks of thee, for what does the Lord thy God require of
thee, o Israel, but that thou love him*? Deuteronomy. 10. 12.


And moreover, besides this, consider that it is he that first gave thee this
affection, that thou should love him; and that there is none other on whom thou
can better bestow it, or who more deserves it at thy hands, then he does.

And finally, consider that thou have engaged thy self unto him by vow in
Baptism, so that as Joshua said unto the Children of Israel, ye are witnesses
against your selves, that you have chosen the Lord, to serve him; so are ye
against your selves, and every time that ye receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, you renew your covenant; so that if you love and serve not the Lord,
you are so many times witnesses against your selves.

And here let us make some little stand to reckon up the several circumstances
that do engage us to love him; as,

First, that he is our Lord, and has bought us at a very high rate; now if a
condemned person, or a man taken by the Turks, should be repleeved or
ransomed by another, we would all think it his duty that he should love him as
long as he lives for it: and so stands the case with us, we all sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and were taken Captive by Satan, at his
pleasure; and Christ has redeemed us from that his more then Egyptian
bondage, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
and that not with corruptible things, as silver or gold, but with his precious
blood, as of a Lamb without, etc. and does not he then deserve thy love? can
thou deny him such a small thing as that is? Again consider

Secondly, what he has done for thee, even from thy youth up, how he has fed
thee, forgiven thee thine offenses, and paid the debt for thee, when thou wast
ready to go to prison for it, so that now the Lord begins to grow angry with
thee, if thou will not yet love him for all this; and yet this is not all, and
therefore

Thirdly, consider also that he loves thee; now as fire begets fire, so does
love beget love, therefore says Saint John, we love him, because he loved us
first; that is, his love to us should make us love him again: but especially
we cannot but love him, if we consider in the last place,

Fourthly, what his love is, for its unspeakeable, Ephesians. 3. 19
and passing knowledge; we can never conceive the height and length etc. All
which, what should it teach us, but these two things?

First, that if we will not love the Lord, Romans 9. 22.
he will show his wrath, and make his power known upon us, that we are but
vessels of wrath, fitted for destruction, as it is said. Again,

Secondly, it should exhort us to love the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore to
provoke us thereunto, we should often consider, and think in these things,
what right and title he has to us, how much he has done for us, and how
greatly he loves: yea and more then all this, we shall thereby also have these
and these things, we shall by this means reap these and these benefits.

First, we shall have his spirit, the spirit of truth, the Comforter which
shall lead us into all truth, and enable us to fulfill his Commandments, and
with facility and ease, whereas else they would be grievous unto us; as for
example, Saint Paul would soon have been weary of preaching and suffering so
much as he did, if he had not had this love in him; and why do parents think
nothing too much for their children, but because they love them? therefore it
is that though they be froward and untoward, yet still they bear with them:
if then we cannot find in our hearts to be quiet, until they look to the
Lord, like as the needle of a compass which is touched with a Loadstone, will
never stand still till it comes to the North Pole; then may this be a testimony
unto us, that may distinguish us from Hypocrites, and witness to our souls
that we love the Lord Jesus Christ; for they keep the Commandments of God in
some sort, and abstain from some one kind of sin, but not out of love to
him, nor in any obedience and conscience of his word, but in love to themselves.

Secondly, this is a mark of thy Resurrection from the death of sin, to the
life of righteousness, hereby shall ye knew that ye are translated from
death to life, because ye love the brethren, now ye cannot love them, but you
must love the Father that begot them.

Thirdly, thou shall get by this thy love to him, for when thou give him thy
heart, he will give it thee again, he will only alter the object, but let
thee keep the affection still, only it shall be better then it was before, he
will purify it from all its corruptions, and cleanse it from all its sins: Nor
shall this be any thing out of thy way, it shall be as much for thy profit as
ever it was before, for when thy heart is set to keep his Commandments, when
it inclines to his statutes, (as so he will incline it) then whatsoever thou
do, Esaias 58. 14.
it shall prosper: so that as its said of the Sabbath, that it was made for
man; that is, for man's good; so may we say the same of all the rest of the
Commandments, that it is made for man; that is, for his good and benefit,
Deuteronomy. 5. 33.
and therefore the promise of life and happiness is made to all alike.

And here by the way take this difference along with thee, to distinguish thy
love from self love, for that is all for it self, but this is all for him
whom thou love; if then thou love the Lord for thine own good, it is self
love, but if thou love him for himself, simply without any respect to the
recompense of reward, then is it true love indeed.

Fourthly, we shall receive much comfort by loving the Lord: now what is that
keeps us from loving of him but our pleasures? we are loath to part with them,
and yet alas we shall receive much more, and they far more substantial,
sollider, and sounder comfort by loving of him, then ever we should by loving
of the world, or the things of the world. Now do but think how good a thing
it is to love one that is but like thee? much rather should thou love one
that died for thee; wherefore if thou would have thy heart filled with joy
and comfort, love him; for so thou shall have joy unspeakeable and glorious.
And last of all, if thou would indeed unfainedly love the Lord Jesus Christ;
consider,

Fifthly, that it makes thee a more excellent man then thou wast before; for
every man is better or worse according to his love, as it is set on things
better or worse; now Christ is the Summum bonum, the chiefest good, and if thou
love him, thou art united unto him, and to his Godhead, for love is of a
uniting nature.

Thou will say, Quest.
these are indeed good motives to make us to love him, but how shall I come by
this love? or by what means shall I get this love into my heart?

For answer whereunto, I tell thee, first of all, Answ.
that if thou can but unfeinedly desire to love him, thou have half done
this work already; and that thou may have such a desire, meditate often upon
those motives before.

This is the answer Christ himself gave to his Disciples, when they asked him,
how they should get faith; why, says he, if you have faith but as a grain of
mustard feed, you should say to this mountain, be thou removed, and be thou
thrown into the midst of the Sea, etc. thereby showing them the excellency of
it, that so he might the more enamour them with the love of it, and make them
desire it above all that they could imagine and think of besides, in
comparison thereof: but if thou would (as thou say thou desire to) love
the Lord Jesus Christ indeed, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with
etc. I answer, and add again, thou can not use a better means to attain
thereunto, and get the love of him into thy heart then these.

First, pray unto God for it, for all graces are his gifts, they are mere
Donatives, and he has promised to hear them that ask in his Sons name,
and to give the spirit to them that ask it, that is, to give the gifts and
graces thereof unto them; nor is he any niggard, for he gives liberally, and
obraideth not.

But thou will say, Quest.
how does prayer beget love?

I answer, it begets it two ways.
First, Answ.
by prevailing with God.
Secondly, by familiarity with him.
First, I say, by prevailing with God; so did Iaacob, and the woman of Canaan,
for considering that he has condescended to their request; that he has
granted their suite, and heard their petition, and that in such a matter, as
they are never able to make him any part of amends; as the forgiveness of
their sins; why, then they think that to love him, is one of the least
things they can do for him, so Mary Magdalen loved much, because much was
forgiven her.

Secondly, by familiarity with him, we have a saying, that nimium
familiaritatis contemptum parit, that too much familiarity breeds contempt; and
however amongst some men it may sometimes fall out so, yet its seldom seen
amongst those that are intimate friends indeed; or say it should, yet I say,
it never so comes to pass betwixt God and the faithful soul; but by how much
the more familiar and frequent they are together, by so much the more fervent
and indissoluble is their love: and this is most certain, that a man that is a
stranger may with thee well, but cannot truly love thee, till he be acquainted
with thee; so neither can thou love the Lord as thou should, so long as you
are strangers one to another; and what brings us and the Lord better acquainted
together, then prayer? wherein (as it were) thou talkest familiarly with God;
even as a man talks with his friend face to face: this is the first means.

Secondly, desire the Lord to show himself unto thee, as Moses did, for this
is a strong motive and means to make thee love him; therefore (says our
Savior to his Disciples that) he that loves him, shall be beloved of his
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto him*, Ioh. 14. 21.
which is, as if he had said, if you would know how you shall come to love me,
or my father, it shall be by this way or means; I will manifest my self unto
you, I will show you my glory, and then you cannot choose but love me, though
you loved me not before.

Now the ordinary way and means whereby he reveals himself unto any one, is
by the preaching of the word, which though it be but a dead letter in it self,
yet when he puts life and spirit into it, and opens our hearts, as he did open
Liddeahs thereby, then we see and conceive his mercy and our own wretched
vileness, whereupon we cannot but love him, knowing how he has loved us, and
gave himself for us: and therefore the Apostle prays, That the God of our
Lord Jesus Christ would give the Ephesians the spirit of knowledge, Ephesians 1.
17, 18.
wisdom, and revelation, that the eyes of their understanding being
enlightened, they may know what is the hope of his calling, and the riches of
the glory of his inheritance in his Saints*; as if he had said, if you know but
these things, then there is no doubt to be made of it but that you will love
him, as well as one would desire: for this is one sure ground why we love him
not, or love him no better then we do, because we know him no better; we are
ignorant of him, and ignoti nulla cupido (as it is said) there is no love, no
longing desire after that which we know not, or know not the worth and
necessity of it: as a sick man has no thought after the sovereign druggs in
the Apothecaries shop, because he is ignorant of any such matter; whereas the
skillful Physician seeks out and sends for them: and as an ordinary rusticke,
cares not for a precious pearl, but casts it away when he finds it; which if
an expert Lapidary had it, he would set much by it, because he knows the
price and worth of it well enough: and thence it is, that when the Prophet
David had professed his love to God, saying, I will love thee o Lord my
strength; Psalm. 18. 1.
he afterward adds (as it were) the reason or ground of that his love
toward him; because he bowed the Heavens and came down. What Is that? why that
he had made himself known unto him: ver. 9.
he had declared his power and might in his deliverance, and that was it that
made him love him; if therefore thou will but desire (I say) to love him, he
will inflame thy heart with the love of him; yea he will open the Heavens, and
thou shall see him sitting on the right hand of God; Act. 7. 56.
as Saint Steven did.

But thou will say, all these are the works of God, and they extraordinary
ones too; Quest.
but what must I do for my part, to have the love of God in my heart? to which
I answer.

First, no; it is no such extraordinary thing for God to reveal himself to
his Saints; Answ.
it is an usual manner with him; but yet,

Secondly, thou must do these things thy self: First, thou must look how he
has revealed himself in the Scriptures, to be a most glorious and gracious
God, a merciful Father in Jesus Christ, slow to anger, and of much mercy; and
now when we perceive him to be such a one, we cannot but love him, and long
after him with all our hearts.

Secondly, we must consider our own misery; this made Mary to seek after him,
and were it not but that we stand in need of him, but that we know we are
undone and damned without Christ, we should never care so much for him, for
the whole have no need of the Physician, that is, they care not for his skill,
nor his help; but they that are sick, they that know their own wants and
weaknesses, they know how to value and esteem of him: and so we, when we see
we are wounded by sin, and sick unto death, then will we enquire and seek
out for the spiritual Physician of our souls, Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, we must humble our selves before him confessing our sins, and that
in particular, as many as we can, by the omission of such and such good duties,
and the commission of these and these sins: especially we must confess our
beloved bosome-raigning sins; so the Prodigal Son confessed, that he had
sinned especially against Heaven, and before his father, by ryotous living,
Luke 15. 19.
whereby he was unworthy to be called his son, and did desire only to be as
one of his hired servants: and now when he saw his father notwithstanding make
him so welcome, who had so mean a conceit of himself, that he put a ring upon
his finger, and shoes on his feet, etc. then he loved him much more: Psalm. 4.
and so it is with Christ and us, when we are once out of love with our selves,
and yet perceive that he loves us, who are not worthy to be beloved, then that
makes us love him again, and the more lowly we are in our own eyes, the more
highly do we esteem Christ, and Christ us.

Fourthly, and lastly, thou must first of all get faith, for as thy faith is
stronger or weaker, so is thy love more or less; if thou have but a little
faith, thou have but a little love, for faith is the ground of love, as the
promises are the ground of faith. Now so long as thou do not believe that he
has satisfied the divine wrath and justice of God for thee, and that God has
accepted the atonement for thee in him, thou can never love him as a brother
or friend, but rather fear him as an enemy or Judge; pray therefore with the
Desciples, Lord increase our faith, and therefore ply the ministry of the
word, for that is the means whereby faith is wrought and begotten in any one*;
Romans 10. 17.
else (I say) again, thou can never truly love him, but as thou do
another man which thou know not whether he love thee again, or no; and so
thou may hate him again at some time or other for all that: but labor for
faith, and that will breed love; and then if thou love him he will surely love
thee; yea, indeed, thou could neither love nor believe in him, were it not
but he loves thee first.

But thou will say, how shall I know that? Quest.
I answer.

It is the Apostle Saint John's own words, Ans.
or rather his words by that his Apostle; we love him, 1 Ioh. 4. 19.
because he loved us first. And besides his word (though that were enough)
thou have his seal, he has given thee his Son, who has given his life for
thee, and shed his most precious blood for thy salvation; and would he have
done this for thee (think thou) if he had not loved thee? no, but herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that God loved us, and sent his Son to die
for us, that so by the blood of the new Testament he might seal the same unto
us*; 1 Ioh. 4. 10.
and even yet by his spirit, he still sues unto us for our love, as a further
testimony thereof.

Oh but (thou will say), I am not worthy of so great love, Object.
for I am a sinner, disobedient, and rebellious.

But I answer, what do thou tell him of that? what if thou were the chief of
sinners; Answ.
he knew that before he gave thee his Son; and he gave him unto thee the
rather, because he knew thou wast so, for he justifies the ungodly; that is,
those that condemn and judge themselves to be so; so that if thou will but
believe in him, and embrace him, it is as much as he desires of thee.

But thou will say, Object.
it may be he is affected to this or that person, and not to me: to which I
answer again.

That his commission is general; Solu.
Go preach unto all nations, Matthew. 28. 19.
baptizing them etc. And so is his invitation too; Matthew. 11. 28.
Come unto me all you that labor etc. so that if thou will but believe and
come in unto him, thou shall be saved; for he casts out none that come in unto
him (as you heard before) Ioh. 6. 37.

And when thou have considered this, then begin to argue and reason thus with
thy self; since the promise is made to all, I know I am one of that number, and
then thou will begin to love him for all thou art a sinner, yea thou will love
him so much the more for that, to consider that for all that he loved thee.

Oh but (thou will say) I see I sin daily and hourly, and that again and
again, against many vows and promises, Object.
against many mercies and means of better obedience

But I answer; what though thou do? Sol.
remember that as there is a spring of sin and corruption in thee, so there is
a spring of mercy and compassion in God; and that spring is set open for sin
and for uncleanesse, to wash and purge thee from the same, so that still (I
say) if thou will but love and believe in him, he will love thee; for
notwithstanding all this, he still woes and sues unto thee for thy love, and
therefore stand no longer out with him, but come in with all the speed thou
can make, which that thou may the better do, thou must remove these two
hindrances out of the way Strangeness, Worldly mindedness.


First, Strangenesse] for strangeness begets coldness of love, whereas
familiarity (as I told you) procures boldness in the day of judgment.

But (thou will say) how shall I come to be acquainted with God? Quest.


How? Answ.
why be much in his praise, in hearing of the word, and receiving of the
Sacrament, there is a communion of Saints (you know) and so there is a communion
of God with the Saints; let us therefore be careful to maintain this
communion betwixt us; by having recourse unto him in his ordinances, and
seeking unto him for comfort in all our troubles and adversities.

Secondly, Worldly mindednesse] that also begets coldness of affection, and
want of love to the Lord Christ, and therefore he circumcises the heart; Deuteronomy.
30. 6.
that is, he puts off all carnal and worldly affections from it, that so thou
may not love the world, nor the things of the world, but may love him with
all the heart, and with all etc. for the love of the world is enmity with God,
so that if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him, for
you cannot serve God and Mammon; and therefore our Savior says, That we must
not only forsake, but hate father, and mother, and wife, and children, and
house, and lands for his sake and the Gospells; or else we cannot be his
Disciples: so did the Apostles, we have forsaken all and followed thee.
Wherefore let us not set these things too near our hearts, but considering
what it is that keeps us asunder; as vain hopes, worldly fears, fantastic
pride, pleasures, profits, and the like, let us cashiere them, and cast them
from us; for what are all these, and all such as these are? but vain things
that cannot profit in the evil day.

And therefore as Samuel exhorts the people of Israel, Turn not aside from the
Lord unto them, either to the right hand or to the left; for they cannot
profit, because they are vain.

But (thou will say) will God then be content with any love? Quest.


I answer, no truly that he will not neither; Answ.
what then? Answer.

First, thou must love him withal thy strength, and with all thy power, with
all the parts and faculties of soul and body.

Now it may be thou art a Magistrate, a master of a family, a Minister, a
Tutor, or any other governor, and then thou must do God more service then
another private and inferior person; thou may compel them that are under
thee, to love the Lord by thy authority and example; God looks for this (I
say) at thy hands; for to whom much is given, of them much shall be required;
thou art but as a servant sent to market, which must give an account for what
he has received, and the more money he has given him to bestow and lay out,
the more commodities his master looks he should bring home with him for it; so
the more wit or understanding, or learning, or knowledge, or authority, and
power thou have, the more love must thou bear unto Christ, and show it by thy
bringing forth more fruits thereof unto him, then others that have none of all
these oportunities, or not in so great a measure as thou have, this is the
first thing.

Secondly, thou must love him above all things in the world besides, whether it
be pleasure, or honor, or pride, or profit, or what else thou will, or can
name besides; yea thou must love him above thy self and thine own salvation;
so that if his glory, and any, or all of these come in competition together,
thou can be content to be accursed for his sake, to have thy name razed out
of the book of life, and to be Anathema for Christ; then is thy love such as
God will accept of, for this is that self-denial which Christ himself
speaks of, and calls for of us.

But thou will say, Object.
durus est hic sermo, this is an hard saying, how shall I be able to do this?
to which I answer.

Thou shall do it the better, Sol.
by considering that he is better then all things, and that the whole world is
not to be compared with him; Romans 8. 18.
I count that all the afflictions of this life, are not worthy the glory that
shall be revealed (says the Apostle) and that made him endure such
persecutions for the Gospel as he did, with joy and patience; and so if thou
be once come to that pass as to know and be persuaded in thy conscience, of
the incomparable worth and excellency of Christ, thou will make more reckoning
of him, then of all the world besides; for as he himself said of himself, He
that will not deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me, is not
worthy of me; so he that loves any thing else above, or equal with Christ, is
not worthy of him; no, thou must be wholly his as he is, as he is wholly thine,
Hos. 2. 19.
and has betroathed thee unto himself; so that as a Virgin that has betaken
her self to an husband, must forsake all other, and cleave or keep her
constantly unto him, so long as they both shall live; so we, being married
unto Christ, must not play the Harlot, and go a whooring after other Gods, but
must be wholly his, as he is wholly thine.

But thou will say, he is not wholly mine, for he is the Saints too. Object.


To which I answer; he is indivisible, Solu.
he is not divided, but is wholly thine as well as theirs, so then if thou will
love the Lord Christ truly and purely, as he would thou should, thou must
love him so, as that all that is within thee be set upon him.

But (thou will say again yet further) what, Quest.
must we love nothing else but him then? to which I answer.

Yes that thou may, Ans.
so as it be with a subordinate, and not with an adulterous love, as a woman
may love another man besides her husband, but it must not be with such a love
as she loves her husband withal, she may not love his bed; it must be only
with a neighbourly and civil, but not with a conjugall or matrimonial love,
and so thou may love thy lands, thy life, thy friends, etc. but so as thou
art ready to part with all for love of Christ: so that hereby shall thou know
whether thy love be an adulterous love or not, if when he bids us follow the
duties of our callings, and we suffer our selves to be drawn away by vain
delights, 1 Cor. 7. 24.
and do not therein abide with God (as the Apostle speaks;) that is, use it
not to the glory of God, and the good of the Church and Commonwealth wherein
we live; and so for any other matter, if we cannot be content it should give
place to Christ, then is our love unlawful and adulterous, yea if our lives
lay upon it, if we do not yet prefer him before them, we are not worthy of
him, we love our selves more then him, it is no true love of Christ.

But thou will say, Object.
this is impossible, that a man should thus love God more then himself, more
then his soul. Sol.


I answer, I deny not but that it may seem so to flesh and blood; but yet thou
must know, that to a man truly regenerate it is not so; for (as Saint Paul
says) I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me: those
things that to the eyes of carnal reason seem hard and difficult, to them
that are spiritually enlightened, are facile and easy to be done, and so is
this.

Thirdly, If thou would have thy love pleasing to God; thou must have it
grounded on him, and that requires two things.

First, It must be grounded on faith in his promises, revealed unto thee in his
word; for without faith, it is impossible to please God, neither is it so much
love, as presumption that has not this foundation.

Secondly, it must be grounded on his person, not on his prerogatives or
privileges which thou shall get thereby, for if we love him only for his
Kingdom, and not for his person (as we do when we cannot be content to suffer
temptation and persecution for his sake) then he cares not for thy love,
because it is self love, and not love of the Lord Jesus Christ, for then if it
were, thou would respect nothing else but him.

Fourthly, thy love must be a diligent love, ready to reform any thing that is
amiss in thee, or which may dislike him; 1 These. 1. 3.
which whether it be so or no, thou may try it by these three marks or
tokens following.

First, it will cause thee to put on new apparel; a woman that loves her
husband, will attire her self according as she thinks it will please him
best, and give him most content, especially when she is to be married unto
him, then she will have a wedding garment that may set her forth, so as he may
take the better liking in her: so thou, if thou have put off the old man which
is corrupt, according to the deceiveable lusts of the flesh, and have put on
the new man, which after God is created in knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness; if thou be clothed with the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness, and give diligence thereunto, to make thy calling and
election sure, then may thou be sure thou love him, and that he accepts of
that thy love from thee.

Secondly, It will open and enlarge thy heart toward him, so as thou will
daily love him more and more, (so says the Apostle Saint Paul) my heart is
enlarged toward you o ye Corintheans; it is not any scanty or niggardly kind
of love that he will like of, but a full, free, and liberal one; so that if
thou can not be content to be at some cost and charges for the maintenance of
the Gospel, and the enjoyment of his love, thou love him not, or at least he
regards not thy love whosoever thou art.

Thirdly, it cleanses thy heart, what is said of hope, is as true of love; he
that has this love in him, 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
purifies himself as he is pure, and of faith it purifies the heart, and so
does love; therefore says the Apostle again, Ye were thus and thus, but ye
are washed, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, etc. so that if you would not
lose your labor, if you would have Christ accept of your love, and you would
know that he does so; suffer not any sluttishnesse, any sin and filthiness
to rest in your hearts, but sweep and cleanse them with the beesome of
repentance, from all such things.

And so hitherto of the necessity of your loving the Lord Jesus Christ,
together with the means, motives, and marks thereof, and in all these, the
equity and justice of God, how worthy he is to be accursed that loves him
not; now

Secondly, follows the object of this our love, which is (the Lord Jesus
Christ) who may be considered three ways. as being our Lord, Savior, Messiah.


First, as our Lord] to whom of due, we do owe our love and obedience: now as
he that runs away from his earthly Lord is worthy to be hanged for it, so he
that runs away from the Lord Christ, and will not love and serve him, is most
worthy to be accursed: but I have spoken of this sufficiently in the former
part of our text, and therefore because I have been so large therein, I will
now be more brief in this, and therefore so much for the first consideration
we must love him also.

Secondly, as our Savior, or Jesus, and Redeemer, who has bought and chosen
us unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works; and therefore let
us not defer it, 1 pet. 4. 7.
for now are the last times, the end of all things is at hand, so that if ye
do not love him now, it will be too late hereafter to do it, if we would
never so feign, and its a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God.

Thirdly, he is the Messiah, the anointed of the Lord, the light that should
come into the world, the high Priest of the new Covenant, ordained and
consecrated of God to offer sacrifice for us, even a peace offering of his
precious body and blood, to be a reconciliation for us unto the Father, and to
set us at one again with him, who before were utter enemies one to the other,
haters of God, and hated of him, therefore is he also called our peace, our
Mediator, and Advocate, and the like: but yet he is not only made and
appointed to be a Priest unto us, to reconcile us unto his Father; but withal
a King too, to rule over us and subdue us, if so be we will not be
reconciled and come in unto him; therefore these two words, Lord, and Jesus,
are here, (and in diverse other places elsewhere) joined together. And so Saint
Peter gives him two the like titles, saying that he is a Prince, and a Savior;
not a Savior only, but also a Prince to them that would not that he should
reign over them. Acts 5. 31.


So that we must mark this then, we do not preach Christ in the Gospel a
Savior only, but a Prince, and a Lord also; and they that love him must be
content to take him as both, as well a Lord and King, as a Jesus and Savior; as
a wife takes her husband, to honor and obey him as well as to love him, or have
him keep and cherish her in sickness and in health: and thus if we be
content to take Christ upon these conditions, then we shall have him with all
his influences, all the fruits and benefits of his passion: but otherwise thou
have no part nor portion therein, Christ shall profit thee nothing, but thou
art and shall be accursed to the death notwithstanding he died.

It may be thou will say, Object.
thou carest not for that.

But let me ask thee one question; Sol.
do thou know what it is to be so accursed? if thou do, consider more
seriously of it, if thou do not, know it is this; First, he curses thy
soul, and that in a double respect of Grace, Glory.


First, he curses it from the excellency of grace; that is, from the
effectual and powerful working of it, so that thou shall be never the
better, Romans ^. 5.
but rather the worse for all the means of grace and salvation; and shall go
on in thine impenitency and hardness of heart, which cannot repent etc.

But thou will still say, that's nothing; Object.
Is it not so, then

Secondly, he curses thee from his presence, in whose presence is the
fulness of joys, and at whose right hand, etc. so he did Caine, Genesis 4. 16.
the text says, he went out from the presence of the Lord*, that he cast off
all care of him (as it were in this life) so as let what would befall him, he
would never pity, nor protect him.

But it may be, thou will say, Object.
that is nothing neither.

Is it not so? Sol.
is it not a great grief for a man to be confind to his house, so that he
must never come to the Court, nor see the Kings face any more? much more grief
then is it, and a far greater judgment must it be for any poor soul to be
excluded from the presence of the King of Kings. And however (for the present)
thou do not now think it so much, yet the time will come thou shall find it
to be one of the most fearefullest things that can be; when thou shall behold
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and thou thy self out, to
have thy portion with the Devil and his Angels; and therefore the Schoolmen
are not afraid to say, that the punishment of loss is greater then the
punishment of sense.

But thou will say, Object.
these are all spiritual things, we feel not these curses; and so as we
have no crosses nor curses in our outward man, our estates, our goods, and good
name, we care not a straw for these, we neither feel nor fear them.

To this therefore I answer, Solu.
that you shall not escape so, but even in your outward man, in your body and
goods shall you be cursed also, for the earth shall not yield her increase unto
thee, but the Heavens shall be as brass, and the Earth as iron; thou shall
sow much and reap little; and thou shall be a vagabond and a runnagate upon
the face of the earth all the days of thy life; and whosoever meets thee
shall slay thee, as the Lord also said to Caine.

But thou will say yet again; Object.
we see no such matter as I speak of, for you know them that love him as
little as your selves, and yet they thrive and do well enough, yea better then
many other that love him a great deal better.

To which I answer, it is true, it may be so, Sol.
they may proser a while, but they shall be plagued at the last; either here,
or hereafter in hell fire for evermore. And now do but consider seriously of
Eternity, what a lamentable thing it is, that when thou have been there ten
thousand times, ten thousand years, thou shall yet be as far from ever
coming out, or having of any end of thy torments as thou wast at the very
first moment thou wentest thither: and therefore remember for this purpose
these two places of Scripture, which here I desire thee to look and read with
me; the one is, where the wise man says, that though a man live many days,
and rejoice in them all, Eccles. 11. 8.
yet he shall remember the days of darkness, for they are many, and all
that comes is vanity*; that is, all his delights shall have an end, but his
damnation shall be eternal, it shall never have either ease or end. The other
place is this; where the Apostle, with such as thus despised the
bountifulness, Romans 2. 7, 8. 9.
and patience, and long suffering, and forbearance of God, not knowing that his
mercy, etc. he tells them that they did but treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath, etc. for God will render unto every man according to his works, to
them that through patience in well doing seek glory and honor etc. and to
them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness,
tribulation, and anguish, and wrath, etc. that is, as if he should say, let
men please themselves in sin as long as they list, yet they shall pay dear
for it at the last upshot; for, for all these things. God will bring them to
judgment, and reward them according to their works, whether they be good or
evil: so that however some drops of his mercy may light upon them here in this
world, yet then the great deep of his judgments, and the vast gulf of his
justice shall be broken up, and he shall rain upon them fire and brimstone,
storm, and tempest, Psalm. 11. ^.
this shall be their portion to drink.

This then may reach thee not to deceive thy self any longer, but to know for
certain that he that will not now take the Lord Jesus, and love Christ whilst
he is offered unto thee, shall undoubtedly be accursed, and that with such a
curse as is here described; for God will not have his Son mocked and derided
by us, there is nothing that angers him more; and therefore its said (as I said
before in the beginning) kiss the Son least he be angry. Object.
And let us not dream that it will be soon enough then to receive him when
his wrath is once kindled: For if we will not take him now, Sol.
then we shall not be able to do it, but shall be afraid to come in unto him,
for then will his wrath burn like fire, and scoarch like a flame, Revel. 1.
14. 1^.
and therefore Saint John says, That his feet are of burning brass, and his
eyes of flaming fire, as if from top to toe he were all on a raging flame.

But thou will say; Object.
what though I do not receive him now, I may receive him hereafter, before he
be so thoroughly moved, and angry with me, as that he will not be pacified.

To which I answer, indeed I cannot deny it, Sol.
but that the time of this life is the time of grace, and offering of
reconciliation, and that so long as there is life, there is hope; but yet I
tell thee withal, that there is a time set down and decreed of God, beyond
which thou shall not receive Christ; for then it may be he has sworn in his
wrath thou etc. he does never reject, till they reject him, and then when they
will not embrace his offer but refuse him, it is just with God to refuse them;
so that afterward though they would receive him, yet they shall not do it;
thus when the Jews had once rejected and refused his Son, then he left them;
and so when the Israelites refused the good land, then he refused them; and
swore in his wrath that they should never etc.

And here, for a conclusion, let us note that the Gospel brings a swifter
and severer curse then the Law does; so that (as Saint Paul to the Hebrews
has it) if he that despised Moses law died without mercy, under two or three
witnesses, of how much soarer punishment shall he be thought worthy that
trampleth under feet etc. Heb. 10. 28, 29.
Wherefore as it is there also said in that Epistle; Whilst it is time, whilst
he stands at the door and knockes, open unto him and receive him, even now
whilst its called to day, harden not your hearts as in the provocation, etc.
least hereafter he swear in his wrath etc. And so to say no more, consider
what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Amen.

FINIS.
November, 30. 1637. Imprimatur

THO: VVYKES.

