A discourse written by M. Theodore de Beza, containing in brief the History
of the life and death of Master John Calvin, with the Testament and last will
of the said Calvin, and the Catalogue of his Books that he has made. Turned
out of French into English, by I. S.

In the year of our Lord. M.D.LXIIII.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Lucas Harrison, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Crane.

The Printer to the Reader.
FRIEND READER I offer unto thee this present gathering or sum, containing
the Life and Death of the Faithful servant of God, Master John Calvin: by the
which thou shall see marvelous examples of the assaults, that he has endured
for the Doctrine of the Son of God, and also what assistance God does give to
his, when his honor and glory comes in question. In the mean time think it
not strange that this discourse does not agree with the accustomed form of
Hystorians, for the purpose of the Auctor who is Master Theodore de Beza, a
good servant of God also, and a companion of Master John Calvin in the work
of the Lord, was not to publishe it as an History, but only for a Preface to
the Commentaries of the said Calvin upon the Book of Iosue, come to light
since his death. I have thought good to advertise thee hereof, to the end that
thou should not think, that the memory of so great and worthy a personage
might be satisfied with so small a discourse, (albeit that it is diligently
and truly set forth) the which shall serve thee only to this purpose to make
thee to hope and look for an ample and goodly History of his acts and
doings, which shall greatly profit to the advancement of the Church of God: to
whom be glory and honor for ever and ever. Sobeit.

Theodore de Beza, to the Christian Reader, health and peace in our Lord.
IF it had pleased God to have kept longer among us his Faithful servant
Master John Calvin, or rather if the peruersitie of the world had not caused
ye Lord to take him so sone to himself: this should not have been ye last of
his labors, wherein he has so faithfully and so aptly employed himself for the
advancement of ye glory of God, and for the edification of his Church: And also
now this Co^mentarie should not have gone forth, without being as it were
crowned with some excellent Preface, as are ye reast. But it fares with it as it
does with poor Orphans, which are not so well provided for as their Brethren,
because yt their father is to timely taken from them. In this mean time I do
see this Orphane to be of so good a house, thanks be to God, and so well
resembling his father, that without any other Testimony, he will of himself
become not only agreeable, but also very honorable to all those that shall see
him. And therefore also mine intent has not been to recommende him by this
Testimony, (for what needs it?) but rather to lament more with him of the
death of him, which has been as a father, both to him and to me: for so much as
I neither may, nor ought to esteem him less to be my father in that which God
has taught me by him, than this Book, and so many others, which have been by
him written. I will then bewail me, but it shall not be without consolation: for
having regard to him of whom I speak, I had rather have had him living here
below, if ye felicity wherein he is now placed, did not change ye
sorowfulnesse of my loss into rejoicing of his gain: and I should smally have
profited by his so holy and marvelous doctrine, and by his life that was so
sincere and good, and by his death yt was so happy and Christian, if I had not
learned by all these means to submit my self to the providence of God, being
fully contented and satisfied therewith. Now as concerning his doctrine, whereof
I will first speak, so far unable are the multitude which have spoken
against him, to yield it suspected with all men of good judgment, that on the
contrary, the same might serve for an infallible argument to approve and
confirm the same: for so much as none has at any time stood against it, but
he has well felt that he has addressed himself not against a man, but
against a very true servant of God. Also he may lawfully affirm (and all
those who have known him will be good and lawful witnesses) that he had never
enemy, which in assayling of him made not war against God. For after that
God did cause his champion to enter within that list or stecade, it may be well
said, that Satan has picked him out even as though he had forgotten all the
reast, to assail him, and to pluck him thoroughly down, if he had been able.
But on the other side God has given him that grace, yt he has adorned him
with so many trophies or victorious tokens, as he has set manifest enemies
against him. If then we shall speak of the combats that he has inwardly
endured for ye doctrine, there may nothing make them to seem easy and slight,
but only ye diligence which he did always use, because he would not suffer
his enemies to take breath, and the constancy which God gave unto him, never to
yield or bend how little so ever it were, in the quarrel of the Lord. The
Anabaptists can bear witness, who shortly after the beginning of his
Ministry in this Church, to wit the year.1536. that he could so well and
happily behave himself in open disputation without the help of the
Magistrate, that immediately ye race of them was utterly destroyed in this
Church: which is ye more to be wondered at, because that the greatest number of
the Churches of Almaigne are yet at this day greatly hindered by them: and if
there be any that is free from them, it has been rather by rigor of Justice
than otherwise. He had an other combat to fight against an Apostate named
Carol, upon certain calumnies and false reports: who being also overthrown as
well by writing as by word, and cast out of the Church of God, dyed miserablye
at Rome in an hospital, as an example to those which do reuolte from Jesus
Christ, to follow a Master which does so well recompense his servants, both in
this world and in the other. And an other time, to wit the year of our
Lord.1553. Michel Seruet a Spaniard of cursed memory, happened to come, who was
not a man, but rather, an horrible Monstre, compounded of the ancient and new
heresies, and above all an execrable blasphemer against the Trinity, and
namely against the Eternity of the Son of God: This same being come to this
town, and apprehended by the Magistrate because of his blasphemies, he was
here so substancially encountered, that he had no defense but a certain untamed
obstinacy, by reason whereof by the just judgment of God and man, he ended by
the punnishment of fire, his wicked life and blasphemies which he had vomited,
both by mouth and writing by the space of thirty years and more. About two
years before there came a certain deceitefull friar a Carmelite, and was
suddenly become of a divine, a Physician, named Hierosme Bolseck of Paris, who
to get him estimation, thinking himself to be in Cloistre, and not in a
Church of God, which he never did know but by hear say, and afterward being
procured by certain naughty and evil disposed persons, of whom it shall be
hereafter spoken, began in open Congregation to condemn the doctrine of the
eternal providence and predestatio^, as though we made God the auctor of
sin, and culpable in the condemnation of ye wicked: Calvin in yt very place
did stand against this disguised Woolfe, and did so answer him by word both
openly and privately, and afterward also by writing that the adversary had no
troth of his side remaining, but a certain Monkish shamelessenes, which made
him and does make him at this day filthy and stinking to every man yt has any
good understanding: yea by his own judgment, as shall be declared by testimony
of his own hand whenever need shall require. For this wicked man who had
deserved punnishment for a seditious act, being used by the Magistrate very
gentlye, because that they thought that there might hereafter some remedy be
found for his sophistical ignorance, after that he had done so many offenses
and wickednesses as he was able in the Churches nere there about, seeing
himself three times driven out of the dominions of the Lords of Berne, in the
end being intolerable to any man, did give glory to God, acknowledging his
errors: and especially his evil conscience, at Orleance in open general
Synod of the French Churches, the year.1562. in such sort that men had some
hope in him. But after that being again possessed by such a like evil
spirit, is returned to his first errors, and is driven from all men, as he
is well worthy, and does serve yet at this present day in all places where he
goes, for a testimony of the wrath of God against all such as do resist ye
truth. Shortly after there was a certain remanaunt of Seruetistes, who
declared themselves, as one being a lawyer of those quarters: who afterward
for the like cause was driven from the university of Tubing by ye right noble
Duke of Wirtemberg, and because he did continue in his blasphemies, for which
he had been chastized by imprisonments and suffered to recant by the judgment
of the said Lords of Berne, with this man there was confederate a certain man
of Calabria named Valentine Gentill, an other of Sardegna, a Piedmontois named
John Paul Alciat, a Physician of Saluces named George Blandrata. These men
wrought under ground as well as they could, showing their blasphemies against
the three persons in one divine Essence and being, until the time that this
faithful servant of God withstanding them, some vanished away, others of them
acknowledging their blasphemies, have demanded mercy at ye hands of God and
of the Seignorie. But shortly after, those wicked ones returned (contrary to
their oath) to their blasphemies, and in the end with their accomplices
conveyed themselves into Polognia, where they have styrred up and do yet at
this day, innumerable troubles, yet have they notwithstanding even to and in
the very place where they are, felt and perceived what the force was of ye
faithful servant of God, of whom we speak: by whose writings the Churches of
Polognia have been so fortified, that the Faithful have been greatly
establyshed, and the enemies of the truth so weakened, yt with the help of
God, their ruin is at hand. Behold these are the principal combats that he
has fought within, for the doctrine, which is much more hard to sustain than
to resite, as ye Books shall testify to the posterity. As for ye other
enemies, they have always assailed him from a far of, but not so far of,
but that he has touched them more nigh than they would willingly: his learned
works against the Anabaptists and Libertines can make sufficient declaration.
And as for the great Goliath Pighius, who was it that did beat down and
overthrow him and his Pelagianisme, but only the power of the Lord in the hand
of Calvin? who did shut up the mouth of the glorious Cardinal Sadolet, but
only he? who has more happily fought with and overthrown yt hierde of Boares
gathered together to destroy and wroute up ye Vineyard of ye Lord? who has
more grievously or more perilouslye in deed wounded Antichrist to the death?
who has more boldly and more aptlye made answer to the wicked (interim)
which has so troubled Germany? This is not all, for who has been of a more
clear sight to know and to reprove the wickedness of false Evangelists, who
framed themselves to all men meet? Who has more consta^tly defended ye
purity of the doctrine against the most dangerous kind of enemies: to wit,
those which under the color of peace and union do endeavor themselves to
corrupt the purity of the same? And as touching the miserable contencion that
was moved about the matter of the Supper, seeing the fire so greatly kindled,
his whole desire was to quench it by a clear exposition of the matter;
without naming of any man: the which he has so well and so aptly done, that he
that shall well consider his writings, must confess ye next after God, it is to
him, that the honor of the resolution is due, which since has been followed by
all men of good judgment. This notwithstanding, Satan enforced himself by all
means possible, to have set division between him and the Church of Zuriche
in this discentyon: which among others he has always esteemed and honored. But
it was in vain, for on the contrary when they had in presence conferred
together, they continued thorowlye of one accord: and then was the consent of
all the Churches of Guise and of the Guisia^s, framed and imprinted in many
tongues, to the great edificatio^ of the people of God. That did much displease
certain obstinate men, among whom there was one named Ioachim Wesphale, an
other Tilema^ Heshusius, which were the most earnest and fervent enemies of
the truth and concord. He was the^ enforced to enter into combat, whereby he
did so maintain the truth, and overthrow and suppress the ignorance and
shamelessness of such personages, that he won great commendation, and the
above named great shame: yea even among those of their sect and nation, and the
Church of God has been the more confirmed in the true and wholesome doctrine.
In conclusion, I think yt there is no heresy ancient, nor renewed, nor newly
forged in our time, which he has not destroyed to the very foundations. For
among al other his excellent Graces there were two that did shine in him: to
wit, a singular sharpness of spirit to discover where the difficulty of
matters did lie, and then also a meruellous dexterity and aptness to make his
aunswers without the losing of any one word, as all they will confess, yea the
very enemies of the Gospel, which would attentively read his works. I have
also omitted one Monstre which he likewise did defeat, albeit that in that
behalf I fought on his side: it is one named Sebastian Castalion, who because
he had some knowledge in the tongues, and had also a certain aptness in the
Latin tongue, he was here received to govern the school, But this spirit
being so naturally inclined to please himself, did so diue him in his vanity,
that in the end he drowned himself therein, because we could never win so
much of him, as to cause him to take the pains to read the Commentaries and
other works to resolve him. That was the cause why he did openly condemn ye
song called Canticum Canticorum, in Latin, as a filthye and wanton Book: which
when it was laid to his charge, he vomited out openly a thousand injuries
against the Pastors of this Church: Whereupon being commanded by ye Magistrate
to avouch his sayings, and being convinced of manifest malice and evil
speaking, by justice he was appointed to depart the town after yt he had
acknowleged his fault: being then in ye end retired to Basil, he continued
there, until ye time of the trouble yt was stirred up by Hierosme Bolsec, upon
Predestination, the same man which held always of the perfection of the
Anabaptists, but it was secretelye and among his own sect, otherwise making
no difficulty at all to shape himself like to every man, and being also
greatly provoked by the death of Seruet, he discovered himself openly, first
in a book which he caused to be imprinted in Latin and in French under a false
and counterfeyt name of Martin Belly, to whose errors and blasphemies I have
answered. He also made an other treatise which he calls in Latin Theologia
Germanica, under the name of Theophile, and in French an other treatise of the
old and new man. In the end he did turn or rather overthrow and confound
ye whole Bible in Latin and French with so vile a shamelessness and
ignorance, that it is marvel that any man could delight therein, were it
not that new things are always agreeable to Ambitious spirits, whereof there
is at this day as great plenty as ever there was. He did set before his
translation, an Epistle dedicated to the late good king Edward of England,
whereby under color of preaching Charity, he overthrows the authority of
the Scriptures, as dark or imperfect: to ye end to send us to particular
revelations, to wit, to ye dreams of the first abuser and deceiuer yt would
declare and show himself. He did also make certain notes upon the ninth
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, whereby he does openly maintain
Pelaglanisme, and does not acknowledge any decree and ordinance of God, but
only in those things yt are good of their own nature, forging in God a
permission contrary to his will, and falsely laying to our charge, that we
make God the Auctor of sin. All this did not any thing move the faithful
servant of God, because yt such calumnies and errors had been already answered
a thousand times, unto the time that he himself made a certain collection in
Latin of certain Articles and arguments, which some men said were taken out
of the Books of M. John Calvin, adding thereunto certain replications: and
this book was sent closely to Paris there to be imprinted, but God provided
for it and caused the first copye to come to my hands, in such sort that we
our selves did cause them to be put in print here, with such aunsweres as it
did deserve: he after that he understood the whole matter, knew not how to
answer the Pastors and Ministers of Basil, but said that he was not Auctor
of those articles, being shortly after called to answer upon the doctrine of
free will and of the providence of God, in open disputacion at Basil, his
doctrine was condemned. And because that certain years before he had been
received to the profession of the Greek tongue, by those that did not
understand of his errors, he was commanded not to deal neither by word nor
writing but with his lecture, which thing he promised and did very evil
observe it, continuing always as he might, in sowing of his errors and
disceiptes: and of a very malice that he had against me, who at that time was
in France greatly troubled, to my great grief, in the civil wars: or at
the least being moved with some unmeasurable ambition, he wrote a little book
entitled, Counsel to desolate France, without putting his name to it, or
naming ye place wherein it was printed, albeit it was a free town: in it does
he condemn all the French Churches of sedition and rebellion, and gives
council to every one to believe what he will, and by that very mean opening
the gate to all Heresies and false doctrines. I did not vouchsafe to make
answer to that worthy counsel, which declared this man to be over beastly
and ignorant in that whereof he did entreat, and very evil exercised in such
affairs, but in the stead of it I did answer to many points whereof he
rebukes me, mingling with them most villain and intolerable errors, under
color of defe^ding that which I did mislike in his Latin translation. This
mine answer being dedicate to the pastors of the Church of Basil, was the
cause that the same Castalion was called by the Church and afterward by the
Seignorie, and was commanded to make answer to that wherewith I charged him,
and did offer my self to prove by his own writings: but within few days
after death delivered him from that travail. I know well that this long
discourse shall be misliked of some men, as though I spoke as a man loded with
passions, and could not be content to suffer the dead to be at rest in their
grave. But I may well protest before God yt I did never hate the man in his
life time, with whom also I never had to do nether in good nor evil in
particular, much less that I would now hate and persecute the dead which
are put over to the judgment of the Lord. But it was needful to make this
known, to the end that every man might beware of his Books and disciples
that he has left behind him. Whilst these things were doing, a certain
Disciple advanced himself, to wit, Frau^ces Baldwin, who could no more
continue in one Religion than in one place, but changed dwelling place and
condition in manner every day, and Religion at ye least three times, in ye end
having no more conscience to loose, he placed himself in a certain Religion,
like to yt of Chanonnes Regulers, the which being such in general as were ye
reast of al their troop, yet when there is a question of their particular, they
become Moncks in ye that is profitable for the Monks: and on ye contrary they
be always seculers, when Monkry pleases them not: and this worthy personage
did kiss ye Pantophle as the reast have done, and because ye people should be
out of doubt yt he did it unfeignedly, he received a good and a worthy
absolucion of his king, to enter again into ye favor of his holiness and his
Cardinals, unto whom for recompense of all his evil hap he became slave. If
then it come in question to have one to write against us, this is the best
Catholic in the world: but on the other side if he must frame himself to
those yt are as it were between two yrons, and boast them yt they hold the
mean, then this good man spitteth out ye reformations of ye Romish Church, and
speaks stoutly of certain abuses, but it is without touching the principal,
and in such sort notwithstanding, yt every man which knows him not, would
think he did mean good faith, and not to purchase him credit. This galaunt
for his beginning, failed not in the year.1561. to set forth a book of such
stuff, without any name, at the present time ye men were at the conference of
Poyssy. Calvin understanding the meaning of this wicked one, made answer
briefly according to his usage: but very paremptorilie and fully, giving
certain attaints to him that was chiefly culpable of this evil. Baldwine upon
this began to chafe, and afterward left not to foam out his rage against him
whom he had so often called father and Master, only to make it known yt he
was revolted in deed, whereupon Calvin did overthrow him, by one only silence.
For as touching the injuries and outrages against his person, he did always
esteem them honorable for the name of the Lord whom he served, for so much as
to be blamed by a wicked man, is a token of virtue. And as for his
reprehensions concerning the doctrine, the one sort were so slender and so
improper in his judgment, that they deserved no answer, the others were but
recitals borrowed elsewhere, and refuted more than a thousand times. And for so
much as it is to me, that this Apostate has also addressed him to gratify his
Masters, I have taken upon me to answer him for the second time, which
thing I hope also well to discharge, with the grace of our God. These be the
principal combats that this worthy personage has happily endured for ye
truth of the Lord. As touching the reast, in this discourse I think I have
entreated of the greatest part of his life: for what was his life other than a
continual doctrine, as well by word as by writing, and by all his manners and
order of life? the which also will do very well to be declared perticularly,
to the end yt every man may understand the maruels of God in the person of
this excellent man. He was borne in Noyon, an ancient and famous town of
Picardie, the year.1509. the tenth of July, of an honest house and of a
reasonable wealth, his father was named Gerard Calvin, a man of good
understanding and counsel, and therefore greatly desired in the houses of
noble men dwelling in those parts: by reason whereof his said Son was the
better and more liberallye brought up, at his fathers charges notwithstanding,
in company with the children of the house of Mommor, with whom also he was in
company at ye schole at Paris. He was always of a singular good wit, and above
all other things of a very good conscience, enemy to vices, and greatly given
to the service of God as men did then call it: in such sort as his mind was
wholly to deuinitie, which was also an occasion that he was provided of a
benefice in the Cathedral Church of Noyon. Yet was his father always minded
that he should study the Laws, and he also on his part having alredie, (by
ye mean of a cousin and frinde of his, named Master Peter Robert, otherwise
Oliuentanus, who afterward turned ye Bible out of Hebrew into French and
imprinted it at Neufchastle,) tasted some thing of the pure Religion, began to
withdraw himself from Popish superstitions: which was the cause that beside
the singular reverence that he had toward his father, he did agree to go to
Orleaunce to the same end, where there did then read an excellent man named
Peter de l' Estoille, who was afterward President of the Court of Parliament
in Paris, under whom he did so profit in short space, that he was not
accounted a scholar, but as an ordinary Doctor, as oftentimes he was rather
in deed a teacher than a hearer, and he was offered to proceed Doctor without
paying any thing, which thing also he did refuse. And because that the
university of Bourges was then^ also famous by the mean of that excellent
Lawyer Andre Alciat which then did read there, he would him. In the mean
time he exercised himself also see and hear in holy letters, with such fruit
and profit, that all those whose hearts it had pleased GOD to touch, giving
them to understand what the differences were that were then moved concerning
matters of Religion, did not only bear toward him singular affection, but
had him forthwith in great admiration for the learning and zeal that was in
him. Among other with whom he did frequent and company, then at Bourges there
was an Almaigne an excellent personage a Professor of the Greek tongue, named
Melchior Volmar, whom I do so much the more willingly remember, because it is
very he that was my faithful governor and teacher all the time of my youth,
for the which cause I will praise God all the days of my life. This good man
seeing Calvin not to be well instructed in the Greek tongue, caused him to
study the same, wherein he did greatly help him, as he himself has
witnessed, dedicating to him his Commentaries upon the second Epistle of S.
Paul to the Corinthians, and did him the honor to call him his Master and
instructor. In this mean time his father died, which was the cause yt he left
ye study of the Laws, and returned to Noyon, and then to Paris: where
notwithstanding his youth, he was not long unknown, nor without honor, by all
such as had any feeling of the truth: he of his part did then resolve to
dedicate himself wholye to GOD, and did travail with great profit in such
sort, that being in Paris in the time of the Rector named Monsieur Copus,
there happened a sedition whereupon he was sent to the Court to be preferred,
where he was known and very well received of all those that had any pure
affection and sound judgment in those affairs: In the end seeing the
miserable estate of the Realm of France, he determined to absent himself
and to be where he might live more quietly and according to his conscience. He
then departed out of France in the year.1534. and in the same year he caused
to imprint at Basil his first instruction as an Apology, dedicated to Frau^ces
ye first French King of that name, in the behalf of the poor faithful that
were persecuted, whom they did most falsely name Anabaptists, to excuse them
toward the Princes Protestants, of the persecutions that they then used
against them. He passed also into Italy, where he saw my Lady ye Duchess of
Ferrare, yet at this day living, thanks be to God, who when she had seen and
heard him, forthwith judged of him as he was, and ever after until his death,
did love and honor him as an excellent Organe of the Lord. In his return from
Italy ye which he had but seen, he pass (in a happy time) through this town
of Geneua, which not long before had received the Gospel by the preaching of
M. William Farell, and did mean nothing less than to tarry there, but to
pass through it and to go to Basil, or else to Strasbourgh. But the Lord being
even then willing to prepare away to his so great goodness as his pleasure was
to bestow upon his Church by the mean of him, did put in the heart of the
said Farel to stay him: which thing was very hard for him to do, in such
sort that after many requests and desires he was feign to use adiurations.
The^ he was contented to stay, not to preach, but to read Divinity, and this
came to pass in the year.1536. in the beginning of September. When he was in
this sort declared Doctor in this Church by lawful election and authority,
he then framed a brief form of Confession and Discipline to give some shape
to this new erected Church. He made also a Cathechisme which may be well
called one of his excellent works, and has yielded marvelous fruit, being so
well framed, that it was afterward turned out of French into Hebrew to win
ye Jews, into Greek and Latin for ye schools, also into Italian, Dutch,
English, Scottish and Fle^mishe, and also Spanishe, for all these nations.
These prosperous beginnings did greatly mislike Satan and his, who failed not,
(as it was an easy matter to do in the first change of ye estate of Religion)
to set himself against the proceeding of the Gospel. Albeit yt it was received
with an oath by all those of this town. Master Calvin on ye other side as he was
in deed of a noble mind, withstoode firmly and constantly with Master
Farel, ye seditious persons, having also on his side an other good man named
Conrant, a Minister also of this Church, being blind of his bodily eyes, but
could well see with the eyes of his spirit, whom also ye said Calvin had brought
from Basil, where he did remain because of the great persecutions, yt were in
France: The end was such, yt the Lord being minded even at once to take his
servant out from the press, and to purge this Town of certain seditious
persons which did abuse ye name of ye Gospel, to pla^t his name else where, and
last of al to frame his servant by certain experience of things which did
afterward stand him in great stead: it was ordained (ye greater part of ye
Counsel not being the best) yt the forenamed should depart ye town wtin.24.
hours, because yt they would not minister ye Supper of the Lord in a City yt
was the^ so troubled and stirred. When this was declared to the said Calvin,
his answer was yt if he had served me^, he should have been ill reco^penced,
but he served him, who in stead of evil recompe^cing his servants, did always
give the^ more than they deserved. And he might justly so say: for he had
followed the example of S. Paul, in serving of the Church upon his own charges
and cost. He then departed to the great grief of all the good, first to Basil,
and then to Strasbourgh, where being received as a treasure, by those excellent
me^ M. Martin Bucer, Capito, Hedio, and others, who at ye present did shine as
precious Pearls in ye Church of God, he there erected a French Church, and
therein did establish Ecclesiastical discipline in such sort, as ye Almaignes
could never yet attain unto, for their Church, even to this very day: he did
also read Divinity with great admiration of every man, and then he began to
write upon S. Paul, dedicating his Co^mentarie upon the Epistle to the
Romans to M. Simon Grinee, who was accounted to be the best learned of the
Almaigne nation, and was his great friend: he had also this grace among
others, that he brought to the faith a great number of Anabaptists which were
sent unto him out of all parts, and among others one named John Stordeur of
Liege, who within short time after dying of the Plague at Strasbourgh, he took
his widow to wife, whose name was Idelleto de Bure, a very grave and honest
woman, with whom he lived afterward very quietly, until our Lord took
her away to himself, the year.1548. without having had any child: at the same
very time there were holden in Almaigne certain imperial assembles or diets
for the matter of Religion, at Woormes and at Ratisbone, in the which Calvin
was chose^ for one of the chief by the advice of all the Divines of Almaigne,
where he did so behave himself yt his renoume became great even among the very
enemies, and Phillip Melancthon among others, did even then receive him into
singular friendship which did always last afterward, and did then call him
ordinarilye the Divine, in token of singular honor. In the mean time ye Lord
did execute his judgments at Geneua, punishing certain which being in the
place of Syndique.1538. were the cause of the banishement of Calvin and Farel,
in such sort as one of them being gyltie of a sedition, and thinking to save
himself through a window, did all burst himself, an other of them having
committed a murder, was by order of justice beheaded, the other twain being
co^uinced of certain untruth against the state of the town, fled away and
were condemned in their absence. When the town was purged of this froth, they
began then to bewail Calvin, and he was desired thither again by sundry
Ambassades from Geneua, and by the intercession of the Lords of Zuriche, to ye
Lords of Strasbourgh, who made great difficulty. On ye other side Calvin seeing
how he profited in Strasbourgh, would in no wise consent thereunto, albeit to
declare the good will that he bare to the town, the year.1539. a whole year
after his banishment, he maintained the cause thereof or rather of the truth of
God against the Cardinal Sadolet, in a large and learned Epistle which is
printed among the reast of his works. In the end he was threatened with the
judgments of God if he did not obey to that vocation, in such sort that to
the great sorrow of the Lords of Strasbourgh, and especially of Master Bucer
and his companions, he was licenced to be at Geneua for a certain time. But
when he came thither and was received of singular affection by those poor
people which acknowleged their fault, and having a great desire to hear their
faithful Pastor, they held him there continually: whereunto in the end the
Lords of Strasbourgh consented, upon condition that he should be always a
Bourgeois of their town. They would also yt he should have had always ye
revenue of a Prebend which was appointed unto him for his scipende of his
reading. But as he was a man clearly void of all greediness of the goods of
this world, so could they never bring to pass that he would receive so
much as the value of one Denier thereof. And in this sort he was again
established at Geneua, the year.1541. the.13. of September, where forthwith
he framed an order of Ecclesiastical Discipline, which has always since
continued there firmly, albeit Satan and his adherentes have employed all
their forces to abolishe it. Now he that would here declare particulerly all
the trauayles and pains that this excellent personage has endured since by
the space of.23. years as well within as without, he should have matter
sufficient to fill a great volume. For if ever there were town furiously
assailed by Satan, and valiantly defended during yt time, it was Geneua, the
honor belongs only to God, but it ought and may lawfullye be said yt Calvin
has been ye instrument of his virtue and power. If there be question of
vigilance, Satan and his could never take him unprovided, but either he has
warned yt flock before hand, or else preserved it in ye place. If we shall
speak of integrity, he is yet unborn, yt has seen him commit any fault in
his office, or to yield, be it never so little, for any man living, or to have
varied in doctrine or life, nor never misreported man. If we shall speak of
labor and pain, I believe yt his like is not to be found, beside yt he
preached continually every day in the week, and most commonly, and as often
as he was able, he preached twice every Sunday: he did read divinity three
times in a week: he made declaration in ye Consistory or as it were a whole
lesson every Friday, in conference of the Scripture which we call Congregation,
and did continue this order thoroughly without interruption until his death, and
in deed never did fail so much as once, except it were by extreme sickness.
Further, who is able to recite his travails ordinary and extraordinary, I
know not if any man of our time has had more to hear, to answer, and to
write, nor matters of greater importance. The only multitude and number of
his books and writings are sufficient to astonishe any man that shall se them:
but much more those that shall read them. And that which makes his labors
more wonderful, is that he had a body so weak of nature, and so low
brought with watchings and overmuch sobriety, yea and being subject to so many
diseases, that all men yt had seen him, would have thought yt he could not
have lived at all. And notwithstanding this, he never left of day nor night
his travail in the works of the Lord: and he could not endure to hear ye
requests and exhortations of his friends which they daily made unto him, to
the end that he should take some rest. I will allege only two examples. The
year.1559. being assailed and maruellously grieved with a fever quartane, he
did notwithstanding, in the chiefest of his sickness, set forth the last
edition of his Christian Institution, and did translate it through out into
French. Likewise in his last sicknesses, which were the stone, the gout, ye
Hemorrhodes, a Phthysike fever, shortness of wynd, beside his ordinary
disease of the Miegrame, be did him self translate wholly that great volume of
his Commentaries upon the four last Books of Moses: examined the
translation of ye first: made this book upon Iosue, and did peruse the
greatest part of the translation and annotations of the New Testament, in sor^
that he never ceased from writing but only eight days before his death, his
voice beginning to fail him. Beside his innumerable pains and his charges, in
all the mischiefs and perilles, wherein this poor City has been, assailed
within by many mutinous and desperate Citizens, tormented without a hundred
thousand ways, threatened by the greatest Kings and Princes of Christendom,
because it was always a refuge and defense for all the poor children of God
afflicted in France, Italy, Spain, England, and else where, it was so that
Calvin bare always the greatest burden: to be short he might well say with S.
Paul, who is he yt is troubled and I do not sorrow? And it was not without
cause yt every man had his refuge to him: for God had adorned him with so wise
and good council, that never man repented him of the following of it, but I
have known many fall into great and extreme inconveniences which would not
believe him. This has been found so by many experiences and proofs, namely in
the seditions that happened the year.48. 54. and.55. to break and disorder
the discipline of the Church, where he thrust himself naked in among ye swords
drawn, and with his presence and words he so frayed the most desperate mutines
of them, yt they were enforced to praise God. The like was in the conspiracy
Catilinarie, which was the very year.55. to have murdered all the French, by ye
Captain of ye town named Amied Perrin and his conspirators, which coniuration
carrying with it a marvelous number of dangers and trauayles, in the end, the
Lords of his great grace, by the wisdom of his servant brought it to that
pass yt it is now at: to wit, to the greatest quietness and felicity yt ever
this City did know. As touching his ordinary life and diet, every man ca^
witness that it was so temperate, that there was never excess in it, no more
was there of nigardise, but a commendable mean, saving that he had always to
small regard to his health, being contented for the space of many years with
one repast in.xxiiij. hours, and never receiving any thing between his meals
in such sort yt all that ever the Physicians could persuade him unto in ye
point, was yt about half a year before his last sickness, he did take at times
about noone a little wine and would soupe of an egg, ye causes were the
weakness of his stomach, and ye Miegrame, for the which he said he could
never find any remedy but a continual diet, in such sort as I have known him
oftentimes to eat no meat in two days. Being of so small a diet, he slept
very little: and for the more part he was constrained to warm him upon his
bed, whereon also he has made the greatest number of his books, being
continually happily occupied in spirit. This is the order yt this excellent
servant of God did continuallye observe, forgetting himself to serve God and
his neighbor in his vocation and charge: yet could he not so do but ye
Satan did raise up against him all the shamefullest slanders of ye world, but
yt is no news, for it is the reward yt the world in all ages has given to
those that would draw them from perdition. I will not answer those that do
call him Heretic and worse than Heretic, (whereupon they have forged a
name of Caluinistes) for his Doctrine makes answer on the contrary more
than sufficientlye. Some have charged him with ambition, but if they be able in
any point to prove it, I am content to be condemned. Is there any man that
has followed greater simplicity in the exposition of the Scriptures, and has
more wherewith to set himself forth if he would have profaned the
Scriptures with subtle and vain ostentations? He would rule all, say they.
O villain and false shamelessness: what pre-eminence did he ever seek? and
if he had sought it, who could have kept him from it? with whom did he ever
strive for the first or the second place, when men have not given unto him
that which the gifts and graces that God had given him did require? when has
he been seen alter, be it never so little? when has it been seen that ever
he did abuse his charge and his authority toward the simplest in ye world?
when did he take in hand any thing without the advice or against the opinion
of his companions? To be short, what difference was there ever between him and
us, but that he did excel us all in all humility among other virtues, and
also in that he took more pain than all we did? was there any man more
simplye apparelled or more modest in all respects? was there any house
considering the estate of the man, I do not say less sumpteous, but more
slenderlye furnished with moueables? And if men will not believe me and ten
thousand witnesses with me, at the least let them believe the slender wealth of
his brother and only heir, and also the inventory of all his goods, and it
shall be found that all that ever he left behind him (accompting also his
books which were dearly sold because of his precious memory, to all men
that were learned) does not exceed the value of two hundred crowns. These
may also answer these shameless evil reporters who have talked so largely,
that the one sort said he was a Usurer, the other that he was a very bancker:
a matter so worthy of scorn and so falsely raised, that any man that ever
did know him, will never require answer to such an untruth. He was so
covetous that having in the whole six hundred Florines for his stipende, which
does not al amount to three hundred livers tournois, yea he sought to have
less, and the accomptes of this Seigniorie can witness it. He has been so
covetous of this worldely goods, that being in favor, yea and honored both of
Kings, Princes and Lords of many nations, and having dedicated his works to
them, I know not (and I think I should have known it if it had been otherwise)
that ever he received of them to his use the value of.xx. Crowns. Also he had
the sacred word of God in such reverence, that he had rather to dye than to
use it as a bayte to Ambition or avarice. He did dedicate his books to
private persons, acknowledging some benefit or friendship, as he did a very
learned and singular Co^mentarie upon the book of Seneca concerning the virtue
of Clemency and gentleness, which he wrote in Parris, being of the age of.24.
years, and did dedicate it to one of the Lords of Monmor, with whom he had
been brought up, not at their charges notwithstanding. The like he did with
his Commentaries upon ye Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, being dedicated to
Simon Grinee: upon the first to the Corinthians, to the Lord Marquis Caraciol:
upon the second to the Corinthians, to Melchior Volmar his Master that taught
him the Greek: upon ye first to ye Thessalonia^s, to Mathurin Cordier his
gouerner in the college of S. Barbara at Parris in his first youth: upon the
second, to Benet Textor his Physician: upon the Epistle to Tite, to his two
singular friends and companions in ye work of ye Lord, Master William Farel
and M. Peter Viret: and the book of offenses to Lawrent of Norma^die his
ancient and continual friend. As concerning ye others which he did dedicate
to certain Kings, Princes, or common wealths, his meaning was to encorage the
one sort to persevere in ye defense of ye children of God, and to stir up the
others to the like. Wherefore also when he saw yt such men did ye contrary, he
made not strange to put out their names and to put in others, which only came
to pass in two of his Prefaces. This be said as touching this crime of
avarice. Others on ye other side have reported him to be prodigal and a
player, but it was as true as ye report of those ye charged him with fornication.
As concerning prodigality and the fruits thereof, his books will well declare
even to ye end of the world, of his pastimes, and of the shamelessness of such
liars. As concerning whoredom, it is marvel yt any man durst so far to
stray, as to forge ye evil report, were it not that it is a thing accustomed
against ye most excellent servants of God. But he is yet unborn that ever did
suspect him of whom we speak in any place whersoeuer he used: he lived about
nine years in Marriage very chastely, when his wife was dead, he continued
in wydowerhead about the space of.xvj. years, even to his death. In all that
time who is he that ever perceived the least token that might be of so
unworthy an act in him? And what woman was there so villain and shameless
ye durst to behold without shame a forehead so reverend and showing to all
men that did behold it, all puretie and fredome? Who has been a more rigorous
enemy to whordome than he? It is true that the Lord has exercised him touching
this matter toward such as touched him near. There has yet worse happened in
the house of Jacob and David, than to him of whom we speak, and in a more
strange sort. But what did Satan in this behalf gain of the faithful
servant of God, but only shame and rebuke to himself in the later day before
the seat of the Son of God? And now to them that he had stirred up, to
raise such sclaunder, Whoredoms, Adulteries, and incestes, are accounted for
pastimes and exercises of the wicked ones, in sort, that one of the greatest
faults that they find with the reformed Churches, is yt there whoredom and
adultery is punished: In the mean while if there be any such fault or offense
found among us, albeit that it be extremely punnished, they accuse us with
open mouth. In so doing, (if they said truth,) what other thing do they than
blame us in that that we resemble the^? But without entering any further into
this discourse, it must needs be, (will they or no) confessed yt the thieves
do not haunt where ye Magistrates and Pote^tates are: but to exercise such
things it were more meet to dwell among the^ where such offense is a virtue.
But to return to my purpose, it shall be well found yt this faithful servant
of God has showed to all the world a singular example, in condemning this
villain and stinking vice, as well in them as in others: for when there were
any found faulty, he had no regard at al without accepting of persons, but to
GOD and his Church: and I say nothing in this, but that which all such as did
know him well, will testify before God. There have been others which have
named him to be irreconciliable, cruel, and also bloudye, which some of them
would moderate, naming him only, to severe. The defense is sone made, God be
praised, and it should not be necessary, were it not yt it shall do well to
rebuke some of them for their peruersitie, and to advertise the others of their
ingratitude toward God. I said in the beginning that which I do now say,
which is, yt he never had enemies but such as did not know him, or else such
as made open war against GOD. I will bring forth to witness the same, a
proof more than sufficient, it is, that hardely may there be any man found in
our time of his calling, against whom Satan has made more cruel war by all
kinds of outrages, but he never pursued any man in any court nor attempted ye
law against any, no, he never sought any revenge: also he never had house nor
enheritaunce, nor never did deal with any traffic or occupying whatsoever it
be, but it is very true yt when they banded against ye doctrine of God which
he taught, he would never yield in any thing, but would according to the holy
laws that be here established, prosecute, that the mockers of God might be
handled according to their desert. But which are they that will blame that,
but only those that do transform a virtue most rare and singular, into a
vice overmuch common and hurtful. By the way, what if I say, and may lawfully
say it in deed, that a number eue^ of those against whom he has been
enforced to stand for matters before recited, have honored his constancy by
their own testimonies? I could name at ye least three, which I will not name,
notwtstanding two of them being brought to punishment for their faults and
offenses, did in the sight of all the people, think all the honor and thanks
yt they might yield unto him during the same, not to be sufficient, calling him
their Father, crying out, saying, yt they were unworthy of his presence,
aduertisements and prayers, considering they had not harkened to his fatherly
admonitions. The third being in his bed sick eue^ to death, who had been during
his life ye counselor of all these strayed ones, could never be persuaded ye
God would forgive him, if ye his faithful servant, whom he had so much
offended, did not also forgive him. So far were these men of from charging him
either with cruelty or overmuch severity. I confess yt he has always showed
ye Magistrates, how detestable yt accepting of persons is in the sight of God,
that they must hold the Balaunce aright: and that God abhors not only those
which do condemn the innocent, but also those which pardon ye offender. Now
if it be vice to say so, and to put it in use, ye holy Ghost must then be
condemned who has so said: or if it be otherwise, such blasphemers that do
call the ordinance of God, cruelty, must have their mouths stopped. But, say
they, he was over rigorous against adulterers and heretics. I may well
answer that which is true, as all the town does know, that he never judged
any man, for it was not his office, and he never thought to do it: and if they
have demanded his advise, not to confound the estates which God has divided,
but to be governed according to the word of the Lord. I know well that I
might auouth it, if I said that they have not always followed his counsel.
But leaving that, what are these merciful censors able to allege, when I
shall say unto them that which is true, which is, that there was never yet good
government in any common wealth wherein adulterye has not been judged worthy
of death: and yet it can not be proved that any one simple adulterer has been
punnished in this City by death. As concerning Heretics, where is, I pray
you, that great rigor? where is it that this bloody man has showed one jot
of a bloody nature? There are few towns of Guisse and of Almaigne where they
have not put Anabaptists to death, and lawfully: they have been contented here
with banishment. Bolsec has here blasphemed against the providence of God.
Sebastian Castalion has here spoken evil of the very books of the holy
Scriptures. Valentine has here blasphemed against ye essence of God: None of
them have here been put to death, two of them were only banished, the other
was set free by an honorable amends toward God and the Seignorie. Where is
this cruelty? Only one Seruet was put to the fire. And who was ever more
worthy than that wicked one, having for the space of thirty years in so many
sundry sorts blasphemed against the Eternity of the Son of God, giving the
name of Cerberus, to the Trinity of the three persons in one only Divine
essence, making the baptism of young children of no value, having gathered and
heaped together all the filthy stinckes that ever Satan did vomit out against
the truth of God, having seduced an infinite number of persons, and for the
chief and principal of all his wickednesses, would never neither repent in
giving place to the truth, whereby he had been so often times convinced, nor
show any token of conversion. And if we should come to the judgment of the
Churches, who would not rather allow yt which all the Churches of Almaigne, and
namely Philip Melancthon a man greatly renoumed for his meekness, has not
only spoken, but also published by writing, the praise of so just an
execution? To end this matter, they which discommende such an act, could
neither better set forth their ignorance in blaming yt which deserves
singular commendation, nor yet their rashenesse, when they deal with him who
did but the office of a faithful Pastor, putting ye Magistrate in mind of
his duty, endeavoring him by all means to bring such a wicked man to some
amendment, and in the end, not forgetting any thing that might let that such
a pestilence should not infect his flock. There are others which have reported
him to be very choleric, I will not make of a man an Angel, yet
notwithstanding, because I do know how maruellously God has been served by
that same very vehemency, I ought not to keep silent that which is true, and
that I do know. Beside his own natural inclination to choler, his wit
being marvelous prompt, the folly of many, the multitude and infinite variety
of the affairs for the Church of GOD: and toward the later end of his life,
his great and continual diseases, had made him unquiet and froward: but sure
he was far of from any delight therein, for on the contrary, no man did
better perceive nor so much find it as did he. This be said concerning his
life and conversation in his house, in whom this only default (that ever I
knew) was tempered with so great and amiable virtues, and so seldom or never
at all acompanied with other vices which are always wont to follow ye same,
that he never offended any of his friends neither in word nor deed. But as
touching in public concerning the charge that GOD had committed unto him, it
is there that I must needs marvel at the great wisdom of God, turning all
things to his glory, and chiefly in his most singular instruments and
Organes. Such as have seen and known with what kind of men he has most
commonly had to do, the things that God has declared and done by him, the
circumstances of times and places, they in deed may judge whereto such a
vehemency, I say, a vehemency in deed Prophetical, did serve and shall
serve to all posterity. And that which made him ^ore marvelous, was, that
nether having nor seeking any thing less than that which is so much required
by those that would be feared by mean of an outward appearance, the most
obstinate and peruers were constrained to bend under the great power of God,
which did compass about his faithful servant. They which shall read his
wrytinges, and shall rightly seek the glory of God, shall there see this
majesty (whereof I speak) to shine. As concerning such as do at this day
handle religion, as they do politic affairs, which are more cold than yse
in Gods cause, and more enflamed than the fire, in yt which concerns their
particular causes, and which do call al ye choler, which is more frankly
spoken than they would, even as he never sought to please such men, even so
do I think it not meet to stand about the answering of them. What would
these wise and temperate men say then, (seeing there is no question but of God,)
if they had more earnestly felt such a choler? I am sure they would have been
also on their part as evil contented, as I do think, and shall think my
self happy during my life, to have enjoyed so great and so rare a virtue, both
openly and privately. Even as I could never be weary of solacing my self in
the absence of so worthy and excellent a personage, in representing him unto me
by the discourse of his rare and exquisite virtues: no more can I without very
great sorrow, make an end of that which rests, and may notwithstanding in no
wise be left untouched, for so much as it is, as it were, the crown and
beautye of all his life. Beside that God did place this great wisdom and
understanding in a weak body, and disposed of it self to the disease of the
Pthysike, whereof he also died: the studies of his youth had made him very
lean and weak, and when he came once to the affairs, he had always so small
respect concerning the travail of his mind, that without the special grace
of GOD, (whom it pleased to build his Church by the means of that
instrumente) it had not ben possible for him to have come to the age which the
Physicians do call the declining. The year.1558. being required by the Lords
of Franckfort to make a voyage thither, to appease and provide remedy for
certain troubles that were in the French Church, which was newlye received in
to that town: at the return of this long and trauaylsome voyage, he had a
tercia^ fever, very sharp, which was as it were the first pushe at his health:
in such sort that in the year of our health.1559. he was assailed with a
long and perilous fever quartane, during the which, to his great grief, he was
enforced to abstain from both preaching and reading: but he was never
unoccupied in his house, what counsel so ever me^ gave him, in sort that
during that time, he began and ended his last Christian institution both in
Latin and in French, whereof we will speak in the conclusion. This sickness
brought him so low, that never afterward he could recover his full health, he
drew ever afterward his right leg after him, which oftentimes did greatly
grieve him: his ancient diseases put them in order also: to wit, the head
ache, and great rawnesses which caused a continual defluxion: he was also
grieved with the Hemorrhoides, so much the more in that that at some other time
by chance that part was made very weak: the cause was for that he never
suffered his mind to rest. He had a continual imperfect digestion, whereunto
he never gave any heed, but when the disease compelled him. The colliques also
followed, and then in the end the gout and the reast. Beside this, by
strayning himself, and by a gnawing defluxion, he fell into a spitting of
blood, which did weaken him to the uttermost. In the midst of so many
diseases, it is a thing very strange that this sharpness of Spirit was rather
let than diminished, and this dexterity of judgment nothing altered. There
was only this evil, that the body could not follow the spirit, albeit that
he did sometime enforce himself, until the time that he was so grieved with the
shortness of his wind, that with great pain he was scarcely able to remove
him two or three paces. The Phisitia^s employed all their industry, and he on
his side did follow their counsel to the uttermost, notwithstanding his griefs
and so many diseases together mingled. But it was all in vain, as he did
always say, looking up to Heaven, speaking often these words, Lord how long?
And then in the end he remained without stirring, having yet the use of his
speech, but could not long speak or continue any purpose by mean of the
shortness of his breath, yet notwithstanding this, he ceased not to labor.
For in this last sickness, as has been above said, he did wholly translate
out of Latin into french, his Harmony upon Moses, did peruse the Translation
of Genesis, wrote upon this book of Iosue: and in the end did peruse and
correct the greatest part of the French notes upon the New Testament, which
other men had before hand gathered. Beside this he was always occupied in the
affairs of the churches, answering by word and by writing, when occasion
required: all be it that on our part we made request unto him, praying him to
have greater regard to himself: but his answer was always to us, that ye which
he did was nothing, requiring us to suffer, that God might find him always
watching and laboring according to his ability in his work, even to his last
breath. The xxv. of April, he made his Testament in brief sort, as he did
always avoid the use of more words than neded, as much as in him was. which
does contain an excellent and singular testimony for ever, that he spoke as
he believed, which was the cause that I did willingly infer this same, word by
word, by the consent of his brother and only heir Antonie Calvin, to the end
that this act may remain for ever, as it has pleased God that the Testaments
of some of his most excellent servants have been enregistred, to be
perpetual witnesses, that one very spirit of God did govern them, both in
their life, and in their death: and also to make the better known the extreme
shamelessenesse of such as would bear men in hand that his death was not
according to his life. And if any man do think any thing to be herein other
than troth, I will not stand much in saying against him: only I do give him
warning whatsoever he be, to think what thing it is, that may be true and
firm among living men, if it be lawful for a man to dout that which has been
done in a Town, in the sight and knowledge of such as would hear or
understand it.

The Testament and last Will of Master John Calvin.
IN the name of God. Be it known and apparent to all men, that in the year
1564. and the.25. day of April, I Peter Cheuelat, Citezen and Notary sworn of
Geneua, was called by the famous John Calvin, minister of the word of God in
the church of Geneua, and Burgess of the said Geneua, being sick and weak of
his body only: the same man declared to me that he would make his Testament and
declaration of his last will, desiring me to write it accordinglye, as he
should speak and pronounce it: which according to his request, I made, and
wrote it by him, and accordingly as he spoke and pronounced it to me, word by
word, without leaving any thing out, or adding any thing there unto, in form
as follows.

IN the name of God, I John Calvin Minister of the word of God, in the Church
of God of Geneua, (feeling my self greatly oppressed with sundry diseases, that
I can not otherwise think, but that God will shortly take me out of this world)
have determined to make and put in writing my Testament and declaration of my
last will, in form following: which is, first of all, that I give thanks to
God, for that he has not only had pity on me his pore creature, to take me
from out of the bottomless pit of Idolatry, (wherein I was plu^ged,) to draw
me to the light of his Gospel, and to make me partaker of the doctrine of
salvation, whereof I was to much unworthy: and that continuing his mercy, he
has spared me in so many vices and wickedness, which did well deserve that I
should be cast of from him, an hundred thousand times: yea and that which
more is, he has stretched his mercy toward me so far, as to be served by
me and my labor, to bear and to show forth the truth of his Gospel,
protesting that I will live and die in that Faith which he has given me,
having no other hope nor refuge but only to his free adoption, wherein my
whole salvation is laid, embracing the grace that he has given me in our Lord
Jesus Christ, accepting the merit of his death and passion, to the end that
thereby all my sins may be buried, and beseching him so to wash and purge me
with the blood of this great redeamer, which was poured out for all pore
sinners, that I may appear before his face, as bearing his Image. I protest
also that I have endeavored me, (according to the measure of the grace that he
has given me) to teach purely his word, as well in Sermons as in writing, and
to expound the holy Scriptures faithfully. And likewise in all the disputations
that I have had with the enemies of the truth, I never used cautel nor
Sophistry, but have proceeded plainly in the maintenance of his quarrel. But
alas, the will that I have had, and the zeal, if I moughte so call it, has
been so cold and slack, that I find me greatly endetted in all, and through
all: and were not his infinite goodness, all the affection that I have had,
were nothing else but smoke: yea those graces which he has bestowed upon me,
would yield me more faulty: so that my recourse is, to that that he being
father of mercy, will be, and show him self father of so pore a sinner. As
concerning the rest, I desire that after my deceasse, my body may be buried
according to the custom, to abide and wait for the day of the blessed
resurrection. Concerning the small portion of goods, which God has given me
here to dispose, I do ordain and appoint for my only heir, my well-beloved
brother, Antonie Calvin, only for credites sake, giving him for all his part,
the cup that I had of Monsieur de Varranes, praying him therewith to content
himself (as I am assured he will) seeing that he knows well that I do it for no
cause else, but to the end that that little which I leave, may remain to his
children. Then, I bequeath to the College ten Crowns, and to the purse of the
pore strangers as much. Also to Jane, daughter to Charles Costan, and of my
half sister, to wit on the fathers side, the su^me of ten Crowns. Then to
Samuel and John, sons to my said brother, every of the^.40. Crowns, and to
my Neeces, Anne, Susan and Dorothee, either of the^.30. Crowns. As touching my
Nephew David their brother, because he has been alwais light and rash, I give
him but.20. Crowns for his chastisement. It is in effect all the goods that
God has given me, according to my rate and estimation, as well of my Books
and moueables, with vessel and all other things. Notwithstanding, if it amounte
to more, I would it were distributed among my Nephews and Neeces, not excluding
at all David, if God give him grace to become more modest and stayed But I
believe as touching this article, there shall be no great a do, namely when my
dettes shall be paid, wherewith I have charged my brother, upon who^e I trust,
naming him executor of this present Testament, with reverend Laurent of
Normandy: giving them full power and authority, to make an Inuentorye without
form of law, and to sell my moueables, to make money to fulfill the contents
of this my will, written this.25. of April.1564. So is it, John Calvin. After
that it was written as before, at the very instant, the said renoumed Calvin
did seal it with his own seal, as soon as it was written. And on the morrow
being the.26. of April, the year above written, the said renoumed Calvin did
cause me to be called again to him, being there together present, these famous
me^, Theodore de Beza, Raymond Chauuet, Michel Cop. Lois Enoch, Nicolas
Coladon, Jacques de Bordes, Ministers of the word of God in this Church, and
that famous man Henry Scringer professor of Arts, al Burgeoses of Geneua, in
the presence of whom he declared that he had caused me to write by him and
after his pronunciation, the said Testamente in the very form and words
above written: praying me to read it in his presence and in the presence of
them that were there required and desiced to the same effect: which I did all
aloud word by word: after the reading whereof, he declared that such was his
will and last disposition, willing to have the same observed, and (for the
better auctorizing hereof) did desire and request the above named to subscribe
the same with me, which was also done the day and year above written, in
Geneua, in the streat called the Chanons streat, and in his dwelling house, In
witness whereof, and for proof of the same, (as reason is) I have written in
ye form aforesaid, this present Testamente, to make him ready for whom so ever
the execution thereof shall belong unto, under the common seal of our very
honorable Lords and Superiors, and mine accustomed Sign manuell, So is it
signed. P. Cheuelat.

Seeing that the shortness of his wind did increase more and more, he desired
my Lords the four Sindiques, and the whole little ordinary Counsel, as they
are called, to come and see him together: and when they were come, he made to
them an excellent declaration of the singular graces that they had received of
God, and of the great and extreme dangers from the which they had been
preserved, which he could well declare to them from point to point, as he that
knew the whole better than any man, and did put them in mind of diverse
necessary things concerning God, touching the government of their charge: to
be short, he did the office of a true servant and Prophet of God, protesting
the sincerity of the doctrine that he had taught them, assuring them against
ye tempests yt were at hand, if they would continue on from good to better. And
then he desired them in general and in particular, to pardon all his offenses,
which none ever found so grievous as he did: he took them al by ye hand, I
know not whether there might have happened to these Lords a more doleful
spectacle or sight, which they al did esteem, (and good cause why, concerning
his charge,) as ye mouth of ye Lord, and in their affection, as their own
father, seeing yt he had known and framed a great piece of their youth. The
Friday the.20. of April, all the brethren Ministers both of the town and
country being advertised at his request, came together to his chamber, to
whom he gave a great and long exhortation, whereof the substance and effect
was, that they should persevere in the well doing of their duetye after his
Death, and that they should not faint, seeing GOD would both mayntayn the
town and his Church, albeit they were threatened in many behalfes: and also
that they should suffer no malice or displeasure to reign among them, but
charity by all means possible, and that they should be of perfect accord
among themselves, and that they should acknowledge how greatelye they were
bound to that Church, into the which God had called them, and that there ought
nothing to turn them back: for those which have tasted the truth and will leave
it, may find excuses under the ground, but God will not be mocked. To this he
added a recital of his entry and coming to this Church, and of his
conversation therein: saying, that when he came thither, the Gospel was there
preached, but things were far out of order, and that the greatest fruit yt
the Gospel had brought forth, was the breaking down of the Idolles: but there
were there many wicked people, and he was enforced to receive many injuries:
but God did always strengthen him to go through with it, albeit that of his own
nature he was fearful: and he repeated twice or thrice these words, I assure
you yt of mine own nature I am timorous and fearful. Also he put them in
remembrauuce, that when he came from Strausbourgh hither, he entered into this
vocation as by constraynt, and seeing no great likelyhoode of any fruit to
come, nor yet knowing what God would work in that behalf, and in deed that
he had passed many hard things, but continuing on still, in time he saw the
blessing of God upon his labor: he would then that every man should wax
strong in his vocation, and keep good order, and that they should have good
regard to the people to hold them in continual obedience of the true
doctrine, and that they had always among them Godly men, albeit that it could
not be avoided, but that there must be evil persons and rebels among
the^ also, and that this should show us very faulty in the sight of God, if the
things being come to so good pass, should afterward fall into decay by our
negligence. As touching the rest, he protested that he had ever been of one
true affection with ye company of his brethren, and desired the^ to pardon him
if that at any time they had seen in him any frowardness during his sickness,
and gave them great thanks, (as often times he used,) for that they did
supply his place in preaching. In the end he took them by the hand one after
another, which was with so great sorrow and bytternesse of heart to every of
them, that I can not call it to mind without great and extreme
sorrowfulness.

The second of Maij, having received letters from M. William Farell, Minister
at Neufchastell, (of whom heretofore has been made mention,) and
understanding that he was minded to visit him, being of the age of four Score
year and more, he wrote to him in this sort.

Be it well with you my very good and dear Brother: and seeing that it
pleases GOD that you shall remain after me, well may you live, having
alvvayes in mind our Unity, the fruit whereof attends upon us in Heaven,
according to the profit thereof that the Church of GOD has enjoyed. I will in
no wise that you travail to see me, for I dravve my breath with great
pain, and do continuallye look when my breath shall fail me. It is
sufficient that I live and dye to CHRIST, which is a gain to his both in life
and death, I commend you again to God with all the Brethren in those parts.
From Geneua this second of Maij.1564. By wholy yours John Calvin.

From that time forth his sickness even to his death was nothing else but a
continual Prayer, notwythstanding that he was always in pains, having often
times in his mouth these words of the Psalm.39. Tacui Domine quia fecisti. I
held my peace O Lord, because it is thou that have done it. Other times he
would say of the.38. Chapter of Esaias. Gemebam sicut Columba, I did lamente as
does the Dove. Another time speaking to me, he said and cried out, Lord thou
punnishest me, but it is sufficient for me that it is thy hand. Many were
desirous to come and see him, but it had been needful to have kept the gate
open day and night, to have fulfilled their desire. But he foreseing that, and
knowing that the shortness of wind would not suffer him to do that which
willingly he would: beside that also, not well liking the curiosity of many, he
besought them to content them selves and to pray to God for him, and to suffer
him somewhat to rest: yea, when I came to see him, albeit that I was very
welcome to him, yet notwythstanding, considering my charge yt I had, he gave
me to understand fully, that he would not in any wise that his particular cause
should occupy me in any respect: in such sort that taking leave of me, he
would often say that he made conscience to let me, were it never so little,
albeit that he was glad to see me: but his nature was always such, that he
feared to stay (were it never so little) the profit of the church, and to
trouble ye least that might be his friends, although there were nothing in the
world more acceptable to them than to employ themselves to do him pleasure.

He continued in this sort, comforting himself and his friends, until the
Friday the xix. of Maij, next before the Supper of Pentecoste, on the which day
because it was the custom of this Church, yt all the Ministers should assemble
them to yield as it were an account of their life and doctrine, and then in
token of friendship they take their repast together, he was contented that the
supper should be made at his house, where he causing himself to brought in a
chair, as he entered in among them he spoke these words, My brethren I come
now to see you for my farewell: for after this time I will never come more to
table. This was to us a piteous entry, albeit that he himself said the prayer
as well as he could, and enforced him to make us merry, not being able to eat
but very little: yet before supper was ended, he took his leave, and caused
himself to be carried again into his chamber, which was at hand speaking these
words with as pleasant a countenance as he could, A wall between both shall
not let at all, but that I will be joined with you in spirit. It came to pass
even as he had said: for until that very day, what disease so ever he had,
he would be taken out of his bed and brought in a chair to his little table,
but after this night he never shifted from lying upon his back, so greatly
weakened, notwythstanding that he was lean of himself, that there remained in
manner nothing but only life, saving that he was very little changed of face:
but chiefly ye shortness of his wind did so trouble him, that it caused his
continual prayers and consolations rather to seem sighs tha^ words to be
understood: and he was of such a countenance, that his only look did plainly
testify with what faith and hope he was furnished. The day that he died it
seemed that he spoke better and more at his ease, but it was the last
enforcement of nature: for that night about eight of the clock, even sodaynely,
appeared the tokens of present Death, whereof I had speedily word, (for I was
but newly departed from him,) and running thither with certain of my brethren,
as soon as I came, I found that he had already yielded up his spirit, so quietly
that he did never rattle, but spoke plainly even to his very death, with
perfect understanding and judgment, without ever stirring hand or foot: he
seemed rather to be a sleep than dead. Behold as in an instante how that
very day the sun did set, and the greatest light that was in the world for
the buylding of the Church of GOD, was taken into Heaven. And we may well say
that in our time by one only man it has pleased God to reach us both to live
and to dye well. The Night following, and the Day also, there was great
lamentation thorowout the town: For the whole body thereof did bewail the
Prophet of the Lord: the poor flock of the Church did weep for the departing
of their faithful Pastor: The Schole lamented her true Master and teacher:
and all in general did bewail their very father and comforter next unto GOD.
Many desired that they might see yet once his face, as men that could not leave
him neither dead nor living. There were also diverse strangers newely come from
far of to see him, which when they could not, for that men thought that he
would not so soon have died, desired greatly to see him dead as he was, and
made great instance: but to avoid all evil reports and speech, he was buried
about eight of the clock in the morning, and at two of the clock at afternone
according as he had appointed, he was carried according to the custom, to the
common Churchyard called the great or large Pallaice, without pomp or any ado
at al, where he now lies abiding ye resurrection, which he has taught us,
and has so constantly hoped for. The body was accompanied by the greatest part
of those that were in the town, of men of all estates, which did the more
lamente him, because there was small likelyhode to recover (at the least of a
long time,) such a great loss. He lived as touching this mortal life, the
space of six and fyftye years, lacking one Month and thyrtene Days. Whereof
he spent the just one half in the holy Ministry, preaching and writing,
without ever changing any thing, or diminishing or adding to or from the
doctrine that he taught the first day of his Ministry, with such power of the
Spirit of God, that never wicked man was able to hear him without trembling,
nor good man without loving and honoring him.

There rests now no more but even as it has pleased God to make him to
speak continually by his so learned and holy writings, that he may so be heard
of the posterity to the end of the world, at what time we shall see our God
even as he is, to live and to reign eternally with him. So be it.

From Geneua this.19. of August.1564.
Advertisement.
FOR because that there is none of the Faithful, who would not gladlye
understand the truth of the number of Books that have been written by the
late M. John Calvin, to the end that hereafter men be not deceived, as is well
known that the like has happened to the writings of great and excellent
personages that men have falsely set forth others under their name: It has
seemed therefore good to join to this a Catalogue, as well of his books and
writings in Latin and French already Imprinted, as of those that yet are not,
at the least of as many as may be called to mind.

Those which are not yet in French are marked with this mark.*.

The Catalogue of the Books and wrytings of Master John Calvin.
Commentaries and lessons in Latin and French al ready imprinted upon the old
Testament. Upon Genesis. Upon the other four Books of Moses in form of
Harmony. Upon the Book of Iosue. Upon all the Psalms. Upon Esaye. * Upon
Jeremy. Upon Daniel. Upon the.xij. yt are called little Prophets.
Upon the new Testament, also imprinted.
Upon the three Evangelists in form of Harmony. Upon Saint John. Upon the
Acts of the Apostles. Upon all the Epistles of Saint Paul. Upon the Epistle
to the Hebrews. Upon the Epistles Canonical of S. Peter, Saint John, Saint
James and S. Jude.
The Catalogue of his Sermons imprinted, which men gathered when he preached.
Upon Job. Upon the Commandments. Upon the Octonaries of the 119. Psalm.
Upon ye song of Ezechias in ye.38. ca. of Esaias. Upon the beginning of ye
Harmony of the three Evangelists. Upon the.10. and.11. Chapiters of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. Upon the Epistle to the Galathians. Upon the
Epistle to the Ephesians. Upon the Epistles to Timothe and to Tite. Also many
Sermons of the Birth, Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Four Sermons entreating of matters very profitable for our time.
A Congregation made in the Church of Geneua, of the providence and eternal
election of God.
Sermons upon the old Testament not imprinted.
Upon Genesis. Upon Deuteronomie. Upon the two books of Samuel. Upon the first
book of the Kings. Upon many Psalms. Certain sums of Congregations made
upon Iosue, gathered even as he did entreat of and handle the textes. Upon
Esaie. Upon Jeremy. Upon Ezechiel. Upon the later eight Chapiters of Daniel.
Upon seven of the twelve little Prophets.
Upon the New Testament.
Certain Sermons more upon the Harmony of the three Evangelists. Upon the
Acts. Upon the two Epistles to the Corinthians. Upon the Epistle to the
Thessalonians. Upon certain Chapiters of the end of the Epistle to the
Hebrews.
Lessons in French not yet Imprinted.
Upon the Psalms, from the.37. to ye end. Upon Jeremy. Upon the.20. first
Chapiters of Ezechiel as well in Latin as in French.
A Catalogue of other Books and treatises which he has made in sundry times
and sundry places.
* A Commentary upon the Book of Seneca, touching the virtue of Clemency.
His Christian Institution. A treatise against ye error of such as think that
the souls do sleep after they be departed from the body, unto ye last
judgment. Two Epistles, the one to flee Idolatry, the other of the duty of a
Christian man. An answer to the letter which the Cardinal Sadolet wrote to
the Lords and people of Geneua. A treatise of the supper of the Lord. *
Certain verses in Latin of the victory of Jesus Christ. A Cathechisme for ye
instruction of Children. A manner of Administration of the Sacraments, with the
common prayers, and the manner how to celebrate the Marriage. A defense of the
pure doctrine concerning free will, against the calumnies of Albert Pighius.
Annotations upon the fatherly advertisement made by the Pope Paul the third
to the Emperor Charles the fifth. Antidote or preservative against the articles
of the faculty of the Sorbonistes of Parris. A treatise or supplication to the
Emperor concerning the necessity of the reformation of the Church. Against the
Anabaptists and Libertines, with an Epistle to the faithful of Roan, against
a Friar a Libertine. An Advertisement concerning the bodies and Relics of
Saints and what profit there comes of them if they be diligently kept. A
treatise in fly superstitions, with the excuse of the false Nicodemites, with
the answer of the Ministers of Zuriche. Antidote to ye Acts of ye counsel
of Trent. The very true mean to pacify yt troubles and to reform ye Church
against ye Interim. An Advertisement against the Astrology Judicial, and such
curiosities, which at this day hear the swaye in manner thorowoute the
world. An agreement concerning the Sacraments. A treatise of Offenses. Of the
eternal Providence of God. Against ye detestable errors of Michel Seruet a
Spaniarde. *Three aduertisements to Westphalus. * Against Hethusius and ye
error of Stancarus. * Against Valentin Gentil. * Answer to the calumnies
which Sebastian Castalion did sow abroad. *An other short answer to other
calumnies of the same man. A Congratulation to the reverend priest, Master
Gabriel de Sacoma^, of ye Church of Lions chief Minister. *An answer to a
certain fine and subtle Neutre. *An answer to the outrages of Frau^cis
Baldwin an Apostate. *A short Advertisement to the Faithful of Polonia. *An
Epistle to the foresaid, for the Confirmation of the said Advertisement. An
answer to a certain Hollander, written to the people of the low country. A
Reformation to put to silence a certain rascal named Antonie Catalan. A
Confession of the faith in the name of all the reformed Churches of the Realm
of France, made during the Wars, to deliver to the Emperor. Also a great
number of Letters, counsels, aduertisements and aunsweres, as well in Latin as
in French, to diverse persons of sundry quality and estate: wherein is
entreated of diverse matters, which (one day if it please God yt it may be set
forth into light) men may then better see what was the wisdom, promptness,
singular judgment, and the marvelous and divine graces, that were in this
Faithful Servant of God.
Finis.
Faults escaped in the first Sheet.
A.iij. leaf, ij. side, iij. line, for more read me.

A.iiij. leaf, first side, x. line. for that read the.

A.v. leaf, ij. fide, xvij. line, for any read every.

A.vij. leaf, ij. side, vj. line, for Guise read Swisse, and for Guisians
read Grisons.

Imprinted at London in Whitecrosse streate by Henry Denham, for Lucas
Harrison, dwelling in Paul's Chuchyarde, at the Sign of the Crane.

Anno Domini. 1564, Nouembris.4.


