An evident Display of Popish Practices, or patched Pelagianisme.

Wherein is mightelie cleared the sovereign truth of Gods eternal
Predestination, the stayed ground work of our most assured safety by Christ.

Written in Latin by that Reverend Father, Master Theodore Beza, and now
lately Englished by VV. H. Preacher of the Gospel.

PROVERB. 22. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall
be holden with the cords of his own sin.

ECCLES. 10.12. The words of the mouth of a wise man have grace, but the lips
of a fool devour himself.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Ralph Newberie, and Henry Bynnyman. ANNO. 1578.

To the right reverend father in Christ, John, by the providence of God Bishop
of London, VV. H. wishes increase of that grace which has promises of this
life and the life to come.
AS Satan the old ancient enemy to al truth, has not, or does not surcease to
be himself, wandering without werinesse, seking by all means, that he may at
the least, in some sort, make full the warrantise of that horrible judgment,
against himself and his, where the smoke of torment ascends for ever, in
brusing the heel of that blessed seed, endeavoring to dismember that body of
his appointed limbs, which being knitte together in the unity of one spirit,
through the bond of peace, does grow up into the fullness of one head Christ
Jesus, standing out in his long continued course of rebellion, especially
aiming at this mark, to darken or bedimme the day light of Gods glory, whose
majesty he can not bear, that himself might see advanced in the palpable
darkness of our depraved being, whereof no time or age, since the worlds
creation, amongst what, or what sort soever, but have been experienced at the
full, as is easily seen, if the case be considered, by descent in all the ways
of the word of life, by which the most mighty and eternal majesty of our
God, has directed and brought down his beloved people unto this gray headed
estate, of these miserable days wherein we be. And as he has through all ages
tofore seriously labored, to have and hold captive in the bond of
intellerable servitude and spiritual slavery, in the palpable darkness of
Egypt, the whole multitude of men, holding it the readiest way to win his
hoped intent, to bring upon them the great flood of forgetfulness of Gods
benefits, and in the countenance of an Angel of light, to step in betwixt
the surpassing brightness of Gods glory, and the true acknowledgemente of our
natural being, an evident experience of that sorrowful separation betwixt God
and man: so in these drossie days of inaccomptable evils, he now has
encouraged himself, with a bigger force, added to his malice, the long
experience of his wicked ways, and to work out his purpose according to the
time, his fierceness is augmented, by many thousand degrees, as who bestirreth
himself most, when he is nearest the end. As the times of gold, of silver, of
brass, and of iron, whereof Daniell speaks, did each succeed and exceed
others, not in succession of time, but abundaunce of iniquity, and fierce
wrath against the people of the highest, til the stone cut out of the mountain
without hands should advance the name of his jealousy, in their standing and
irrecouerable overthrow So found this loathsome Leuiathan none easier access
to break in upon the Lords family, with all outrage as shameless sinful
man, yea of that purple strumper, and Babilonicall whore of Rome. Apoc. 27.4.5^
And for his more hope of success, he has of old enforced all his endeavors
to this purpose, that the name of the highest might not be known amongst his
people, and to stop the passages, and ram up the ways of the word of
life. And in this case in the fair outshewes of many untruths, he has
promised beaurie, but pays bands, pretends truth, Antichrist the ^ope.
Ap^^^^.
but inhaunteth falsehood, and in stead of the welsprings of the water of
life, in the person of his dearest friend, he rendereth nothing, but the foul
stinking and impoysoned waters, with the wormewoode of false doctrine and
lies, issewing from the welspring of iniquity, the seat of the seven headed
beast noted with the name of blasphemy, an habitation of Devils, an hold of
all foul spirits, a cage of every unclean and hateful bird, whose
wickedness to claim, and their wiillingnesse to yield, who have received the
mark of the beast, that has pow^ed out to all nations the wine of the wrath
of her fornication, the high presumed title of undoubted iniquity, has
brought upon the world the great harvest of sin. Sup^^m (...).
But eternally, blessed be the name of our God, who keeps his promise for
over, makes light to shine out of darkness, and to the great comfort of
his chosen, has confounded the counsel of Achitophel, and brought our hope out
of bondage. But eftsoon the Romish Merchants, on their ministers behalf,
bestirre themselves, because their mart is staid, and their filthy dregs not
warranted to so common sale, as tofore they were. And least the whole glory of
our deliverance, not so much from civil servitude, as that spiritual bondage,
wherein Satan held Captive the whole multitude of men, might be ascribed to
the Lord our God, on the behalf of his, he aduanceth man against the
almighty, and pleads the downefal of Adam too, but either in part or the
death of Christ but in sufficient, and so adding one iniquity above the rest,
denies the Almighty in his being, or concludes him in the alteration of
time, to ascribe to man the mightiness of his own deliverance, and set him
freely in the hand of his own counsel with will avouched without impeachment.
And these practices of Satan, as they are universal, ^re will a^o^^bed by the
^apist^ on the D^^^^ (...).
and stand out against the Lord in the furtheraunce of his Gospel, which is
by election, and avouched in time and place, when it may do mischief, so has
mine own^ experience approved true, that our warfare is not against flesh and
blood, but spiritual craftiness in heavenly things. In which, my many
conflictes with Satan's crafty ones, about the freedom of the will of man,
wherein they labored the overthrow of Gods election, the sovereign stay of
our assured safety by Christ the Lord, the almighty vouchsafed me the feeling
of the fellowship of his. And as the Devils drifte and Popes purpose, to deface
the truth under the hand of his smeared Catholics, in the dispersed
questions at H^luelia, was easilye ouerturned by the provident goodness of our
God, in the happy travel of the reverend Father M. Bullenger of Zuri^ke, and
the opprobrious slanders and broched contumelyes of Fontidenius and Cardillus
against the truth, the glorious Gospel, the glad tidings in the blood of
Christ, were stopped of their course, and abridged of their hoped intent, by
the praiseworthye endeavor, and published trau^ll of Iohanes Fabritius: so
were the blasphemous mouths of certain Sycophants against the Lord, in the
person of that reuoumed father in all the world M. Calvin, sone stopped by the
reverend in Christ M. Theodor Beza of Vezel, which his said work, when I
had perused to my great comfort and enablement against the foe, I began
eftsoons to pity the want of such a worthy work to mine own countriemen,
to whom the Lord has not given the understanding of tongues, though many
and mighty blessings in his heavenly truth. And least I might be found to
have buried my poor talent in the earth, when it might do good, or deuoyd of
that Simpathie, which the people have that enjoy the Lord, I employed mine
endeavor by all the spare time that I had from other necessary affairs, to
acquainte this the said renoumed and worthy work, with our mother tongue, and
that especially for two sorts of people, the one, are those of the Lords
secret ones, who yet wander in the way of ignorance, and eftsoon take part
with the wicked cause, for lack of helps, in that they find no mean to
withstand the batteries of Satan in the enemy. The other are those, whom god
has already sealed in the fellowship of his truth, by the testimony of a good
conscience, and assured zeal to serve the Lord in Sion, and yet want
enablement to stand for the Lord. But amongst these especially for the help
of them, whose place of present being does require at their hands their better
enablement to further the Lords poor ones, in the way of life, whom they have
won without warrantise, whose diligence in time to come God grant may be so
much, as their understanding small, whom inchaunting Circe, the world has
bewitched, and brought into a compass beyond themselves, and made them
retchlesse in love of the Lord, and as fallen under (...) and sonke down in
selfeloue, have thrust themselves into the Lords sanctuary, the dyreful
downfall and destruction of many souls, as it is written, Vbi non est visio,
dissipabitur populus, where there is no preaching the people perish, or
without walking in the warranted way, have left to call to the Lord for
laborers, and made stones bread, and in their blind liking, have with Vzza
stepped to the upholding of the Lord's Ark, in the time of staggering, but to
their own decay, whose condemnation sleeps not, whereof some in deed have
Vrim, but not Thummim, some Thummim but not Vrim, and many, none of both, whose
song will be with Lysimachus, if repentance be not a remedy with speed. That
this my poor travel might be set in warrantize against Zoylus, and the
carping foe, to pass forth, for the accomplishment of that good that is hoped
for, I eftsoon most humbly recommend it to your Honors protection, whose zeal
for the Lords family, I have eftsons experie^ced to my great comfort, in the
time of my being within your jurisdiction in Lincolneshire. The Lord increase
in you his many and mighty blessings, and multiply upon you the measure of
his grace, that as he has chosen you into the forefront of his harvest, and
given unto you amongst others, the chiefest, and especial charge to see his
field furnished with laborers, so he continually make full the measures of his
own mercies in your heart, that the end of al and singular our attempts may be
lyned by the word of life, to the aduancema^t of the name of our eternal God,
by the faithful furtherance of the free passage of his word among his people,
that such as yet wander in the wilderness of most palpable blindness, or sense
less obstinacy, for want of workeme^ well armed with appurtina^ces incident to
such soucraign embassage on the lords behalf, might be brought home to the
unity of one simplicity in Christian profession, that Gods glory may be
advanced, his Church universally profited, and your Lordship, with others in
such place discharged to stand boldly before the majesty of the Almighty in
the day of Christ. Which thing, as for many benefits received, I am most
bound, so I most humbly and hartilye crave at the hands of our eternal
father by Christ, to whose merciful assistaunce and mighty providence
(remaining to perform unto you all the duties that I may) I do most humbly
commit you.

Your Lordships most bounden, in the Lord William Hopkinson.

THE PREFACE OF the Slanders against the Doctrine of John Calvin, (or rather
of every faithful Congregation) of the secret Providence of God.
THY Doctrine, John Calvin, (a man much renowned in all the world) has many
favorers, but therewithal the same in like sort has many adversaries. But I
who wish there may be one doctrine as there is one truth, and all to consent
thereunto, if it may be, have thought convenient to admonish thee
familiarly of those things which are usually bruyted against thy doctrine,
that if they be false, thou would refute them, and send thy refutation to
us, that we may the rather withstand them, and do it with such proofs as
the people may understand. And there be many things wherein many dissent from
thee: but for the present, (leaving the rest to some other convenient time) I
will deal with thee of the argument of Destiny or Predestination: because
both this Article moves much controversy in the Church, which we wish may be
suppressed: and also the Adversaries reasons in this Argument seem to be
such, as can not be refelled by those Books which hitherto thou haste
published.

There are carried here and there of this matter certain Articles gathered out
of thy books, which I will here tumultuously set down, and then I will
show those things which usually are alleged against every of them, that thou
may the rather see where unto to answer.

THE ANSWER.

ALBEIT we have ever endeavored to set forth that doctrine which is not ours,
but Jesus Christ's, in such sort that we might win many to the delight and
love thereof, yet art thou Sycophant much deceived, if thou think that we
stand upon the multitude either of foes or favorers. For neither are we so
much unskillful of the state of men, or unmindful of the very words of
Christ, that we should forget that there have been ever more found who have
withstoode the truth, than defended it. Thou truly, as I perceive, bethinkyng
thy self of some wise preface, haste chosen that one, which did most accord
with thy nature and inclination: for so almost it falls amongst men,
especially of guilty consciences, that they deem others by their own
disposition. Therefore because thou (shrowding thy self as it were under the
shadow of thy pretended modesty) do of old aim at this mark, that the
most may think thee some body, haste in deed deemed that we are grieved with
the same infirmity, and therefore that thou could not work us a greater
dispite, than if with a certain sottishe kind of chattering thou might
pretend to have done this as bewayling our misery, and careful for the
defense of our cause, thou should friendly and familiarly write unto us. But
in deed we marvel that any man so practiced in deceit, could so forget him
self, as not to think that men would straight enquire how it could be, that in
so weighty a matter writing so familiarly to thy friends, thou should
suppress thy name. But what if they also should know that which is manifest to
us, that thou have not let but that these broched Slanders might have bin
bruted in all the world, before we should hear any whit of the^; truly they
would not doubt to report thee, as mostly all other divine things, so also to
have lewdly and wickedly abused the sacred name of amity. But we, if thou
know it not, do leave for thee to regard the multitude of favorers: thine
(I say) it shall be for us. For neither do we defend that cause, wherein thou
art worth one rushe. And thou art the very man (albeit this time has others)
whose protection if the truth require it, should do in such sort, as if the
improuident sheep should think them selves in safety under the defense of
some greedy Wolf. Truly thou art much deceived if thou supposest thou can
go unknown, thy trifling scurilitie, thy foolish ambition, thy babbling
subtilties, thy great folly, thy endeavor void of all godliness, finally
thine intolerable vanity in every parts of this writing, bewrays it self.
All which as thou have them common with many, yet so they do apparently show
forth in thee, that whether thou termest thy self Bellius, or Theophilus, or
(...) no body, finally whatsoever Physnomie thou do pretend, yet those thine
entries bewray thee to be a Cumane Ass. Whom therefore think thou to be so
sad that would not deride thee, or so pleasant that would not be in fume
with thee, if he should hear thee giving out that thou wishest nothing more
than one doctrine? Thou (I say) who first presumedst to bring into these parts
where the divine light has shined, a fresh Academicall (...), great doubt, or
impossibility to conceive. But in deed is this the way and mean to
establishe one doctrine, to report the word of God to be so doubtful and
uncertain, that which way soever thou take it, it suffiseth not to decide
the controversies of Religion, and we must look for some other new revelation
from heaven: For thou may easily recount all these, since thou haste so often
written them. Away with this hypocrisy: why come thou not out of thy
lurking corners? why doste thou hyde thy name? why doste thou not bid open
war to the truth? For truly thou can not now be unknown: and though it
be against our wills, thine obstinacy will bring to pass that we shall name
thee.

Thou requirest of us proofs that the people may understand. We answer,
that we profess that doctrine which can seem to the world nothing but
foolishness, And how true this answer is, we may very well gather by the
example of Christ himself. For except he satisfy thee, whom may we think
shall? But thou must needs confess that those people did very little profit
in his doctrine, which continually followed him, when those twelve his dearest
familiar friends, to whom he imparted his secret mysteries, when he their
master was presently to ascend into heaven, seemed not sufficiently to have
known what is the nature of his kingdom.

But I know where upon thou stand. Because thou haste read that the
wisdom of God is hid from the wise and prudent of this world, therefore
how much the more any man is unskillful of good arts and discipline, so
much the rather thou deemest him worthy to be judge of divine mysteries. Thou
therefore most allowest ye mind of the multitude, and I know not what vulgar
kind of proof does best please thee: for neither do thou it (as I think)
as if thou did in deed believe it were so, but that in deed thou may
know more to deceive the unskillful and common multitude. But if thou art
ignorant (...), the wisdom of the flesh is the very thing that lets us to
see the light of God: neither is it only in those wise men, but in every one.
Who soever is subject to this disease (as all be that are not renewed of the
spirit) thou labourest in vain to teach him the secrets of Christian
Religion, whether thou should maffle with the multitude, or labourest to be
wise with the prudent, that is, to doat of purpose. We must receive these
things by faith. But faith is the gift of God, and comprehends arguments not
devised of our own brain, but taken out of the word of God: which if thou
do not understand, there is yet no cause why thou should blame the too much
darkness of things, or require more perspicuitie in Calvin, or any other. Thou
thy self have within thee that darkness, which causes yt thou art blind in the
clear light. Thou contemnest the writings of learned men, ere thou comost to
them, not that thou may learn, but that thou may reprove them. Thus (...)
selfloue, this pride does blind thee, howsoever thou do shadow these with a
certain false counterfayte of liberty and simplicity. Give glory to God, and
pray him heartily that he will open thine eyes: then shall thou prove those
arguments to be both plain, evident and necessary, which now thou reprouest
as weak and beggarly. Thou saydest before that thou had determined to deal
of that one argument of Destiny, or Predestination. We truly who have long
sithence much heard thee to be out of measure impudent, and by experience
know it to be so, do yet marvel that thine impudency could be so great,
that thou durst object to Calvin that hateful name of Destiny: whereof what
he has tofore written, it shall not repent us to set down in his own words,
both because, albeit thou art full of envy, they are excellently, plainly,
learnedly and godly written: and also that by the entrance, every one may know,
with what faithful mind thou vndertookest this matter. Thus therefore says
Calvin: Those that endeavor to work despite to this doctrine, do falsely urge
that it is the Stoickes opinion of Destiny: Chrysostom. Just. cap. 14. par. 40.
which also was objected to Augustine in his time. Albeit we contend of
words against our will, yet we admit not in any wise the name of Destiny,
both because of that kind whose profane strangeness Paul has taught us to
avoid, and also because they endeavor to burden Gods truth with the hatred
of it. These has Calvin written in so many words, which if thou did not
know, what rashness is it to reprove that thou knew not? but if in deed
thou did, the^ what impudency was it to charge him with that crime which
thy self knew to be false? But here I will pleasure thee. For thou will say
it is not Destiny in name, but in effect. It is ^o. Hear therefore what in
the same place he adioyneth: The very opinion of the Stoiks (says he) is
falsely and maliciously objected unto us. For we devise not with the Stoics a
necessity of the perpetual bond of causes, and of a certain intricate order
which is contemned in nature: but we determine God the arbiter and moderator of
all things, who in his eternal wisdom has before all worlds decreed that
he would do, and now in his power acco^plisheth that he decreed, whereupon we
affirm that not only heaven and earth and insensible creatures, but also the
purposes and minds of men to be so governed by his providence, that they are
brought to that end which is determined of the same. And then he adds, by
what means if thou should consider the second causes by themselves, any
thing may come both at adventure, and unlooked for. Which disputations if
thou understand not, thou ought to blame thy self, who at the least
know not by Cicero and Plutarche; what was the controversy of Chrysippus
and Diodorus. But what of these? verily that all may see how much credit is
to be given to that accuser, which so shamefully lies in the very beginning,
saying that every and ye very worste in that part of their speech are wont to
pretend some show of honesty. For that which concerns the matter it self
we will further examine in his place. At last thou addest that wherein verily
thou haste exceeded thy self, and in deed thou seem to have well observed
this principle of Rothorique, that those things which we would most firmly
should be kept in mind with the auditors, may be spoken in the last
place. There are carried about (thou say) of this argument certain
Articles, gathered out of thy books which I will tumultuously set down.
And, is it so, a great chaunter of the truth, that thou should take such
pains to make tumultes in the Church of GOD? Is it so, (I say) waste thou not
well in thy wits, that thou should forgette to ask of these rogues, that
carry about these Slanders, whether they would first with sufficient
witnesses prove these things they carried, to be true? For tell me what
would thou answer if I should only say that all these are false which
are objected against Calvin. Truly thou would either suddenly confess thy
self a false accuser, which thou clokest as well as thou canste: or truly
thou would be constrained thy self to accuse thine own foolishness,
which wilt think that thou ought to inquyre whether the accusation were
just or unjust, then whether it were true or false. And in deed, as thou
shalt shortly understand, the most part of these Articles (as thou call
them) is such stuff, that bare denial is sufficient.

But go too, that great care to reconcile the Church has even nourisht thee.
And those that know thee say thou art a simple man, so that often times thou
know not whether thou speak with or against thy self, therefore in deed
it shall not be amiss that we bear with thy infirmity of nature. Moreover
thou being so good a man and so much our friend, thou could not choose
but be much chaffed when thou heardest those Churches wherein thou haste been
nourished, and those men whose liberality has long done thee good, to be
charged with such impiety. Therefore thou did that is too much proper to
fumishe men, suddenly to set thy self to shuffle in our cause: and when thou
had no sufficient defense, thou would certify us of the whole matter. So
it is, that the greatest matter escaped thee, that is, to approve how true the
accusation was. It were pity but thou should be pardoned of this too. But I
pray thee, what meanest thou by this, to deal Tus multuously in so weighty a
cause? Beware in deed that some suspect thee not (as men be no fools now) to
do nothing in this matter in very good sooth, and in earnest. But no doubt,
as thou art crafty enough, thou haste an answer ready, publishe it
therefore, that whilst thou indeuourest to pleasure thy friends, thou lose the
credit both of wisdom and honesty.

The title of the Slanders.
ARTICLES gathered out of the Latin and French books of John Calvin upon
Predestination.

ANSWER.
THOU oughtst neither to use this Title, Slanders, impudently, and maliciously
ascribed to John Calvin of certain ignorant and malicious men.

The first Article, that is, the first Slander.
GOD in the bare and alone determination of his will, has created the
greatest part of the world to perdition.

REFVTATION.
HOW false this slander is it shall appear by the very self writing of
Calvin. For thus he says. I say (says he) with Augustine, that the Lord
created some whom he undoubtedly foreknew should be damned, and that it was
so, because he would so. But wherefore he would so, it appertains not to us
to enquire, who are not able to comprehend it: nor is it lawful that the
divine will should be called in question of us: whereof so often as any mention
is made, the very sovereign rule of Justice is under that title named. Again,
The same chapt. the 5. Sect.
because (says he) the scripture does plainly show it, we say that the Lord
in his eternal, and unchangeable counsel, has once determined whom in their
time he would receive unto life, and whom also he would give over unto death.
Those to whom he vouchsafes eternal life, we say to be adopted by his free
mercy, and in no respect of their own worthiness. Whom he gives over unto
death, those truly in his just and irreprehensible, but that also
incomprehensible justice, he abridgeth the way of life. Again, Lib. of the
eternal Predestination of God.
if we (says he) are not ashamed of the gospel, it is requisite that we
acknowledge whatsoever is therein manifestly set down: that God in his eternal
decree, whose cause depends upon none other, refusing others, has ordained
whom he saw good to eternal life, and whom by his free adoption he vouchsaueth
to lighten with his holy spirit, that they may receive eternal life offered in
Christ: that others being of themselves unbelieving, destitute of the eyes of
faith may remain in darkness. Again, as Augustine writes, Christ. Inst.
cap. 14. sect. 13.
so farforth (says he) the will of God is the very sovereign rule of Justice,
that whatsoever he will, eue^ in that he will it is to be holden rightuous.
Therefore when soever it is demanded why the Lord has done so, it is to be
answered because he will: but if thou proceedest in asking why he will so, thou
seek some greater or higher thing than the will of God which cannot be
found. The same Sect. 15. Ibidem.
Also we must ever return (says he) to the alone determination of his will,
the cause whereof is secret in himself. Again the Apostle sought not starting
hooles, as if he were taken tardie, but showed that the consideration of Gods
Divine justice is more sovereign than that it may either be measured after any
humayne sort, or be comprehended with the weakness of man's wit.

These says Calvin, and many others every where of like sort, whereof (I
say) it may be easily gathered that it is Slander ously spoken of thee
whatsoever thou speak of the bare determination of God. For they call that a
bare determination whereby any thing is so done, that no regard be had whether
it be just or unjust that is done.

We therefore do in deed confess with Paul that al things are done by
purpose of the Divine will, that whom he will before they be borne, or ever
they have done either good or evil, he either loves or hates: and therefore
in his time either pitieth or hardens: but we add this, that this
notwithstanding, there is no injustice with God, that he which does so decree
these things, does notwithstandying that which is altogether rightuous. And
this we prove by many reasons. First because that the will of God is the
sovereign rule of Justice: neither is it a good consequent that that is
unjust, because man's reason sees no cause of such Justice. For what? does not
the sun shine, because the blind is still in darkness? Again, we say they
deal foolishly, who hold that any thing is good in it self before God will
have it so: seeing that contrarily, it is requisite that God will anything to be
just before it can be so. For the will of God depends not of the quality of
things: but the contrary, the quality of things by order of causes does follow
the will of God. Thirdly we add also that in such decree whereby God from
the beginning determined whatsoever vassals of his wrath he would, that the
execution of his purpose must be distinguished from the purpose it self, that
is the purpose of reiectyng from damnation. We understand no other cause of
the purpose than the very will of GOD, which can not be but altogyther most
just, albeit the blind wisdom of the flesh thinks otherwise. But the
causes of execution, that is damnation, the Lord has plentyfully and plainly
showed us, even the voluntary corruption of Adam derived unto us, and the
fruyctes of that corruption. But here again man's reason inforceth it self.
Whence (says it) be the causes of this damnation? have they so come to pass
against the will of GOD? no forsoothe: for then he should not be Almighty.
Therefore with his will, for he does not suffer unwillingly, and that is the
opinion of Epicures, to ordain a careless foreknowledge of GOD, which is
easily overthrown by infinite testimonies of Scripture.

But if he have decreed these things to be so, and I could not resist his
will, am not I blameless of that fault which altogether rests in him? And
this is that great doubt which no man understands, save those who out of
his word have learned to think reverently of GOD. Therefore Paul, when he
comes to this point, denies not that it was the will of God, which the
wicked could not resist: but their collection of this approved principle, he
utterly denies, because GOD can not be unjust: and he recalleth us to the
consideration of man's estate, that we might reverence so high a mystery,
not that we should reprove it. But in deed you are wyser than the Apostle,
for thou take these things not to have come to pass by the will of GOD, but
if it be so, then is it marvel that the Apostle did not remember it, that he
might have answered the very self thing. Neither do thou consider all this
while whether this rashness does headlong enforce thee truly to this point,
that thou may more and more incomber thy self, whylest thou think that
thou can co^prehende the infinite wisdom of God. For that we may yield
thee that thou seek, that the causes of damnation do chance without any
determination of God, see how many and wicked absurdities may follow. For
first if they chance against his will thou deniest the Omnipotency of God,
who could not withstand that, which he would. But if in deed thou say he
wincketh at it, how much do thou differ from Epicurisme? It remains then
that he permits it willingly, and there is one and the same difficulty. For
if thou say that either our sins foreknowen or already committed have
given occasion to this will, thou say nothing. For we seek the Original of
these sins, that is, the causes of corruption, from which thou canste no
more seclude the determination of God, than when there is question of the
fruictes of corruption, seeing that here also the same inconveniences do
accomber thee, and thou art taken in the same Labyrinth. Furthermore, see how
well thou defendest Gods Justice. For truly that which he has suffered,
albeit he has not determined it, (for we will give thee so much) yet he
could have let it even with a beck: Why therefore did he not suppress
Satan in time? why did he not thoroughly establish Adam and Eve? or if thou list
not look back unto them, why did he not commanund the fountain of sin to
stay in Adam, that it should not issue out upon his posterity? was it because
the sins of his posterity deserved it?

But they should have had no sin, if corruption had not been enlarged. But
why does he daily give Satan such liberty which he can restrain? truly
where soever thou turnest thee, humane reason shows us this, that he is
equally in fault, who when he can prevent one from falling to destruction, yet
does it not, with him that throws him down headlong. Therefore although that
thy solution should be of force, human reason should not surcease to deem
God unjust. But thou will say: These things are curious. They are in deed, and
therefore we think it sacrilege for any irreverently to attempt these high
mysteries of God. But we say that that is curious and wicked too, to demand
how God should be without fault, if he ordain the causes of damnation.
Which question thou haste undertook to dissolve: but we think with the
Apostle that it is altogether impossible with human senses to be expressed,
which is curious, which is passing wicked, which seeks the secret mysteries
of God without his word. Is it thou which seek a reason of the Divine
wisdom, and therefore willingly and of purpose runnest headlong into danger?
or I? who when we come to Gods will, being mindful of man's imbecilitie, do
secretly reverence the majesty of god. Therefore that I may briefly say this,
let this be the furthest reach of man's judgment: although the cause of his
decree is unsearchable, whereby God has determined from everlasting to create
many, in whose just damnation he might manifest the glory of his justice, and
for that cause whosoever are appointed unto death, cannot but perish in their
time, yet that God, because he damneth none but the corrupt and guyltie, is
therefore without all blame of their damnation, as he who rightly decerneth
those things which men do unjustly, and therefore justly punishes. But if
humayne reason can not endure it, yet it does not follow that it is otherwise.
Rather let whatsoever is flesh give place, (for so I had rather than speak as
thou do) that we may wholly repose our selves in the word of God. But thou will say, Where is the word of God? Surely thou can not deny, except thou will add somewhat to thine unmeasurable impudency, that in teaching these
things, we have as it were persisted in the steps of Paul. But we shall see
more of this when we shall deal with thee hand to hand. Now I shall
discharge my duty, if I shall evidently lay open to all Readers thine
intolerable impudency in devising these detestable Slanders. Therefore that I
may return thither whence I have digressed, I will further avouch two places
out of Calvin against thy slanders. In his book of eternal Predestination.
For thus he says: Albeit before the fall of Adam God for secret causes had
determined what he would do, yet do we read in Scripture that he conde^neth
nothing but sin. Esa. 23. b. 9.
So it remains that he had just causes to reject some, but unknown to us:
and he hates or condemns in man nothing but that which is not agreeable with
his justice. Again he says, Let us learn that we ought so to consider the
Providence of God, that we may give glory and praise to his omnipotency. For
the wisdom and justice of God is ever to be joined with his power. Like as
therefore the Scriptures do teach, that the Lord in his justice and wisdom
does this or that, so teach they a certain end for which he does this or
that. For that feigned devise of the absolute power of God, which the Scholemen
infer, is an execrable blasphemy. For it is as much as if they should say
that god were some tyrant, determining what he list without equity. Their
Schools are full of such blasphemies: neither are they unlike the Ethnicks,
who held that God did dally in men's matters. But we are taught in the schole
of Christ, that the righteousness of God does shine in his works, of what
sort soever they be, that all mouths may be stopped, and glory given to him
alone. Doste thou (Sycophant) at the last acknowledge how much thine
impudency was in these patched Articles? Thou have further added other
slanders. For first, for that which Calvin has said, that some me^ are
rejected for just cause, but to us unknown, thou making no mention of any
cause, say that we teach, that the greatest part of men are created to
damnation. But yet we will not strive of the number, for we know by the
Scriptures, and the continual experience of all ages, that the most do enter
by the broad gate which leads to destruction: yet notwithstanding doste not
thou surcease to be a slaunderer, who in accusing do add somewhat of thine
own. Then (wherein thy wickedness does most appear) thou so writest these
things as if we should say, that the end of the creation of Reprobates is
their eternal damnation: which slander I thus refell with the very words of
Calvin. Inst. Christ. cap. 14. sect. 17.
It ought to be known (says he) among all men, that Solomon says, that God
has created all things for him self, even the wicked against the day of
evil. Behold, seeing the disposition of all things is in the hand of God,
seeing the determination of life and death remains in him, and so at his will
and pleasure ordeineth that among men some even from their mothers womb should
be undoubtedly given over unto death, who should glorify his name in their
destruction. Therefore that we may briefly conclude, Calvin thinks not that
the Reprobate are therefore simply created that they should perish, but that
perishing in their own defaulte, they might advance the Justice of God. And
further, that their perdition so depends of the Predestination of God, that
the whole matter and cause of their damnation be found in them selves: and
albeit it is incomprehensible to human senses, yet that it is the just
determination of God.

Why therefore do thou wickedly and maliciously leave untouched all that
which is spoken of the fault of them that perish, and the glory of God? But
go too, let us hear with what sound Arguments thyselfe can oppugn thine
own slander.

The Sicophantes Arguments against the first Article.
THEY say that the first Article is both against Nature, and against Scripture.
Of Nature they say thus: Every living creature naturally loves his issue: but
this nature is of God, whereon it follows that God should love his issue. For
neither, would he make that living creatures should love their issue, except
he loved his own. And this they prove thus: The Lord has said, Should I
cause others to bring forth children, and shall not my self bring forth. As
though he should say, That which I cause others to do, I my self do the
same: But I cause others to bring forth children, therefore I also do bring
forth. Hence they bring an argument of similitude: God causes living
creatures to love their issue, therefore he loves his own. But all men are
the issue of God, for God is the father of Adam, of whom all men are borne:
Therefore he loves all men.

REFVTATION.
FIRST of all (I say) thou do unwisely in this place, to dispute either of
the love or hatred of God toward men. For neither is it demanded here
whether he has hated any, but whether he has rejected any. Which two being
diverse, thou notwithstanding haste deemed one. I will speak more plainly,
that thou may not complain of obscurity. We say that there is an assured
order of causes ordained of the Lord, notwithstanding he at once beholds all
things as present, yet has he willed some causes in order to succeed, and
some to go before: which order of causes also the Philosophers have
acknowledged, and have called (...) succession by turn. We affirm therefore
that the hatred of God in rejecting of men in the order of causes, has not
proceeded from the eternal decree of God, (as that which of right we place in
the highest degree of all causes,) but rather to succeed. So it is, that
albeit whomsoever the Lord from everlasting does predestinate to destruction,
afterward in his time he hates: yet to Predestinate to destruction, is not to
hate, but to give them over to his hatred. But therewithal when the Lord
appoynteth unto death whom he lists, he also orders the causes of his
just hatred to come, that the whole matter of his hatred remain in the men
them selves decreed to destruction, and therefore his Justice to shine in them
to be prosecuted with hatred, and lastely to be damned. But thou art deceived
in that, which deemest that God does first hate any man before he assign
him unto death. Which is as foolish as if thou should say, that he first
begins to hate before he have determined whom he will hate. Therefore I
could at one word conclude with thee, that we thus far agree, that we both
confess, that God hates and condemns nothing in men but guyltinesse and
sin: but that we disagree in this, that thou supposest the hatred of God to
be the cause why he decrees some to destruction: and we say that that hatred
is not the cause of the sacred decree, but the effect.

Neither does it prejudice us, that Paul alleging the words of Malachie, I
have hated Esau, seems to take hatred for the eternal decree of rejecting.
For I say, this word (I have hated) in that place declares nothing, but, I
have decreeed to hate: seeing Paul in that place disputes of the decree of
God, and not of the execution of the said decree. Neither does there want
sufficient testimony of Scripture to approve this exposition by. God has
chosen us, says Paul, Ephesi. 1. a. 3. before the foundations of the world
were laid: that is, he determined to Elect. For in deed thou must needs
confess, that GOD in time does execute those things which before all times he
ordained, So. 2. Timoth. 1. c. 9. there is given (says he) unto us the grace
of God in Christ Jesus, before all time: that is, God decreed to give us his
grace in Christ Jesus before all time, which albeit in very deed he does not
give us, before that effectually he call us to him self. So he is called the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Apocalips. 13. b. 8. that is to
say, for as much as he was preordayned before the world was made, which was
performed in the last times, as Peter him self expounds. 1. Peter. 1. d.
20. But why does the Scripture speak so? Truly that whatsoever the Lord has
decreed shall be, we may understand to be so sure, as we are sure that that is
done which we see done. But yet that it is so as we say, that is, that Gods
decree proceeds in the order of causes both love and hatred, it evidently
appears in this, that otherwise thou art constrained to appoynte the causes
of the divine decree in men them selves: Whereon it will follow, that either
God has not determined what he would do to men before he made them, and
careless beheld them perishing: or if he had determined, yet afterward the
nature of man being changed, he also would change his purpose. Both the one
and the other how far it is from the wysest workemaster, and endued (that I
may so say) with the surest and most constante nature, there is none but may
see.

Then if these things should be so, that is, if GOD for the foreknowen
corruption should hate any of his works before he had ordained them to
destruction, wherefore was it needful for Paul to cry out: Romans 9. d. 20.
and. 11 d 33.
O man, who art thou which pleadest against God. etc. O the deapth of the
richesse, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways paste finding out. Wherefore (I say) should
God be set out to us as a Potter, which fourmeth what Vessels he will, to
honor or dishonor? For the solution that thou bring is ready, that it is
no marvel if God appoint some to destruction, and that causeless they
complain of his will, seeing that their own sins do as it were enforce him
to do it. But God forbid that we should use any answer so absurd,
foolish, and estraunged from the nature of God. Let us rather say, that it is
the Lord which has done whatsoever he would, and has done all things
rightly, seeing his will is the very rule of justice.

Furthermore, whereunto tend all thine Arguments? Not to this end, that thou
may show that God loves all men? But if this be true, what remains that
either none shall be damned, or else that those should perish whom God
loves? For if thou doste except, that God does hate them in the end for
their sin, and whom he loved from the beginning, thou shall run headlong
into an other great downfall. For truly if he did love, he would also save.
Why therefore does he not save? Truly because their sins have caused that he
should destroy those who^ before he would should be saved. O merueylous god,
such as in deed thou imaginest, which daily and hourly should be changed,
whose determination men when it pleases the^ may fordo, and the whole end of
whose counsels depend not of the eternal and immutable decree, but of the
second causes. But truly if we should follow thine opinion, the will of man
shall be, not the second, but the first and chief cause of Gods decree: as
in like manner Augustine says right well, Judgment should not be in the
Potter, but in the Claye. See whereto these rustical cogitations enforce thee,
that it shall truly fall to thee which is written, That it shall come to pass
that they be confounded of the majesty, who being not contented with the
manifest word of God, do curiouslye search his secrets. But least we
seem to dallye, go too, let us consider thine Arguments. Thus therefore thou
contendest, This doctrine is against the nature of GOD, therefore it is false
and wyck^d. I deny the assumption, which thou so confyrmest, God causes to
bring forth young, therefore he brings forth. So also by a like, God
causes living Creatures to love their issue, therefore he loves his. But, all
men are the issue of God, (because God is the Father of Adam, of whom all
men are borne) therefore God loves all men. These be thine Arguments. Now
hear again what I shall answer.

First of all I say, that the place of the Prophet of the issue of GOD, is
either wrested of thee maliciouslye or impudentlye. For the Prophet deals
not there of the universal creation of all men, but of the only renewing of
his Church, that is, of the free adoption of the Elect in Christ. What
impudency therefore is it, to apply that to creation which is spoken of
adoption? and to enforce that to all men, that only appertains to the Elect,
that thou may communicate the peculiar grace of the Elect with the Reprobates
and Bastards. But thou will say, Who is father of the rest? Verily even he
whom Christ has named, when speaking to those counterfaits and bastardly
children: You are (says he) of your father the devil. Nor is there cause why
therefore thou should exclaim that I am a Manichee. For I refer this
increase of children of the Devil, Ioh. 8. f. 44
not in respect of creation, but in respect of their depraved nature, which
God so ordained, that he be not Author thereof, but rather the Devil, and the
will of man which willingly has depraved it self. Thou will say therefore in
respect of creation he in like case is their father. I grant it: thou will
add therefore he loves. But that I utterly deny, and I will by and by prove
it to be false. But now only I demand how aptly thou haste recited the
testimony of the Prophet: Then what madness this is, to esteem that what
soever God has given to living creatures, is in God himself? In deed it is
very wonderful, that thou prouest nothing that the rude multitude aloweth not,
except thou also faynest yt God has head, arms, hands, and a womb too. It is
marvel but that thou deemest he does in deed here see, desire meat and
digeste (as some have tryfled of the Stars) or at the least to muse, to
dispute, to covet, and to chaufe: yea, but thou will say, I speak only of
those things which belong to God. Therefore thou oughtst to have defined what
those things were. And albeit thou should change thy self into every shape,
thou shalt never find any thing attributed to living creatures, which may in
like sense be avouched of God. Yet I confess that the Scripture (such is the
goodness of God) does oftentimes like a nourse as it were maffle with us: but
yet so that it observes a certain choice. Wherefore in like case thou ought
to have bou^ded thy similitude with his limits. I also grant that, (...) that
natural affections in the nature of things, and especially in men, are great
arguments of Gods goodness. But yet who will grant thee (except he be mad,)
that God loves those whom he does love, none otherwise, than men love one
another? See even of thine own examples how false and foolish this is: which
of us would have children borne to him like Toades, Snakes, or spiders? But al
these, (if it be lawful to speak as thou do) the Lord does daily bring
forth: neither is there any creature, which for his wonderful goodness he
preserves not. But what? will thou have a lame, a blind or a fool borne to
thee? yet the Lord does every day set such spectacles before us. And what?
when he exciteth some in whom he may manifest his power (as Moses speaks) or
when he forms certain vassals to dishonor as Paul writes? yea also a
greater thing, when he corrects those his beloved and dearest children, I say
not for their sins, but he will the just be oppressed of the unjust, to
be executed, and in the end most cruelly slain for his own glory (for so
euerywhere speaks the Scripture, and experience confirms it) will thou
make one this love of God with the decrees of man's nature? Thereupon the
Disciples ask when they see the blind man, who has sinned, he? or his
parents, that he should be borne blind. Jesus answered, that neither he,
nor his parents sinned: that is, that he was borne blind, neither for his own
sins nor for his parents? but that the works of God might be manifested in
him. What say thou to this goodman? hear that your outscape of foreseen
sins has failed thee: and some Physician might be deemed a cruel Father,
which I say not, should wound his son, but also (that I may speak as you
do) should suffer his Son to be wounded, that by the curyng thereof he
might get a name. Thou see beast, thou see how beastly thine
imaginations of GOD be, when thou do consider either the love or hatred of
God according to the prescripte of nature created? In like case David, when he
fell into these cogitations that he might decerne of the hatred and love of
GOD after the manner of men, I am become (says he) a beast before thee: that
is, till he went into the Sanctuary of the Lord. Thou should have sought
out the nature of GOD before that thou did dispute of his love and hatered.
There be manifested to us living in this world two ways to know (...),
that that may be known of God. One the contemplation of things created does
show us, which Paul disputyng with the Romans and Athenienses of the
first principles of Christian religion, does manifest. The other, God has
showed us in his word. None of both I confess is to be neglected, but how
much more certain this is than the other, David proves by his own example,
and if not of our selves, yet by continual observation of all ages it may
plentifully be perceived. For who ever taught more unmeet things of GOD than
those wise Egyptians of whom afterward was Greece taught? or whence but from
the same did spryng Idolatry? let be perused the speeches of Apollonius with
the Bracchamans and Gymnosophistes, and we shall see what humayne Divinity is.
Yea how doteth that divine Plato, and how often erreth he from those first
principles which they call (...) common knowledge: Truly ye very last words of
Socrates when he died, we owe a cock to Esculapius, do sufficiently bewray how
sound knowledge Socrates had of divine things, except he then began to doat
on his deaths bed, and also that Plato would lean the self dotage of his
Master in writing: or else that then he left not (...) dissemblyng. But
without doubt that saying of Paul is true, they are become vain in their
own reasonings and their foolish heart is full of darkness: when they thought
themselves wise they became fools. Also that the world in the wisdom of God
did not know God. When Paul wrote these things, he did not undoubtedly blame
nature, daily showing us (as David says) the wonderful works of God: but
accused our blindness which may be helped of one only God, and that by the
hearing of his word. Because thou do not consider this thou rightly reapest
this reward of thy foolishness, that because thou endeuourest by the rules of
this nature, to conclude the nature of God, thou offerest thy self to be
laughed at of very children. But, thou will say, I afterward show thee
Scripture. I grant that in deed, but yet so that thou conclude it with those
thy principles by the contemplation of visible things: when it ought to be
contrary, that is, to allow those principles which the order of nature
yields, so far as they consent with the authority of Scripture, whereof we
shall hear hereafter.

Let this therefore be the very sum of the answer, that God does love his
issue, but in his own order which he has manifested unto us in his holy
word, so far as was needful for us.

I come to ye other like sottish writing, I will use no harder speech. All men
(thou say) are the issue of God: because God is the father of Adam, of whom
all men are borne, therefore God loves all men. First I answer, that thou
do against the rule of Scripture, which do confusedly attribute to God,
the name of Father, and that summarilye in respect of all men, that is, which
also communicatest that which is only proper to one Church in Christ with
strangers. That place in deed of Malachie is very unfitly applied of many to
the general procreation of all men, when it is rather referred to one public
father of Israel, whether Abraham or Jacob, as appears by a like place of
Moses. But least I seem to contend for words, (albeit the controversy is
not in vain) the Lord created all men in Adam, and let him be in this point
the universal father of all. If this be reason good enough to prove that God
should love al men, how is it that contrariwise the Apostle shows al in Adam
to be the Sons of wrath and death, and therefore of hatered? will thou
answer that the Apostle beholds all men as they are corrupted in Adam, and
therefore abiected? Be it so, for so it is in deed. But how do thou
behold them? as yet being in Adam? no in deed, in that thou say not that
God was, but is the Father of all, nor to have loved, but to love all. Thou
must therefore seek some other outscape, verily even this, as thou may say
that GOD nevertheless loves all, because he offers his grace to all. But if
this be so in deed, the foreseen corruption has not caused that the Lord
should reject some, seeing he loves all notwithstanding they are corrupt,
that he offers them the favor of life: and that so that he gives them
grace, to receive grace offered, (because that otherwise the Lord should
seem to us, as I afterward shall speak in his place, not to deal
faithfully with men.) But furthermore it shall be requisite to conioyne
contumacie with corruption, that is, furthermore to refuse grace offered. But
if it should be so, we should not be borne the children of wrath and
death, but we should become so after we should refuse grace offered.

In like case after Pelagius teach the Anabaptists, and thy companion
Seruetus, Cataba.
that children stood not in need of the grace of GOD in Christ, saying that
they were not rejected by nature. Finally, what is it to take away Original
sin, or at the least so to extetenuate it, that there be no just cause of
reprobation, if this be not? what says David to the contraric? Behosde
(says he) I am conceived in iniquity. Psalm. 51 b.
Show then that all iniquity does not deserve death before God. But what
says the Lord himself? that (says be) which is borne of the flesh, is
flesh, and the flesh is enemy to God: because those that are in the flesh
can not please God. Either prove therefore that no (...) themselves, seeing all
are equally the children of wrath, what more untowardness might God see in
these, than in them, wherefore he should offer grace to the one, and deny it
to the other? that he should take pity on the one, and harden the other, or in
deed (as you say) should suffer to be hardened? Therefore of foreseen
corruption, or incredulity, or foreknowen sins it is a foolish invention:
and therefore it is needeful that thou confess this difference to depend of the
will of God, albeit the reason of this justice is unknown to men. Let us set
down an other more manifest example: God is indifferently the father of Esau
and Jacob, and that not only in Adam, but also in Isaac, with whom he made a
covenant of peculiar blessing. But will thou dare affirm, that God is no
otherwise the Father of Esau than of Jacob? for we would grant thee this that
Esau may have God his father: if thou dare affirm this, the Lord from
heaven shall refell thee, crying, the elder shall scrue the younger: and least
thou may wrangle that this is to be understand of every servitude, the Lord
is yet against thee, testifying that the excellency of Jacob was joined with
bys love, and the reprobation of Esau with his hatered: whereof it was an
assured sign, that he lost the promise of the land of Canaan, seeing that
was the earnest of the heavenly blessyng and adoption. It remains then that
we grant thee that God also loved Esau as a Father, yet that he loved Jacob
far otherwise. But tell me, whence is this difference, Romans 9. c. 25
but of him that pitieth whom he pleases, and hardneth whom he will as the
Apostle says? For if thou returnest to the foreknowen frowardness of Esau,
the Apostle resists, who, having called Jacob beloved, and therefore elect
before he was borne, that we might know election, not only in time (as that
which is eternal) but also in the order of causes to prevent all things, and
so that utterly no place be left for foresight, for faith or works, as those
which are not causes, but fruits of election: So when he comes to the
opposite member, he utterly shows by the like reason, that Esau was hated,
and therefore vowed to destruction before he was borne, or had done any evil.
That verily we also may understand in this behalf not only an eternal
purpose of rejecting, but that it is superior to all causes of destruction.
And that here is left no place to foresight, or corruption, or incredulity,
or of evil works. For these in deed be causes of damnation, so only
adherent to Esau, that God by no means be guyltie of the crime, but yet are
they causes of the eternal decree of Reprobation, not for going, but following.
Other wise if these words of Paul, Before they were borne, and or ever they
had done good or evil, you do otherwise in one part expound than in
another, over and beside that general principle, that contraries have all one
discipline, shall plentifully refell thee: there is none who will not see that
apparent force is offered to the Apostles words, if one and the same sentence,
and in the self words, should be racked into diverse expositions. Which in
deed shall be, if in one part you say that foresight is excluded, and in the
other notwithstanding reserved. Finally, if the purpose of rejecting should
have stood upon foresight, over and besides that the self things of
necessity must have been foreseen on both parts, whence at the last the
objections which follow should have sprung, in foredoing of which the Apostle
so forceably contendeth. For neither should the Elect have had whereof to
complain, except they would complain of mercy: nor also the reprobate, if
for their foreseen deserts they had been rejected. But it is one thing to
ask why God has hated, an other thing to ask why he has Predestinate to
hatered. All which least happily thou think I have devised, hear what
Augustine has thought of the same matter in his Enchiridion to Laurentius,
Cap. 98. Paul (says he) supposing that which is spoken as it might be, to
move those which could not reach to understand the profoundnesse of grace: What
therefore shall we say? (says he) is there iniquity with God? God forbydde.
For it seems an unjust thing, that without the merit of good or evil
works, God loves one, and hates another. In which thing if God would the
works to come, either good of this, or evil of that to come, to be
understood, as he did foreknow them, he would not have said of works, but of
works to come, and so have dissolved this question: yea he would have given no
question needful to be dissolved. These Augustine.

It remains therefore, that albeit if God may be said indifferently to be
the Father of all men in Adam, yet can it not be said indifferently that he
loves men, yea, nor that he loves all men: and therefore that all this thy
reasoning is vain and foolish, because the purpose of God stands not in the
love or hatred from this common benefit of creation, but of the eternal, and
albeit secret, yet the most righteous will of God.

An other of the Slaunderers Arguments.
TO create to perdition is not of love, but of hatred, therefore he created
none to perdition.

REFVTATION.
AS this Argument does depend of the aforewritten, so it is of necessity
that the first being infringed, this also do sail. Thou haste collected
evil that all are beloved of God, because that all were created in Adam. But
we contrariwise approve, that God by his incomprehensible, but yet just
decree, has Predestinate whom soever it pleased him, to his hatred, and
therefore to destruction, neither that that is discrepant from the nature of
God, which ought not to be measured by the common sense of men. And then we
show that, that God is not moved with the hatered of any, that he should vow
him to destruction: but that he has hated him whom he has Predestinate to
destruction: and that truly the cause of this hatered and destruction is
manifest to us, that is, voluntary corruption in Adam, which isluyng upon all
his posterity, yields also like fruictes to the tree: and that to satisfy
all stayed wits, that albeit they know not the cause of the sacred decree, yet
both because it is divine, and also because destruction is so descerned, that
together the just causes of perdition be determined abidyng in men themselves,
and also they confess it to be just. Wherefore also we have proved that, that
we use not to speak so, as that we say that any one is simply created of God
to destruction, but therefore, that by his due damnation God might show forth
his justice. But that the damnation of the Reprobate is just, because their
perdition does so depend upon the Predestination of God, that yet the whole
cause and matter of their destruction be found in themselves. These whosoever
understands, at the least shall see this, that it is most absurd that thou
sayste, that it is of hatered to create to perdition. For that I say again,
before the Lord would create men (we speak of the order of causes) he neither
hates or loves: but whom he creates he has decreed from everlasting,
either to love in Christ, or to hate in Adam. Therefore to create to perdition
is not of hatred, but of him who has decreed to hate, to hate (I say) for
just cause, which he so annexed to the decree of hatred, that all the fault be
in him whom he hates. Further, if no man be therefore created that God in his
due destruction might be glorified: then God either has determined to save
all, or boroweth the causes of his counsel of the foreknowen will of men, and
that so, that whom he knew would refuse grace offered, for that cause he should
vow them to destruction, and in deed should suffer them to run headlong,
seeing they will so. But oh good Lord, how many things be here affirmed, not
alone foolishly, but also wickedly? For if God has decreed to save all, as in
deed he determined if he love all, how is it that he does not save all? Is it
because he can not? If that be so: he is not omnipotent. Or is it that he will
not? Then the Lord alters his counsel: and when he says he repents, we
must not now understand that to be spoken of God, not by translation and
improperlie, but properly and in deed. But and if he require the cause of his
purpose of the men them selves, what workman is he that depends of his
work? yea, what wise man ever thinks to say, that God determining to make
men, first considered of what forte they would be, that thence he might
consult, then to have considered wherefore he would create them? Then what shall
become of them to whom grace is never offered, of which sort we have
foreshewed that there be many.

Will thou say that all these are saved, for as much as they have not that
foreknowe^ cause of refusing grace? See, for as much as thou haste once
declined from the right pathe, into what absurdities thou runnest. But this is
the right way, that God has created all for his own glory, even the wicked
for the day of evil. In this doctrine is no circumstance of words, no
absurdity, if thou doste determine that which is most true, that the will of
God (albeit it sometimes seem otherwise to us) yet always is the sovereign
rule of justice. Again, I pray thee how is it, that thou take such pains to
defend the reprobate? rather I pray thee let us give them over, and leave them
to the eternal Indge to be damned. Let us rather be occupied in giving thanks
to God, and setting forth of his glory: who, when he also might have
predestinate us to destruction, yet rather gave us to his son, by whom,
being apprehended by Faith, we are freelye saved. And this benefit of God
does wonderfullye shine forth toward us, by the contrary, destruction of
reprobates: and hitherto the reprobates are set to be considered of us, not
that we should defend their cause, but learn in fear and trembling, to
reverence the Lord.

An other of the Slaunderers Arguments.
To creat is a work of love, and not of hatred: Therefore God created all men
in love and not in hatred.

REFVTATION.
AGAIN, thou beatest against the same rock, which know not how to set
hatred under the decree, and that so, that betwixt the decree and hatred, be
interiected the cause of hatred, whose gus^tinesse remains in men
themselves, as I have already said a thousand times. Again, albeit we
willing lie confess the goodness of God to have appeared in the very work of
creation, nor that God has properly hated his own work, but his corruption,
yet who will grant thee, that thou would enfore by this argument, that God,
because that for his singular goodness, he created the reprobate, therefore he
did not predestinate them to his deserved hatred. But I will help thee here.
For not only in the creation of the reprobate, but also in all their life, a
certain vnspeakle kindness of God does often shine, insomuch, that if thou
beholdest the present state of things, and ascendest no further, the Lord
may rather seem to favor the wicked than the righteous: which cogitation
much moved David, and deceyned the Epicures. But what (says the LOKDE) of
all Reprobates in the person of Pharao, saying: Therefore (says he) have I
raised thee up, that is, have brought thee forth, that in thee I might
declare my power, that is to say, in working mightily on thee. Nor yet am I
ignorant, that there is not wanting those which otherwise expound the word of
Exciting, which answers to the Hebrew word: but the Apostles saying does
sufficientlye declare, that it is to be expounded so, that it ought to ascend
to the very creation. Again, what way so ever thou do expound it, truly
it shall express the Lords benefits upon Pharao, whom notwythstanding he
had from everlasting decreede to destroy, and that because he would. For why
otherwise should Paul ascend to the will, and should not rather say, he
has pity on whom he pleases, and those that deserve this, or whom he
foreknewe would deserve, those he suffers to be hardened. So also GOD from
everlasting predestined Esau to his hatred, but yet he blessed him in the
plentye of the Earth, and deawe of Heaven.

I smaell the son of the bond maid, is no heir with the son of the Free
woman, but yet he increased to a mighty nation. There is therefore extante
great signs of Gods blessings, even to the very Reprobate, but thereon it
does not follow, that thou seek, that God had not predestinate the^ to his
hatred. Yea this follows that Christ says, That the goodness of God is
infinite, that does good to his ennimyes: and the reprobate shall be so much
the more (...) inexcusable, by how much they have receyned the more benefits
of GOD. Paul therefore worthilye recalleth us to behold (...) the long
suffering of God to the very vessels of wrath, but yet he therefore denies
not that they are the vessels of wrath, made to destruction.

An other of the Slaunderers Arguments.
There is no Beast so savage, (much less is Manne) whi^ the would bring
forth his issue to miserye: how much less GOD? Should he not be worse
than the Wolf? So reasons Christ, if you, although evil, can yet give
good gifts to your children, how much more GOD? And so reason thine
adversaries: If Calvin, notwythstanding that he is evil, yet would not beget
his son to miserye, how much less GOD? These and the like they speak of
Nature.

REFVTATION.
I marvel thou canste speak thus, and since thou arts so miserable, (for what
is more miserable, than both this sottishness and iniquitye) that thou doste
not perceive thy misery.

The Lord cries to the woman, I will augment thy sorrow and thy travel. He
cries to the the manne: In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread,
till thou return again into the earth: with forrowe shalt thou eat the
fruits of the earth, and it shall yield thee Thorns and Brembles: he cries
to the Earth it self, accursed be the Earth for thy sake. And under this
burden traueleth and groneth the universal state of all things says the
Apostle. Job complayneth that man is borne unto misery, and the few days he
lives are filled with iniquitye. The wise Preacher witnesses, that there is
nothying under Heaven more vain or miserable than Man. David in infinite
places complains the same.

The Philosopher being swallowed in this device, brake into this blasphemye,
that they exclame that nature is a stepdame to man, and that it is best not to
be borne.

The common sense says, that which in deed Pliny has written, that there
is nothying more miserable, than Manne, that he begins his life in
affliction. But thou art found alone, which deniest that Manne is borne to
miserye. But yet thou will say, thou do me wrong, who simply deny not
that men are borne to misery, but so begotten or created of God. But I pray
thee, what love is this? for will thou measure the nature of God by man's
capacity, when with his only beck he can sanctify men, who otherwise should
he borne miserable, yet rather wills to be borne in calamity, or indeed
to speak after your manner, permits. But happly thou will except, that God
being angry with the sins of men, does this worthilye, with which sin
being after a sort enforced, he abandoneth the affection of a ^at her to some,
and he loves not all, when he renounceth some.

But so faure is it off that thou should acquit thy self myth this
answer, that thou speak more and more against thy self. For first,
whence be these sins, but from corruption: And the alone corruption of Adam,
why suffers god to be derived upon all his posterity? Thou can here
insert no foreknowledge of sin, which has enforced God, since it is of
necessity that thou set the cause before his effects. I will speak more
plainly that the people his effects. I will speak more plainly that the
people may understand me. If GOD will have no man to be borne to myserie, why
does he the^ permit them to be borne in corruption, since of necessity
misery follows corruption? Shameless impudent, will thou not here at the
last, give all glory to God? will thou not curse that blasphemy, that God
is worse than a Woulfe, if he will that man be created to misery? will thou
not once think it good to rest silent in that secrets justice of the
incomprehensible god? Will never this firmest triple reason bring under this
thy beastlenesse, That God since he is just can do nothing unjustly in his
works, albeit he does manyethings which to us may seem unjust for that we
cannot comprehend the causes of them. That God simply creates none to
misery, but so together ordayneth the causes of this misery, that he that is
borne miserable, should worthilye be borne miserable. That God in the purpose
of rejecting, respects not the destruction of reprobates as the lasteende,
but his own glory, which shyneth in their just reprobation. So plainly
speaks the spirit of God, and thou caytife wilt murmr against God, and
wilt never understand what impiety it is, to bind GOD to the laws of this
nature, nor to confess in God any other light of wisdom and justice, than
whose brightness thou may endure? But I will yet go further with thee: will thou deny that blindness is a misery? I think not, except thou be
blinder than the blind themselves. But when as thou, and the rude disciples
supposed the borne blind man, of whom I spoke before, to have bin borne to that
misery, either for his parents sins or for his own, what answers the
Lord to them and thee? Neither this (says he) has sinned; neither his
parences: that is, the Lord neither considered his ^or his parents sins,
when he would have him borne blind, and therefore miserable: but therefore he
was borne blind, that the works of God might be manifest in him. God now and
accuse the LORD himself as blasphemous.

But what? do thou think Job himself, an upright, and simple man, so
cruellye vexed of Satan, that without trembling we can not read those things
that are mentioned of him, him I say not then in deed to have been miserable
when he brake out into most dolerous complaints: or that he fell by chance
into these miseries, or that God was angrye with his sins, or that with a
certain ydled sufferaunce, or wynkyng, he should give his servant into the
hand of Satan?

Thou canste say nothing of these, but the sexte of the History reselleth
thee, and Job himself so much, when praising God, he says, the Lord gave
and the Lord has taken away. But if the Lord also be then most just, by
the self confession of his own servants, when he for a time humbles them
with some miseries to his own glory, will thou abridge him theprayse of
justice, when, whom he pleases, also for his own glory, he cre ateth to just
damnation? Just damnation I say, seeeing be never condenmeth any but the
guyltie of Sin. Further, the place which thou citest, proves again with what
faith and conscience thou use to auduch the scripture. For how is that when
yet hitherto thou have cyted but only two testimonies of scripture, thou have
so foolishly and wickedly wrested them both? If you being evil (says Christ,)
can yet give good gifts to your chidren, how much more God: What gatherest
thou of this? that God being good creates none to misery. As though the Lord
in that place did speak to all and does not confirm his Church, that with
boldness it might cry Abba father. Or in deed art thou so skill esse (at
least) that thou know not yt this voice is of the spirit of adopito^? For
so witnesses ye Apostle. But yt thine exposition, may be in force, what else
can thou gather thence, but only this, that God uses to do good to all? But
does it follow thereon that he neither creates the vassals of his wrath, which
yet he suffers most patiently, nor wonteth, as it pleases him, to use his
children to his own glory? Believe me, if thou can, thou art more worthy
for this foolishness, in the schools of some rusticall teacher to be ierked
with whippes, than to be one that should be dealt withal by arguments. Then
thou bring Calvin for argument, who thou say is evil. We in deed are
not the men who esteem Calvin (as thou with thine are wont to gybe) for a
God: and Calvin is he (if there be at this day any other under heaven) who has
most hated that thou most desire, that is to say, the glory of me^. But yet
this testimony we can and ought to give to the truth, that he must be passing
excellent, whom in these our dates none will hate, that have bidden battle to
godliness and true religion, or in deed, who never knew him.

Finally, would God it were not so certain, that the testimony of true
goodlynesse displeases thee and thy faction, and that thou would rather
repent, than confirm the fincere judgments of all good men against thee.

Other arguments of the slaunderer.
And of the scripture they say thus: GOD saw that all that he had made were
exceeding good: Therefore Man, whom he had made, was exceeding good. But if
he has created to destruction, he had created that which was good to
destruction, and he loves to destroy that which is good, which but to
think is wicked.

REFVTATION.
ONE cried, send me to the stone quarries. But I am compelled to cry, who I
pray you will send this fellow to Antycera? For I pray thee, if I should
collect so, God created me whole, therefore he created that I should not
perish by disease, who would not think me mad? God created Man right and
innocent I grant, and yet to destruction. First we use not to speak so, but we
say that Man was created for the glory of God, and the^ we distinguish the
same: for we affirm, that God has created some, that in saving them by
mercy: others, that in condemning the^ by just judgment, he might manifest
his glory, as Moses, Solomon, I sai and Paul do testify. Therefore thou
sayste, He created that which was good to destruction, and he loves to
destroy that which is good. But I say that this consequent is most foolish.
For thou concludest much more than thou haste spoken, and therefore reasonest,
as if thou shouldeste prove that Manne is created of GOD not only good, but
also that he should never become evil, which latter is false. For because the
Lord was worthilye to condemn some, it was necessary that their beginning
should be good, both because God, in that he is good, cannot creat any thing
but that which is good, and also for that if their beginning had bin evil; he
could not justly have damned that himself had made: but yet so it was
requisite that their beginning should be good, that it willingly deprauing it
self, might evident the way to just dampnation, that is, to the just
execution of Gods eternal counsel.

Therefore the beginning also of Reprobation was good, that as the Lord
decreede from the beginning, so in very deed in his due time he might justly
condemn, not the righteous, but those that of their accord became evil: as
he who cannot but love that which is good, so can he not, but hate, and
punish that which is evil. But also that thou by the way maiste learn
this, (...).
that for the Elects sake it was requisite that Adam for that cause should be
created good, that he of his own accord might become evil.

For when the Lord also had determined to show forth a more ample favor
in saving his elect, than in the creating of Man: that is, when he had
decreede not of nothing to creat them to salvation, but being worthy of
whatsoever punishment, freely to make them partakers in Christ of his
eternal Kingdom: What place had there been to this incredible louying
kindness, it they had for ever continued steadfast in Adam? for he has no
need of this mercy that is not miserable. What have therefore the Elect to
complain of the mutable condition of Adam, since so much the more glorious and
happy is their salvation. What also the Reprobate, seeing that, except they
were corrupted in Adam, they should not have been dampened? For here I repeat
that I have often said, that so the reprobates destruction depends of Gods
decree, that yet the whole matter and fault of their damnation remain in
themselves. Lib. de Aeterna Praedest.
Yet there is one excuse, says Calvin, very well pretended, that Adam could
not escape that which was decreed of God. But voluntary transgression
suffiseth enough and enough to guiltiness. For the secret counsel of God is
not the proper natural cause of sin: but the apparent will of man. Seeing man
may find with in him the cause of this evil, what avails it to wander that
he may seek it in heaven? The fault is manifesse in himself, An endless
toil.
because he would sin. Why has he, forcing into the secrets of heaven,
drowned himself into a Laby-rinth? For that God knowing and willing suffered
man to fall, the cause may be secret, but unjust it cannot. Go now,
slaunderer, and exclayme that we make God a hater of good men.

Another Argument of the Sclaunderer.
God created one man that he might place him in Paradise, which is eternal
life. Therefore he created al men to eternal life, for all men are created in
one.

REFVTATION.
FIRST I demand whence thou have drawn this, that God created one man that
he might place him in. Paradise. Verylie of some secret revelation, in whythe
thou placest ye perfection which thou seasest not to dream long since. I read
that Adam was placed in that most pleasant Garden: but that this was the
chief and determined purpose with the Lord, that he might place him there, I
read in no place. Yea if thou will stand upon the very words, I rather
read, that he was created to have dominion over every living creature.
Therefore the foundation of thine argumentation is fallen, as that which
rests not upon the authority of Scripture, but upon thine own
fantastical dream. God sent a sleep upon Adam, did he respect that when
he made him? he made him a coat of skin, but did he therefore creat him?
See thou how sottishly thou sholdest conclude? But thou will say yt this
Paradise is a figure of eternal life. But tell me from whence also haste thou
that? because the Lord, and after him Paul and John, by the name of Paradise,
understand celestial glory? Indeed a strong Argument, as though the
Gretians understood not by this word al pleasant orchards, and that it is
usual in Scripture with these like earthlye shows to shadow eternal
felicity.

Jerusalem in infinite places does shadow the Church: is therefore every
inhabitant of that City a member of the Church?

Again, if that Paradise were eternal life, then shall also the Devil,
Death, and Sin, be in eternal life, and that Paradise being ouer-tourned
by the flood, also eternal life shall utterly perish. See whether childishe
shifts do headlong enforce thee, with which thou do feed thy self in
such wise, as the Camelion is reported to live with the air.

But least thou maiste complain that I rather dally out thine arguments
than solute them, I will show thee what we are to think by the word of God
of this Argument, that is, of the end of the first created man.

Quadruple wise we learn to understand the counsels of God: one is by
revelation in the Prophets, whose examples are every where extant in Scripture:
Another is by peculiar revelation of the spirit, as we read of Simeon, and
also of all faithful, to whose spirit the spirit of God bears witness
what be their gifts by Christ. For that is it which we call Faith and (...)
assured persuasion, which cause, by the example of Paul, that we are so sure,
that we are freely elect of GOD in Christ, as if we had bin present in his
eternal counsel.

The third is by our observing the sequel of natural causes, as often times
the natural and wise men, and such as are skillful in humane things, do
foretell many things. But this conjecture in many things is deceitful and
uncertain, because that God oftentimes orders the mean causes, according to
his secreate will.

But the fourth is the most sure mean, and without al exception the most
sure, because it judges (as they say) of the latter. I therefore say there are
two things, which not only the word of GOD, but also common reason does show
us. One is, that God is never changed, and therefore that that thing comes
to pass by the eternal and immutable decree of Gods counsel, that things are
often altered. For God not only decrees those things, which are of stayed
nature, of which forte there be very few, but also those things, that for the
most part are changed every hour, but not without assigned rules of
alteration by him.

For example sake, the Lord blessed the earth which he made, which after
Adams sin he cursed. But is God changed? no indeed: but in the beginning
only for a time he blessed that, which being fulfilled, he had determined to
curse the same for the sin of Man. If any ask me whence I have them, I will
answer, that I have it from the success. For seeing God is not changed, and
that it came so to pass as I said, of necessity it is we confess, that it
was so determined with God from the beginning. Also the Lord gave the
ceremonies of the law to his Church by Moses, who notwithstanding by the
Apostle pronounces afterward, if you be circumcised, Christ prosyteth you
nothing. But does the Lord change his purpose, that he should allow that
which before he disallowed? no indeed. For he ordained the ceremonies but for
a time, that is, to the preaching of Christ, at whose coming it was
requisite, that they should vanish away, as darkness in the day spring.

Also, he assigned Saul King over Israel, but for a time: which albeit he
did not manifest at the beginning, yet he sufficiently has proved it, when he
received him. And together when he decreed that he would reject him, he
determined the cause justly, and he would take from him his kingdom for his
own fault, all which are certainly collected by the success. And the other
is this, which common reason does show us, that nothing is done which God
knows not, or against his will, or he being idle: for neither ignorance, nor
imbecilitie is agreeable with the nature of God, nor an idle foreknowledge may
be attributed to him, specially in the government of so excellent a work, that
is to say, of Man, but that for the most part the wicked assertion of
Epicures will be confirmed, That God cares not for men. For it will be, that he
being idle, that is, dooyng nothing, he suffered Adam to be circumuented of
Satan, and at last, as one awaked out of sleep, endeavors to give remedy.

The Scripture says much otherwise, which affyrmeth that al things are
gonerned of God, Pro. 16, Exo. (...).
even those that seem most casual. It testifyeth, that the very Sparrowes
do not fall to the earth without the heavenly fathers will, and that all the
hairs of our head be numbered.

Satan indeed cannot touch Job, except God see it so good, and for that
cause permit it Satan, yea the Devils truly could not rage against the
swyne, except leave be asked of Christ, which he granted not against his
will, but willinglye. It rests then we say, that all things are done if
God will: and therefore as we see any thing come to pass: let us say that it
came to pass, not without the just, eternal, and immutable decree of GOD,
But if any manne will exclame here, that we enforce the Stoycall necessity.
Indeed I grante with Augustine, or rather with the truth it self, that the
will of GOD is the necessity of things, but this Stoicall I deny. Nor do we
bind GOD to the second causes, as Homer brings in his Jupiter complaining,
that when he would resist destinye, he could not.

We (I say) acknowledge no such destiny, but we say, that there is a sure
and immutable success of all things, which the Lord has freelye, wisely,
iustlye, from everlasting determined.

Yet we say that the second causes are not enforced of Gods decree, except
when he pleases to bridle his ennimies, but they are willingly carried to the
end determined of God.

Finallye, both mere natural, and voluntary motions of (...) of free choice,
we not only not take away, but account them as principal amongst second
causes, that is, which, (as we said even now) are of their own accord
inclined to that end, whereto the counsels of the most wise, free, and just
GOD the Creatoure do tend. Let this be for example, GOD the father
tendering the salvation of his Elect, assuredlye decreede that CHRIST for a
certain season should dye. This I say so ought to be, that I affirm it
could not be before his hour had come (as say the Evangelists)
nor after the prefixed time was come, that it could otherwise be, which
appertains to the success.

In the mean time, when Christ was fresh in years, and was of excellent
constitution in body, if you respect in part (...) the strength of Nature,
it was such that he might have lived many years: also such was the nature
of humane wyil, which would have wonderfully abhorred most cruel death,
lincked with the wrath of GOD the father, and also would have prayed pardon.

Therefore, if by it self thou should consider the power of Nature, then
will we say, that Christ could not have dyed: also if thou should
consider, (...) the force of Will in him, that he might have wished not to
dye. But Nature by natural motion, and will of his own accord, consented to
the decree of GOD, that is, to death of necessity. Therefore, there is not
why thou should object to us the Stoicall assertion, which takes from God
a liberty to decree, and to determine second causes, that is it brings GOD,
spoiled of his Divinity under gouernemente, and to willing counsels or
deliberations leaves no place. Nor is it prejudicial to us, (that I may
speak these by the way) that there seems force to be offered now and then
to the second causes, as when the Sun stays his course, and the Sea is
divided.

For we said that GOD is not bound to second causes, but that he may bend
them whereto it pleases him: Nor is it to be doubted, but nature willinglye,
would give place when the Creator commands.

There is more difficulty in the corrupt will of the Diuelles, and all those
who are not regenerate, which it is sure does sometimes oppose it self
utterly, that is wittingly and willingly against ye decr^es of God. But here
is altogether apparent the in comprehensible and in^^ plicable condition of the
counsels of God, that like as the will of the devil and his members, in that
it utterly opposes it self against God, yet ignorauntlye serves the works
of God no less than with willing force it should yield to obey him.

Tell me therefore (that we may amongst many choose one singular example)
when Satan endeavored to destroy Joseph by his brethren, by whom God had
decreed to save the Isralites, what did he? truly the self thing that he had
decreed, against whom he did oppose himself, that is, that Joseph having
gotten authority in Egypt, might prepare refuge for the Church of GOD. Joseph
therefore respectyng Gods decree, and comforting his amayed brethren, said: You
did not send me hither, but God. Therefore, where I said, that the second
causes do readily endeavor themselves to the will of God, as appertains to
the corrupt will of the wicked, is thus to be understood, that we may rather
consider the issue than the form often hat will. But these (it may be) are too
far fetched, Genesis 453^.
which yet I thought good to set down in more words, that in part I might
displaye the wickedness, and in part the foolishness of him, who yet shamed
not to obiecte unto us those things, which of what forte they should be, he
verily never seems to have understood. I come to the matter. We show, that
all things come to pass by the eternal immutable decree of God, for that with
him is neither ignorance, nor imbeciiltie, nor (...) negligence, nor any
alteration of counsel. We also show this, that those things that are changed
are not changed, but by the eternal and immutable counsel of God. But this
third we have approved, which depends of the aforesaid, that this collection
is most sure, this thing is so come to pass, therefore it was the council of
God, that it should so come to pass.

Of these it is easily gathered, what is to be thought of the end of the
first made man, truly that (which the issue shows) he was created good, but
with this condition, that in certain time, of his own accord, and by no
fault of the Creator, this goodness being lost, he might ignorauntly
prepare the way, both to them that are to be saved in mercy, by whose
salvation, God has decreede from everlasting to manifest his glory: and also
to those that should justly be damned, in whose just destruction, lykcwyse he
determined from everlasting, to show forth the inmeasurablenesse of his
justice, and severity. Adam therefore was created good, so that if thou
consyderest this straight of nature by it self, that is the integrity and
innocence, then he might and ought to be saved, and also his posterity that
he was to bring forth like to himself. But if thou consyderest Gods decree,
that is, wherefore he created him good, thou shall find he neither could
remain good, which appertains to the success, nor that his posteritye could
be borne in any other estate, then in that whereto as inthraled, God from
everlasting had determined they should be borne.

Thou demaundest whence I have these? I answer that I collect them of the
success, or as they say of the latter, nor that thou canste deny those
things I have spoken, but that either thou should make God varyable and
inconstant, or weak and ignorant, or that appertains to the ordinance of
causes, unoccupied, I add also rash and unskillful. For what? before he made
man, did he not forsee with himself wherefore he would make him? or at the
least foreseeing the faults, defermyne what he would do unto men.

Who I pray thee could indifferently suffer these things to be spoken of God,
which are not to be found in men, except such as are destitute of all wit
and reason? But if he had with himself foresette anend, I ask of thee what
it was? Thou will say to bless al men. Now therefore good fellow show how
the counsels of God are not uncertain, and infirm. How God is not variable
and inconstante, how not altogether weak, if by no means he now perform
that which he had determined, concerning the blessed life of all men. For
neither causte thou say by that thine invention, that even those whom he
saves, are not saved by thy forged decree, seeing they are saved by Grace, not
by nature. And there is no doubt, that very many are given over to eternal
forments, seeing without Christ there is no salvation, and Faith comes of
hearing. But by his own fault thou will say. I grant it, but what does
that help thee? For if that were decreede with God, to save Adam, and all his
posterity, surely either God will not, or he can not perform that he had
decreede: if he will not, then he has changed his purpose, if he cannot, then
is he not omnipofent. But how far off both be from the nature of God, thou
see. Therefore, also that kind of Doctrine, by thine argument, which
enforces us to these blasphemies is false. Yet further I guess thou haste one
refuge in store, that is, that thou maiste say that God indeed created Adam,
and all men comprehended in him to eternal life, but upon condition, if Adam
should persist in his innocence, which was set in his power, and therefore
that God seems not to have changed his purpose.

I aun swear, that it is true that thou saisfe of the condition, but not in
that which thou supposest. Nor is it to he thought, yt God after the manner of
me^ depends doubtful in his counsels, and in second causes, as he pleases
to determine this or that, For what God should this be, which depen^eth upon
the rule of things created?

Therefore that which is said of the condition, is utterly to be taken in the
contrary part, (that is to say) that Adan was created with condition of the
fall interiected, but that utterly which should be performed, albeit
willinglye, freelye, and readily, yet necessarilye, seeing that Gods decree
could not fail. For the decree of God depends not upon the will of Adam,
but the contrary, Adams will of Gods decree, with whose efficacy,
notwithstanding the will was not enforced, but by his own voluntary motion,
(albeit Adam neither knowing nor respecting the end, and therefore sinning)
was carried to the end appointed of God, that is, to this point, that the way
might be opened both to the mercy and severe justice of God. For in one and
the same work, Adam of his own accord, and therefore finning endenoured one
thing, and God wrought an other thing: so indeed Adams and the Devils drifts
were frustrate, because there is no counsel against the Lord. Prou^ (...) 30.


But God justly using a sinful instrument, wrought that he would: because
what soever he has determined, it is wholly requisite that if should come to
pass also, even as he had appointed. If these things do not satisfy thee,
which rest upon these stayed principles, that God is ever just, although
men conceive not alwases how he can be just, that God depends not of second
causes, but always justly does govern them, even then also when they do
wickedlye, that God does nothing at unawares, and with no certain end
determined, nor that he is ignorant of any thing, nor to will, or discern
any thing which he cannot, nor that he ydly beholds what shall come, or
what is, but that he does all things (as Solomon says to his own glory,
and therefore to have fore-decreede to do: that God cannot be changed; but
also that those things, which are changed, with all fixed and firm
circumstaunces, are of his immutable counsel changed, If I say those things
do not satisfy thee, which rest upon such certain principles, and so
agreeable to the nature of God, and so innumerable testimonies and examples of
Scripture, I say freely, that I now take no pains to satisfy thee and thy
faction. For he that does that, shall verily do in such wise, as if (as he
says) he would do it of purpose.

An other of the Slaunderers Arguments.
IF all have fallen in Adam, it is necessary, that all shall stand in Adam,
and in that same estate, as Adam.

REFVTATION.
ALL these things I grant thee, and that so, as they make quite against thee.
For seeing Adams posterity shall stand in no other estate, than Adam stood
in, that is, that he might voluntarily throw down himself headlong to
destruction, whence afterward the Lord would deliver all these, whom he had
from everlasting decreed to give unto his son, the self thing ensues that
we to give unto his son, the self thing ensues that we wish, that the
Elect have nothing to complain of this decree of God, seeing their estate is
now by so much better, than if Adam had not sinned, by how much it is more
excellent to be saved by Christ the son of God, than by Adam: by Grace than
by Nature. And that the Reprobate also cannot complain any thing of God, as
which, albeit according to the decree of God, they are fallen in Adam, yet
fell they in him voluntarily, and not by force, and therefore are but
deservedly damned. If this does not satisfye thee and them, I will cry with
Paul, O man who art thou that pleadest with God?

Another Argument of the Sclaunderers.
I will not the death of a Sinner.

REFVTATION.
SEE how rusticall thou art, that is, rude and unlearned, for thou have utterly
forgot of what thing there should be demand. We strive not good man of death,
and eternal damnation, (for we know that no man is damned but for his desert)
but of the purpose of damning, whose cause, albeit to us it be unknown, yet is
it ever just: for whatsoever God will, is just: and so God decrees that he
does decree, that he ministers just causes to the execution of his decree.
Why therefore do thou slide, omitting the mean causes from the decree of
God, to the execution of it, that is, from the purpose of damning, to
damnation, as though in deed the Lord should simply have thus determined from
everlasting, I will vow this man to destruction, and not whether I will give
over this man to destruction for his own fault, that my justice may appear I
will speak yet more plainly. Thou do foolishly that do cite the
testimony of death, that is by the execution of the counsel, where the
counsel it self is in controversy. Yea the Prophet, whose double testimony
thou abusest, disputes against the men of thy faction, who complained that by
the absolute power of God (as they call it) they had incurred Gods vengeance, as
though God should deal with them tyrannously, that is, should rage against
them, whether by right or wrong. But what says the Lord by the Prophet,
verily he recalleth the^ to yt causes of destruction remaining in themselves,
which also we do continually. There is not says ye Lord by the Prophet why ye
should accuse me, as I receive ye penitent, so I punish none but ye graceless
and rebellious: for when your conscience shall accuse you, why put you ye fault
in me: That this is the Prophets meaning, every one that weyeth those places
will confess: and surely, al me^ of stayed judgment, when they hear these
things, and shall try themselves, will rather muse upon ame^dment of life, and
a renewed mind to be obtained of ye Lord, than vp^o the sifting of the councels
of God. Briefly therefore I say, that ye Prophet mounteth not to that eternal
decree of God, but shows ye true use of that doctrine, which also we, for as
much as lies in us, do indeauoure to imprint, that is, that we ought to
search the decree of God concerning our selves, not in those his unrevealed
secrets, but in his word which is appointed for us to consider. But thou will
urge the word, I will not: as
though in deed the word Caphees with the Hebrews should simply signify to will,
or rather does not signify to allow, and to have acceptable, for which the
Grecia^s say (...) to be well affected. And know thou, that God will many
things, which yet he approoueth, not (...) simply, but (...) by his mean, as
for example, when he does exercise his, or correct them by the hand of the
wicked, do thou think that it pleases him well that the wicked do, albeit
they are excited by him, as he says every where by his Prophets, and so much,
that therefore Nabuchadnezer was called the servant of the Lord: Truly if thou
think so, thou art in a great error, seeing these self same offenses, he
afterward so severally punished in the Chaldees, what then; forsooth God
simply allows not those things, y^ is, in ye they oppress his people, but in
y^ by this means his patience is confirmed, those yt sinned are recalled to
amendment, his justice is manifested in punishing the wicked, the wicked fill
full there measure, finally whereas these judgments set forth his glory, here
the Lord approves the use and most just end of these things. And the
destruction of reprobates is also of this kind, not that God is simply delited
therewith, but for his own glory, for which cause he testifies by Solomon
that he created the wicked against the day of evil. Therefore I have often
said, that we use not to speak so, as to say that God created any men for
their destructions sake, but that by the just destruction of some he might
manifest his own glory, verily then the which end, nothing more just or
requisite can be imagined. Therefore this appertains nothing to the purpose
of the present controversy, whether God for his own glory have predestinate
some, that is, the wicked to destruction: which thou deniest: I with Moses and
Solomon affirm: neither can thou gather any thing else out of those places
of Ezechiel, then ye which we say, that God is so loving, that when he deals
with men after their deserte, he is not delighted with their destruction, but
alone provides for the glory of his own name: like as just and favorable
judges regard not the torment of offenders, as though yt only were their
purpose to shed men's blood, but because the law and equity requires, that by
the punishment of offenders the wicked may be feared, and the good may be
defended from the injuries of evil men, therefore they have hated not the men,
but offenses in the men, and by the prescript of laws do punish them. This, I
say, is ye meaning of ye word, I will not, against those who accused God, as
some cruel tirant, who should rage against men without any regard of good or
evil: when contrarily he never punishes any but offenders: and that so, as he
is not delighted with their torments, but with his own justice. Otherways, if
thou simply take ye word of nilling, you must in deed show, how God being
unwilling to damn y^ wicked, and therefore willing to save them, so many
notwithstanding are punished with overmuch torments by sentence of the same
unwilling God.

Finally, thou should have noted, to whom this Sermon of Ezechiel was
applied, truly not to a wicked people, and obstinate, but to the people of God,
amongst whom seeing he had many elect, it is no marvel that he used that
speech to them, whom contained within his covenant, he endeavored to recall
unto himself. But thou to thy o^ other follies whereof I have spoken, have
also added this, that thou would appropriat to all mankind that only
belongs to the Church of God.

An other Argument of the Sycophantes.
GOD will have none to perish, but all to come to the knowledge of the truth.

REFVTATION.
THOU art the same thou waste wont to be, and indeed thou do yt which
Heretics be wont, when with evil conscience, they patch together the pieces
of Scripture, that they may urge them upon the simple and unskillful. Peter in
that place which thou wrestest after thy manner, strengthening the elect against
certain scoffers, who, (as to many at this day) did deride whatsoever was
spoken of the supreme judgment. Beloved, says he, be not ignorant in this one
point, that a thousand years with the Lord are as one day, and one day as a
thousand years: that is, as I take it, that the Lord after the manner of men
is not bound to any moments of time, which is to strictly observed of some.
Then he adds, the Lord that promised is not slack, as many account this
slacknesse, but he is long suffering to us ward notwilling that any should
perish but that all thould come to repentance. And it is even as much as if
Peter should have said, There be many of you who think the Lord deferreth
his other coming beyond equity, who in deed do think far otherwise of
God, then convenient. For first let us weigh who he is that has promised to
come, that he might utterly deliver his. In very deed he is God. But may he
then defer his promise even one moment, whose word is most sure, and who
has prefixed appointed seasons to his promise? Then see how some by impatience
do sinisterly esteem this sufferance. For they think that the Lord does
after a sort despise his Church, or that he does not esteem it so much as
is requisite, when of the contrary part, the Lord would not defer that
his coming, except he should use great patience and lenity toward us. For
he only deferreth his coming till he shall have gathered his people, whereof
he will not that one should perish, but rather that by true repentance they
should all be saved. It is proved by many reasons, that this is the simple,
plain, and apparent meaning of the words of Peter. To this end he
indeuoreth, that he may confirm the faithful against Epicures: whence it is
that he alleges those things which solely belong to the faithful, that in
deed he might recall them to the promises. Finally, Peter is wholly
conversant in this, that he may teach the delay of the judgment to come to
endure more patiently, which in deed do not agree with the froward and
obstinate, who would pray the Lord to protracte that judgment as long as
might be, as appears by this speech of the Devils, why dyddest thou come to
torment us before the time: so far is it of that the Lords tariance should
seem too long to them. Therefore seeing he calls them beloved whom he
speaks to, and adioyneth himself unto them, as who says, (...) toward us,
not (...) toward you, who is such a dullard that sees not that this speech
belongs only to the Church alone, I say to the elect.

Therefore in an other place it is said that the Lord in that judgment shall
first gather together all his elect out of all the world, Mat. 24. c. 31.
that is to say, Mar. 13. d. 27.
the number of them nown being accomplished. Apo. 6. e. 11.
Finally, John is the best interpretor of Peter: for of him are alleged the
souls of them that are stayne for the word of God, to try that they are
werie of this long delay, how long O Lord which art holy and true, do
thou not judge and revenge our blood against those which dwell in the earth?
but what answer have they? Even the same which Peter mentions, that is
that they must rest yet a little while, that is to say, but even so long, til
the full number of their fellow servant and brethren be accomplished. These
therefore are they (thou Sycophant) of whom, the Lord will have none to
perish, and all whom he calls to repentance in his time, but the rest
whom he has created against the day of evil, for his own glory (as Solomon
says, whom it is better to believe then thee) there is no doubt, but for
their own offense he will have to perish: as the Scripture plainly
witnesses of the sons of Helie, and the reprobate Jews. Here therefore thou
dashest against the same rock, 1. Sam. 2.25. Isa. 6.9. John. 12.39.
where against earwhyle thou made shipwreck. For that which only is spoken
of the chyloren, thou also will have to belong to the dogs: which albeit if
I should grant thee, yet here also must thou show, how some perish against
the will of God, for an idle sufferaunce of judgment agrees not.

An other of the Sycophantes Arguments.
IF God created the greatest part of the world to perdition, it follows that
his wrath is more then his mercy. And yet the Scriptures witness, that he is
slow to wrath, and swifte to mercy, so that his wrath is only extended to
the third or fourth generation, when his mercy reaches unto thousands.

REFVTATION.
THERE be almost in this Argument more faults then sillables. That which
thou brablest of the greatest part of the World, is all thine own, as I
said before: albeit it may appear by the authority of Christ, and the
continual observation of all worlds, even to the blind themselves, how few
do enter at the strayte gate, in respect^ of them which go the broad way,
which leads to destruction, yet we use not willingly to weerie our selves
in these speculations, whether there be more vassalles of wrath and reproach,
then of mercy and honor.

Again, as I have often said, we may not say that GOD has simplye
created some to perdition, but to declare his own glory in the just
condemnation of some.

Also the sequel which thou adioynest, holds not, for albeit that GOD
should save but one man, we say the greatness of his love, which he has
manifested in the secret and incomprehensible mystery of his eternal son,
is such, that by infinite degrees it should exceed all his severity to the
wicked, how great soever it be thought. For who in heaven or earth may
comprehend what is the breadth, the length, and profunditie of his love
toward us miserable sinners? For how great these are, that eternal word,
which in the beginning was God with God, to be so abaced, that he became man,
subject to all the infirmities of our flesh, sin only excepted, that we
again might be made the children of GOD. That eternal word to be conceived,
to be borne and to draw the common breach with us. The almighty to be
afflicted the space almost of four and thirty years: with all troubles and
afflictions, with hunger, thirste, watchings, with horrors both of body and
mind, with infinite slanders: the life it self to be slain with most
sharp and cruel torments, and to be shut up in a sepulcher: For so we may
speak by the example of Paul, not that we should confound the natures, but
unite them being several. But what, seeing that now in such falsehoode of the
world, the continual love of Christ toward his Church, does not nor ever
shall cease: if but one I say, and only pryuate man should be made partaker
of this wonderful, and inexplicable benefit, what matter yet can be urged of
this love of God, with his severity against all other men, and the very
rebellious Angels? But thou a crafty fellow, had rather discerns the state
of wrath and mercy, by the number of the damned and saved, then by the nature
of them.

But why should thou not do this, who art not ashamed to write that that
Paul which confesses himself to know nothing but Jesus Christ crucified,
and who has set forth unto the world so mightily, all the riches of the
Gospel, that he has delivered to the world the rudiments of Religion, and
that he had a certain, more perfect, and more secret doctrine which he has
taught to certain his more perfect Scholars, I imagine nothing herein, or
sclander as thou do? Thine annotations upon the first Epistle to ye
Corinthians are extant, wherein thou speak so plainly and so apparently,
that thou can not deny this blasphemy, therefore I marvel not that the
mercy of God in Christ crucified is so esteemed as nothing of thee, that thou
dare compare with his severity, who had rather believe thy self than the
Apostle, and openly transformest the Christian religion into Iewishe or
Anabaptisticall babbling. And that which apperteyneth to the twofold
testimony of Moses, thou also too impudently wrestest the either of them: for
what if I should except, that God did there manifest what a one he would show
himself to his Church? Truly I should say as it is, as appears even in
this one example. Let us compare the fact of Saul, with the offense of David.
Saul contrary to the commandment of God, which seemed a grievous thing,
did not by and by sley Agag the King that was taken captive, and keeps the
fatter Cattle by oblation,
either for the Lords Sacrifices, or for himself by covetousness. And what
did David that worthy Prophet, who had so often experienced the loving
kindness of God? he defloureth another wife, fostereth sin, he procures a
most worthy and valiante man to be slain, by most filthy surpassing
treachery, and so much the rather, that he might yield to his cruel desire,
he wittingly and willingly hazzerdeth the whole host to most evident peril,
the Arc of covenant, and the name of God himself to the scoffings of the
enemies, but Saul is immediately rejected, nor can the Lord be entreated by
any the tears of Samuel, and David is streighte received to mercy, but why
so? in deed the foreknowledge of sins will here do thee no good, but to
this thou must come of necessity, that God pityeth, and hardneth whom it
pleases him. Yet Saul has not what to complain, for who has first given
to the Lord and it shall be restored him? Nor is it injury to Saul, though
David find grace. But yet who can not see in Saul (...), the wonderful
severity of God (as Paul speaks) but in David that express nature of God,
which himself described in Moses, when he says, that he is ready to mercy,
and slow to wrath. I may therefore agree with thee for once, if I should
except, that the Lord in that place does only speak to his elect, as he, who
rather shows himself worthelie, and of good right terrible, and inexorable
to the rest. But least thou exclayme that I do wrangle, I confess that the
Lord does use an incredible favor and lenity, even toward the very
vassals of wrath, ordained to destruction. Whence is it that he should not
destroy Cayne by and by? Whence is it that he should protracte the floude so
many years? Whence is it that he should bless Esau with the plentifulnesse
of the earth? That Ismaell should grow to a great kindred? That he should
suffer the Cananites and the Amalachites so long? That he should not take away
Saul by and by, but suffer him so long to enjoy the benifyte of this life, and
also the renoune and benefits of the Kingdom of Israel? Finally, that we
prosecute not antiquities, whence is it that he so nourishes, and so
favorably susteyneth so many wicked Turks, such tyranny of Antichriste,
and finally thy self with so many false Prophets, who cease not to seduce
whomesoeuer they may from Gods truth. Great, yea great and incomprehensible
is this goodness of GOD toward his enemies, which would God they could
once acknowledge, whosoever are elect among them, and be not known, that
they might at the last return to him, who truly shows himself favorable,
and slow to wrath even to his adversaries.

In expoundyng the other of the same, Moses, or rather testimony of the Lord,
thou offendest in like sort, for the use of this Doctrine solely apperteyneth
to the Church, to whom alone the law is properly assigned, and the Gospel
Preached. And there be diverse dispositions of men, and there is a twofolde
nature in the very men regenerate, therefore is there added threatenings with
the promises, that the flesh of them, and whatsoever is servile, may be
restreyned, but the spirit, and whatsoever is free and at liberty in these
confyrmed. Nor be these threatenings only vain scarecrowes, (says the
Lord) eftsoons stays not in the words, but sharply corrects even his
own children, and tameth in their sight the adversaries with terrible wrath,
yet in the mean time I grant that his mercy does excel, but I affirm it,
especially in his Church.

But see how sottishe thou art, who abusest these testimonies, to the end
thou may avoid that eternal and secret mystery of the divine decree. Why
do thou not rather abide in the next causes of destruction, and persist in
the Apostles paths? for so should it come to pass, that thou should rather
reverence the loving kyndnesse of GOD toward his enemies, then thou should
not yield him which is lawful to every potter no man withstanding it, when
as yet a certain proportion of the clay and potter may be intended, and of God
and things created, whatsoever yet these be, there holds no comparison,
except so much as God adopteth men unto himself of mercy, for that we may
ascend unto Adam, what proportion is there of the similitude and the thing it
self yet I grant that Gods benefits toward men be innumerable, especially
if they be considered in Adam: but thou art wonderfully deceived, when thou
deemest that therefore God has spoiled himself of his deytie, that it should
not be lawful for him without the note of cruelty, to create how many men it
pleased him, in whose just condemnation, (for albeit he has ordained whom
he would to destruction, yet he boweth none to death, but the deseruers of it)
to manifest his upright justice and his hatred against sin. Do trees and
plants at this day conspire against the Lord as thou do, that they are
devoured of men? Do all living creatures expostulate with God, because they are
appointed to the slaughter, and set forth to the greediness of men no I trow,
Romans 8.
for so says the Apostle (...) that the creature does sigh and groan not as
though it did expostulate with God, but because it does frette against the
enemies of God, and in deed so it is, for if the earth it self, if heaven,
and the stars, and the beginnings of all things, if almost the infinite
kinds of beasts, fishes, and souls, if stones and rocks coulds speak,
although their estate may seem miserable to man's reason, yet would they not
only not expostulate with God as fierce and cruel, but they will voluntarily
have bin thankful to him, that they were accounted worthy to serve his glory.
but thou Sycophant art found, who would accuse God of cruelty, except he had
ordained all to eternal life, albeit thou make not mention of all in this
place, yet it must be so, for if there should but one be ordained to eternal
punishment, if thou might be judge, God shall not escape the note of
cruelty. For albeit he is more cruel that damneth many, then that damneth
one, yet he therefore ceasseth not to be cruel, that damneth but one by thy
judgment, who either wilt not, or can not discern the just purpose of
damnation, from damnation it self. But that we may omit all those things
which thou say, the people can not conceive, I say, that thou in wresting
this testimony of Moses, art like to them, who marvel why more Drunkardes
than Physicians do come to old age, and think not in the mean time that it
is chance, that there be by many degrees more Drunkards than Physicians. So
albeit, as thou falselie deemest, God should save the issue of every faithful
man, to the thousanth degree, not one only excepted, and should destroy the
Infidels children, only to the fourth Generation, yet for all that should
there be more that should be damned, because there have bin ever more in the
World that did hate GOD, than did love him.

But thou art both deceived, in that that thou deemest that the Lord has
beer set the consideration of his nature, either in the multitude of those
that are to be saved or damned, also in that that thou take those things in
such wise as if the Lord had bound himself to save some man's posterity,
to a certain number, without exception, both which, continual experience
does teach to be most false. What then? is the Lord untrue? no in deed,
but in these words he only shows how much he is more frequente in well
doing, than being keeping and mindful of injuries, in persecuting his
adversaries, but so, that finallye he does well to them of whom he is beloved,
and hates them of whom he is hated, and makes it free to himself, to have
mercy on whom he will, and whom he will to harden, as he has manifestly
showed and proved in effect in the history of Helie the Priest, that I may
omit Ismaell and Isaac, 1. Sam. 2. c. 2^. f. 30.
Jacob, and Esau, and innumerable others. See how wisely and to the purpose
thou disputest against the truth.

The second sclaunder.
GOD has not only predestinat Adam to damnation, but to the causes of
damnation, whose fall he did not only foresee, but would it with an eternal
and secret decree, and ordained that he should fall, which that it might come
to pass in his time, he appointed an Apple the cause of the fall.

The censure of the Sycophant.
SO they say that the second Article is the Devils doctrine, and they require
of us Calvin, that we show them where it is written in the divine books.

THE REFVTATION.
IN patchyng of this sclaunder, thou have kept thine inclination, for thy self
have forged that thou brablest of Adam, predestinat to damnation. and of the
Apple that God set before him. These (I say) thou have impudentlye faygned,
that it shall not need to answer any thing to them. And how reverently and
religiously Calvin used to think and write of the fall of Adam, may appear
by these testimonies, which I have written out word for word, partly of his
Institutions of Christian Religion, and partly of his Book of eternal
Predestination. So depends the destruction of the reprobate (says he) of
the Predestination of God, that the cause and matter be found in themselves,
for the first man did fall, for that the Lord did so see it expedient. Why he
so determined, we know not, yet it is assured that he determined no
otherwise, but because he saw it good that the glory of his own name
should be advanced thereby. Where thou hear mention of the glory of GOD,
think there to be justice, for it must be just that deserves praise, man
therefore falls (Gods providence so ordeyning) but he falls through his
own fault.

The Lord had pronounced a little before, that all things that he made was
very good, whence therefore comes this wickedness to man, that he should
fall from his GOD? least it should he deemed to be by creation, God by his
word approved whatsoever had proceeded from him, therefore his own malice
corrupted the pure nature which he had received of the Lord, and by his
fall, enforced all his posterity to destruction with him, wherefore, we shall
rather see the apparante cause of damnation in the corrupt nature of man, than
seek out the secret, and wholly incomprehensible, in the predestination of
God.

Nor let it grieve us thus far to submit our judgment to the
immeasurable wisdom of God, that it sayleth in many of his secrets, for if
those things which is not permitted or lawful to know, the ignorance is
learned, the show of knowledge, is a kind of madness. These (Sicophant) be
Caluines words, which alone shall plentifullye suffice all governed wits, to
deface thy slander. But we will also add these of abundance, that your
impudency may more and more appear. There be (says he) three things to be
noted. First, the eternal predestination of God, to be firm and ratified,
whereby he determined, what should come to pass of all mankind, and of every
man before Adam fell. Then that Adam himself for the worthiness of his
defection, is inthralled to death: and finally in his person being now
desperate and a castaway, that all his progeny was so damned, that whom
afterward God did freely elect, he should dignifie with the honor of
Adoption. But also a little after in the same place, when (says he) there is
any speech had of Predestination. I have ever constantly taught, and this day
do teach, that there they must begin, that all the reprobate which are cast
away and damned in Adam, are worthelie left in death, that they perish
worthily, who are by nature the children of wrath, so that no man have cause to
complain of Gods too much severity, seeing that all men carry the
guiltiness shut up in themselves. If we return to the first man when he was
created innocente, that he fell willingly, and thereby that it came to pass,
that by his own fault, he brought upon him and his destruction. Now albeit
that Adam fell no otherwise than God knowying, and so ordeyning, he lost both
himself and his posterity, yet that makes nothing either to the deminishing
of his fault, or charging of God with the crime, for this is ever to be
considered, that he deprived him self of that innocence which he received
of GOD, he voluntaryly vowed himself into the bondage of sin and Satan:
willingly gave himself headlong to destruction. One excuse is pretended, that
he could not avoid that which was decreed of God. But volumtary transgression
suffiseth enough, and too much, to guiltiness: For the secret counsel of God
is not the proper and natural cause of sin, but the manifest will of man.
The foolish complaint of Medea is of the old Poet worthily derided, Vtinam ne
in nemore pelio etc. She being taken
with the surious love of a stranger and unknown man, betrayed her country,
when she was in her self guilty of infidelity, and barbarous cruelty, when
the scourge of inchastitie does afllict her: she foolishly turns her self to
causes a far off, when man finds within himself the cause of evil, what
avails it to wander that he may seek it in heaven? The fault is manifest,
in that, that he would sin: why does he (rushing into the passages of heaven)
drown himself in a Labarinth? Albeit that men wandering by infinite fetches
do endeavor to deceive themselves, they shall never so amase themselves, but
they shall receive the sense of sin graven in their hearts: ungodliness
therefore labors in vain to deliver man, whom his own conscience
condemns. And for that God wittingly, and willingly did suffer man to fall,
the cause may be secret, but unjust it cannot be. This is Caluines sentence
of Adams fall, which why it should displease thee thou should rather have
showed, then to have so impudently slaundred it: but there be two things
which you use to pretend, to the which, I will answer apart. First ye
complain, as you are men very religious, that by this means God becomes the
author of all sins, since by the fall of Adam all have succeeded, whose
offense is to be attributed unto him, if in deed Adam fell by his inevitable
decree. Then you require the express word of GOD, whereby that doctrine may
be ratified. That which belonggeth to the first, thou have heard already,
wherefore this thy consequence is naught worth, God ordained this, therefore
he is in the fault. Calvin shows a reason out of Augustine in these words.
This (says he) without controversy is to be holden, that God has ever hated
sin, for indeed this praise whereby he is glorified of David, is incident to
him, that he is a God that will no iniquity, but rather in ordeyning the fall
of man, he had a most excellent and just end, from which the very name of sin
is estraunged. Although I so affirm him to have ordained it, as I grant not
that he was the proper author thereof, do thou here (Sycophant) Calvin
excellently refuting that very blotte of blasphemy, which falsely and
maliciously you object against him? but yet these things satisfye thee not. Be
it so, for what may satisfye such envy, such madness, and such leawdenesse,
as this is? But yet indeed these things do (whether thou will or no)
sufficiently show what wickedness it is, to dare object ye to any man, which
he has plainly testified, that he hates as a most wicked blasphemy. But let
us yet bring more testimonies out of the same Book, ^ucharid. 2d Lauren. Cap.
^00.
least I be (says he) too tedious. I verily perceive that to have bin
accomplished that Augustine teaches. And these be the words of Augustine.
These be the great works of the Lord, sought out into all his wills, and so
wisely sought out, that when the Angelical and humane creature had sinned,
that is, had done not that which he would, but that it self would, even by
the same will of the creature, whereby that was done which the Creator would
not, he fulfilled that which he would, using well even the wicked as the
chief good, to their damnation, whom he had predestinate to pain, and to
their salvation, whom he lovingly predestinate to grace, for as much as
apperteyneth to themselves, they did that which God would not, but so much as
apperteyneth to the omnipotency of GOD, they were by no means able to do it,
surely even in that self thing which they did against the will of God, the
will of God is done of them, for therefore the great works of the Lord,
sought out into all his wills, that in a wonderful and unspeakable manner
that be not done beside his will, which also is done against his will,
because it should not be done if he did not suffer it, nor indeed does he
suffer against his will, but willingly. But also the said Augustine a little
before says, it is not to be doubted, Ibid. c ^. ^^.
that God does well in suffering to be done, whatsoever is evil done, for he
suffers not this, but by his just judgment. Albet therefore those things
that be evil, in that they are evil, they are not good, yet that they be not
only good, but evil, is good, for except this were good that they should even
be evil, they should by no means be suffered to be of the omnipotente good,
to whom without doubt, as it is easy to do what he will, so is like
easy, not to suffer that he will not, except we believe this, the very
beginning of our faith, whereby we profess our selves to believe in the
Almighty God, is endangered.

After that Calvin has cyted these, and many others, at the last he adds
these, that he might cross those sclaunderers which you have drawn out of
Pighius his puddles. If I had ever affirmed (says he) that it came to pass
by the instinct of the divine spirit, that the first manne should alienate
himself from God, and not rather every where affirm, enforced by the
instigation of the Devil, and the proper motion of his own heart, it might
be, that Pighius should worthily insult against me.

But now, when removing the nearest cause of the action from God, that I might
together remove from him all fault, that man alone may be under the offense,
he slauderously and wickedly wresteth upon me this saying: that the defection
of man is one of Gods works. And whereas by the ordinance, and foreknowledge
of God, it was decreed what should come to pass concerning man, yet is not
God to be drawn into the fellowship of ye fault, as either author, or alower
of the transgression, since it is manifest, that it is a secret, far beyond
the understanding of man's mind, least we shame to confess our ignorance. Yea
let not any of the faithful, sorrow to be ignorant of that which the Lord
deuoureth with the brightness of his improchable light. Furthermore, seeing
that Calvin has so plainly, not so written as reported out of Augustine, who
think thou will be so foolish that he would not note thine impudency, or
so mad to persuade himself, that you are moved with any care of godliness
to auouche the glory of God, which Augustine or Calvin would have withstoode?
but least we seem desirous to oppress you with the sole authority of the
name, if whatsoever is done by the ordinance of God, it be so done as if in
deed it be wickedly done, therefore God is to be drawn within the compass of
the fault, say I pray thee (that I may pass innumerable examples whereof we
will speak anon) how will thou excuse God in the most heinous wicked act of
all others which ever (I say) not only were done, but even imagined of men?
the betraying, the condemnation, the slanders, and finally I say the most
cruel death of the son of God. Now thou have to deal not with Augustine,
and Calvin or some other of their company, who are wise to the Church of God,
Act. 2.23.
foolish in your sight, but with Peter himself. For he plainly and openly (as
thou requirest) says, that Jesus was taken and crucified of the Jews, who was
betrayed by the determined counsel and providence of God. But what did the
whole Church at Jerusalem? In deed (says he) Herod and Pontius Pilate came
together against thine holy son Jesus, whom thou have anointed, that they
might do those things which thy hand, and thy counsel had determined to be
done. These be the words of the holy Ghost, speaking by Peter and the Apostles,
not that they might turn the fault of the wicked men upon God himself,
which wickedness we so detest, that it has never entered into our thought,
but that they might set against the sclaunder of the cross, that secret
council, and incredible love of God the father toward his. But do we speak
any other ways, or be you so wise, that you should think you can speak more
deuinely than the holy Ghost himself has spoken, or rather so shameless, and
even so wicked, as that you dare accuse that for blasphemy in any, whose
author even the spirit of God would advance. We say in deed that Adam fell
of his own free will, and by his own fault, and yet not by chance, but even
as the determined counsel, the providence, and hand of God had determined
that it should come to pass. These self things affirms Esaias of Christ who
in deed (he says) was stricken and wounded of the Lord for our iniquities,
when the wicked, both Jews and Romans considered nothing less. These things
does Peter express, the universal assembly of the most holy Church
confirms. Now show thou how that offense is worse than this, or grant
that we may use the speech of the Apostles without suspicion of blasphemy, or
invent new outscapes, that thou may go on to be like thy self.

It remains that I answer to the other which you use to seek, that is,
where it is written in the books of God, that Adam fell not without Gods
decree. In deed we marvel at this new Religion in an Academicall man, and
which denies the word of God, howsoever it be taken, to be sufficient to
deceive the controversies of Religion. But least we seem to retire, first I
ask of thee where thou have expressly read that the Angels were created of
God? Thou haste I think no place more manifest then that of John, ^^hn. 2.3.
that all things are made the eternal word of God, and without it to be made
nothing of those which be made. But why may not I by the like reason for
confirmation of that matter which is in question, bring that saying of Paul,
^^ph. ^.^2.
that God does all things for his wills sake? For thou must grant of
necessity that God has ever been the same. Then, seeing the same Apostle does
aptly witness, Romans 9.21.
that God like unto a Potter had ordained of one lump certain vessels to honor
and mercy, and certain to reproach and wrath, how will thou wreste this
saying, that thou maiste not ascend to the very workmanship of Adam? For the
name of lump does not agree with mankind created, but to be created much
less that by the name of a lump, should be understood mankind corrupted.
And I call that mankind to be created, not only that which God had not yet
in very deed created, but also he neither considered or beheld as created,
much less as corrupted. For if ye Apostle should have stayde in the sin or
corruption of Adam, as in the highest degree of all causes of election and
reprobation, that is, if he would this similitude to be understood of men
created, and the same depraved, either in very deed or by the foreknowledge of
God. Certes it could not have been said that God did make the vassals of
wrath, but that in miserable state those whom he foreknew would be, or which
already were the vassals of wrath. But so should ye whole proportion of the
similitude be frustrate, which if it hold not in this point, say I pray thee
wherefore Paul has used it, and tell us wherefore he has cried out so
vehemently, O man, who art thou? for if it should be so, why should they
complain of that which belongs to the vessels of mercy? but if on the
otherside corruption be the highest degree of causes, why should also the
Apostle take pains here? For to make the vassals of wrath were all one, as to
leave them in corruption, who of their own nature were borne so, there should
not be left to the reprobate any pretense of the least complaynt. And if there
had been any reason of this Divine judgment to be avouched, he ought to
have given this one, that God is not bound to show mercy to any. Why should
the Apostle exclayme here, and bid man reverence the secrets of the Divine
majesty without, searching further? for albeit that which many allege, that
Paul does not in that place dispute why some should be rejected, but why
these more then they, since like are due to the like, although peradventure it
be not spoken sufficiently to the purpose, yet it makes wonderfully against
you. For what shall ^e due both to the one and other but just condemnation, if
(as you will have it) their foreseen corruption did go before ye decree of God?
if thou think this too dark, go to, let us set down some familiar
similitude, that we may be at thy commandment. If a creditour that has two
equally in debted to him, forgive to the one the debt he owes, which he
requires of ye other, who indeed will not say he is mad, if he say he has
injury done him, because he is more hardly dealt with then the other? if any
king of two equally imprisoned for one offense, do show mercy to the one, and
execute ye other, shall their therefore be in ye judge any show of iniquity,
because he does punish him? yea if there were here any iniquity, it should not
be in that that he punishes him, but in this rather that he should not punish
the other also equally wicked. Therefore if this had been the determinate
purpose of ye Apostle, he should not have avouched the justice of God in the
destruction of the reprobate, but rather in the safeguard of the elect, which
things since they are so, thou see ye wheresoever thou turnest thee, thou
can not avoid, but that thou art enforced to confess, that God is compared
to a potter, in whose sight was the clay whereof he would make in time the
vassals, both of honor, and dishonor, because so it was his will, then the
which there is nothing more just. But say, how did he make them? verily in
Adam, whose creation also the Apostle undoubtedly considered, when he mentioned
the Potter and the Clay. Furthermore, how are the vassals ordained in Adam,
some to mercy and honor, and some to wrath and reproach? truly not without
the voluntary fall of Adam coming betwixt, for except by his own will,
albeit by the ordinance of God, yet without all fault of God, Adam should
have fallen, there had neither place bin left for mercy, nor for judgment,
and therefore the council of God should have bin to no purpose. Confess
therefore by this place of the Apostle, that it is God which has made the
vassals of wrath and mercy, and therefore has justly ordained the necessary
causes to that end, except thou had rather accuse God of ignorance and
rashness, or ymagine the Potter to depend upon the clay, and not the
contrary, that the Potter forms the Clay, so as it pleases him, that it may
come to the appointed end. Furthermore when Paul says, that God has included
all under disobediente, Romans 11.32. Genesis 3.22.
that he might have mercy on all, that is to say, which shall believe (as the
same Apostle expresses in another place) and therefore which were elected.
Think thou not that he does ascend even to the very fountain of
disobedience, that is, to the fall of Adam, when he shall come to that point
that he cries, Oh the depth of Gods judgments? But these in deed seem not
to the sufficiently manifest, for thou would that a place should be set
down, wherein God should be said manifestly, and in plain words, to have
willed and decreed, that Adam should fall, but I ask again, where thou can
find in the Scriptures (so as thou requirest) the drunkenness of Noe and Lot
expreslye condemned, and also his incest, the lie of Isaac in Gerar, the
manslaughter of Simeon and Leuy, the malice and whoredom of Judah, the poligamy
of Abraham, and many others, the evil and very wicked judgment of David,
whereby he punished Myphiboseth, the son of a most loving man, with the loss
of half his goods, and enricheth Siba a wicked betrayer of his master, as
for a good act, with great rewards, these I say, and innumerable the like, I
ask where thou can find condemned in plain and proper words? surely I
fear thou can find it in no place, and will thou therefore think that
these are not to be condemned? I think thou will not, except it be that thou
deemest a man may dispute of Poligamy on either part, that hear also thou
may retain the custom of Academians? Shall it be lawful to add or to
de^ract any thing from the divine doctrine? no indeed, but doctrine is to be
distinguished from examples, which be but as it were hangers on of the
doctrine: In that highest Religion this is to be observed, that we wholly
depend upon the written word of God. But if we desire to know what is set
before us in examples, either to be allowed or rejected, certain general
positions are to be compared with that, whereof the question is, albeit the
Scripture, in the very report of examples, does not always express it, for
proof sake, albeit those factes, whereof we have spoken, are not manifestly
condemned in the report of the^, yet because the word of God does manifestly
forbid drunkenness, incest, lies, mankillings, whoredoms, deceyptes, wicked
judgments, and finallye the having of many wives, since the Lord has said
from the beginning of two, and they shall be one flesh, we shall not doubt that
they all are reprehe^ded as sins, whereto even the most excellent men were
inthralled. But since thou can not deny these, how is it that when we come to
that history of Adam, wherein is described his fall, thou will not follow this
order, but requirest the express sentence of God. For, thou will say,
because it is far from the nature of God, to constitute that which is evil,
so much the more that self thing which is the fountain of all evil. But we
have already showed before, that God does ordeyne justly those things which
men do unjustly, that God (I say) does well use a sinning instrument, for God
considers one thing, that is, his own glory, for which he has made even the
wicked, as Solomon says, but the froward will of Satan, and wicked men
promises it self another thing. So it comes to pass, that in one self
work God is just, Satan wicked, and men unrighteous. That thou may
understand this, set we before us this self example of Adam. When God
would make man for the manifesting of the glory both of his mercy and
justice, as the issue of the matter shows, and the Apostle sets before us,
under the example of the Potter. He made Adam to his own similitude, that is,
holy and innocente, as the same Apostle expounds. But why did he that? truly
because, that since he is good, nothing can be created of him that is wicked.
But it is requisite that they be depraved, both of whom he has determined to
show mercy, and also, whom for his glories sake he has decreed justly to
condemn, then because albeit he could have created that which was defiled,
yet if he had created any defiled thing, he could not justly condemn his
own work. Therefore (I say) it was needful that Adam should be created
holy and innocente, that he which of his own free will, without any fault
of God, became defiled, should open the way to Gods eternal counsels, that
is, to the manifesting both of his mercy and justice. It was therefore
requisite that God should open this only way to himself, that is, ordeyne
the fall of Adam, but to that end which I said, which seeing it is most
just and holy, it follows, that his ordinance is also just. But Satan in
the mean while unwittingly serving the determination of God, what does he
indeauoure? truly being inflamed with the hatred of God, and boiling with
envy, he labors so deface that excellent work of God, But what does
Adam, and Eve? truly they do violently thrust down even God himself as a
liar and envious, from the throne of his deytie. The Serpente therefore, and
Adam and Eve are worthily punished, who were so the instruments of God, that
so much as in them lay, they were not obediente to him, but rather conspired
against him, yet manifested the way to his eternal and just council. The
beginning of sin is to be sought in the voluntary moving of the
instruments, whereby it comes to pass, that God has justly decreede that
which they unjustly did, as we before alleged out of Augustine. But yet
thou will say, they could not resist the will, that is, the decree of God. I
grant, but as they could not, s^ also they would not, but they could not
otherwise will. I grant, in respect of the issue, and (...) efficacy, but
yet the will of Adam was not forced, yea he assented unto sin, not only with
wylling, but free motion, when his (...) his strength was not subject to the
bondage of sin. But these thou will say, do not yet satisfye me, I
grant that to, but who art thou, who acknowledgest no Justice or Wisdom in
GOD, except whereof thou may perceive the reason? why do thou not rather
enquire who thy self art, and reverence the goodness of God in fallen and
corrupted Adam? Adam is fallen willingly, that God decrees is just, if these
two do not satisfy thee, that thou place all the offense in Adam being fallen,
the Apostle pronounces thee unworthy with whom a man should dispute any more,
because thou neither know who God is, nor who thou art thy self. But go
to, at the last let us strike sail. I have showed what rule we must follow in
weying examples. I also have showed, that here is no blasphemy which thou
may fear. It remains that I show out of what Chapters of Christian
doctrine it may evidently appear to be true that we affirm, that is, that
Adam fell neither by chance, or God not knowing of it, or ydlely suffering it
to be so, and much less against his will. This therefore (I say) is confirmed
by all those places of Scripture, where is affirmed, that there is no rashness
with God that is omnipotent: that God has not only made all things, but also
does govern them: that God cares, and has ever cared for men: that there is
nothing secret to God: that God is not changed, nor moved with repentance,
albeit the Scripture does sometimes speak so, that it may as it were maffle
with us, all these (I say) thou must either refute as false, or confess that
which we affirm, and I have repeated already a thousand times, that is, that
Adam has fallen, God not only foreknowing, but also justly ordeyning and
decreeing it, for if before the workmanship of man he did deliberate wherefore
he would make man, he did rashly and unadvisedly. If he decreed another thing
then that which came to pass, he is either not almighty, whose councels Satan
has infringed, or inco^stant, which changes his purpose. Behold Sycophant,
more manifest testimonies of Scripture as I think, than thou would, and
many more than thou look for, but that is almost incredible, that thou, who
so carefully be thynkest how thou may support the justice of God, that is
to say, staggering, and in danger to fall, did never consider how weak
that is whereto thou leanest, albeit we should grant it thee. For I pray thee
(if thou please to examine this divine wisdom by the rule of man's
judgment) how shall God be without fault, if man so left by his
determination, and prostitute to the fraud of Satan, that the workemaister
did idly from Heaven see him fall, who yet could have vpholden him with his
only beck when he was falling, nor had any cause why he should hate him? Thou
see (I think) into what dangerous downefalles they of necessity plunge
themselves, whosoever like Giants had rather practice a way to heaven, than to
rest upon the simple word of God, by which we understand that God is in Heaven,
who does whatsoever pleases him, and does all things justly, albeit our
flesh determine otherwise. For because he is God, he can not be unjust, and
he is in such wise just, as that his justice surpasses all our understanding.

The third sclauuder.
THE sins that are committed, are done, not only by his sufferance, but also
by his will, for it is frivolous to assign a difference betwixt the
sufferance and will of God, for as much as perteyneth to him, whosoever does
this, will pacify God with smooth speeches and flattery.

THE AVNSVVERE.
NOw at the last we are come to that, whereof you are wont to triumph, as
though we did make God the author of sin, for of the twelve Articles which
remain, I see them pertayne to this one purpose, that is to the end you may
seem in a matter never so absurd, and of it self almost incredible, to
imagine no falsehoode, especially to those men who have not either leisure or
will enough to read our writings. But so I trust I shall answer that all
men though very unlearned or else thy very friends in nothing more then this
one may easily perceive thine impudency and ignorance. For seeing their be
two sorts of men which urge against us this blemishe: one of them which
confess in deed that we do not say so, but that yet we set down those things
of which it is necessarily gathered: and the other of them who are not ashamed
to say and write, that we plainly affirm this same, it shall be sufficient to
teach those that they knew not, but in deed the shameless impude^cie of
these is worthy to be more sharply suppressed. Yet I will do my best that all
men may see that I rather weigh what may be come us then thee. Seeing therefore
there be only two things whereby men may be decerned of men, that is to say,
deeds and words, under which also I comprehend writings, say I pray thee,
if thou can, that the demenours of Calvin or any of us be such, as that the
least suspicion of such blasphemy may fall upon us. For he must not only be
alyed to some one small fault, or crime, which should amoue all difference
betwirte good and evil, filthiness, and honesty: but utterly given over to
all wickedness, and wonderfully practiced, without all shame, in every kind
of mischief, even so much, that as the Logitians say, (...) affection has
proceeded in (...) into an habit. But that we may confess our selves
willingly, and of our own accord to be by almost infinite distaunce far
from that perfection which thou dreamest, yet by Gods benefit so have we lived
to this present day in the Church of God, that (which I wish be spoken
without all show of boastyng) no man has yet been found, which has thought
our lyse worthy his reproof, of whom all good men had rather not be
reprehended then praised.

And truly I think, thou shall not persuade any wise man, that it can be
possible, that if we were in that opinid, that we should think that (God
being the author) we might sin unpunished, having willingly left our cout^y,
and despised those things which most men be in love withal, and finally not
regardyng all those things whose assistance they seek, for who have determined
to walow themselves in the filthe of pleasures, we had rather almost, in the
sight of the whole world, endure what so ever miseries, amongst which I
account this the chief, that we have continual conflicts with like monsters
as thou art: had rather (I say) suffer al these calamities so many years, and
to procure the cruelty of all men against us then yield to those things,
whereto not only nature it self, but also self will and reason would draw us.
But that which appertains the writings of Calvin, whom alone before others
you think you must gnawe upon, how am I afraid (good man) cast with this your
fact, you will most co^sirme to us yt very same doctrine, which you fight
against. For what wise man think thou, who when he shall read but the very
titles of Caluines books, and shall know that you lay to his charge this
sclaunder, will not straight way think that all memozie and reason is quite
taken from you, by Gods just judgment? For what furious madness is this to
attribute this Heresy to Calvin, which being in our memory renewed of the
Libertines, your selves well knowing it, yea even thy self (Sycophant) being
conversant in the same City, and it may be in the same house, he has so
vehemently and plentifully refuted? Therefore that it may be evidently seen
even of all blind men what is your security, impudency, and leawdenesse,
that it may appear to men and Angels, what wrong you do, not so much to
Calvin or our Churches, as to the very truth of God, and lastly, that all at
once may understand what is our judgment of these things, go to, let us
hear with how strong, how true, and how sound arguments, even eleven years
ago, he has refuted in his book written and published this blasphemy of the
Libertines, and those self offenses, which you shame not to object to the
faithful servant of God, hear therefore (Sycophant) how true it is that
Calvin makes God the author of sin.

Four Chapters gathered out of Caluines Book against the Libertines.
OF the opinion of the Libertines, whereby they think that the alone immortal
Spirit does all things, which poison lurketh under this sentence.

Chap. xiij.
AFter they have ymagined the alone spirit, according to their own will, when
they have destroyed and abolished the natures, both of Angels, of Devils, and
also of souls, they say that this Spirit does all things, not that they may
signify that which the Scripture teaches of him, saying, all creatures,
Ephesians. 1.
as they do remain in him, that so they are governed of him, and are subject
to his providence, and that every one in his order is obediente to his will,
but that whatsoever is in the world, must directly be judged his work. So they
attribute no will unto man, as if he were a stone, and they take away all
difference of good and evil, that by their iudgenie^t nothing can be done
wickedly, seeing God is author of all things, but that the matter may be
showed more apparently, I will set down some example of their iangling. When
that Swyne Quintinus once as it was came into a place, where one did lie
slain, and a certain godly man was there present, who said for very horror,
woe is me, who has done this wicked act? he answered by and by in his
Picardian tongue, I, if thou will know, have done it. Then the other, as one
astonished, said, have thou, art thou so wicked? Quintinus answers, I am not
he, but it is God. How says ye other, are ye offenses to be imputed to God
which he commands to be punished? Then began this filthy fellow the more to
vomit out his poison, saying, so ye matter stands, thou thy self have
committed it, I have committed it, God has committed it. For that which I and
thou do, God does, also what God does we do, for he is in us. This being
granted, this sin should be imputed to God: or it is to be concluded, that
there is no sin done in the world, since there is nothing which is not made of
God, so all difference of good and evil is taken away, whereon it will follow
that we may not reprove any thing as evil, seeing all be the works of God,
and it shall be lawful for men, as it were with reins let loose, to do
whatsoever comes in their mind, not only because we are without the danger of
sinning, but also because to restreyne any desire, is to hinder God. For
example, has one committed whoredom? he is not to be blamed, for there
should be enforced blasphemy against God. Has some one desired his
neighbors wife? let him have her if he can, for he knows certaynely that he
does nothing but the will of God. That apperteyneth to riches, he that can get
them by force, or by any crafty means, let him do it boldly, for he shall
undertake nothing which is not allowed of God. He that has violently taken
whatsoever he could, let him not much trouble himself about restoring of
them, for it is not beseting that God should be corrected.

The some turn these five speculatio^s to their profit, for whatsoever it be,
they will neither that themselves be touched, nor that God whom they immagine,
do any thing that may be hurt to them. If any one have suffered detrimente
against himself, or loss of goods, they laugh, and say, that all those be
excellent, even that they contend with God, who accuse the authors of
michiefe, but if their least finger be never so little touched, forgetful of
these fine reasons, they break out into choler, and are not more vehemently
chafed against any.

Here I will set down a pleasant History, whereby I will show what these
dotages do them good, when they have most need.

There was at Paris a certain Cobbler so forced with the poison of this sect,
that he judged nothing to be evil.

It came to pass, that when he would on a time visit Stephanus a Fabrica,
with whom he had some dealing, and found him sad for his servant,
which having run from him, had taken with him certain money, but the
chief cause of his heaviness was, that he feared, least he should in some
other place abuse his name amongst his Chapmen. The Cobbler asked what was
amiss with him, he aunsooered in three words (as he was a man of few
words) incontinente the cobbler exalting himself, as if with displayed wings,
he would fly above the Clouds, he reproved Stephanus as blaspheming God, for
that he called his work wickedness, and because GOD did all things, nothing
is to be judged evil. Stephanus knowing that he could profit nothing by
reasoning with him, in one word he cut of his talk.

Within few days after it came to pass, as God would, that a certain
servant committed theft against this smatering Philosophical Cobbler, he
as one half mad, running this way and that way, desired in great have, to
hear somewhat of his Servant.

When he could not find the man, he came to Stephanus his house, that with
howling and complaining he might ease his mind, now he began to cast
upon that thief, heaps of raylings, and was proceeding further. When
Stephanus thus interrupted his talk, what? (says he) is it good to
blaspheme? or may we accuse God? if he have done this, he is rather to be
praised, the frantike fellow being auercome with his words, which himself
had used before, and being stricken with shame, he departed, and yet for
all that he repented not.

By this example we are taught, how the Lord does confound those mad
men, with experience it self, and yet that does not profit them, whereby
they should the less frowardlye continue in their madness, for they are
possessed of the Devil, which does not suffer them to see those things
which are laid before their eyes. Then is to be noted, that there follow of
this article three execrable evils.

The first evil is this, that this granted, there shall be no difference
betwixt God and the Devil, as also in very deed the God which they immagine
unto us, is an Idol, worse than the Devils themselves. Another, that men shall
any more be moned with no conscience to shun evil, but as beasts, having no
difference of things, shall follow their own appetite. The third, that no man
shall now dare to judge of any thing, but all things must be allowed,
whoredoms, murders, theftes, and the greatest offenses of all shall be taken
for laudable exploytes. That this article may better be dealt withal, I must
treat in order of these three, which I said would follow, and then their
foundation being overthrown which they abuse, must be refuted.

HOW the providence of God, whereby he does all things, is to be considered:
how the Libertines speaking of it, confound all things, which is the first
consequence of the abouesaide Article.

Chap. xiiij.
WEdenie not, but all things are done by the will of God, and so much the
more, when we declare why he is called Almighty, Genesis. 4.
we attribute unto him an effectual power in all creatures, and teach, that
having once created the universal world, he also does so govern the same, and
has ever his hand ready in the work, that he may keep all things in their
estate, and dispose them according to his will. That I may more easily express
what this means, I say, that we must consider that God does work three
manner of ways in the universal goernement. For first, there is an universal
working, whereby he directs all creatures according to the state and
property which he has given to every of them, when he created them. This
governance is nothing else than that which we call the order of nature. For
whilst the infidels due acknowledge nothing in the disposition of the world,
but that they see with their eyes, and therefore constitute nature as it were a
Goddess which should rule and govern all things: this glory is to be given
to the will of God, that it alone guydeth and rules all things. Wherefore,
when we see the Sun, the Moon, and Stars perform their course, let us
think that they obey God, that they execute his commandments: and not that
only, but that they are governed with Gods hand, and that all things are done
by his power. So when we behold the course of earthly things, al things to be
attributed to God, but the creatures are to be judged as instruments in his
band, which he will apply to the work, howsoever it pleases him. The
Scripture oftentimes touches this universal providence, that we may learn to
give glory to God in all his works. And God especially commends to us this
his power, that we may acknowledge the same in our selves, to the end we may
be rid from arrogancy, which, so soon as we forget that we be in his hand,
does use by and by to surmount in us. To this it is that Paul said at
Athens. In him we live, move, and have our being: Act. 17.
for he does testify unto them, that except he do sustain us with his hand,
for never so little moment of time we can not continue, seeing we remain in him:
and as the soul disperseth his power through all the body, does enforce the
members: that so we be quickened of God, of whom we obtain, whatsoever
strength and ability is in us. Yet this universal working of God, does not
let but that all creatures both in heaven and earth, may receive their
quality and nature, and follow their proper inclination. The other way whereby
God works in his creatures, is that he compels them to the obedience of
his goodness, justice, and judgment: even as be will now help his
servant, now punish the guilty, now try the patience of the faithful,
or chasten them with a fatherly affection. So when he will bestow abundance
of fruytes, he gives Raynes in his time, sends warmth by his Sun, and
lightsome and sayre days: then also he uses other natural means as
instruments of his loving kindness. But when he does withdraw his hand unto
himself, the heaven becomes as it were brassie, the earth as ironie.
Therefore it is he that makes Thunders, Froste, Hayles, and Tempests, and he
causes barra^nesse. Therefore whatsoever the Ethniques and ignorant attribute
to fortune, we must ascribe to ye divine providence: not so much to that
universal power, whereof we have spoken, but to his special moderation whereby
he governs al things, Esa. 45.
as seems best and most to his glory. And that he teaches, when he says by
the prophets, that he creates light and darkness, sends lyse and death:
that nothing good or evil comes but from his hand: in so much that he says
that he governs also lots, and other things which seem casual. Prou. 16.
But if some one be casually slain not by fore practice, that he is cause of
his death, and has so appointed, least we should deny any to fall by
chance, but all things by the determination of his counsel. And he is
vehemently offended, when we think that any thing ro^meth from other where,
and do not look upon him, that we may acknowledge him, not only as the
principal cause of all, but also as the Author, determinyng by this or that
mean all things by his counsel. So therefore let us conclude, that as well
prosperity as adversity, Raynes, Winds, Hayles, Froste, Brightness,
Abundance, Famine, War, and Peace are the works of God, and that the
creatures, which be inferior causes, be only instruments which he has in
use to execute his will: and therefore vieth the^ at his pleasure, turns those
things which way soever it pleases him, and brings them to that pass, that
that undoubtedly may be done which he has determined. There is further to be
noted, that he uses not only senseless creatures in this sort, that by the^
be may work and perform his will, but even men themselves and also the Devil.
In so much that even Satan and the wicked are executers of the Divine will.
Even as he used the Egyptians to afflict his people: and a little while after he
stirred up the Assyrians, and others like, that he might punish their
offenses. We see he used the Devil that he might torment Saul, deceive Achab,
and when need is to exercise his judgments against all the wicked, or on the
otherside to prove the constancy of his own people: whereof Job is an example
unto us. Which things when the Libertines here, rashly and unadvisedly
breakyng out, nor lookyng any further, they conclude, that the creatures do
nothing else. So they horribly confound all things. For they confound not
only heaven with earth, but God with the Devil. And that comes so to pass,
because they observe not two exceptions much necessary. The first is, that
Satan and the wicked are not so Gods instruments, but they also play there
own parts. For we must not so immagine, that GOD works so by a wicked
manne, as by a stone or block: but as by a reasonable creature, according to
the quality of nature, which he has given him. When therefore we say that God
works by creatures, that booteth not why the wicked for there part should
not work too, Esaias. 5.
which also the Scripture does manifestly show. For as it pronounces that
GOD will hysse, and as it were sound with a Trumpette, that he may bring
out the Infidelles to battle, that he will barden and inflame their hearts: so
it ceasseth not to show their own counsel, and of what will they are, and
ascribes unto them that work, which by Gods decree they execute. The other
exception, whereof these unhappy men have no understanding, is this. That there
is great odds betwirt the work of God, and the work of a wicked man, sich
God uses him but insteede of an instrument. The wicked is incited to his work
with his covetousness, or ambition, or envy, or cruelty, and he regards no
other end. Therefore of that root, that is of the affection of mind and end
which he respects, the work takes his quality, and is worthily judged
cuill. But God has altogether respect of contrary things: that is to wit,
that he may exercise his justice to befend the good, that he may use his grace
and mercy toward the faithful, and correct those that deserve evil. See in
what sort we must discern betwirt God and men, that hence we may behold in
the self work his suffice, goodness, and judgment: thence the malice of the
Devil and Infidels: but let us take an excellent and lightsome glass, wherein
we may behold these: When word was brought to Job of so great loss of his
goods, of the death of his children, and of so many ^uils which vefell him: he
acknowledged that God did vid visits him, saying: the Lord has given me all
these things, and he has taken them. And in deed so the truth was, but in the
mean time, did be not know that the Devil did cause this evil upon?
understood he not that the Chaldees had briuen away his heardes and cattle?
did he commend those robbers and theenes? or did he excuse the Devil, because
that affliction came out from God? No I trow. For he understood that there was
great difference in these things. Therefore condemning evil, he said. Blessed
be the name of the Lord. In like so David, when Srmei did persecute him, he
said he received it from God: and he saw that that wicked wretch was a rod,
wherewith God did chasten him: but praising God, he does not therefore
afterward less condemn Semel. But I must yet deal of this in an other
place. Let this now be sufficient to hold, that God works so by his
creatures, and so uses them to serve his prouivece, that the instrument
whereby he works, cease not to be evil: and because that he turns the
wickedness of the Devil, and ungodly men, into good, therefore they be not
cleared or excused by that they sin not, and their works wicked and to be
damned, for all take their quality of the purpose and will of the Author. Who
so therefore distinguish not these things, do ouerturne all things as twine
with their snoute, and do disturb those things with horrible confusion which
are set in an excellent order. Such be the Libertynes, which not only
conioyne in fellowship, the Devil with God, but also transform him into God:
denying by this pretense his works to be commendable, because he does nothing
but that which is appointed of God. But this Heresy, (if we give credit to
the ancient Doctors) took his beginning of Simon Magus: We of the contrary
parie must observe, that the creatures in earth, do their works in their
degree, which as they shall be done to that or this end, so are they to be
taken to be good or evil. In the mean time, God governs and disposes all
things, and directs them to a perfect end: he turns evil into good, or at
the least, working after the goodness of his own nature, he enforces some
goodness, out of that which is evil, he so uses the Devil, that he does
not mingle himself with him, whereby he may have any thing common with him, or
be entangled as conjoined in the society of evil, or with his justice take
away the nature of evil. For as the Sun sendyng forth his beams into a dead
carcass, and ingendryng certain corruption therein, draws nothing corrupt
or impure to it self: nor causes by the pureness of it, whereby the carcass
is the less corrupt and filthy: so God works by the wicked in such sort,
that the justice which is in him, shall not justify them, nor be defiled with
their naughtiness and corruption.

The third kind of divine working stands in the governing of the faithful,
in whom he lives and reigns by his Spirit. For as much as we are depraved
with original sin, we are very like to barren and dry earth, bringing for
the no good fruit at all, for corrupt is our judgment, our will disobedient
to God, prone and ready unto evil, and finally all our nature is defiled,
which seeing it is so, we can not only not enforce our minds to good things,
but that which more is, we are not apt to think one good thought, but (as
Paul says) if we are any thing apt, it is of necessity that that come from
him. Therefore it is he that works in us to will and perform, which
lighteneth us, that he may bring us to the knowledge of himself, he draws us
to him, forms new hearts in us, mollifying our hardness. He himself it
is which breaths into us an affection of praying, imparteth power and
strength, to resist all the temptations of Satan, and causes us to walk in
his precepts. But by the way is to be noted, that we have choice and will by
nature, but because both of them are depraved with sin, the Lord does
reform them, and of evil does make them good, therefore because we are apt
to discern, for that we will, for that we do this or that, it is a natural
gift, but in that we can make choice of desire, or do no other thing but
evil, that is by the corruption of sin.

In that we desire to do well, and be endued with power to perform it, that
comes by supernatural grace, whereby we are regenerate te a better, and
indeed divine life. Behold therefore what God works in his children, that
is, taking away their crooked nature, he directs them with his Spirit, to
the performance of his will. But these frantike fellows, crying out with
force, that God does all things, do make him the author of evil, and then as
though the nature of evil were changed, whilst it is covered under this veil
of the name of God, they affirm it to be good, wherein they do more violente
and wicked sclaunder against God, than if they should transfer his power
and justice some other where, for seeing there is nothing more proper to God
than his goodness, it must needs be that he be denied of hymsclfe, and be
changed into a Devil, that he might work wickedness, which thing is
attributed unto him of these. And in deed there God is an Idol, which is
more execrable to us, than the Idols of the Gentiles. But (as they say) they
suppose they have well washed their hands, when they answer, that they
affirm all things to be well, seeing they are done of GOD, as though it were
in their power to change black into whighte. In deed they have done worthily,
if, after they have called God spoyler, thief, and whoremonger, they add,
that there is utterly in these none evil. But who has condemned murder,
whoredom, robberies, and theftes, except GOD? So truly of us he must be
reproved of a lie, that we might excuse his works. But the Schripture (say
they) does universally pronounce, that GOD works all in all. I answer,
that they leawdely and falsely apply the Scripture to that, for when Paul
uses this sentence, he only speaks of the graces of the holy Ghost. And
that the very place does sufficientlye witness, in which Paul admonishes
the Corinthians, that they use them well, 1. Cor^^.
seeing they are the gifts of God: for because, as he says, no man can allege
one word to the glory of Christ, except he that speaks by the holy Ghost,
from whom al good things proceed. And verily what appertains to good, let us
willingly condiscende ye it may be wholly attributed to God. But how will they
show that evil comes of God? where will they show that God steals in the
thief? in the spoyler and murderer to sley the innocent? Therefore these
pretenses do not only not purge their blasphemies, but do vehemently increase
them, and make them twice more grievous.

OF the other consequence which follows of that, God does all things: that
is, that no man ought to be moved any more with the ^nscience of any thing.

Chap xv.
WE have showed before, that if all things are to be attributed to God, as the
Libertynes will, and man may be said to do nothing, it will come to pass
that we shall be moved with the conscience of nothing. For that should not be to
audyde sin, but rather to do again the work of God. Nor do I only say,
that that may be gathered of their former speech, last we should contend in
disputing whether that were there meaning or no: but I say, that self thing
which themselves confess. And so much the rather they especially determine
that thing with themselves, that they may bedasle consciences, to the end that
men void of al care, might accomplish whatsoever came in place, and whatsoever
they desired, as if God had given his law in vain, whereby good might be
discerned from evil. But I ask this one thing of them, whether we have not in
the law the declaration of the Divine will? but by that God has pronounced
that whoredom, theft, murder, and as it follows, covetousness, hatred,
envy, ambition, and others of like forte do displease him. Now if they may
be said to be acceptable to him, is he not teproued of a lie? Moses
witnesses, that the law was given, that we might learn to serve God, to
stick to him, and to obey his will, least we provoke his wrath against us
with our sins. These miserable men do endeavor this, that they may find out
in us the like thoughts. And least we should conceive any thing, they bind up
our eyes with this swathing band: that is, that all things are done by the
will of God: and therefore that nothing does displease him as if God were
mutable, and agreed not with himself, or a dissembler, affirming that he
hates and detesteth that, which yet he lusts and aloweth. For this says
Paul, the wrath of God comes upon the unbelievers. Ye make sad the Spirit
of God, says Isay. You have been burthenouse to me says the Lord in an other
place. 2. Reg. 24.
Also the Lord is vehemently angry with, and his displeasure is inflamed
against Israel. I know in deed that God is not subject to men's affections:
but all these speeches do signify, that he disaloweth and condemns evil:
and that therefore sin is the cause of enmities twixt us and him: and that
we can not, so long as we do evil, agree with him, that rather we may look
for correction and reuengement, seeing he is a just indge, who ca^ suffer no
iniquity. We almost read in the whole Scripture nothing else, but these
exhortations, Fear the Lord: take heed thou offend him not: takeheede and
avoid evil. But these mad men do exclayme the contrary, that it is foolish
to fear least we offend him, since we do nothing either good or evil, Romans 2.
but he works all things in us. Paul says that the very Gentiles wanting
both Scriptures and doctrine, have the law written in their hearts, that is a
conscience, wherewith they either defend or accuse themselves before God.
These evil disposed men, endeavor to deface it, denying that there is any thing
whereof we may be accused, seeing all things are done of God. How should they
shame to peruerte the Scriptures, when they dare doc so much, yt they fear not
to deface that persuasi^ naturally infixed, and printed in our minds of God?
if for the excusing of our selves, we would allege ignorance, God sends us
to our conscience, which can abunda^tly teffifie against us. But these mad
men, having suppressed this testimony, say that God ought first to accuse
himself, if he will intend any accusation against us, seeing he works all
things in us. Moses calls yt a root bringyng forth gall and. Wormwood,
Deuteronomy. 29.
when with starterings we endeavor to suppress al rentorse of conscience, and
so deceive our selves, that we should think wickedness to be sport. An in
very deed what poison ra^ be more deadly and pestilent in all the world? Also
he calls that to join drunkenness to thirst, Dent. 29.
and by good right: for our natural affection is an inordinate appetite, and as
it were a thirst to do wickedly, When therefore we bless our selves (as he
says in that place) and persuado our selves that we shall have peace, so long
as we live loosely and wickedly: that is even so as, as if one vehemently
inflamed with thirste, should make himself drunk with wine, least he should
any more be moved with any sense, when he ought rather to have brydled and
repressed I is thirste with sobriety and abstinencie. An excellent place truly
for our instruction: that we may understand what poison lurketh under the
honey, which these unlucky men deliver unto us. Yet notwithstanding they
continually apply themselves to this outscape, that there is utterly nothing
done besides the will of God. But I answer, that, for that belongs to the
works that we do, Gods will is to be considered of us in such forte, as
himself declares the same. As, for example, when he commands every thing
to be kept to his proper owuer: that loss and injury be not done to any:
there bys will is evident. What therefore may please him further ought not to
be searched, for we know that if we do that, we shall obey his will: but if
not, we shall not be accepted of him.

If any therefore should steal, and say then that he has done nothing besides
the will of God, he lies impudently, seeing he has transgressed the
commandment of God, in the which he was given to understand of it. Some one
will ask whether any thing can be done against the will of God: I grant their
can not. But we must utterly take heed that we inquire not of his providence,
which is unknown to us: sith we know what he requires of us, what he
aloweth, or what be condemns. Solomon affirms not without cause that it
will come to pass, Prou 15.
that he shall be confounded of the glory that searches the majesty. And of
truth, it is for ever necessary that it fall out so, and that this way the
arrogancy of the proud be punished. That we have by experience in these, who
when they will clyme above the clouds, that they may search out the will of
God, when they are not contented with the revelation which is set bowne
thereof in the Scriptures, they run headlong into so absurd and beastly
dotages, as is horrible both to be spoken and heard.

OF the third onsequence which the Libertines draw out of this proposition,
God does all things: that is, that it is not lawful to reprove any thing.

Chap. xvi.
AFter they have so let louse the raynes to al, as they suffer every one to
live as he list, by this cullor, that they suffer themselves to be governed of
God, from the same ground they gather that it is wickedly done if he be judged
for any matter. But they ca^ have no sitter doctrine, whereby they may make way
to their abominations. For they have gained much, when they have closed or
rather shut up yt eyes of their auditors, that no man dare any more judge,
whether their sayings and doings be good or evil. But if we grant them this,
whereto is this sentence of God, whereby he curses all those that call evil
good? See how God denounces all things to us cursed and unfortunate, if we
hold that be good, which he ^udgeth evil. These on the other side suffer
nothing at all to be condemned. If they were above God himself, that they
might remitte the punishment which he threatens, it might be there were some
place of pause: but who would be condemned of God, that he might be absolved of
Quintinus? when they will set this article abroache, they use these words, A
Christian ought to use all things to his commodity. For as I have said from
the beginning, they never speak simply and plainly, as they may apparently
express that they have conceived in mind, but do entangle the matter with
crooked shifts.

I willingly in deed yield unto them that, that a Christian ought (as he
says) to take every thing to profit: but in that sense that the Seripture
teaches, that is, that in adversity he may call to remembrance that which
Paul says, that the faithful are afflicted for this cause, that they may be
conformed to the Image of Christ, and so let afflictions be a help to
them, to obtain salvation and let that consolation sustain them. If he see
his brother slide or go astray, let it be to him in steed of a glass, to the
end that knowing the infirmity of man's nature, he may walk in the more
fear. But if it be so that himself fall, let him thereby be admonished of
his own imbecillitie, that he may distrust his own strength, and be made more
humble, and lay aside all arrogancy, and let it be to him as a spur,
whereby he may be furthered to call upon God with more feruente inuocations.
See how Christians turn all things to their commoditte, not that they may
delight themselves in their sins, or shut their eyes, least they may behold
that which is evil, but rather that being heavy and sorrowful, because they
may see that God is offended both of themselves and others, they may be
prepared to repentance, humility, and the fear of God, and that they may be
careful that they may take heed to themselves in time to come. After this
sort David gathered commodity by the fault that he had committed, not in any
respect justifying himself, but when he heard his condemnation more and more,
confirming himself in the goodness of God, foreseeing least afterward he
might slide again into such calamity. Even in like sort does Paul admenish
us, to convert those sins which the children of Israel committed against
God, to our commodity, that is, that whilst we consider the punishments
which followed, we may be taught by their example. See now wherefore the
Scripture does cite as well the sins of the faithful, as of the contemnes of
God, not that it might make us blind, whereby we shall be able to determine,
or utter nothing for certaynetie, and shall doubt, whether that which is evil
be good, but that when the knowledge of evil is perceived, we might shun
the same, as it plainly sets down what we should judge of every work. But
they allege that it is ^^ritten, let us not fudge, for the Lord uses these
words, judge not, Math. 7.
but wherefore? that he may reprehend their rashness, who vsurp the authority
of God, in judging of things they know not. The same argument is handled of
Paul, in the fourteenth to the Romans, where he reproves them that condemn
their breethre^ for matters indifferent: we have (says he) all one judge, to
him we must give accomptes, it apperteyneth to him to determine of such
matters, let us not therefore enforce our neighbors prostrate under our
opinion. In deed it is an excellent and most profitable doctrine to, as there
is one spiritual lawgiuer that is God, so that he is the best Judge of our
minds. But in the mean time, the testimony is not therefore of less force,
which already he has brought, when therefore we judge whoredom, theft,
blasphemy, drunkenness, and ambition to be greeuaus sins, we give no
judgment of our selves, but we approve that which God has given. But of
the contrary, these shameless dogs, feygning that they will not judge, do
make themselves higher judges than God. I pray thee, if after the supreme Judge
have given sentence, some private man should say, the matter is to be left in
doubt, as if nothing should be certain, and the matter by judgment
condemned, not to be taken as evil, should not he as a factious man, or
author of sedition, be deemed much worthy of great punishmente, because he
would subvert all order of right? But these filthy dogs, under this pretense,
that they say, we must not judge, endeavor to make frustrate the supreme
judgments of the highest God, which he has published to all the world,
and that whatsoever he has pronounced, is but deceyuing.

We see therefore, that as we may not presume so far, as to judge according
to the lust of our own heart, so all things are to be approved, and as it
were ratifyed with our assente which God has judged, therefore, as auouche
him to be a good and righteous Judge, we shall condemn with him wicked works,
and as he advises, we shall judge a good or cuill tree by his fruits.
Afterward, they allege this sentence, Hipocrite, Math. 12.
first pluck the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see to
remove the mote out of thy brothers eye. But what will they conclude thereof?
Math. 7.
This answer belongs to Hypocrytes, who only note other men's faults, and
conceal their own, as when he said to them which accused the Adultresse,
he that amongst you is without sin, let him cast the first stone at her.
He does not therefore forbid to punish offenders, but only adnionisheth,
that when we reprehend others, we begin at our selves, when we correct them
that have offended, let us be without those faults, which we correct in
them, that we may show our selves to be moved with the true zeal of
justice, to hate evil, as well in our selves, as in them, without all respect
of persons. But betwixt these two there is maruellons great difference, to
judge nothing by Hypocrisy, and utterly to judge nothing. The Lord
commands, that we judge according to truth, that we be not more seueare
against our neighbors, than against our selves, but these dogs with
this cullor will have all judgment, be it never so consonante to reason, to
be excluded and abolished. Albeit if an Hypoerite flattering himself, shall
reprehende another, it follows not, that he which has offended, shall
therefore be excused, for evil is ever to be damned. But this is the fault
of an Hypocrite, that he measures not himself by the same rule, and easily
forgyuing himself, he uses the extremity of law against others. But (as I
said in the beginning) ye ribalds do not endeavor to obtain this in vain,
for they should open to themselves a notable ingresse, if they might persuade
the world, that nothing at all were to be improued. But it is best to note
Satan's subtlety in this place, and whereto it tends, for over and above
that our neighbors faults, and the scourges, wherewith God punishes them,
ought sufficiently to warn us, that we provoke not his anger against
ourselves. There is also another thing required of us, that is, that our
minds ought to be stricken with grief, because God is offenbed, and because
the soul of the finner runs to destruction. With such a zeal of Gods glory
we should be inflamed, that when it is imperilled, we should be oppressed with
the anguish of sorrows, where with our heart may be sore afflicted. We ought
so to love our neighbors with a ready affection of mind, that when we see
the peril hang over them, and especially their souls, we may be moved with
compassion. Satan indeed by these Losels would make men amazed, that
whatsoever confusion we shall see, we shall be touched with no care, nor be
affected in any sort. If we see the name of God to be torn with blasphemies,
his holy precepts violated, souls destroyed, and all finne and wickedness
florishe, as in deed these scoffers, whatsoever befall, do laugh, are touched
with no care, least collor might kill them, except when somewhat is done that
less pleases them, for then forgetful of all these pleasant speculations of
not judging, they become far more sharp and rigorous than others. And they
also secretly mock them of whom they are nourished, and ldoe thrust out
their tongs behind their backs. For all their delighte and study is in this,
that they may iocandly take their pleasure in quietness and security, for
they have heard this sentence of Solomon, that the bones are withered with a
sorrowful spirit. So least lost with leanenesse, they have found this way of
pleasant and peaceable delighting, that is, al carfulness expelled, in
approouing all those things, wherewith it is of necessity, that Gods children
be moved and troubled in mind, least they should have any more cause of sorrow.
Lo how delighting themselves in evil things equally as in good, they turn all
things to their commodity. But Paul says, that this is a heap of
iniquity, Romans (...).
when one does not only commit iniquity, but assenteth thereunto with
delight. Therefore if there be credit to be given to Paul, let us hold
these for the most wicked of all men, which are not therewith satisfied, in
that they sleep in their own sins, they break out into that wickedness,
that they glad themselves in others sins. Do not these things yet content
thee, and will thou urge me to other of Caluines Books? hear therefore what
he has taught a good while ago of the same matters, in the. 2. Chapter,
and. 69. Section, of Christian Institutions. Far other is the manner (says
he) of the divine action, which that it may more certaynely appear to us, let
the calamity done to holy Job by the Chaldees be for an example. The Chaldees
when they had stayne his pasters, they dispoyle his flock as enemies. Now
their wicked act is evident. Nor ceasseth Satan in that work, from whom the
history tells all that did come. But Job himself reknowledgeth the Lords
work in it, who he says, took from him those things that were taken away
by the Chaldes. Now may we refer the selfsame work to God, to Satan, to
man the author, but either we shall excuse Satan by Gods company, or pronounce
God the author of evil? easily, if we first consider the end of working, and
then the manner. The Lords determination is to exercise the patience of his
servant by calamity: Satan labors to drive him to desperation: The
Chaldees by another man's goods, besides right and equity, see to get
advantage. Such diversity in the purposes does mightily distinguishe the
work, there is no less difference in the manner, God yields his servant
to be afdicted to Satan, he yields him the Chaldees, whom he chose to be
his ministers to execute it, and gives them to be enforced, Satan otherwise
provoke the wicked minds of the Chaldees with their poisoned darts, to the
accomplishment of that wicked act. They furiousely rushe to imustice, and
wrappe and defyle all their members with wickedness, Satan therefore is
properly said to work in the reprobate, in whom he exercises his kingdom,
that is, the kingdom of sin God is said also to work after this manner,
because Satan himself, seeing he is but an instrumente of his wrath, he
inforceth him this way and that way as he will, and at his beck, to execute
his just judgments. I let pass here the universal moving of God, whence
all creatures, as they are sustained, so they receive efficacy to do any
thing. I speak only of that special doing, which appears in every deed.
To ascribe therefore one deed to God, to Satan, and to man, we see is not
absurd, but the variety in the end and manner causes, that the inblame^ able
justice of God does shine forth, and ye wickedness of Devil and man to his
own confusion, does bewray it self.

What more? let us hear also what he wrighteth in his Book of the eternal
Predestination of God against Pighius, whose impudency thou have set thy
self to follow. Pighius urges, that if man's Apostacy be Gods work, it is
false that the Scripture says, that all things are good which God has
made, but I can safely testifye, and boldly pronounce, that this false
imagination did never enter into my thought, I therefore affirm every where,
that the nature of man was first made innocente, least the wickedness which
by his defection he has drawn to himself, might be ascribed to God, that
death, whereto he inthralled himself, which before was partaker of life,
did so come by his own fault, least God should be thonghte the author. The
same, in the same Book, whatsoever men sin, they would impute it to him,
but if any would escape, (I say) he is more streyghtely cheyned with the
bonds of conscience, than that he may deliver himself from just damnation.
Let Adam make excuse as he will, that he was deceived by the enticementes of
the wife which God gave him, yet the deadly poison of infidelity within, the
secret most pestilent aduisor ambition, the diuelishe breathing of
presumption, will be found within. They are therefore much less to be
excused, who endeauoure to draw the cause of their evils, out of the deep
secrets of God, which bewrays it self out of their own depraved heart.
Let every one acknowledge his own sin, condemn himself, and confessing
from his heart his own giltinesse, let him seriousely entreat his judge If
any murmr, the exception is ready, O Israel, thy destruction comes of thy
self. The same in the selfsame Book, speaking to the sclanderer. They charge
us (says he) with a filthy and shameful slander, who pretend that God is the
author of sin, if his will be the cause of all things that are done, for that
which man wickedly commits, set on either by ambition, or by
couetousenesse, or by lust, or by whatsoever other wicked affect, seeing God
works by his hand according to his justice, although secret judgment, the
name of sin can have no place in him, infidelity, cruelty, pride,
intemperance, envy, blind selfeloue, any wicked affection, causes sin in
man. In G O D thou shalt find no such thing. And a little after, such is
(says he) the manner of Gods working in the sins of men, that when it
comes to him, with his pureness he utterly abandoneth all blemish. But what?
do not these suffice thee in the manifesting of Caluines mind, and proving thy
falsies: Let us therefore add those things which he wrote upon that
place, where Peter vpbraydeth the Jews, that by the haude of wicked men they
crucified Jesus, Acts. 2.
who was delivered by the foreknowledge and determinate counsel of God,
because (says he) Peter seems to signify, that the wicked did obey God,
hence follows one, of two absurdities, either that God is ye author of evil,
or that men, in doing whatsoever wickedness, do not sin. I answer, that men,
after a sort, to execute the same thing which God with himself has
determined, and yet do nothing less than obey God, for obedience rises of a
voluntary affection, and we know that the wicked have a far other intent.
Again, no man obeys God, but he that knows his will, obedience therefore
depends of the knowledge of the divine will. Further in his law, God has
manifested his will to us, wherefore, they finally obey God, who measure their
works by the rule of his law, and then willingly submit themselves to his
gouernemente. We see no such thing in all the wicked, whom skilnesse, God
inforceth hither or thither. Now therefore by this pretense will say they be
excusable, because they give place to God, seeing we are to seek the will of
God in his law, and they as much as in them is, endeavor to rebel against
God. As much as apperteineth to the other, I deny that God is the author of
evil, because in this speech there is a certain testimony of a wicked affect,
for an evil act is esteemed of the end whereto every one te^deth. When me^
commit either theft or murder, they therefore sin, because they are thieves
or murderers. In their theft of murder their wicked purpose is to be weyed.
God who uses their iniquity, is to be placed in an higher degree. For he
inte^deth a far other matter, because he will correct one, and exercise ye
patience of an other: and so he never declineth from his nature, that is from
perfect equity. So in so much as Christ was delivered by ye hands of wicked
men, and in that he was crucified, it is done by the appointment and ordinance
of God. But the betraying, which of it self is wicked, and the murder which
conteyneth in it such heinous offense, ought not to be deemed as Gods work.
What will thou more? the day truly suffices me not to recite such
testimonies. But if I should have alleged but even one of these testimonies, I
think there is none, to whom your great and incredible impudency might not
sufficiently appear. But yet I will set down others in their place, and least
you complain that I rather obscure a dark matter then make it manifest, I
will briefly show what our judgment is of Gods ordinance and action even in
those things, which not as they are of God, but in respect of their being done
of the instruments, deserve the name of sin: and also what we teach out of
the word of God, of the difference of sufferance and will: and then I will
answer thine arguments a part. I have thought good to manifest these things
with brief and plain distinctions, aphorisms or articles, that thou might
not complain of darkness.

1 God effectually does, Ephesians. 1. 88.
or brings to pass all things according to the determination of his will.

2 God verily executes this counsel in certain moments of time, but yet the
same is eternal, and going before all things, not only in time, seeing it is
before al time, but also in order. For otherwise the will of God should not be
the chief rule of the counsel of God: but rather the foreseen, or foreknowne
qualitiess of things, enforcing God to take this or that counsel, should
prescrive an order to the will of God.

3 This Counsel cannot be separate from the will of God, but we shall despoyle
him of his deity.

4. This counsel is not only set in the moderation and direction of effects,
as Pallas with the Poet is sayned to turn away the darte of Pandarus from the
breast of Menelaus, to the inferior parts fenced with a studded gerble: but
has a workyng and effectual force in all things, which Paul has declared by
the word (...), to do effectually.

5. This force and power of working is attributed to God working, for it is not
said to be of God. Therefore by this word, there is not showed any natural
faculty, given to certain things of God the creator, to do this or that: but
the very power of God which he has in himself to do all things.

6. The universal note in the saying of Paul, cannot be restrained with any
exception be it never so little, but God in that part shall be taken to be
idle, by the assertion of Epicurus. But if we say that any thing is done
against his will, he shall be spoiled of his infinite power.

7 The conclusion therefore stands, that God as it pleased him decrees from
everlasting all things to be, and so also performs the same in his time by
his own power of workyng, cuen as he will.

8 Yet there follows none of these blasphemies, that is, that God is either
the author of sin, or is delighted with sin, or also that he wills
iniquity: or that Satan or men in doing evil, obey God, or in that they do
evil, do that which God will, and therefore be without fault. But all such
blaspemies be most far, not only from our tongues, but from our thoughts.
That these consequences ^uayle not, it may be showed thus.

9 God executes the determinations of his will by second causes, and mean
instruments, not as bound to them, as the Stoyckes imagined, but making,
mouyng, and directyng them, freely and mightily even as he list.

10 Of these instruments there be two superior fortes. For some be living
creatures, that is, which by an inward and their own motion are moved.
Others without life who only are moved by an external force. But the living
are in a twofolde difference. For some be endued with reason and judgment,
others be void of reason, and are moved by a blind force of nature.

11 The lyuelesse and so also they that have life, but without reason, are not
said to do either well or evil, by cause they are enforced rather then do:
but they which use those instruments, are said to do well or evil.

12 The living endued with reason and judgment, are either Angels or men, and
they again of two sorts. For in deed the Angels he some good and some
evil: but men verily by nature are all evil, but are so diffeuered by grace,
that many be altogether evil, but many in some sort good, that is, for so much
as Gods Spirit has sanctified them.

13 What things be of this kind, when they are in any action moved by that
interior and their own motion, they are worthily said to do, and therefore at
the last the difference of good or evil doing falls into this kind of
instrument. Nor in this respect can they well be called instruments, but
rather efficient causes.

14 And I call that an evil deed, which has not the revealed will of God
for his warrant: contrarily a good which respects the same.

15 The same, albeit they are causes, for as much as they work by the interior
and their own moving, yet in an other respect they are called instruments, yt
is as often and for as much as they are moved of an other: as when ye hangma^ at
the co^manudement of the Magistrate kills a man, or as when by the
inforceme^t of Satan some hurts others, or when in the name or at the
commandment of any one we do good or evil to any.

16 In this kind of works, every one sees one, and the same work to be
attributed to two, that is, to one, in doede as enforcing, and workyng, by
another, as by an instrument, and to another, but to the agent himself, for so
he is an instrument, as in deed he works by his interior and own motion,
but not simply, as the hammer or are in the hand of the Carpenter.

17 Yea for this double respect, there seems also to be yielded a double
work, and in deed so much, as one is commendable, the other vicious: as if
the Magistrate deliver the offender to the hangman, every man will worthily
commend that work: but if the hangman, being rather moved with hatred, or
covetousness, or any other wicked desire, then with the judges commandment,
do put him to death, truly before God he can not escape the fault of murder.

18 Now therefore, let us apply these things to God himself, whose power of
working we proved before to come in between, in all things that are made
without all exception: and that so that by those things which he has made, as
by instruments, he executes in his time whatsoever he has decreed from
everlasting.

19 What soever God does, it is good, since that no evil can proceed from the
sovereign goodness, but he does all things. All things therefore are good,
for as much as they be done of God: and that difference of good and evil has
only place in the instruments, and in deed in those of whom we spoke in the
fouretenth proposition.

20 For if these instruments be good, and respect the manifested will of God,
they do well, and God does well by them: whence it is that that work is every
way good: as when the good Angels do execute that which God commands: and
holy men do follow when God calls.

21 But the evil instruments, (evil I say, not by creation but by corruption)
for so much verily as they do, they do always evil, therefore they worthily
incur the wrath of God: for as much as God works by them, they serve the
good will of God, either against their will or by ignorance. For by what soever
instruments God works he does always well.

22 And so God works by those instruments, as he does not only suffer them to
work, nor only moderateth ye effect but also he exciteth, inforceth, moves,
rules, and furthermore (which of al is the greatest) even creates them, that
by them he may accomplish that he has determined, all which God does justly,
and without all injustice.

23 For as often as an evil man sins either against himself or some other
like evil. God brings to pass without all sin that either the wicked shall
revenge himself, or that the wicked shall afflict the like with deserved
punishments, which both is the most just work of God, and by these examples
of his judgments God does recreat and comfort his.

24 But so often as the wicked annoy the good they in deed sin, and at the
last are worthily punished, yet nevertheless the Lord by them, corrects,
teaches, and confirms his, and in deed by the very enemies of the Church
he makes his Church glorious.

25 Yet these evil instruments can not be said to obey God, because albeit God
does execute his work by them, yet they so much as in them is, and that
appertains there counsel and will, they do not the work of God, but their
own work, for which they are worthily punished. For albeit it is good which
God works by the wicked, yet whatsoever she evil do is evil.

26 Nor avails the consequence, God does al things, therefore he commits
sins. For the name of sin agrees not, but with a depraved quality, which
wholly is in the doing instrument.

27 But by reason of this depraved quality, the work, which by it self is
but one, is after a sort made two and double, and that so much, that one
resists the other, that is, the just work of God, the unjust work of man,
by direct contrary.

28 Yet God works other ways by good instruments than by evil. For over and
above that he does his own work by good instruments, the good instruments
also do his work with that strength and efficacy which God gives them: the
Lord finally does his own work by the^, and in them he also works to will
and do. So often as the Lord executes the just counsels and deer^es of his
eternal will by the wicked, as by Satan, or men, in that they are not
negenerate, he aduaunceth his own strength and efficacy in his work by them,
either not knowing, or against their wills: but yet in so much as they do
his work, the Lord works not in them, but lets loose the raynes of
Satan, whereto also he gives, the wicked to be stirred and enforced by his
just judgment, that they may be carried by his and their own lust.

29 Therefore we repel not the name of sufferance or leave, nor was it ever in
our minds, to say, that God works in the wicked. But because the difference
of will and sufferaunce which Augustine no doubt took from the Greeks, the
Sophisters drawn from Augustine, and finally thou from them, have depraved:
because, I say, this difference is usurped of you to appresse the truth,
therefore we utterly repel it.

30 For you set will against sufferance, whereupon it follows yt God suffers
those things which he does suffer either against his will or in deed idly, and
not regarding the^. But we yt contrary, least we either rob God of his
infinite and inmesurable power, or think with the Epicures, we say yt is the
truth, yt God does nothing but willingly either by instruments, or permits
to instruments yt they may do, yet so that whatsoever he do, he do it
mosteiustly, and most justly suffers what soever he suffers.

31 And he works in respect of his own work: but he suffers in respect of
yt work which yt evil instrumets do willingly, in so much as they be active
not passive instruments, yt we may retain yt words accustomed in scooles. Yet
he justly suffers that these do unjustly, because that sins, in so much as
God suffers them, are no sins, but punishments of sins. For it is a just
thing before God, yt sins be punished even with sins. But these self actios,
for as much as they proceed from Satan and wicked men, stirred up of Satan and
their own concupiscence, in this respect they are sins, which the Lord
justly punishes in his due time, for the Lord never suffers sins as they
are sins, yea he ever disaloweth and forbids them.

32 Nor is this consequence aught worth, God will all things, therefore he
aloweth all things. For he wills many things, and therefore suffers not
because he does simply allow them, but (...), after a sort. For he aloweth
them in that he suffers them; because that hitherto they be no sins, as we
said already: but he disaloweth and reuengeth, as he co^sidereth the wicked
instruments whose deeds they be.

33 These be Augustines words, in his Enchiridion to Laurentius, the. 100.
chapter. Great are the works of the Lord, sought out into all his wills, as
in a wonderful and unspeakable manor, that is not done besides his will,
which is done against his will; because it should not have been done if he had
not suffered it: nor in deed does he suffer against his will, but willingly.
The same in his fifth Book against Iulianus the third Chapter, where, of set
purpose he has disputed against them, which determine an idle foreknowledge or
sufferaunce, and at the last breaks out into these words, truly (says
he) if we suffer them over whom we have authority, to commit offenses before
our eyes, we shalve guilty with them. But how innumerable things does he
suffer to be done before his eyes, which verily if he would not, he would by no
means suffer? and yet is he just and good.

34 The whole Scripture, and common reason does show, that nothing is done
without ye will of God, no not of those which seem most casual, as Genes.
27.20. it is said, God brought the pray to Jacobs hands by and by. And in
Exodus 21.13. So often as man slaughter is committed at unawares, the Lord (says
Moses) has brought to pass, that he should fall into thy hands. The like is
said of the event of lottes, in the Proverb. 16.33. of all the counsels of
men, in the. 4. of Daniel. 32. of the falling of Sparowes, in the. 10. of
Matthew. 29. and finally of all things without exception, in the first to the
Ephesians. 11.

35 But it plainly appears almost by every page of Scripture, that in deed
the most effectual will of God, does some betwixt, even then also when he
works by the wicked. So he is said to have sent Joseph into Egypt, Genesis
45.8. So he stirred up Pharao to manifest bys power in him, Exodus 4.21. So he
gave the wives of David to his son Absalon, 2. Sam. 12.11. So he stirred up
the mind of David to the number of the people. 2. Sam. 24.1. So he commanded
Simey to curse David. 2. Sam. 1.10. So David called his enemies the sword and
hand of the Lord, Psalm. 17. verse. 1^. and 14. So the Lord calls the Modes
and Persians his sanctified, and instrument of his wrath, Isay. 10.5. and.
13.6. So the falling away of the ten Tribes he calls his work, 2. of
Numbers. 11.4. So says Job, the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away,
Job. 1.21. So the King of the Babylonians is compared to an axe and a saw,
that is, because by him, (thinking no such thing) the Lord executes his work,
Isay. 10.15. So the Godly are afflicted by the will and predestination of God,
Romans 8.29.1. Peter. 3.17. and. 4.19. So there is no evil in the City which
the Lord has not done, Amos. 3.6. and Ieremias in his lamentations. 3.37. who
is it (says he) which says it is done, and God has not commanded it?
therefore out of the mouth of the Lord proceed not good and evil.

36 But go to, let be chosen for example the work of all others most
excellent and together the most wicked: in deed the most excellent, if we
behold the infinite justice and mercy of the father, or the immesurable
obedience and love of the son: but the most wicked, if we consider the
instruments themselves, as Satan, Judas, the Jews, Pilate, and Herod. And
this work is the death of the son of God, full of cruelty and ignomie. If
we should in this fact deny, that the eternal council of God did come
betwixt, we shall be convinced with infinite testimonies of Scripture. It is
ratifyed, that we were elected in him, before the foundations of the world
were laid, no otherwise, than in him that should dye, Ephesians. 1.4.1. Pet.
1.20. for which cause also he is said to be the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world, Apoc. 13.18. that is, not only by the foreknowledge,
but especially by the determinate council of God, in so much verily, that
Herod and Pilate, albeit they thought no such thing, yet therefore did
accord, that they might execute those things, which the hand and council of
the: Lord had determined to be done, Arts. 4.28. therefore. he could not be
taken but in his time, John. 7.30. and. 8.29. and. 12.27. For he was delivered
by the determined council of God, and decree going before, Acts. 2.25. and
he was wounded of God for our iniquities, Isai. 53.5. for God is he, who has
not spared his own son, but gave him for us all, Romans 8.32. Therefore, if
but only this example were extant of the eternal and least idle Providence of
God at any time, it should in deed abundantly suffice to convince all those,
who falsely cry out, that we make God the author-of sin, when we say, that
nothing is done but by the just will of God.

37 For neither therefore do we excuse, but most vehemently accuse Satan, who
working in the children of disobedience Ephesians. 2.2. both also when the Lord by
Satan himself, and by Satan's bondslaues. 2. Timo. 2.26. does most
effectually and justly perform his will. Therefore every where we acknowledge
and reverence the goodness and judgments of God, albeit we oftentimes see not
the reason of them. And we all condemn the very instruments which be evil,
and their sinister and wicked actions, that is, all the shifts and slightes of
Satan, the envy and brother quelling of Joseph's breethren, the wickedness
and obstinacy of Pharao, the horrible incest, and fathermurthering mind of
Absolon: also the rashness of David, the lewdness of Semey, the falsehode
and malice of David's enemies, the sacrilegious falling away of Jeroboam and the
ten tribes, the theft of the Chaldees, the insatiable avarice, incredible
greediness, intolerable arrogancy of the Babilonyans, and finally, the
wicked councels, and most savage cruelty, of all the ungodly against the
Church.

38 It appears by many and manifest testimonies of Scripture, that God also
punishes sins with sins, and that by his in no case idle, but truly
effectual and mighty (...), and nevertheless just permission, for it is he yt
gives kings in his wrath, Nehe. 9.37. and. Job. 34.30 He it is that causes to
err, Isai. 63.17. by cause he mingleth among them the spirit of error, Isai.
19.14. He it is which hardneth, and turns the hearts, which blinds the
eyes, which makes drunken with the wine of giddiness, Exodus 4.21. and. 7.3.
and. 9.12. and. 10.1. and. 11.10. and 14.4. Deuteronomy. 2.29. Ios. 11.20.1. Samuel.
2.25.2. Chron. 22.7. Psalm. 105.25. he it is that reue^geth the contempt of
himself, giving over into a reprobate sense, Romans 1.28. and sending strong
delusion, that they might believe lies. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. He it is which
seduceth Prophets, Erechixl. 14.9. and finally he it is that sends evil
spirits, with commanndement to hurt, and power given to deceive, as 1. Kings.
22.22. and. 23.2. Chron. 18.21.22. Job. 1.12. and. 2.6. Go no we Sycophant,
and cry out if thou list, till thou be hoarse again, that we make God the
authoure of sin, but go to, let us hear with how mighty arguments thou
can assault us.

The Sycophantes first Argument to the third Sclaunder.
AGAINST the third of the difference of will and sufferance, they say this.
Calvin says that he is a Prophet of GOD, and we say, he is a Prophet of
the Devil. But it is of necessity that one sort do lie, for if he be a
Prophet of God, we lie, but if he be the Devils Prophet he lies, who says
he is a Prophet of God. But if both be, GOD willing it, that is, if GOD will
that Calvin say that he is a Prophet of GOD, and that we should say he
is a Prophet of the Devil, he will contraries, which is impossible: for if God
will a lie, he will not the truth, or if he will the truth, he will not a lie,
whereupon it follows, that if he will that one sort say the truth, he will
not that the other do lie, but out of doubt one sort do lie, therefore they
lie, God suffering, and not willing it. There is therefore in God a difference,
between sufferance and will.

REFVTATION.
First of all (filthy Sicophant) by this argument which thou take, it may
appear to every one, with what mind thou vndertookest to deal in this cause,
yt is, swelling with that envy and leawdenesse, which bereft thee of all
judgments a good while ago, but thou would not lose this pleasant saying,
nor indeed have thou lost thy labor, since I think there was yet no man
found that could read these thy wrightings, without extreme laughter. But
Calnine seems to me for this cause to be much bound to thee, because thou
do sclaunder him so openly, for indeed to be sclaundered of so obscure a
man, such, as eucry one that knows thee, does long ago confess thee to be,
is to be praised, and in deed with that kind of praise, which of all others
is most commendable, seeing it is void of all suspicion of flattery, but
these railing trifles we may leave to thee, for more forceable is that renoune,
which all Churches give to the faithful Prophet of God, (albeit least of all
requiring it) than that it may be defaced with the scoff of a blabish rayler,
and greater is the dignity (that thou with thine may burst with envy) of
this faithful servant of God in Christian Churches, then that it may be
obscured with any thy fomings. But go to, let us join together, thine
argument is such, God can not will contraries, a lie and truth are contrary,
therefore he can not will both, but he suffers a lie, and wills truth. Then
is therefore difference between will and sufferance. Hear now good man what
I answer. I say, there is a manifest ambi^uitie in ye name of will, for
sometimes will is spoken of those things which we simply allow in themselves,
sometimes it extends further, and also belongs to those things, which we
in no wise approve in themselves, yet we embrace them for others, and in deed
so much, as that we persuade, and for our power execute them. As for example:
there is none except a bloudsucker, who simply loves war, seeing it brings
with it innumerable evils. There shall be also some Prince, an enemy to the
Country, who so often as he can not other ways defend his people, he had not
rather take in hand lawful war; than resign the people to the enemies lust.
Therefore a good and gentle Prince simplye will not war, if thou considerest
war in it self: yet he will for just causes go to war: nor does he ^dlys
suffer his people to undertake that, but of his own accord and willingly, he
goes to war even with the danger of his own life. But who may think that
the Magistrate, except he be altogether cruel, is delighted with the grief
of any Citizen, much less with his death? yet the same albeit sorrowing, and
in no wise allowyng the slaughter, in that it is slaughter, should in no case
idle, or against his will, but with his will and seriouse endeanour, make
inquisition upon an offensive Citizen, and deliver him being convict, into the
hands of the formentor, with commandment given, to execute him, with this or
that forture. But war and peace, to save and kill are contrary, yet who is
so sottishe, that would therefore deny, that the Prince can not will both at
one and the self instant? but say, by what mean? thou will allege that in
deed, because war is not contrary to peace, in so much as the Prince
wills it, yea it does assist peace: nor to kill a Citizen, is contrary to
the health of Citizens, for as much as a good Prince kills an evil Citizen,
since he kills him justly, that he might defend the good. But see thou at
last good man, that those things in themselves do very well agree, which thou
call contraries? But if thou art consereyned to acknowledge this difference
in the very actions of men, thou which fear not to measure all the works
of God by common reason, will not here suffer thine own rule to hold? But
go to, let us try these by the rule and prescripte of the very word of
God. We acknowledge that which David said to be true for ever. Thou art a
God which will not iniquity, and hold him that thinks otherwise, for a
wicked and blasphemous man. But that which thou do collect, that is, that
when we say without all exception, that nothing is thought, spoken, or done,
wherein the will of God does not come betwixt, and that we even endeavor
that, that God is the author of all wickedness and mischief: but we say
this, that this is nothing else but too manifest a sclaunder. For we affirm,
that in God there can be no difference of good and evil, albeit for as much as
he is God, after his peculiar and proper manner, he is cause of all and every
thing. For all things, in so much as they are done by the will and decree of
God working (as the Apostle says Ephesians. 1.11.) whether he perform his work
by good or evil instruments, are always just, good, and holy, but in so much
as the instruments work, sometimes their actions be good, and therefore
acceptable to God, but sometimes evil, and therefore inacceptable to God, and
inthralled to his just judgment. For albeit God wills and does all things
that be done, yet he wills not all things in such forte, or executes in
such wise, as the instruments will and do, for the fault is in the
instruments, not in God. But now it is that we see which works of the
instruments be good, and which also evil. But that that may be
conveniently made plain, we say, that the will of God is used in two sorts,
for sometimes it conteyneth only those things, which the Lord does simply
allow, that is, because the quality of them is good of it self, as when
David says, teach me to do thy will: and when we pray the father that his
will may be done in carthe as it is in Heaven, that is, that all our life may
be framed to his will. In these places I say, and innumerable others, the will
of God shows nothing else, than that which the Lord has manifested to us
in his word, to be acceptable and pleasante to himself: nor in deed do we
say, that Satan or men, in that they do evil, do the will of God, but
rather resist the will of God, and therefore in the end to suffer just
punishments of their wickedness. And therefore we determine that they are
evil, whose quality is such, that in themselves they displease God But
contrarily, those are good, which God does simplye in themselves allow: but
sometimes the will of God does conteyne even those things, which he does not
simply allow, but rather rejects and reuengoth them, which yet he deareeth,
and (...) by his mean, and in a certain respect do please him, which when
thou vndershandest not, thou foolishly reprchendest. For what? will thou deny
yt they do heynouslie offend which persecute ye Church but yt the saints are
afflicted by ye will of God, if it be so yt thou deny it, Peter himself shall
refute thee in two places, It is better (says be) if God will so, 1. Pet. 3.17
and 3.^0.
that you be persecuted for well doing than for evil. The same in ye same
Epistle, Those (says he) that by ye will of God are afflicted, let the^ commit
their fowls to him (...) well doing, as to (...) faithful creator. Do you
hear yt name (...) of will? But what says Paul, where be handles the same
arguments? Those (says he) whom he knew before, he predestinate to be
co^formed to the image of his son. Romans 8.29.
Now therefore we perceive, that the Predestination and will of God did come
betwixt in the afflictions of the Saints. Peter also in another place,
disputing of the Cross of Christ (which place we have oftentimes already
cyted) makes mention of (...) the determinate council, Acts. 2.23.
and foreknowlege of God. Acts. 4.28
And in another place, the whole Church at Jerusalem makes mention of the
hand and council of God, but does God allow the wickedness of them that
persecute the Church? no in deed, but the wicked which persecute the Church
shall at the last suffer deserved torments. But God does daily try out, and
perfect his Church by that same thing, which he worthily reue^geth in his
enemies: and in this respect, the will, council, ratified and determined
decree, and finally, the very work of the most just and most wise God, does
no less come betwixt, than when he uses choice and holy instruments, to the
accomplishment of things of themselves most good and excellent. If this
consolation be taken from us, as in deed it is, if we believe ye dreaming I
can not tell of what idle suffera^ce, besides the will and decree of God in such
as these, how shall we ever remain firm and constant? nor does he say al
things, which thinks yt the end and issue of al such matters are governed of
God. But this ought especially to be believed, yt Satan, or Satan's
instruments, can not practice against us, be it never so little, that y^ our
good father has not from everlasting decreed and determined for our
commodity, yt our co^solatio^ might be full and firm. But it may be that in
this kind of evil, whereby the godly are afflicted, thou will deny, yt Peter,
Paul, and the other holy wrighters, when they make me^tio^ of ye will,
counsel, decree, and hand of God, do not intend those that persecute the
church, but them rather which suffer these things. But it I shall remove this
objection, I sear least some may think, that I do you an open injury, who
should suppose that it were possible that you should broche such foolish
questions. Yet I will also undo this doubt, because I see nothing of it self
so plain, and without all difficulty, which may not greedily of you be
taken, to the end you may both incomber your selves and others. First of all
these things are so united in themselves by mutual relation, that is the
acti^^ of those that persecute the Saints, and the sufferaunce of the
afflicted Saints by them, that he which says God will this, but does
only suffer that, may worthily seem ^oyde even of common reason. But least I
seem to contend with thee with reasons drawn only from common sense, (which
compass of contention thy self yet seem to have prefixed us) go to, let us
hear the Spirit of God himself speaking, whose authority I wish thou
could once prefer before thy fruitelesse and childishe inventions. Job
being given into the hand of Satan not for any sin of his, but for a most
excellent example both for his and our confirmation sake, the Lord (says he)
has given, Job. 1.21.
and the Lord has taken away. What would thou answer here, good man?
agrees the word of taking away with Job, from whom the thing was taken, or
rather with him who takes the thing? For Job neither cries out that he has
wrong done him, or excuses ye thieves, but acknowledges and reuerenceth the
suste will of God in giving and taking away: I say, he acknowledges the will
of God. Who may not see that Job by the word of taking away, as well as giving,
has intended not only the will and purpose of giving and taking away, but
even the very self giuyng and taking away? For the Lord both in giving and
taking away, uses whatsoever instruments be pleases, and that in nowise
enforced but willingly. Therefore in the like argument, as we have showed
before, calls his adversaries albest wicked men, yet the sword and hand of
God. And further will thou deny, I say not only the detecminatio^ or will, but
also the power and hand of God to come in betwixt in the afflictions of
Saints, yea in respect of the persecutors themselves? At the least, hear what
Paul says of the most bitter death of the son of God He spared not, Romans 3.2.
says he, his own Son, but gave him for us all. And will thou acknowledge,
here no decree, no will of the most good God our most loving Father: Further
let us now come to that sort of wicked, with whom the Lord, albeit using the
hands and help of the ungodly, does yet justly correct his children: here
also we shall show that the decree, the will, the counsel, and finally the
action of God does come in betwixt. Finally what examples of outrage, cruelty,
and vngoblinesse, did not the Chaldees she we in Jerusalem and all Iudes? who
is he that lift up his hand, that stroke Judah, who (his ensign being
displaied) gathered together the Gentiles unto war, Isa. 9.25.26. Isa. 7.18.
Isa. 10.5.
that with an hiss stirred up the people a far off, which brought strong and
mighty waters against Judah. Let us hear the Lord him self answering by Isai.
Isa 8.7.
O Assure the radde of my fury, and the staff of my wrath in their hand. I
will fend him to a disseinbling people, and I will command him against the
people of my indignation, that he rob them as a pray, that take spoils, and
give him to be trod upon as the duste in the streets. Ier. 25.9.
But what says the Lord in Jeremy? I will stand (says he) and will take all
the nations of the North and Nabucadnerer my servant King of Babylon, and I will
bring them upon this land, against the inhabitans thereof, and against al
these nations by the borders thereof and I will spoil them. Ezech. 24.9.10.11.
And in Erechiell, Woe be to the blouddy city, says he, for I will make the
burning great. I will he ape on much wood in kindlyng the fire, in consuming
the flesh, in casting in spice, that the very bones may be burnte. What more?
Thus says the Lord God, Ezech. 24.20.21.
behold I will pollme my Sanctuary, even the pride of your power, the
pleasure of you, and your hearts desice. But I pray thee (good fellow) does he
nothing, but enely forsake, or suffer idly something to be done: or does he
only moderate ye issue of things, who himself inciteth ye enemies, appoints
armies, leads the hoaste, and brings even into the city, and commands
that none be spared, kindles the fire, and by all means does nourish it, and
finally does prostitute the very Temple to the rauine and avarice of all the
ungodly? If thou deniest this work of God, the work, I say, of God not idly
lookyng on, but effectually workyng the same thing by Nabucadnerer, I will yet
rather believe the Lord, than the false Prophet. For the Lord reasonyng thus
of the self thing, that is of the destruction of the City: After, says he,
Isa. 10.11.
that the Lord has finished all his work in mount Sion and Jerusalem, I
will visit the proud heart of the king of Assure. Therefore when thou flyest
to the Sanctuary of his idle and fruytelesse sufferaunce, what other thing
do thou show, but that thou art void even of common reason. For truly it
is even as much, as if thou should say that GOD being idle, does work
against his will: except it be so, that thou dare accuse the Prophets, yea
even the Lord himself of blasphemye, and in deed of ignorance. But what did
David, when he was exasperated with the cursings of Symer? 2. Sam. 16.10.
Thus (said David) he curses me, because the Lord has commanded him to
curse me. So when the ten Tribesfel away, not only from Roboam, but also
from the Lord himself, for which defection they afterward suffered most
sharp punishments, does not the Scripture plainly witness that it was the
Lords doing that the king should not harken to the people? Truly I do not
imagine any thing here, since the holy Ghost in the report of his History
uses
the words cause or occasion, than the which I see not what could be said
(...), more effectual. Wherefore also the Lord himself dealing of this
defectio^, and speaking to the army of Roboam by Semahia the Prophet. 1. Re.
12.24. 2. Chr. 11.14.
Go not up (says he) neither fight ye against your brethren the thyldren of
Israel: let every man return to his own home: for this thing is my doing.
But also go to when the Lord threatened that he would revenge the adultery of
David with the punishment of a like, and therefore the greater mischief, that
is with incest. what says he? I will take (says he) thy wives in thy sight,
and will give them to thy best beloved, who shall sleep with thy wives in the
sight of this Sun. Beholds goodfelow, the very words of the Lord. Go
therefore and accuse God of blasphemy: For why should thou not dare to do
that, seeing (blushlesse and shamlesse face) thou dare reprehend his servants
affirming these same things, as wicked and blasphemers? But, thou will say,
these have need of some interpretation. But of that we shall see hereafter.
Now let us come to the third forte of evils, by which the Lord punishes the
wicked either by the good, or else does it amongst themselves, like as I should
stryke with a hammer, so one should mangle and flea an other. But here again we
affirm not that truytlesse and forged sufferance or leauyng which you dream,
but that the counsel, decree, will, and finally the action of God, did in deed
come in between, and that most just and holy, both also when evil
instruments work wickedly, which God does most justly grant them, and
executes by them. What then? will thou deny that the good are stirred up of
God to the destruction of the wicked: I think not! But what is to be thought
of evils committed among themselves, then also when one do injury the other,
appears even by that place of Esai, where the Lord calls the Medes and
Perstans, Isa. 15.30
whom he would stir up against the Babilonians, his holy ones, and the
instruments of his wrath. But also in an other place, where there is mention of
those kings which set themselves against Joshua. Ios. 11.20.
This was done of the Lord (says the holy Ghost) who had hardened their
hearts that they should withstand Israel with battle, and that they might
give them over to the slaughter, nor that any pity should he showed them, but
they should utterly be destroyed, as the Lord had commanded Moses. But of
hardening we shall see in his place. Now answer what it is to deceive a false
Prophet. I know what thou will answer, that is, the same which thou art
wont to brable of leauyng: of which matter let us hear, if thou will,
Augustines words, disputyng against one Iulianus, 3. Book against Julian. Ca.
5.
and plainly refutyng that your separation of sufferance from will. What is it
(says Augustine to Julian) that thou sayste, when they are said to be given
over to their own lusts, they are to be taken leaft by the Divine patience,
and not enforced to sins by power? As if the same Apostle has not set down
these two at once, both Patience and Power, where he says, what and if God
would, Romans 9.22.
to show his wrath, and make his power known, suffer with long patience the
vessels of his wrath, prepared to destruction? Yet what say thou of those,
that this that is written, And if a Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a
thing, Eze. 41.9.
I the Lord have deceived that Prophetetis it patience or power? which soever
thou choosest, or grauntest
each, yet thou see that it is the sin of him that prophesies false
things, and the punishment of sin. Or will thou also say here, where the
Lord says, I have deceived that Prophet, it is to be understood, I have
left him, that being seduced for his cesertes, he might err? Do as thou
will, yet in that sort he is punished for sin, that in false prophesying he
sinned, But behold that which the Prophet Micheas saw. The Lord setting upon
his throne and all his host stood about him on his right hand, 1. Kin.
2.9.10.21.22.
and on his left. And the Lord said, who shall deceive Achad King of Israel,
that he may go up, and fall in Ramothe Galaad. And one said this, and on
other said that. And there stood forth a spirit in the sight of the Lord,
and said, I will deceive him. And the Lord said to him: In what? And he said,
I will go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. And he
said, thou shalt seduce him, and shalt prevail, go out, and do so. What
will thou say to these? Verily, the king himself sinned in believing false
Prophets. Over and above these, it was the punishment of sin. God being
Judge, and God sending an evil spirit, that we might the more apparently
understand how it is said in the Psalm, Psalm. 78.49.
that the Lord sent the wrath of his indignation by evil Angels. But in
erring any whitte, in judging or doing any thing rashely or unjustly: God
forbid. But it is not said to him in vain: Thy judgments are as many deepes.
The Apostle cries not in vain: O she deepenesse. The same, Augustine in the
same place says, Psalm. 140.9.
who can be so mad, as when he has heard what is reported in the Psalm,
Give me
not over (O Lord) to my sinful desire: that he say, that manne has
prayed thus, that GOD be not patient toward him, if GOD give not, that evils
be done, Mat. 6.13.
except in afording his patient goodness when they are done. What is also that
which we say dailye, Lead us not into tptation, except, yt we be not given
over to our lusts? For every one is tempted, drawn, and enticed of his own
concupiscence. May it be, that we ask of GOD, that his goodness be not
patient toward us? We therefore pray not for his mercy, but rather proucke
his wrath. What wise man would ever think these, nay what mad manne would
ever speak this? God therefore gives ever into the suffera^ces of reproach,
that those things may be done, which are not convenient: but he iustlye gives
over, and those things become sin, and the punishementes of sin paste, and
the deserts of punishementes to come. As he gave Achab into the lie of the
false Prophets, as he gave over Roboam to false counsel. He does these
things by marvelous and unspeakable means, which knows how to execute
his just indgements, not only in men's bodies, but in their hearts, which
makes not evil purposes, but uses them as he pleases, seeing he cannot will
any thing unjustly. These says Augustine agaynsie your ercoure. But goeto,
let us strike sail at the last. By these therefore which we have made
plain in so many words, and confirmed by so many testimonies of Scriptures,
we say, it sufficientlye appears, that the name of Will does even appertain
to those things which although either of their own nature, or for the evil
purpose of instruments are evil, yet in a certain respect are good, that is,
for as much as God by them does try out or correct the good, and punish the
evil. Therefore God is not contrary to himself so often as he will, and will not
one and ye self same work, seeing it may he done in a diverse respect, nor
wills he resistances, so often as he seems to will contraries, because it may
he, that those which of their own nature are repugnant in themselves, may yet
in some respect agree between themselves: And I will show thee that, in yt same
supposition, which thy self haste propounded us. That Calvin is a faithful and
true Prophet of God, it appears by all those arguments, whereby yt worthiness of
me^ can be approved to me^. Therefore God will, and acceptable to him, that
Calvin be taken for such as he is, that is, for a most excellent instrument of
the Church, and those that do slander any man, there is no doubt but they do
an injurious work against God. For he has said, he that receives you
receives me, and he that despises you, despises me. Because also Christ is
set for a downfall to many, who therefore love darkness more than light,
and therefore as worthy that they should perish, therefore God being angry
with the world, has raised up thee a false Prophet, and other thy likes
cuerywhere, to whom he has given the strength of error, that those who have
refused the truth, might thorough you believe lies. Therefore as he once
commanded Semei, so now you dogs, that you cease not to bark at and bite a
man, who of all that live this day has best deserved of the Church of God. Yet
neither do you so much as in you lies obey the will of God, but rather fighting
against God and your own conscience, do most wickedly and shamefully slander
the most holy servant of God: for hitherto you do yours, and the work of
that spirit who has wholly possessed you long ago. But God nevertheless does
perform a most just work by these your barkings, and that which you do most
wickedly, and that he least will and allows of al others, in as much as it
issues from you, this self thing he most justly wills and allows, but
utterly in another respect, yt is, forasmuch, as he by this mean tries out his
Church, and daily more and more keeps his servants with buffets in modesty
and humility, or stre^gthneth him to perseueraunce, reuengeth the unthankful
world, and finally, brings thee with thine to his just judgment, except it
be, that you had rather at the last repent. But if thou compare these things
with that which we have said to be namely acceptable to God, that such as
his servant is, such he be taken of good men, thou shall find, that these
things be no more repugnant, between themselves, than when the Lord wills
and commands, at one, and the same time, the South wind, to gather the
clouds, which should be dispersed of the Northeast, or a rock in the sea to be
beaten with contrary winds. Behold now, gentle friend, what thou may
answer to them, of whom thou receyuest this brabling argument Now let us
proceed to the rest.

The second Argument of the Sycophante to the third Slander.
They bring also many evident examples of the difference of sufferance and will,
namely out of the.20. Chapter of Ezechiel, where GOD after he had in many
words vpbraided his people, because they would not obey his precepts, at the
last he concludes thus, Go serve you every one his dunghill God, seeing that
you obey not me. As if he would say this, I suffer you to follow your own
lust, seeing you will not obey my precepts.

REFVTATION.
LO thou stumblest again at the same stone, and imaginest monsters to thy
self, which thou may withstand, to the end thou may be thought some
other Hercules. For because we say, as the truth is, that is, that God neither
against his will not idly beholds, but willing, and always iustlye, and
wiselye decreeing men's matters, does, what soever he does, commands,
whatsoever he commands, and suffers, whatsoever he suffers, because no
outrage of the instruments can prejudice the wisdom and justice of God by any
means: thereupon thou straight ways gatherest, that we inte^d that whatsoever
God willingly suffers, that he simply and by it self should allow. But
seeing that, that withmany others, thou dreamest waking, go too if it please
thee, wrestle with thine own dreams, that all men may know that this is not
our forgery. For we affirm, that God never wills iniquity, no not even
then, when for secret causes, albeit yet for most just causes, he lets
loose the raines of the wicked, or gives them to be Satan's bondslaues.

That which in respect of the instruments is iniquity, in respect of Gods
judgment, neither does he allow it simplye, but (...) after a sort, and
therefore it is permitted, which in another respect he condemns and hates,
and worthyly punishes in the instruments: for it is a just thing before God,
that he punish sin with sin, as we have plentifully showed out of the
word of God, and also out of Augustine a little before. Therefore Sycophant,
albeit this place of Ezechiel were not otherwise to be taken, than thou
think, yet it should not make against us. For neither say we that Idolatry
is acceptable to GOD, albeit by his just judgment he will, and also
brings to pass by Satan and what soever instruments he will, that those
who have refused the truth, Romans 1.21. and further.
should embrace falsehoode, and finallye might break out into whatsoever
filthynesse. But all these good Sir, belong nothing to this place. And here
also thou bewrayest thy passing gross ignorance. For neither he that speaks
so, as the Lord does in this place, does either command or permit any
thing, but rather with a most sharp scoff, does vpbraide the falsehoode and
unthankful mind, that if it may be, they which are reproved may at the last
with shame return into the way. The like kind of speaking the LORD used,
when Judas even now being at hand, he said to his Disciples sleeping and in
vain, being so often warned to watch and pray, sleep, and take your rest.
For indeed it is so far off, that he should with this speech persmade the^
to sleep, or give the^ leave to sleep, that contrarily, he fiercely chideth,
and with a most sharp reprehension awaketh them, with the sight of the
present peril, whereof he had in vain admonished them. Therefore when I weyed,
this thine Argument, I marvelled in good sooth, that it was possible, that such
a rudesbie and a man so sottish, should undertake to teach others.

The Sycophants third Argument to the third Slander.
This seems to be the same which he spoke a little before in the same
Chapter, because they have refused mine ordinances, I have given them precepts
which be not good. But God gave not to the Israelits precepts that were not
good, for all the precepts of God be good. But because they refused the good
precepts of God, he left them: and they being left of God: fell headlong into
evil precepts, as that prodigal son, having left his father, or rather
being left of his father, fell into ryote: and as Paul teaches, because men
loved not the truth God sent them the spirit of error that they might
believe lies.

REFVTATION.
THAT which is reported of Balaam, yt is, yt he blessed Israel who^ he was
hired to curse, the same I can affirm of thee, who defe^dest our cause which
thou have undertook to withstand. For what is it to send yt spirit of error
^or do thou think yt this shows no other thing, tha^ to account as one
forsaken? Or he yt sends one for some certain cause, either sends him
against his will, or condemns nothing? but to what man yt is not mad shall
thou ever persuade this? But we will speak of this in ye refutation of the next
Argument. And that which thou triflest of the leaving of the prodigal son,
is nothing. For what, do thou think, that the son was forsaken of his
father, regarding nothing, or against his will? If none of both be true,
surely he forsook him willingly, nor did he cast away all care of him, but
would at the last that he should (as they say) smell of his expenses, and
then he thought most of him, when he seemed to have forsaken him, of the which
thing we will speak, in the depelling of the the sixte Argument. Therefore
this does not make against us, but against thee, which separatest sufferaunce
from will. But thou bewraiest thy shameful ignorance in the explication of this
place of Ezechiel. For to give precepts that be not good, does not show to
live so as thou may run into evil precepts: but the Lord calls evil
precepts, trybutes, burdens, laws, and finally, whatsoever the conquering
Chaldeis were to lay upon the captives: As if the Lord should say, ye would
not obey my most holy and just commandments, but for this your infidelity I
will severely punish you, for I will give you to be ruled of others, who shall
enjoin you, whatsoever most iniust, hard, and fylthy things, and shall
enforce you to perform them. This exposition, if not out of the Latin
interpreters, yet truly thou might have learned of the Hebrews, except
thou art wont to contemn and despise all writers. But does not this your
tradition declare that idle forsaking? Verily thou shalt never make any
believe this, which has never so superficially seen the Prophets: and this
is no less foolish and doltish, than if thou should say yt men that be
malefactors, convict and contemned, are not of a willing magistrate delivered
to the hangman, but only forsaken.

The Sycophants fourth Argument to the third slander.
The like seems to be that of Amos in his 4. Chapter, Go to Bethell and
sin, seeing that you love to do so. So at this day, because men would not
obey God, who says that he wills not sin, God has suffered to stand out
spirits of error, which may teach, that God wills sin: that those which
would not obey the truth, may obey lies.

THE REFVTATION.
I say again, that thou art a doltheade, which take a most sharp vpbreading
and rebuke for sufferance. And I send thee again to the Grammar schole, that
thou may learn there what is the force of the figure called Ironia, and how
many sorts there be accounted of it. And that which thou ceasest not to
tryfle of the spirit of error, who can take it in good part? Eze. 14.9.
If a Prophet being deceived, speak the word, I the Lord have seduced that
Prophet, says the Lord in Ezechiel. 1. King. 21.22.
And in an other place what says the Lord to the lying spirit? Thou shalt
persuade (says he) and overcome: go out therefore and do so. And what
witnesses Paul? 2. These. 2.11.
For that (says he) that they have not received the love of the truth, to the
end they might be saved, therefore GOD will send them strong delusions, that
they may believe lies. I pray thee, good man, advise again and again with
thy self diligently, he that sends from him the executioner with certain
commauncementes, that he punish with just correction men that be conuicte
malefactors and condemned, may he be said only to forsake them, and not
himself rather willing and determyning to make strong the executioners hand to
their just punishment; Al these, if thou know not, albeit of their own
nature be sins, which God hates and reuengeth, yet for as much as they are
decreed of God, they are nothing else but punishments of sin. If thou
belienest not Augustine, Against Julian 3. book. Chap. 3.
who handeleth that Argument plentifullye and plainly against Iulianus, yet at
the least believe Paul, Romans 24.26.28.
who manifestlye witnesses this thing, in three places of his Epistle to the
Romans. And whereas indirectly charging us, thou sayste there be spirits of
error, which starting up should teach, that God wills iniquity, we pass
not much, because that thine impudencye may be condemned through Gods
goodness, with our lives and writings. And see how of the contrary thou
can excuse thy self of most manifest slander, which think, that sins
are permitted of God, in that they are sins, Neither when I say this, I
return evil speeches, but for a false slannder, I render a true accusation.

The Sycophantes fifth Argument to the third Slander.
Further they bring a place out of Zachary, where GOD says he is angry with
the quiet nations, because that when he was lightly angry with the Israelites,
they helped evil, that is, did more grievously afflicte the Israclite, tha^
Gods displeasure could bear, therefore God suffering, not willing it. A like
example they allege out of the Prophet Obed, who reprehendeth the Idumeans,
because they did more grievously afflicte the Jews, the tha^ Lords wrath
required.

REFVTATION.
THIS verilye I impute to the Scriuener, because he wrote Israelits for
Idumeans in the latter prophecy which thou cytest. For I suppose this thy
Obed, to be he whom the Hebrews call Obadia, and the Latins Abdias. But
truly I cannot excuse this, that thou recitest out of this Prophet, those
things which then shall find in him in no place, Therefore for as much as
helogeth to this place, thou art taken tardye with an open lie. For I read in
Abdias, that the Idumeans should be grievously punished, because they most
cruelly raged against their kinsemen already vexed by them by all manner of
means: but that which thou wrytest, is no where extant in him. The place
therefore of Zachary remains, in the expounding of which, see with what
snares thou have entangled thy seft, from whence thou canste not rid thy
self. For I ask as it were from what point thou wylt begin this thy
secreete sufferaunce from will? Verilye from whence those nations went beyond
those bounds which were set them of God? Let us suppose that they were more
moderate, yet hitherto it will follow, that (God willing so) the Jews were
oppressed of them. Thus far therefore they sinned not, if we rest our selucs in
thine intentions. For thou denyest yt will of god in any sins, by any means to
come in betwixt. But who will grant thee this, yt ungodly and wicked men sin
not in afflicting Gods people, without this exception be added, if they pass
the bounds which are set the^ of god? Art thou so ignorant what obedience is?
Truly great is the force of truth, which enforces thee against thy will,
either to deal plainly with us, or to dissent from thy self. But, least thou be
ignorant, good man, Satan or any wicked man can not move his foot, no, not
even his finger, to hurt either good or evil, whether he know yt Lords decree
or not, but he shall sin grievously For an evil tree does always bring forth
evil fruits: yea, though the best Physician do plant and dress it, and uses
his poisons to certain remedies. But of this matter let this be an example.
Let there be a wicked Citizen judged an enemy to the country, and for that
cause be ba^nished: he meets with another as wicked, or more hurtful, who
not knowing the edicte of proscription, he kyileth the man in robbery, with
that kind of death, wherewith he should have died, if the common wealth had
had him in their power. Does this man seem to have obeyed the common wealth,
who ki led the man that was under proscription, or rather worthy to be punished
as a thief? For how can he seem to have obeyed, that knew not the edict of
proscription? The same also is to be judged of the Chaldeis and other enemies,
of the people of God, who albeit they afflicted yt Jews with deserved
punishments, and did execute Gods judgments, yet they can not seem to have
obeyed god, even whose name they did not reverence, much less did think to
obey his commandments.

This only is the difference, that the common wealth did not appoint that
spoyler to kill him: but the Lord called the Chaldeis, albeit they knew it not,
to execute his judgments, as himself test if yeth in infinite places, and
chiefly in the. 23. of Ezechiel, which place I think can not be read without
trembling. Therefore the Chaldeis did not properly the Lords work, but by
the^ not knowing it, and thinking no such thing, the Lord executed his just
work, and nevertheless did afterward most justly punish the^, as the Prophets
had witnessed. For so the Lord in Esai, (...) 10.5.6.7 (...).
when he said, oh Assure, the rod of my furye, and the staff of them in my
displeasure, I will send him to a dissembling nation, and I will command him
against the people of mine indignation, that he rob them as a pray, and
take spoils, and lay him to be trodden upon as the duste in the streates. And
then he adds: but Assure himself thinks not so, nor will his heart
conceive it, because it will be in his heart, to root out and destroy many
nations. And straightway he says: But it will come to pass, when the Lord
has perfected his work in mount Sion and Jerusalem, I will visit the proud
heart of the King of Assure, and the glory of his high looks. which
afterward the same prophet prosecuteth more largely in the thirteenth
Chapter. But let us also suppose the wicked themselves to understand, that
it is the commandment of God, yet, that they, in the execution of Gods
commandment, can do nothing else but sin. For example. The Magistrate
gives over every offender lawfully convict and condemned to the Executioner.
The Executioner, who otherwise is an enemy, afflicts yt man with yt same
kind of torment yt was appointed him, but moved with hatred or covetousness,
not setting before him the Judges commandment, but this one thing, that he
may satisfy his mind. Will thou think him innocent before the Lord, who
sees the thoughts of the heart, and not rather guilty of murder, yea, eue^ of
sacrilege, who abuses yt sacred judgment of yt Magistrate, to satisfy his
own lust? Such was Satan's fault, when not by the bare sufferaunce of God,
as thou will, but by express commandment, he was sent to ver Job, and also
to deceive Achab. And it is very like, that the Idumeans did no otherwise,
which are reprehended of Obadia, seeing it is probable, that they were not
ignorant of those things which the Prophets had preached against the Jews.
Therefore, that we may strike sail at the last, indeed thou think right,
that thou think, that the wicked are enforced by the will of God, against
those, whom God by them will punish: But here thou art deceived two ways,
and that with a deadly error. First, in that thou think they do not sin,
except it be so, that they exceed measure, which we have proved to be false.
Again, because thou think they can go beyond the bounds and limits which
God has set them: which error lincked with wonderful blasphemy, it
remains, that I reprove. I say therefore, that the Lord, so often as he
decrees any thing (and he first decrees with what punishementes he may
corect the sins of men) is wont also to determine all things (as it were)
with ratified and set limits, of places, of times, and of persons. Also I say,
that all things are so firm and ratified, which God has decreed, that seeing
he is never changed, the issue also must needs follow of all things,
which he has appointed, and altogether such as he has appointed. But I
dispute not here of second causes, least thou should accuse me after thy
manner, as a defe^der of Stoical destiny. I dispute of those governed ends,
which GOD has decreed and determined.

Those ends in deed thou think cannot be removed without unspeakable
wickedness: I think thou art taken convict of double blasphemy,
when thou say this. For I grant, that if they might be avoided, that he
which does this, were guilty of sacrilege, and he seems guilty of
offending the divine Majesty: but that GOD permits any thing to be done
against that he has decreed, I deny, because he should disagree from
himself. Again this I deny, that it is not in any man's power, to pass those
ends which God has set and determined. He that shall deny these, I say, is
guilty of sacrilege, is blasphemous, wicked, and a mad manne. For what
manner of God shall we esteem him, whose sentence is not firm, and ratified,
and whose decree and will should depend upon second causes. For, whereas
thou supposest, that thou canste escape these inconveniences, when thou say,
that the ends, which GOD has prescribed, cannot be passed, except he
suffering, but not willing it, that is, least his will seem inconstant, does
evidently prone thy foolishness. For if he suffer against his will, it
follows, that some thing is dono, which God would not should be done.
Where then is his omnipotency? For, if thou do except, that he would not
it should be done, but that he did not let it, and therefore his
omnipotency not to be imperiled, which could, but would not oppose it
self: neither in deed shall this help thee, From one danger to a greate^
but from Silla thou runnest headlong to Charibdis. For so it should come to
pass, that to suffer should signifye all one thing, as not to hinder: as if
one suffer a stream to run headlong down a hill, which he can stay. But if
God do not let any thing, therefore he lets it not, because that either he
would it should be done, or of the contrary, that he would it should not be
done, or finally, that he cares not whether that thing be done or not. Choose
which of these pleases thee best. If thou say, that GOD will have that
done, which he suffers, thou make with us, or rather with the LORD
himself, who testifyeth that even the Sparrowes, fall not to the ground
without the Heavenly fathers will: nor therefore is there danger, least
thou make GOD the Author of Sin, as we have plentifullye made plain
before. But if thou think, that he suffers something, because he would
not it should be done, who will not think thee without common sense? for he
would rather forbid that, than suffer it. And truly common reason tells, as
the only will of God suffices, that any thing be done, so also, that any
thing be not done, it suffices, because GOD will not that it be done.

There remains a third, that he suffer something to come to pass, which he
wills it be either done or not done, as that be cares not whether it be done
or no. But who knows not that this doctrine is Epicurious? Furthermore, who I
pray thee, besides thee alone, knows not, that ye omnipotency of God
stands not only in this, that be can do what he list, but in this also, that
all the power and strength of all inferioure causes depends of him? But
whence is this strength, but from a willing God? For neither can it be wreasted
from the beginning, neither proceed nor issue, as out of the hands of an idle
God, that inferior causes should be enforced, not by his, but by their own
determination. For I deny not, but that the instruments are in deed enforced,
which are endeued with will, according to their own liking, but because it is
carried to the end ordained of God. For because (as Augustine has
excellently and truly written) the will of God is the necessity of things,
nor that Stoycall, which thou falsely obiectest against us, but which takes
not away the voluntary moving of will, as the same writer has plainly
manifested in his books, entitled of the City of God. Therefore when thou
sayste that God nilling, Of the City of God the. 3. book the S. Chapter, the
ninth and tenth yerses.
but suffering, the limits may be passed which he has set, thou either
spoilest him of his omnipote^cie, or make him light and inconstant, and
finally, contrary to himself. But this thy blasphemy, even all dumb creatures
do reprehe^d with open mouth, which have continued so many thousand years in
their estate: and they plainly confess, that they cannot pass the breadth of
a line, except he will and commands. The strength of I straell will not
deceive, (says Samuel) nor will be removed with repentance, seeing he is not
a man, that he can repent. And Paul says, it is not possible, that the word
of God should fall away. But it must needs fall away in some part, if any
thing, yea, even the least, be done beside his will, yea, eue^ of those which
he does not simply allow. But what do I bring these witnesses? for Balaam
himself that hireling Prophet does reprove thee, GOD is no man that he should
lie, Number. 23.9.
(says he) nor the Son of man, that he should repent. Does he say, and not
do? or speak, and not make good? yea, even Satan himself, that lying and
unclean spirit, does reprove thee, in whom, when there wants not a thousand
ways to do mischief, and is so great wickedness, as we cannot possibly
think, yet he is so straightly bridled, that he cannot even hiss again,
except the Lord with his voice excite him: and is so straightlye fettered,
that he cannot move so much as his finger, but by the Lords assignement. He,
even he, I say, does confute thee, and, albeit against his will, yet he
confesses against the testimony of his own conscience, that thou art
enforced of him, that thou might break out into these blasphemies. For he
acknowlegeth, that, except power be obtained of the Lord, he cannot hurt any,
be it never so little: and then when it is granted him of the Lord, to hurt
(for the Lord gives him this power of his own good will, either, that he may
punish the wicked, or allure, recall, try, and correct his own, as we have
showed before) so often he feels himself constrained to remain within the
determined bounds, Job. 1.12. and. 2.5.6 1. Kin. 22.22 Apoc. 6.4.8., and
7.2.3, and. 9.4.
as appears by the story of Job, Achab, and other testimonies. Therefore,
that I may at the last come to the very place of Zachary, that the enemies
of the Jews, did more grieunously afflict them, than the wrath of Gods
displeasure could bear, yet they could not pass the decree of God, no not
the breadth of a nail. For Gods decree depends further than his displeasure.
And it is showed in these words of the Prophet, that there is no cause why the
people should measure the wrath of God, by the multitude of calamities which
they suffered. For that the Lord sent them a great part thereof, not as
being angry, he would destroy them, but contrarily, as though a loving father
should correct them, that they might return themselves to good life. The
Lord therefore after his manner, as it were some most loving father maffling
with his children, testifies, that he is angrye with their frowardness and
cruelty, to whom he had given his children to be corrected, but not
destroyed, that is, that the Executioners dealte more cruellye with them, than
his displeasure could bear. But all these are no otherwise to be expounded by
(...) humane affection than when we read, that God has bin angry, or
repented, of which matter we will speak anon. For whereas thou triflest
elsewhere, that many things are done against the determination of God, as if
the issue of Gods counsel depended of a condition adiected, and that indeed
such as is set in our power, all this the Church of Basil out of the
word of God has worthily cursed long ago, for sacrilegious blasphemy. And
the rather, because we are entered into this speech, I think good to annexe thy
words out of that unclean quaternion of thine annotations upon the Epistle of
Paul to the Romans, which being by good right condemned of the Church at
Basil, yet thy lykes have not ceased to sperple throughout all Churches. I
hinke therefore good, I say, to recite them, and refell them, because they
belong to this place. Thou say est, it is easy to show, that many things are
done against the determination which is toyned with condition. The
Potter has determined the chalk to be a vessel for the kitchen, but that
vessel is cleft in the furnace, contrary to the determination. God had
determined to bring all the Israelites that he brought out of Egypt, into the
land of Canaan, as Moses himself shows: and therefore were al baptized into
Moses in the cloud: but because they would not assault the Cananites against
the determination, they perished in the wooddes: and as the Scribes fordidde
the counsel of God, in themselves Luke. 7. God had vowed King Ezechias to
death: but by prayers and godliness Ezechias obtained fifteen years contrary
to the determination. Sire hundredth such may be brought. Do thou acknowledge
thy words, thou monster of men, than the which, Satan could not vomit any
more filthy thing against Heaven? For, who is our God, if his counsel depend
upon us? if any thing can come to pass (as thou say in the same place)
against his will and determination? if he be changed like men? if men may
violate his determination? if he shame not to make frustrate to morrow, that
which he determined to day? I humbly beseech you, you noble Senators of the
most famous City, and also you most excellent and well learned Governors of
ye University at Basil, how long will you sufferin your bosom, this shame,
this filth, this monstrous beast? But to the matter: thou deprauest shamefully
and filthily three testimonies, that thou may strengthen thy blasphemy. For
indeed it is true, that those Israelites were not forbidden to go into the
land of Canaan, but for their own fault: but whence do thou understand,
that the Lord did ever otherwise determine of them? from thence, because they
were all baptized in the cloud, as if indeed the Lord had ordained to life
all those that are borne of Abraham, after the flesh, and circumcised, or all
those which are baptized in the Church of Christ. And that which the Lord
says to Moses, Number 8.14.
ye shall not doubtless come into the land, for which I lifted up my hand,
(ye is, I swear) ye I would place you in it: this I say, if thou take to make
for thee, thou art much deceived: and by those which we wrote a little before,
you may easily be refelled. For what answers ye L. to Moses, praying for ye
peopls health? I have forgiven this people (says he) according to Yet by and
by it follows, that except two, none above twenty years old, should enter
into Canaan. What then? verily, yet the LORD says, he spared the people, to
whom he had threatened destruction: nor is this to be taken of every person.
The LORD therefore had sworn to the people, that he would place them in
Canaan: which also he did, albeit they went not in, which had rebelled:
and in deed he partly punished so the Re belles, as yet he showed mercy to
their posterity, and abode by his promise: but partly he so showed himself
merciful to these, as he iustlye punished those, and nevertheless cleared
his own faithfulness, as is showed in the. 20. Chapter of Ezechiel. In the
mean time, there is left no place to the changing of his determination, or
for repentance. For whereas it is sometimes said, that the LORD has
repented: If thou understand not, that it is spoken by figure, in deed thou
know not the first grounds of Christian religion: if thou impudentlye
deniest it, thou art more worthy for thy blasphemye to be suppressed of a
Magistrate, than that thou should be informed of any one.

In the other place, which thou citest out of Luke, thou bewrayest thy
manifest and intolerable malice. From whom did ever this blasphemy proceed
besides thee, that he should say, that men might infringe the counsel of
God? And thou thy self in deed, when in Latin thou did rather pervert
than convert, waste somewhat more shamefaste, for so thou haste interpreted.
When this was heard, the people and publicans being washed with the wasing of
John, praised God. But the Pharisees and Lawyers, (so much as in them did
lie) did foredoe the counsel of God. But say, when thou would add that
exception, as much as in the^ did lie, did thy conscience tell thee, that this
sentence could not stand without this exception? How is it therefore, that that
omitted, thou dare now is impudentlye wreste this testimony, that thou may
ratifye so horrible a blasphemy? But further good Lord, what sacrilegious
impudency is this, to dare so openly transfer the most sacred word of
God, to whose only authority the truth amongst men leans? And indeed I
leave thy washing to such a fine and dainty man as thy self. For we are not
the men which despise baptism: but who taught thee to expound (...) against
themselves as much as in them was. It should rather have been laid (...) as
much as was in them. And seeing that (...) has many significations, why have
thou chosen that which was of al others least appertyyning? was it not because
thou haste determined as much as was in thee, to deprave this place and many
others? For who can not see that those were set against the Publicanes,
embracing the doctrine of God by direct contrary, those who despised the same,
and abandoned it from them? For the word (...) does oftimes declare this: as I
chn. 12.48. and 1. Thessa. 4.8. in the which place thou thy self use the
word of retecting. See thou therefore, most shameless man, that this
testimony does nothing less than confirm thy blasphemy? But I assure thee,
this will come to pass, that if thou repentest not with speed, and bring a
more religious mind to the dealing in holy writings, the very stones will
rather rise against thee, than that thou should escape with this
sacrilegious impude^cie unpunished. That remains which thou alleagest of
Ezechias, of which sort of examples thou auouchest there might be many
brought. It seems good to rcproue thine ignorance with the words of
Calvin himself: because (though thou burst with envy) of this matter there
can be nothing spoken neither more briefly nor more truly, nor more plainly.
Thus therefore he says in that golden work, whose true title is yt
institution of Christian religion, in yt chapter of predestination and the
providence of God, yt 53. and 54. section. As when we hear yt God is angry, we
may not think yt there is in him any disquietnesse, but rather think that
this speech is taken from our sense, because God seems to bear the
countenance of one that is moned, and angry, so often as he executes judgment:
so may we not conceive any other thing by the name of repentance, than the
alteration of his works: because men are wont, in changing their works, to
show that they displeased them. Because therefore every change amongst men, is
the correction of that which displeases, and correction proceeds of
repentance, therefore by the name of repentance is signified that which God
changes in his works. In the mean time, neither his counsel nor will was
infringed, nor his affection changed: but that which from everlasting he had
forsaken, approved and decreed, he prosecuteth with a standing course,
howsoever any soden change may appear to the eyes of men. Nor while the
sacred history reports the destruction forgiven to the Ninevites which
before was published, and the prorogation of Ezechias his life, when death was
denounced, shows what Gods decrees were abrogate. They which so think, are
deceived in threatenings: which albeit they simplye affirm, yet nevertheless
it is to be understand, that they conceive in them a secret condition. Why did
the Lord send Jonas to the Niniuits, who should foreshe we their
destruction? Why did he foretell of death to Ezechias by Esaias? For he could
have destroyed both those and them, without warning of destruction. He therefore
weyed another thing, than forknowing their destruction, they might behold it
coming even hard at hand. Verilye he would not they should be destroyed, but
amended, least they should be destroyed. Whereas therefore he prophecieth that
Nineuy should be destroyed after fortye days, it is therefore done, least it
should perish. Whereas the hope of longer life is cut off to Ezechias, it is
therefore done, that he might obtain by request a longer life. Who sees not
now yt the Lord by such like threatenings would awake them to repentance, whom
he fears, that they might escape the judgment which their sins had
deserved? If that be so, the nature of things inforceth us thither, that in a
simple denuntiation we understand a secret condition, which also we confirm
by like examples. The Lord reproving the king Abimelec, because he had taken
from Abraham his wife, Genesis 20.
uses these words: Behold thou shalt dye, for the woman whom thou haste
taken, for she is the man's wife. And after that he had made excuse, he says
thus: Restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for
thee that thou may live. But if not, know that thou shalt dye the death,
and all that thou haste. See thou that by the first denunciation he might
strike his mind the more vehementlye, to the end he might make him careful
to restore: but by the other he plainly manifests his will? When the like
reason is of other places, infer not upon them, that any thing of the former
counsel of the Lord is disanulled: because he has made frustrat yt he
pronounced. The lord rather makes way to his eternal ordinance, when in
denouncing punishment, he moves the^ to repentance who^ he will spare, than
change any thing in will, no nor in word, except because he sets not down
by sillables yt which is manifest he means. If in teed yt be to stand true
which yt prophet Esaias says, The lord of hosts has determined, and who can
disanul it? his hand is stretched out and who shall turn it away? These says
Calvin, which if they cannot satisfy thee, yet they are such as I trust
will satisfy all governed wits. Nor does it make for thee, which he
mentions of a secret condition, seeing thou, not as he will have the
condition annexed to the den^^^cing of his decree, but to the decree it self:
and that because those things which the Lord has decreed are doubtful and
uncertain, or as if the will of the Lord which is placed in men, be turned
now on this part, now on that, according to the variable end of the
condition, Which opinion is verilye so absurd, and so far estraunged from
the nature of God, that it can never seem to have pleased any man except him
that is stark madds.

The Sycophants sixth Argument to the third slander.
They bring also the example of this prodigal son, which I have already
touched, who if thou sayste the father being willing, went a ryoting, it will be
most absurd the went then against his will. And so they say that offenders
are the prodigal sons of God, and sinning by Gods suffraunce not by his will.

THE REFVTATION.
Because in the exposition of parables there is lest some place to
conjectures, therefore frantique and curious wits, do new here in pride more
liberally vaunt, than in parables. But I rather think, that the end of
parables, is to be considered, and the several part to be so curiously
examined, except it be so that the very interpretation stand upon the
declaration of them, because else it can not be avoided, but we shall run
into most filthy imaginations. Further I grant, that the Lord in this
similitude, does represent unto us his clemency under the form of some most
loving father, and also, that in the person of the prodigal son are sinners set
out which for a while, have as it were withdrawn themselves from the sight of
god, that they might delight themselves in sin, whom yet afterward long tamed
with just afflictions, and returning themselves to good life, the most loving
father receives to grace. The other part of the parable I touch not, because
it belongs not to our purpose. Also let us see to how great purpose thou
reasonest out of this place. Thou deniest that the son went a ryoting with
the fathers will. I grant the sons ryote was not approved of the father, nor
that the father did respect that, that he should ryote, when he let him go.
But thou indeed art a marvelous peremptory man, which in mind conceinest
nothing else of God tha^ that which is incident to man, because God in this
similitude has set out himself to us under the similitude of a mortal father.
As if indeed God should therefore signifye yt he uses not to deal other ways
in any matter with his, than men be wont, and does not rather in this place
set down to us this lone thing, that is his immeasurable goodness even
toward them, who have provoked him to anger with many sins. When thou
missedst these bonds, I say thou art far from the matter. But let us
forgive thee his fault. If any advise to bring an insolent son, and whom by
no means he can hold under, being let go from him, into some greatedaunger,
from the which yet he may deliver him so often as he pleases, and casts him
out thither, because he knows no better way to recall him to amendment,
who will think it to be absurd, if one say that the son run into that
peril with his fathers will? or rather who will not praise the father to be
very wise, rather than reprehende him as fierce and cruel? For he set to
himself in this counsel for the end, not the peril of the son but rather his
safegrade and amendment. But all the elect children must think this same
thing of the heavenly father, albeit yet in this matter the estate of al be not
alike. For because that all things without exception, do fall to the commodity
of them that love the Lord, therefore it can not be doubted but GOD, so often
as he wythdraweth, as it were from his elect, the grace, whereby they were
vpholden, in so much, that they fall even into most filthy sins, does
permit it willing, and by his determined counsel: in no wise, so yet, as if
he allowed their sins, but also by this means he will have the^ admonished of
their imbecilitie, or to arrogate nothing to themselves, or to be more
watchful against the enemy than ever toofore, or if they have already gone
astray, to amend, or also, that they should be a warning to the posteritye.
Therefore he would certain blemishes should be in Abraham, in Moses, and
in Aaron. Therefore he permitted David not but willing to fall into most great
offenses: which counsel of GOD, when afterward he had acknowledged, Psalm.
51.6.
against thee (says he) I have sinned, and done evil in thy sight, that thou
may be justified and clear when thou art judged. For by how much the more
unworthy David was, whom the Lord should forgive, by so much the more did the
faith and constancy of God shine out in keeping his promises, when he did
forgive David. Also the same in another place acknowledging how much he had
profited in that trial. Before I was troubled, Psalm 1119. and 71.
I went wrong, but now I keep thy word. Again, it was good for me that I
was in trouble, that I might learn thy commandments. So out of doubt he
would prepare Peter to modesty, by that threefolde denying, and also Paul to
be buffeted of the Angel of Satan least he should wax insolent. Away
therefore with thy forsaking, or inuoluntarie sufferaunce, as if the father did
never so little time account the prodigal son forsaken. When of the contrary
he was then most careful for his son, when he seemed most angry.

The Sycophants seventh Argument to the third Slander.
They also bring that saying of Christ. And you will not go away: Truly he
would not that they should go away, but he suffered them.

THE REFVTATION.
Yea, so far it is of that he should in this speech bid them go away, or
give them leave to go away, which if be had done, out of doubt he had done it
willingly: that contrarilye, with these words he kept them still with him,
when he had set before them the faythlesse falling away of others, and
recalling secreetly to their remembrance so many benefits as they had
received of him. But thine ignorance must needs be increedible, that
understand not such kinds of speaking that be so common.

The Sycophants eight Argument to the third slander.
Finally, they bring common sense, which says, that there is difference
betwixt will and sufferaunce, according to which common sense Christ was wont
to teach divine matters, and which if thou doste for do, all Christ's
similitudes shall fail, of which we judge by common sense.

REFVTATION.
Thou would never out of aldoubte have spoken so, except the Lord had taken
from thee all common sense: and that indeed by just judgment, as by cause
thou fightest against his providence, the worker of all and eucrye thing, by
thine own example, it might be approved in all the world. In deed I grant
it one thing to bid or command, but another thing to permit, that this, or
that be done: but I say, that common sense does show to
every one, that will is joined with an inseparable bond both with
commandment and with sufferaunce, albeit sometimes men overcome with
necessity or importunity do command or suffer to be done, that which
otherwise they would not. But for as murhe as thou requirest similitudes, go
too, let us declare these with examples dilated. Those that perform their
business by others, it is of necessity, that they give them authority to do
whatsoever apperteyneth to the accomplishmente of that business, as the
procuratour may deal by commandment. But who besides thee alone did ever
think^ to say, that this sufferaunce, was contrary to will, seeing that this
whole sufferance, proceeds of mere will, and so much the more of choice? But
the manner of working is no other, which the lord uses in yt doing of those
things which are done every day. For first he has given to every, not
only sort, but also scuerall, that universal power and faculty which thou
may see manifold. Then he applies this same power every moment to singular
and particular actions, eue^ as by his eternal and inchangeable counsel he
does not only foreknow and govern, but also wills and decrees all things.
And he uses, as we said before, both good and also cuill instruments, which
destruction began not from the creation, but corruption: but so he uses them,
that if there be anys vice in the instruments, this contagion come not so far
as unto him. For he rightly decrees, wills, and permits, not only those
things, which the voluntary instruments will, and do justly, but also those,
which wicked instruments will and do wickedly, as we have plentifullye made
plain before. But all these, not otherwise, than by the willing sufferaunce of
God, do that which they do. For what thing in heaven or in earth, has of it
self either this power, or use of this power, whether he use it rightly or no?
Therefore I profess, that I cannot see what common sense can show thee, that
sufferaunce can be separated from will, or that God can suffer any thing
against his will. Yet I confess, that there is otherwise great odds
betwixt God and men, using the help and procuration of men. For that we say
nothing of the lewd counsels of men, that, which for the most part men do,
being enforced with necessity, ^^cause they cannot accomplish their own, nor
other men's matters, God does it with most free will: seeing otherwise he is
of himself Omnipotent, and in himself altogether (...) sufficient.


Men often times either by fear or force, or by some other mean constrained
rather than provoked, do permit many things, which they would not undone. But
God alone decreeing with most free will, permits that which
he does permit. Because Apollo in the Poets swears rashly, by the law of an
oath, after a sort he is constrained to grant the Chariot to Phaeton
perishing. Yet he willing, grants the Chariot, because the regard of an
oath prevailed more with him, than the certain peril of his son. Jupiter
complains in Homer with tears, Mat. 14.10. Mat. 6.27.
because he could not when he would, denuer his Sa^pedo from present death.
Herod swearing rashely, when he heard the head of John Baptiste to be
required, and being heavy, advised with himself whether he had rather, the
maid being rejected, fall into the crime of perjury, or kill most cruelly
the most innocent man, not showing cause why: and at the last, not so much I
think, for conscience, which was none, as moved with vain glory and
ambition, least he should seem to have sworn unadvisedly, or in performing
an oath inconstant, does not only suffer, but commands the head of John,
being cut off, to be given the maid in her hands, as Mark very well notes. A
sick man fearing his life, gives himself to the Surgeon, to be cut: yet
not against his will, yet not altogether with free will. The same we may
think of the Merchaunte, who in a great tempest, does not only suffer his
merchandise to be cast over boorde, but also he with his own hands does
cast them over. Behold thou many eramples of sufferaunce in all which, yet Will
cannot be secluded from Sufferance. Be it far from us, yet to conceive any
like things of God, because neither rashenesse, nor ignorance, nor repentance
take place in him, nor is he enthralled to any necessity. For as Augustine
says well and learnedly, the life of God, and the foreknowledge of God, we
put not under necessity, if we say, it is of necessity, that God live ever,
and know all things: as his power is not lessened, seeing he is said, not to
can dye, or be deceived. For thus he cannot this thing, that indeed he were
rather, if he could, of less power. Yet he is rightlye called Omnipotent, who
cannot dye, nor be deceived. For he is called Omnipotent. by dwing what he
will, and not in suffering what he will not. Therefore, that I may dispatche
at once a way to Anticyra, with that thy common sense, and there, An I Will in
Thessalie where Helleborus gro vveth, which purges melancholy.
if thou causte, having drunk a gallon of Helleborus, learn at ye last to be
wise, and so to dispute of common sense, that we may vnterstand thee to be
endued with some sense. For where thou say, that Christ was wont to teach
divine matters according to common sense, who will ever grant it thee,
except he be voice of all Christian religion? Christ uses, I grant,
familiar kinds of speaking, but where did thou ever know, that divine
matters did agree with our common sense, and therefore, that they could be
taught according to our common sense? Paul cries, that the natural man
perceives not those things that are of God: the same witnesses, that To (...)
the wisdom of the flesh, is enmity againsts God: the same professes, that
he teaches, that doctrine, which should of the Gentiles be taken for
foolishness. The same cries, O Man, who art thou? and O the deepth of Gods
judgments: and Christ praising Peter's confession, Flesh and blood (says
he) have not revealed that to thee. But thou on the contrary vrgest us to
common sense, as the supreme judge of Gods mysteries. Show us therefore most
pregnant fellow, why the Lord protracted the calling of the Gentiles so long:
how the word could become flesh: how Christ is borne of a Virgin: how he
can feed us in earth with his quickening flesh, which is in Heaven: how the
Lord will, which thou haste foolishly denied, that many should be borne to
misery, that he might be glorified in them, as by the example of him that was
borne blind, and by Christ's own words we have taught: why the calling of
many should be deferred to the last time of their life: How may it be, that
the greatest part of men should hear nothing at all of CHRIST: how the
Lord seeing he can save all, enen only with a beck, yet saves few: and why,
of two equal in themselves, he rather saneth this than that. Finally, that we
may persiste in the propounded example, (there be infinite of that sort) I
pray^ thee, that by thy common sense thou will foredoe this dubble knotte
which Augustine fasteneth. Great, (says he) are the works of the Lord, that
in a wonderful and inspeakeable manner, that be not done besides his will,
which is done against his will, because it should not be done, if he did not
suffer it, nor indeed does he suffer against his will, but willingly. Also,
if we suffer those that be under our authority to commit evils before
our eyes, we shall be guilty with them. But how innumerable does he suffer
to be done before his eyes, which if he would not, he would by no means
suffer? and yet he is just and good.

That remains, which thou reportest of Similitudes, as if in deed Christ
did add them for plainness sake, as we use in teaching. But I grant indeed,
that they are taken of familiar experience, but so far it is off, that I
agree unto thee, that they are alleged for perspicuitie, that contrarily
trusting to ye testimony of the holy Ghost, I affirm, that it was done by the
just judgment of an angry God, that Christ's might set down his mysteries to
a faithless and adulterous nation riddle wise. Mat. 13.10.11.13.14.15.16. Mat.
4.11.12. (...). 8.10.
For there is great odds between similitudes, which in declaring a thing are
wont to be used of Masters, and those, which they call Parables, which thou
maiste call more rightly Allegories, or Kiddles, tha^ Similitudes. But why
should we not credit the holy Ghost rather than thee?

The fourth Slander.
All the wicked acts that man commits, are the good and just works of
God.

THE ANSWER.
WHat is it to play the Devil, In his book of eternal Predestination.
if this be not? The words of Calvin which thou have wrested, are these. We
must (says he) see how the will o^f GOD is cause of all things that are
done in the world, and yet GOD is not the Author of evils. I will not say
with Augustine (which yet I reverence as spoken truly of him,) that in Sin
or evil, there is nothing posititious. For it is a sharp saying which would
not content many. But I make choice of an other beginning. Those things which
are wickedly and unjustly done of men, the same are the right and just works
of God. If this seem to some at the first sight a Paradox, Beyond the
common opi^^^^.
let them not at the least be so high minded, but a little be content with
me to enquire out of the word of God what is to be thought. These says
Calvin. Then he shows by ye Scriptures, how God by his counsel governs
those things which seem most casual, what is the Stoicall necessity, and
how far casualtie is not abandoned. Then he descends to those actions wherein
the counsels and endeuoures of men come in betwixt, and teaches, that God
works, so as that that be performed which was or dained from abone, even by
the wicked themselves, albeit unwitting and against their will. Summarily,
Calvin teaches, that God works well, even by evil instruments so often as
pleases him, nor therefore, that himself is allied to any fault, or that
the evil instruments do not sin. If he speak either wickedly, or unaptly, or
too obscurely that speaks so, let yt holy Ghost be blamed of all these
faults. For yt Lord lets not in Isai to call yt miserable destruction of
Jerusalem full of al calamities, Isa^. 10.12.
and so much the more of offenses, his work, but utterly in a contrary respect.
So Peter doubts not to say, that Christ was betrayed by the determinate
counsel and foreknowlege of God. Act. 2.2^.
The Church at Jerusalem accords with Peter, and speaks yet more sharply,
if there be in these kinds of speaking any sharpness at all. For it speaks
of Herod and Pontius Pilate, no otherwise, than of the Executioners of the
counsels of God. Also Paul says plainly, that God spared not his son.
David says, that Joseph was sent before of the Lord into Egypt. The same
calls his adversaries, the Hand and Sword of the Lord. The Lord himself
calls Nabuchadnezer his servant. But is this with the Libertines, to make God
the Author of sin, or to intermixe the wicked acts of the ungodly with the
sacred works of God? But of these it is spoken plainelye in the depelling of
the former slander.

The Sycophants arguments to the fourth Slander.
Against the fourth, against that of the Prophet Isai, they cry out: We be to
them that call good evil, and evil good. If sin be good, and the just work
of God, it follows, that righteousness is the evil and unjust work of God,
for righteoousnesse is every way contrary to sin. If sin be just, it
follows, that injustice be just. For sin is injustice. If son be the work
of God, it follows, that God does commit sin: and if he commit sin, he is
the servant of sin, by Christ's sentence. If sin be the work of God, and
Christ came to abolishe sin, he came to abolishe the work of God. But if he
came to abolish the works of the Devil (as Peter witnesses) which be the
works of the Devil? if sin be the just work of God, God hates and
punishes his own just work, therefore he is unjust. But if it be objected to
them, that sin is not sin to God, they will answer, to whom therefore is
it sin, or why does he himself hate it, or why is it sin, but because it is
contrary to the law, not of men, but of God? If sin be the work of God, God
commits sin, and if God commits sin, he sins, as he that does
righteousness is righteous. But if God sin, why does he forbid others to
sin? why does he not rather command them to sin. that men may follow
him? The child ought to follow his father. Be ye holy (says he) for I am
holyes Therefore by the same reason it shall be said: Commit sin, for I
commit sin.

THE REFVTATION.
Truly thou could not cite any place more to the purpose than this of I
sai, that it may wholye agree with thee and thy faction. For what else is it
to call God evil, tha^ to do that you do, that is, to pervert those things
which be we! and godly written with most filthy slanders. See therefore how
gently and simply I will deal with thee: whatsoever thou collectest by these
arguments, I consent to thee, that it is true: but it may be, I grant thee
more, than in deed thou would, that is, that thou art brainelesse and
stark mad, that thou sholdest hold such a conflict in so hot contention
against thine own shadow. I will only in few words answer to yt objection,
which y^ unworthily layst to our charge. For we do not say yt sin against
God, is not sin, but when we distinguish between the works of God and of
Satan, or the wicked, we use to say this in respect of God working, the works
are good and just, which works, if we consider the evil instruments, as they
also work, are evil and unjust, and therefore are of God punished with just
punishments. This is not our distinction, Isai. 10.5.6.12. Act. 2.23. and
4.28.48. Epist. to Vin centios.
seeing the Lord in Esaias does manifestly confirm the same: and Peter also,
with the whole Church at Jerusalem, as we have taught a little before. So also
Augustine, when he says the father delivered his son, and the Lords own
body, and Judas the Lord: why is God in this actio^ just, and man guilty,
except because in one thing which they did, yt cause not one, for which they
did it? But if also thou please to read that which the same Augustine has
after his manner deuoutlye and wittilye written of these matters in his
Enchiridion to Laurentius, in the. 100. Chapter, thou shall understand many
which ought to have bin understood of thee before thou should reprehend our
doings. Therefore this distinction you must either grant or refute, A monster
with ^hree heads.
not that Chimaera, which thou imaginedst to thy self, seeing that
appertains nothing to us: and this heresy of the Libertines, is of none more
vehementlye and plentifully confuted, than of Calum himself, whom thou
chargest with that, such is thy shame.

The fifth Slander.
No adulterye, theft, or murder is committed, but the will of God comes in
betwixt. Instit. Chap. 14 Distinct. 44.

THE AVNSVVER.
IF thou had added that which Calvin in that place handles in good earnest
against that self heresy, which thou no less impudently than wickedly,
layest to our charge, the^ at yt last it should have appeared to have bin truly
said which thou sclaunderously reprouest. For we say not simply, that the will
of God does come in betwixt in these things which be evil, but we add two
things. One is, that the will of God does so come in between even in these
things, yet as in no case he allow, or do work in the^, in that they be evil
but as they be yt punishments of other evils, or else by the^ the Lord
executes his, in deed sometimes secret, but yet always just judgments. The
other, that yt Lord so often as pleases him, does so use, even evil
instruments, to yt performing of his just works, yt the instruments in yt mean
time, do in no case obey the will of God, but in deed do resist it by direct
contrary. Of both we have said already very many things. Yet I will in few
words repeat some of them, that at the last I may satisfy thee. When the
Lord would punish the adultrey of David, behold says he, I will stir up
against thee evil out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives in thy
sight, and I will give them to thy neighbor, and he shall sleep with thy
wines in the sight of this sun. For thou did it in secret, but I will do
this thing before all Israel, and before the sun it self. But say Sycophant
he that does these (and the Lord does all these justly, nor is the author
of incest, Isal. 33.1.
but he justly punishes adultrey and murder) does he seem to thee not to put
in his will between? When thou shalt cease to spoil, says the Lord, thou
shall be spoiled. And does not the Lord seem to them to have given over
willinglye spoylers into the hands of other spoylers? If thou dare deny
this, the Lord himself shall refell in the same Prophet Esaye, speaking to
the Medes and Persians, Isai. 13.3.
by whom he had determined to spoil the Babilonians, the spoylers of yt
Jews. I have given commandment to my holy ones, and have called the mighty
to my wrath. But what? when the Lord said to Satan, Behold, whatsoever
things Job has, are in thy power, did he decree nothing: and a little after
did Job spoke blasphemy, when having despised the roberie of Satan and the
Chaldeis, he said, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away? And when the
Lord says, that it will come to pass, that be that stryketh with the sword,
shall perish with the sword, does he not seem to thee to speak of those
judgments which he willingly executes by the hands of others, yea even when
one spoyler spoyleth another. Therefore the will of God, and that iusse and holy
comes in betwixt, both then also when men do evil, and therefore have just
punishmente. But I think it good to cite the very words of Calvin, not
named, as thou have done, but whole, that I may set out to all men to be seen
thy singular malice and impudency. In those things which are already come to
pass, many do esteem the providence of God wickedly and most unworthily. All
things yt are done, have respect to the order of the divine providence.
Therefore neither theftes, nor adulteries, nor murders are committed, but the
will of God comes in betwixt. Why do they therefore say the thief shall be
punished, which has despoyled him, whom the Lord will chastise by poverty?
Why shall the murderer be punished, which killed him, whose life the Lord had
ended? If all these obey the will of God, why shall they be punished? Thus
far Calvin has spoken in the person of the Lybertynes, in which matter thou
bewrayest such lewdness as has not been heard of, which attributest to
Calvin himself, which being spoken in the person of the Lybertines, in the
same place he afterward refuteth in these words. For he adds these: but
indeed I deny, that they obey the will of God. For we say not, that he
which is carried with an evil mind, does yield his ministry to God
commanding, seeing he only obeys his wicked affection. He obeys God, who
being informed of his will, endeavors to that end whereto he is called of
the same. And whence are we instructed, but out of his word? Therefore in the
accomplishment of matters, yt his will is to be sought of us, which he
declares in his word. That only God requires of us which he comma^deth. If we
commit any thing against the commandment, it is not obedience, but
disobedience and transgression.

Calvin adds further, other objections of the Libertynes, which in an other
place I will set against thine arguments. But now, naughty fellow, art thou not
ashamed of thy self, because thou obiectest to Calvin those very thying which
he has dissolved? Thou dealest even in such sort as the Epicures are wo^t,
Psalm. 14.1.
which will enforce David on their side, because it is written in him. There is
no God.

The sixth Slander.
The Scripture manifestly witnesses, that wicked acts are assigned to God,
not only willing, but the author thereof.

THE AVNSVVER.
WIit thou Devil never leave to Slander: No one man within all memory has
beaten down either more vehemently, or more Godly, this blasphemy of the
Lybertines, than Calvin, and will it not shame thee so often to urge the same lie
in other words? How often have I answered already, with how many
Testimonies taken out of Calvin himself, have I laid open your impudency? I
will not repeat again now that I have said a thousand times. Yet it shall
be labor worth, to see what occasion thou tookest to patch this flaunder.
Calvin wrote in his book of eternal Predestination, against Pyghius and
Siculus, out of whose puddles you have drawn your unclean filthynesse. In his
book of eternal prodest. of Saints. 20. ca.
Augustines sentence (says he) must be kept: when God will any thing to be
done that must not be done, but by me^ willing, that he together inclines
their hearts, that they become willing, and works in their hearts not only
by helping, but also in judging, that they, who had no such purpose, may fulfill
that counsel, which his hand has determined. And by and by, here truly it may
easily be gathered, how vain and inconstant that defense of divine tustice
is. That those things which be evil, are not done by his will, but only by
his sufferance. Truly, for as much as they are evil which are done of men with
an evil mind (as I will set down more plainly anon) I grant they do in no
case please God. But whereas they feign that he suffers those things being
idle, which the Scripture pronounces to be done, not only with his will, but
he being author, is too fryuolous a shifte. Thus far Calvin, whom indeed
thou thoughtst to hold enta^gled in thy snares, when thou read these things,
but how foolishely, I will show anon. For I will gratifye thee, and allege
another like place out of Caluines book against the Lybertynes, Chap. 14. The
Lord (says he) is highly displeased, when we suppose yt any thing proceeds
from any other place, and do not behold him, that we may acknowledge him, not
only as the chief cause of al, but also as author, determining by his counsel
al things by this or that mean. So therefore let us conclude, as well prosperity
as adversity, Raines, Winds, Hayles, Frost, fairness, abundance, famine,
war, and peace be the works of God: and the creatures, which be inferior
causes, be only instruments which he has in use to execute his will, and
therefore, that he uses them as he pleases, turns them which way soever
he will, and brings them to that point, that it may altogyther be performed
that he has determined. These be Caluins words, which if thou takese, as if
he said, that God were the author of wicked acts, or wills sin, thou
certainly exceedest all impudency, seeing Calvin in those places confuteth
that same blasphemy. And byeause many, that they may disolue the Argument of
the Lybertines, do rushe out into another error, not much less to be
reproved, as those which determyne an idle sufferaunce of God in most matters
for the action, therefore before all things he has thought this error to be
refuted. He teaches therefore, that God executes his work, no less by evil
instruments than by goodtand therefore, seeing he always works as (...) al
sufficient of himself, not as an idle beholder, nor only the geuernour of the
very end, but to come in betwixt as the very author: the author, I say, not
of the work, which evil instruments do wickedlye: (for this thou have added
of thine own store Sycophant) but of that work which God does most fustly by
them, then also when they do most wickedlye. Calvin does not teach, that
wicked acts are committed, God either being willing or the author of them: but
he teaches that which is most true, albeit the evil instrument sin by
cause he works with a depraved will, yet God does nothing less than sin,
when he works well by an evil instrumente, and that he is the author of
this his most holy work. So by Satan and the wicked, he continually
exercises and confirms his Church. So, so often as he pleases, he reuengeth
the wicked, by the hands of the wicked. So he chastized his people by the
Assyrians. So he would by Absalom punish the adultery of David, when David
himself was saved. So by Joseph's breethren, he prepared a place of refuge for
his Church. If thou denyest these, I call thee to the testimony of the
Scriptures, which indeed almost infinite we have cited in the depelling of the
third sclaunder, that I may omit those things which we have so often
described word for word out of Augustine and Calvin upon the same matter.
Do thou now Devil acknowledge thine own impudency.

The Sycophants Arguments to the fifth and sixth Sclaunder.
AGAINST the fifth and sixth, they say both many other things, and especially
these: if God wills sin, and is the author of sin, God himself is to be
punished, for sin must needs be punished in the author of it. If God
wills sin, the Devil wills not sin, for the Devil is contrary to God
in all things, if God wills sin, he loves sin, and if he love sin, he
hates righteousness. If God wills sin, he is worse than many men, for
many men will not sin, but how much so ever any one comes nearer to the
nature of GOD, so much the less he wylleth sin. Why then says Paul,
The good that I would do I do not, but the evil that I would not, that I
do? Why wills not Paul that which God wills, or why wills Paul that
which God wills not? Finally, they ask what Scripture does witness, that
wicked acts are committed to God, not only being willing, but the author
thereof.

THE AVNSVVERE.
WHat should I (Sycophante) contend with more words against thee? thou art
out of thy wits, when thou think us so foolish, as that we should ever
think that GOD wills, or loves Sin, or that evils are cominitted to GOD
as the Authoure. But what soever in this place thou have sottishlie wrested
against us, who knows not, that they are drawn from him whom thou do
strive against? Therefore thou art not only shameless and a lewd man, but
also unthankful, which dissemblest by whom thou have profyted.

The seventh Slander.
Whatsoever men do when they sin, they do it by the will of GOD: for because
the will of God often times strives with his commandment.

THE AVNSVVERE.
ALbeit Satan and Infidels can not execute, be it never so little, either
against the godly, or ungodly, except God decree it, will it, and permit
it. Yet it follows not, that the sin which they do, they should do it by
the will of God. For albeit God wills that same thing which Satan and Insidels
will, yet he wills not after the same forte, and in that respect, as Satan
and Infidels will. For God wylleth justly, and works by them justly, that
which these both will and do wickedly: by cause they are so enforced of God,
that yet they do their own parts, that is, with counsel and will depraved.
There is therefore great dissension, where there seems to be greatest
agreement, and of the contrary great agreemente, where there seems to be
much discord. Of the which matter I think good to add that excellent place
of Augustine, that thy slander may be the better seen. In his Enchiridion to
Lavvre^rtus. Cap. 100.
So therefore he writing to Laurentius says, which place Calvin has aptlye
cited, and adorned with excellent examples. Sometimes, (says he) man wills
that with good will, which God will not, yea, he with good will much more,
and much more certain: as if a good son would his father should live,
whom God with good will will have to dye. And again, it may be, that Man will
that with an evil will, which God wills with good will, as if an eutil son
would his father should die, also God wills it: the other truly wills
that which God wills not: but this wills that which God wills, and yet
the godliness of the other, albeit willing an other thing, is rather consonant
to the good will of God, than the ungodliness of this, who wills the same
thing. So much it differs what manne wills, and what be agreeable to God,
and to what ends every one refer his will, that either it be approved or
improued. For God performs certain his wills, and that good, by the evil
wills of wicked men, as by the auill willing Jews, by the good will of the
father Christ is stain for us, which was so great a good, that the Apostle
Peter, when he would not it should be done of him that would be stain, be
was called Satanas. How good appeared the goodwils of the godly faithful,
which would not that the Apostle Paul should go up to Jerusalem, least he
should suffer those evils there, which Agabus ye prohet had foretold? And
yet God would have him suffer these things for manifesting the faith of
Christ, exercising the martire of Christ, neither did he fulfill his own
good will, by the good will of the Christians, but by the evil will of the
Jews: and they rather appertained to him, which would not that he would,
than those by whom being willing he did that he would, because that same
thing indeed, but he by them with good will, but they performed with an evil
will. But all wills be either of Angels or of men, either of good or of evil:
either willing that which God wills, or an other than God wills the will
of the omnipotent God remains always inuicted which can never be evil,
because also when it ordains evil, it is just, and verily, that which is
just is not evil. Behold the first part of thy slander plentifullye,
truly, and plainly manifested. Now I come to the other wherein thou do
maliciouslye imagine, that Calvin teaches, that the will of God is often
contrary to his commandment. I will first speak of the matter it self,
then I will show Caluins words, that every man may know thine impudency,
in deprauing them. We grant, that the Lord in the table of the
commandments, and the explication thereof, has plainly and simply
manifested to us his will, so much indeed as makes to the leading of a
godly and innocent life. Yet I say thou art brainelesse and stark mad, if
thou think that all the will of God is comprehended in his law. For what?
Does not the free redemption by Christ appertain to his will. Yet is there of
this benefit no mention in his law. For the declaration of this law,
belongs to the other part of the divine word, which is called the Gospel.
But while we speak so, do we attribute to God two wills, and those repugnant
by dircete contrary? For these be contraries, Except thou do al these things,
thou shall dye the death: and albeit thou do them not, yet, if thou do
believe, thou shall live. Yet God forbid, that we should attribute to God two
wills, much less contrary, seeing the will of God is ever one, most simple
and like it self. For the LORD never gave his law with that will, that by it
he might save us, but rather that thereby being conuicte of unrighteousness,
he might bring us to CHRIST. Nor does the Gospel abolish righteousness by
the law, but that which we find not in our selves, it teaches to be freely
imputed in Christ by Faith: Thou see therefore, that there are not straighte
two wills, where there appeared two, nor that there is repugnaunce there,
where appeared to be chief. I will proceed. If thou think that thou know
whatsoever GOD will, nor that there is over and above. any secreate will of
GOD, say, I pray thee, what shall befall to thee or me to morrow by the will
of the Lord. Prophecy how long the Lord will suffer, that thou shalt waste
the Church of GOD. Or if thou like not to telthese, foreshewe by thy Sybilles,
which I hear thou art wont to prefer before the holiest Prophets
themselves, as more worthy and evident, which of the two Kings shall
conquer, Henry or Phillip. For if thou will accomplish this, and thou shalt
easilye do it, if there be no secreate will of God above thy reach, thou shall
deliver many miserable mortal men of great care and heaviness: and that
which thou miserablye gapedst for long ago in vain, thou shalt by and by
get thy self a great name. It rayned with us this day in the morning. the
rest of the day was fair y nough. Let us set of the contrary, that in the same
instants it was fair at Paris when it rayned here, and that it rayned when it
was fair here. All these things came to pass by the determination and will of
GOD. Are there therefore together in him two wills, and those indeed
contrary? But do not you Sycophantes acknowledge at the last, how sottishe,
how foolish, and ridiculous you are? For when we say, that there is a
certain will of GOD revealed to us, but says also, there is a secreate will,
by and by with great laughter, you for such sage and reverent men do ask,
whether there be two wills in God, and how we know this secret will. As
though in deed when we say so, it be not sufficiently apparent, that we
say not any other thing, than that the will of God, that is, his eternal
counsels, be partly manifested to us, so much as concerns our health, as
Paul witnesses Act. 20. that he had showed all the counsel of God to the
Ephesians, that he might shut up all the way to false doctrine: but
partly yet to remain secret, that is, forasmuch, as according to his
infinite wisdom and power, he has decreed many things, and daily
executes, which exceed all the capacity and understanding even of the
Angels themselves, much more of miserable Dwarffs, and so much the more
ought rather to be religiously reverenced, than curiouslye searched. But if
thou do not acknowledge this to be true, thou art more than senseless and
stark mad. Yea in the self same doctrine, which he has manifested to us.
How many things be there, whereof we may in no case doubt, and yet whereof,
if thou endeuourest to enter consideration, thou doatest no less, than if thou
would, comprehend God himself? This brightness dazeleth the light of
our eyes, both in the contemplation of many things, but also most chieflye in
this argument, that we handle.

For seeing it is an assured truth, that God hardens whom he will, and that
this will cannot be withstoode, if thou ask how therefore God is not in the
fault, thou shall show which in deed is the truth, that men be sufficiently
convinced with the testimony of their own conscience, but because that reason
cannot satisfy man's judgment, it is of necessity, that thou say with Paul,
O man, who art thou that conte^dest against God? Romans 9.20.
And when thou haste reasoned many things of these mysteries of God, if will be
of necessity, Romans 11.33.
that thou cry out with Paul, O the deepenesse of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God: and with David, Thy judgments O Lord, are as
the great deepes: and with Isai, Psalm. 36.5.
Thou shall secreatly reverence his infinite omnipotency. All your subtilties
therefore do fail, or rather your brabb^ing trifles, as though we should
assign, that God were contrary to himself. For albeit, that man's mind cannot
comprehend by what reason that should not be done besides his will which is
against his will, as Augustine says, yet it follows not that this is not
true, seeing there be extant so many and manifest testimonies of the word
whereby it may be confirmed to be so, as we have showed. For that idle
sufferaunce in the action of evil instruments, and that only moderation of
the success and alone conversion of good into evil, besides that it is
reselled with most manifest places of holy Scripture, it is also contrary to
the nature of God, who should have no action in revenging evils. Yet
Augustine alleges that reason which may always satisfy all reasonable
dispositions, Lib. against I^lizans, 5. Ca. 3.
as we have showed before in the confuting of the third slander. For how
often works the Lord by evil, and therefore sinning instruments: albeit the
actions themselves of their own nature be sins, yet in respect of God
working, they are no sins, but the punishments of sins, wherewith either
the Lord reuengeth sins paste, or prepares his to patience, or does both
together. Therefore God even then, when he seems to will sin, which yet he
has forbidden in the Law, cannot seem unlike himself, yea rather he
shows himself such a one as the law does set him forth to us, that is, a
severe punisher and revenger of wickedness. But no man (in my judgment)
has more plainelye she wed this thing, than Calvin, and verily in that very
place which thou though-test best to reprehend.

There is not (says he) any cause, why any manne should draw God into the
society of the fault, so often as betwirte his secret counsel, and the
manifest wicked desires of men there appears any likelihoode. And by and by,
of a truth, (says he) when Paul cries out: O the Profunditie, he plainly
teaches, that there was some other judgment of God concerning the Jews, than
is expressed in Christ's words: Jerusalem how often would I have gathered thy
children together. And whereas he would not the sons of Hely should obey
their father, that will differed from the precept of the Law, wherein he
commands children to obey their parents. But this is the place, of which
thou haste patched thy slander, and indeed with apparent lewdenesse. For, for
to differ from the precept of the law, thou haste placed, to fight against
the precept of the Law. But those things which do differ in themselves, do
not yet of necessity rebel one against an other? as in this kind:
Frowardness does not fight against obedience, insomuche indeed, as God
wills it. For God wills not, that the sons of Hely should be rebels
against their father, as beholding and allowing this rebellion in it self, but
rather by this means making way to his just judgment. But do these fight
between themselves, and not rather especially accord in themselves, to
command, that obedience be showed to parents, and to punish those that
rebel against that precepte, with another rebellion, that they may reap
their just punishment at the last? Further, least I seem to thee to fly
to subtilties, let us hear what exposition Calvin gives of this saying,
least thou may complain of darkness or of doubtfulnesse. For what is
more indifferent than that he himself be the interpreter of his own mind?

Many (says he) be deceived in that, because they conceive not, that God
justly wills those things which men sin in doing. Thou will say,
How? He abhors adulteries and incestuous conjunctions. Whereas Absalom
defiles his fathers Concubine be sore the people, is it done with the will of
God? But he had foretold by his servant Nathan, that he would do this. I
will take (says he) thy wives before thine eyes, and will give them to thy
neighbor, who shall lie with them in the sight of this sun. Thou did
it secreatlye, but I will do it before all the people, and before the sun.
The Scripture is full of such examples. Shall we therefore, either impute to
GOD the guiltiness of sin, or shall we coin a dubble will in him, that he
may be at odds with himself? God forbid. But as I have showed already,
that he wills the same thing with the wicked and ungodly, but in a diverse
sort: so now is to be observed what things be diverse in sort, that he
wills in like manner, that in this variety which seems to our minds,
the Harmonye may be well ordered. Forasmuch, as the grievous offense of
Absalom is savage impiety against his father, the treacherous violation of
Wedlock, yea, the filthy Profanation of the order of Nature, do undoubtedly
displease GOD, who is pleased with Honesty, Chastity, Faith, and Modesty,
who will have the lawful order which he has prescribed to be amongst
men reverenced and kept inuiolate. Yet, because it pleased him this way to
punish the adulterye of David, he wills in the same sort those things,
which to us seem diverse. It is therefore one and a simple will, whereby he
commands what ought to be done, and by which be punishes the breach of his
laws.

It is said elsewhere, that sins be punishments, which he requiteth for
sins paste. Romans ^ 2.3.24.25.26.27 28. (...) I ^^s. 2.10.12.
In such documents we are to con^^der two things: the just indgement of God,
where by he declares, that he hates sin, to which he inflicteth punishment:
and the wickedness of man, which is apparently contrary to the will of God.
But what marvel is it, if such immesurable brightness ^oe darken the light
of our mind? The bodily cies are not sufficient to behold the brightness of
the Sun: is there either more clearenesse to our wit, or is the Majesty
of God inferior to the brightness of the Sun? It is not therefore meet
that we be too wise: least in the mean time we either deny that which the
Scripture does plainly teach, and experience confirm, or dare be bold to
challenge, as unsitting for God. Hitherto Calvin. And thou shamest not
Sycophant, the most shameless of all others that ever lived, to affirm this
that Calvin says, that the will of God is often against his commandment,
that is, that God dissenteth from himself? I pray thee Reader, that even by
this thou will consider what is the conscience and religion of these men.

The Arguments of the lying Sycophant, to the seventh flaunder.
Of the seventh they ask, if the will of GOD be often contrary to his
commandment, how it may be known when he wills or nilleth that he
commauneth

REFVTATION.
It is thine own forgerie, that the will of God is contrary ts his
commandment, therefore, thou do as mad men, wound thy self, when thou
writest these things, that which the Lord commands we say does please him,
and whatsoever he forbids, does displease him: but if he seem sometimes to
wisll that which he has forbidden in the law, yet is there no repugnance in
him, because the Lord in one sort, and for the same end, may will those
things which by nature are repugnant, as by manifest testimonies of Scripture
we have showed you a little before.

The Sycophantes second Argument to the seventh Sclaunder.
IF (says Calvin) it should always be done that he commands, whether he
wills or nilleth it, it follows, that he wills that sometimes his will
be resisted, for if he command me, that I should not commit adultery, and
yet wills that I commit adultery, and yet I ought not to commit
adultery, I ought to do against his will.

THE REFVTATION.
OVT of doubt thou have a wonderful wit: we say and affirm, that the will
of God is not elsewhere to be sought, but in the word of God. And that which
thou addest, whether he will or nill, thou addest of thine own store, as
Sycophantes use to do. But to will, is sometimes said of those things which
we allow simply, and by themself, if we be good, because they be good, if we
be evil, because they are evil, for both good men are delighted with good
things, and evil men are delighted with evil things. But sometimes we are
said to will that, which also, albeit we utterly reiecte by it self, yet for a
certain end we desire, and yet for all that we do not either dissente from our
selves, or will that our purpose should be withstoode, because that those
things which by their own nature ars contrary, do yet very well accord in
themselves, for as much as we will them. Good Princes study to preserve peace,
and wills that the lives, not only of all, but of every other subjects be
safe kept, yet the same command, that offenders be slain, and they appoint
wars, which are accomplished with the lives of Citizens. But what can be in
themselves more repugnant, than to preserve life, and to kill? peace and war;
but yet with one and the selfsame will, yea even in one respect, good Princes
sometimes will them both. The Lord condemns theft, yet the same wills that
Job be proved and excused by theft. Here is no repugnancie in the will of
God: for to forbid theft, and to confirm the patience of his servant, by
what means soever it be done, do in deed differ, but they are not contrary:
only the repugnance is between the will of God, and the will of Satan,
because Satan wills wickedly that which God wills well. God condemns
adulteries, and worthily casts prostrate incestuous persons under severe
torments. It pleased the same to punish the adultery of David, with the
incest of Abselom, and here is no repugnance, yea, an especial consent.
Neither wills the Lord the incest of Abso lo^ as incest, but as the
correction of an adulterer. Therefore where the Lord may seem himself to
transgress his own law, so far it is off that he should violate it, that he
even punishes the transgression thereof. But again, the evil will of Absalom
strives with the good will of God, ^lbeit in appearance they seem both to
will one thing, for God will punish the adultery of David, and also the
arrogancy and untruth of Absalom himself. But Absalom willingly and wittingly
does that, which he knows to be forbidden, both by Gods and Man's laws,
therefore he sins against God, against nature, against his father, and
against himself. See thou Sycophant that thy subtelties do fail of
themselves? for that these may not serve thy turn, yet that saying of
Augustine remains sure, in a wonderful and unspeakable manner, that is not
done besides the will of God, which is done against his will. Thou will say,
thou do not conceive it, but the Sun shines, albeit the Poles see nothing.

The Sycophants third Argument to the seventh slander.
BUT now, when he gives universally commandment to Israel, commit not
adultery, whether will he they should not all commit adultery, or that
part should commit adultery, and part not so? here Calvin, they require
some certain answer, if thou say, that he will that part should commit
adultery, and part not, God shall himself be contrary to himself in one,
and the same precept.

THE REFVTATION.
WHERE good man, is that thy common reason? If the Precepte of not committing
adultery, should only appertain to part of the Israelites, and to the other
part should be commanded adultery, wherefore should God be contrary to
himself, if be should to diverse command diverse, or even contrary things? He
will that the Levites carry the Arc, he forbids others to touch it, or
stay it up, if it were about to fall. But is God therefore contrary to
himself, because be approves in some that which he condemns in others? But
hear a plain and apparent answer. God wylleth, that no man should commit
adultery, therefore thou will say, it is false that adulteries are committed
with the will of God, or that the will of God does come between in adulteries.
I grant, in respect of adultery, it is adultery: I deny it, in that it is
the punishmente of adultery, or some other crime, as appears in Absalom. For
this recompense before God is just, as Paul says. What say thou to these
things good man?

The Sycophants third Argument.
ALSO they say, that God is an Hypocrite, if he command, one thing and will
another, and that he has honey in his mouth and gaul in his heart.

THE REFVTATION.
BUT thou art no Hypocrite, which so apparently ^^sest such a filthy speech.
That which God commands, he always commands without dissimulation: that
which he for bids, he forbids simplye. But thou will say, he eftsoons
requires of some one that which yet he would not he should do: if you be
credited, give an example. He requires of Pharao, that he let the Israelites
go, and yet he will not that he should dismiss the^, seeing he willingly
hardened him. He sends Isay, who should require of the people amendment of
life, yet he blinds the people, that seeing, they should not see. He daily
calls many, whom yet he draws to himself. This thou say is your
doctrine, I grant, for so we have learned to speak out of the word of God,
but we for all that, deny God to be a dissembler, for to command, and to nill
are not contraries, but these in deed are contraries, to command and
forbid, to will and to nill, therefore God should then have bin a
dissembler, if he should have commanded Pharao to let the Israelites go, and
should have let Pharao that he should not obey it, when he was ready to
obey: or if he should say to the unbelievers, I will, that you repent, and in
the mean, in not drawing them, should bid them be retchlesse of repentance.
And albeit it be true, that God wills, that is, approves and accepts
whatsoever he commands, and plainly manifests his nature, both in
bydding, and forbidding, yet it follows, not that he always gives grace to
those, to whom he commands or forbids any thing, that they can perform
that he commands, or absteyne from that he forbids. The Lord therefore
said to Pharao by Moses, send away my people, and yet he does not move his
heart, but hardneth it. He says to the Israelites by the Prophet Esai,
Repent: and himself said to the Pharisees Repent: and by Paul, believe the
Gospel, and yet he does not draw the most of them. Yet I deny, that here is
any show of dissimulation, for the Lord in very deed requires, that he
does require, and forbids in very deed that he does forhidde. But if there
be any thing here, wherein humane reason may murmr, this is rather it, that
the Lord should seem either unwisely, or unjustly to command that which he
knows can not be done, or to forbid that which he knows sufficiently can
not but be done. But be it far away, that any want of wisdom or iniquity
be found in God. Yea, he is most wise, who adua^ceth his own glory with such
horrible indgements, and makes manifest to us what is the blindness and
malice of man's mind, and how miserable the state of man is without his especial
grace, punishes the wicked, and teaches his with trembling and feate to be
careful of their salvation, and to reverence God. And unjust he can not be,
albeit he requires that which he knows can not be performed, and forbid
that which he knows can not be anoyded, for neither is he bound to any man,
nor does he require any thing but that which by good right is due to him. And
whereas man is not able to perform, let him accuse himself, who did
prodigally lavish the most plentiful abilities which he had received from God.

The Sycophantes fourth Argument to the seventh Sclaunder.
IF it be objected against them, that God has two wills, and that contrary
one against another, that is one manifest in his commandments, and the
other secreate, they ask who has manifested that secret will to Calvin, for
if Calvin and his do know it, it is not secret, but if they know it not,
why do they avouch an unknown thing?

THE REFVTATION.
THAT God has two wills, much less contrary, the very Manichees have not
said, as those who had rather determine two beginnings, than to vomit out
this blasphemy, that God does daily infinite things willingly, which none
might in deed suspect, no man denies but he that is mad. But in those
things which he has manifested to us, how many things be there, whose
reason is so secret in God, that it passes the understanding even of Angels?

This is the secret and incomprehensible will of God, which we auouche, partly
being urged with experience, and partly being taught by the words of all the
Prophets and Apostles, who cry out almost on every leases side of their
Books, that the judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out. When we come to this will, we secretly reverence it, whose (...)
wherefore we confess that by no means we can understand. To us therefore it
is assuredly manifest, that there is some secret and insearchable will of God,
and he that speaks so, does not search out unknown things, but to thee O
Sycophante, how can there be no will of God unknown, which in deed know
not thy self?

The Sycophants fifth Argument to the seventh slander.
ALSO they say, that two contraries can not be at once and together in one
subject, but to will, and not to will one thing, be contraries.

THE REFVTATION.
I abuise thee, that thou take in time some profitable medicine, which may
cause thee to sleep, for many watchings seem to make thee mad, that thou
should dream being awake. But that which is to the matter, we have enough,
and more than neded, refuted this sclander a little before.

The Sycophants sixth Argument to the seventh Sclaunder.
IF God have two wills, one contrary to another, it is credible also that
Calvin (that is a follower of God) has two wills, and to say one thing, and
to think and will another thing, therefore we will not credit him, as a double
tonged, double hearted, and double willed man.

THE REFVTATION.
I acknowledge thy boldness in coining words. I acknowledge thy foolish
scoffing. Therefore, albeit thou denyest as thou art wont impudently, that
which thou think can not be proved, yet this one place does sufficiently
show, that there is no other coyner of these arguments, or in deed writer of
them, than thou alone, so now known to all good men, by thy singular
impudency, lewdenesse, and hypocriste, that thou can not only no longer
lurk under the name of Bellius or Theophilus, but also even then thou can
not hide thy self, when thou addest no name. But to what purpose should it be,
to return these thy raylings, which thou can make no man believe, but those
that be like thy self?

The Sycophants seventh Argument to the seventh Slander.
ALSO, if God commanding justice, wills injustice, is follows, that the
Devil commanding injustice, wills justice. And if God willing one thing,
and saying another, does not yet sin, it follows, that if any man shall
imitate him in this, he shall not sin, for in deed, to follow God is not
evil, therefore is shall be lawful for men thus to command, lie, and say one
thing, and carry another thing in your heart, that you may be like your
father, which says one thing, and wills another.

THE REFVTATION.
Go to, go forward valliaunte Bellerophon, for Chymera is conquered, if thou
stand to it lustilie.

The Sycophants eight Argument to the seventh Sclaunder.
THEY ask with which will the Lord speaks,
when he commands his to pray, Thy will be done, and he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven, he is my Brother. Also Paul, Thou art
called a Jew and restest in the Law, and boastest of God, and know his
will, and allowest excellent things, and have learned the Law. Here verily
the will of God is said to be that which is commanded in the Law, which
will, if it be good (as in deed it is) it is of necessity, that if there be
any contrary to this, it be evil, for whatsoever is contrary to good, is
evil.

THE REFVTATION.
I answer, that all these are spoken of that will, which does most condemn
thee. For he that sclaundereth an innocente against his conscience, he
transgresses the whole Law of God, and is a Devil. But that which
apperteyneth to the matter, I shame to repeat that which I have so often
urged, that GOD is always like himself, and in one sort wylleth those
things which be contrary by nature. We have cyted more testimonies out of
the Scriptures, than that thou can endure the multitude of them, and more
plain, than that thou can obscure them.

The Sycophants ninth Argument to the seventh Sclaunder.
ALSO, that saying of Christ How often would I have gathered thy children
together, and thou would not? Verilye, Christ speaks of his manifest will,
as which he had made manifest by so many means. But, if he had another
contrary to that, his whole life was mere Hypocrisy, that which is most
horrible to think.

THE REFVTATION.
Indeed this saying is to be understood of the manifest will of Christ. Yea,
I even give thee a further thing than thou maiste desire. For I say, that in ye
place, Christ speaks not only of his, but also of the ministry of al ye
Prophets, which had she wed the word of ye Lord in Jerusalem, seeing all the
Prophets were Christ's instruments, that is, of that alone Prophet which the
Lord promised to the Israelits by Moses. Deuteronomy. 18.15. 1. Pet. ^.11.
But it is a matter ^f some weight, to know wherefore the Lord should
manifest his will by his Ministers. For we here consider Christ as executing
ye office of a Minister, both by the mouth of his Prophets, and also by
himself, Act. 20 27.
when he was a Minister of Circumcision. Paul says, that he showed to the
Ephesians, all the counsel of God. Therefore Paul knew all the counsel of
God. For neither speaks he as a distraught man,
or as thy Sybilles, those things which he understood not, but those things
which he knew, even from God, and embraced by faith. But when the same would
show forth the word of God in Asia and Bythinia, Act. 16.6.7.
he was forbid by the holy Ghost. Some counsel therefore of Gods. Paul
knew not, which, if he had known before, he would not have assayed to go
into Bythinia.

Add moreover, that he being rapte up into the third heaven, he says
boldly, that he saw secreates, which it was not lawful to utter. How do
these two agree in themselves, that he kept nothing secret, who yet had
learned by revelation, those things which it was not lawful to teach, except,
because there be many things secreate with GOD, the knowledge whereof, to the
perfecting of godliness, is not yet ripe or profitable? But is there here any
repugnance between Paul and the spirit of God? Yea in the show of discord,
is greatest agreement. For that which Paul wills well, with a better will
the Lord wills not, albeit the reason thereof be secret, and ye reason of
Paul's will manifest. And seeing each of these wills is good, for both God
provides for his own glory, as he knows it is convenient, and Paul is
careful for the glory of God, (as the office of Apostleshippe requires) they
may differ, but be contrary they cannot. For that which is good, in that it
is good, may differ from some good thing: to be contrary to some good thing,
it cannot. So he omitted nothing, which might be profitable for the profit
and salvation of the godly, but he made manifest the whole counsel of God:
yet he declared not those things, which Moses witnesses remain secreate with
God. Deur. 1.^.
What then? whence is that show of odds? verily, even from thence, that
albeit the Lord manifest the doctrine of salvation to his Ministers, by whom
he may instruct his Church, yet he makes not manifest to them what he
has determined of any one.

He sends them then, that they should preach the glad tydinges of salvation
to some one whole Country, but he reserueth to himself in his secreate
counselles, in whom he will have the preaching of the Gospel to be
effectual, and at what time: and again, whom he has decreed by the same
preaching to blind and harden. What is therefore the office of Ministers?
verily, to call all indifferently to salvation, to do good to all, to allure
all with words and benefits. For they leave the secreate judgments of God,
till he make them manifest. Hence is that appearaunce of odds, between God
and his ministers, seeing they eftsoons labor to gather togi^her those,
whom they knew not to appertain. Here be those daily mournings and
complaints of Ministers, which see those resist, who ought least: of which
kind also, is this complaint of Christ which thou bring. But yet, in the
show of discord, we have showed before, Mat. ^3.32.
that there is no contrariety. But yet, if thou please to attribute this saying
of Christ, as to God, not as to the Minister of GOD, in what sort it is
certain, that, albeit he be free from all sin, yet some ignorance has place
in him, know thou not, that the Lord, that he may allure his children with
his loving kindness, does sometimes massle as children with us? He
complains, that he is deceived of his Vineyard, wherein, Isai. 5.2.4.
in steed of sweet Grapes, he found wild Grapes. But wil^e thou gather
hence, that the Lord can be deceived? He says elsewhere, taking aduisement of
sending his son to the husbandmen, after that his servants were stain, Luc.
20 13.
it may be, they will reverence my son. Will thou gather hence, that, as men
are wont, he was doubtful in mind, and that contrary to his expectation, it
fell out, that his son was slain, seeing it is said elsewhere, to have
delivered his son to the Jews, to be crucified, and that be spared not his
son? Therefore, seeing that out of this place also thou gatherest, that God
dissenteth from himself, or that the people of Jerusalem could infringe the
counsel and will of God, Act. 2.23. Romans 8.32.
(as thou fear not to say in another place) or, that, they perished against
the will of God, what else do thou bewroye, but thy wonderful ignorance.

The Sycophants tenth Argument to the seventh Slander.
Finallye, they say, If God commands an other thing than he wills, that
there is not two wills, but a lie: For he that says he wills that which he
wills not, he lies, and in word only to command, is not to will, but to
lie.

THE REFVTATION.
Because, here also, thou alleagest a matter, that never came into our minds. I
consider no other thing, but that thou perseuerest in thy madesse.

The eigth Sclaunder.
The hardening of Pharao, and moreover, his frowardness of mind, and
rebellion, was the work of God, and that by the testimony of Moses, who
ascribes to God, the whole rebellion of Pharao.

THE AVNSVVERE.
IN another place thou definest, that to harden, declares nothing else, but
not to mollific. That definition I say, to be foolish and ridiculous. For
seeing we al (as thou thy self art constrained to grant albeit a little
after thou dissentest from thy self) carrye flintie hearts, to harden,
declares not not to mollify, but to make something of hard, harder. Seeing
this hardenesse is from the birth in us, and is enlarged upon us, not by
creation, but by coruption, and therefore God worthily detesteth it, and even
by his ins^e judgment dubleth it, how is it, that you fear to grant, that
the hardening was the just work of God, the punisher and auenger? Verily, thou
canste not deny, that the spirit of GOD does not speak otherwise. For in
how many places is GOD said to harden, to blind, to shut up the ears,
to make gross the ha^te, to hold the heart, to turn the heart, to give
over into a reprobate sense, to send a strong delusion, and many like? How
often do they come in reading? But of sufferaunce in these things, there is
not indeed the least mention in the sacred Books, as much indeed, as I can
call to mentorte, Act. 14.16.
except in one only place, where it is said, that the Lord in times paste,
suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own ways. But neither this-place, nor
any like if it be so that thou find any, do any whit relieve thee, seeing
that in Sufferaunce, is necessarilye included Will, much less, that these
should be repugnant between themselves, as we have showed in his place. But
it is labor-worth, to show the self words of Calvin, that here also thy
lewdness may be manifested. These therefore be Caluines words, The heart of
Pharao is hardened of God (says Moses.) In vain here do they fly to
sufferaunce, as if God may be said to have done, that be only has suffered
to be done. For Moses plainly affyrmeth, that that hardness was the work of
God: These says Calvin. But thou most lewd Sycophant, writest, that the
whole rebellion of Pharao, was by Caluines sentence, ascribed to God. As
though indeed this thy lie cannot be convinced by that same sclaunder, which
thou adioynedst by and by.

The ninth Sclaunder.
The will of God is the chief cause of the hardening of men.

THE AVNSVVERE.
Whom he will he hardneth (says the Apostle.) But if also, thou seek some
higher thing, than the will of God, thou maiste in deed wander without God: we
rest in this bound with the Apostle. Further, he that says, that the will of
God, is the chief, or the highest cause of the hardening of men, can he
ascribe to God the whole rebellion of Pharao? For, if it be the only cause,
why is it called the Chief? If behooves a liar to be mind full, (Sycophant.)

The Sycophants Arguments to the eight and ninth Sclaunder.
In the eigth and ninth articles, they ask what Moses meant when he writes
And Pharao hardened his heart. But is it so to be interpreted, Pharao hardened
his heart, that is, God hardened Pharaos heart? That shall be much more
violent, than if thou should say, God hardened Pharaos heart, that, is he
suffered Pharao in the natural hardenesse of his heart, because Pharao
refused to obey him. Then they ask of that: This day, if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. But, if they have so expounded it, GOD will
not harden your hearts, it will be most absurd: for he should command
men, that which is Gods: For, if it be the Lords to harden hearts, it
cannot be enjoined to men, that they should either harden, or not harden the
hearts, no more than, that they should add, or take away from their stature
one cubite.

THE REFVTATION.
Indeed this is the pillar and foundation of thy goodlye disputation against
Predestination, which thou have inserted in thy Annotations of the ninth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans: which, how firm it is, let us see.
I pray thee therefore, (Good man) who ever, besides thee alone, made blind by
the just indgement of God, was so senseless and mad, that when the highest
cause is assigned, he would suppose the inferiors to be moved, or not rather
to be established? Make to your selves a new heart, Ezeck. 18.31.
and a new spirit, (says the Lord.) Will thou gather thereof, that it is not
the Lord, that should give a new heart, and create a clean spirit? which
should take away the stony heart and give a heart of flesh? 1. Tim, 4.19.
If thou do these things, (says Paul) writing to Timothy, thou shalt save
thy self. Will thou gather of this, that we are not saved of God by Christ?
Fathers of families are said to feed their families, and he that lives by
his labor, is said to nourish himself: also, bread and meat are said, to
nourish us. Does not therefore God feed us? yea, al these as (...) things
set in their order, do very well accord. For being converted of God, we
convert: being urged of God, we do: and God blessing us, we live by our
endeavor. See thou therefore Ass, yt they are foolish and ridiculous
whatsoever thou have imagined, that thou might discountenance the truth? for
neither (as he says) is there any council against the Lord, and so uses the
just judge to besotte them, which do not stay themselves in his word.
Induration therefore is the just work of God, who hardneth whom he pleases,
and yet not otherwise than justly hated, seeing they be corrupt. Induration is
also the work of Satan, by whom in deed the Lord works in the hearts of
infidels, as it is written, The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, 1.
Samu. 16.14.
and an evil spirit sent from the Lord did trouble him. It is also the work
of the false Prophets whom themselves also the Lord seduceth by Satan, that
one may enforce another into just condemnation, as it is written, If a Prophet
deceived speak the word, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet, Ezec. 14.9.
1. Reg. 22.23.
as also it appeared in the Magical Egiptians, and in Sedechia the false
Prophet. Finally the hardening is also their work which are hardened, because by
their native wickedness, they being enforced by the lust of Satan, the false
Prophets and their own, they do harden themselves, therefore by an indoubted
and inseparable conjunction, they cleave together, which thou absurdly deemedst
to be contrary in themselves. But I will add heereto the words of Calvin
himself, that thy lewdenesse may the better appear. It does not hinder
(says he) that is spoken in another place, that Pharao did harden his own
heart, because we neither ymagine, that the hearts of men are enforced with
outward means, that they should be forcibly driven: nor do we transfer the
cause of hardening upon God, as if of their own accord, and by their proper
malice, being barbarous, and hard hearted, they did not stir up themselves to
wickedness, but that which men do wickedly, the Scripture teaches that it is
not otherwise done, but when God does justly decree it to be, as is reported in
another place, that all, except the inhabitants of Gybeon, opposed themselves
against Israel, that it was of the Lord, which made obstinate their hearts,
These says Calvin in that very place which thou dare sclaunder, as
ascribing to God all the rebellion of Pharao. Art thou not ashamed to see this
cleerenesse thou Sycophant?

The tenth Slander.
Satan is a liar by the power of God.

THE AVNSVVERE.
These be Caluines words, which after thy manner thou have cited maimed, that
thou may persuade, that it pleases Calvin that God be the author of lies,
and so much the more to command lying. Thus contrariwise says Calvin, God
himself does now use the wicked, to punish the sins of men, as it were
whippes, and sometimes, as if he should draw them by the neck, he causes them
to be ministers of his loving kindness.
These says Calvin, who after he has with plain testimonies proved each
member, at the last he adds, the same is to be seen in Satan, the Captain
of all the ungodly, and Prince of all wickedness. God sends him to deceive
Achab, with this commandment, that he be a lying spirit in the mouth of all
his Prophets. * 1. Reg. 22.23.
So the spirit of error is the minister of the wrath of God, to blind yt
wicked which would not obey the truth. That therefore thou say (Sycopha^t) is
true, but thou should have added, that lying is not manded of God, for as
much as it is lying (for thus far God does not command or allow lying, but
forbids and punishes it) but in that it is the just punishment of them
which have preferred lying before truth, 2. These. 2.2^.
as Paul expresses.

The Sycophants Argument to the tenth Slander.
AGAINST the tenth Article they reason thus: If Satan be a liar by the power
of God, then it is a just thing to be a liar, and Satan is just, for if it be
just to command lying, to obey with lying is just, for the righteousness of
obedience is esteemed by the righteousness of the commandment: and as to
obey a wicked precept is wicked, so to obey a just precept is just.

THE REFVTATION.
THERE is neither lie nor sin commanded of God in ye it is sin, but as it
is ye punishment of sin. And it is a just thing before God to punish sins
with sins, as we have ple^tifully showed in his place. Then that the
obedience may be said to be just, it is not enough that the precept be just,
but that is also required, that that which is justly commanded, be justly
executed. Therefore Satan even then does not obey, yea he resists God by a
direct contrary, when he does that which God commands, for agreement in that
kind is the chiefest disagreement, because God justly wills and commands
the punishment of sin, but Satan does so execute this, not ye he may punish
sin, but yt as much as in him lies, he may commit sin.

The second Argument of the Sycophant to the tenth Sclaunder.
IF Calvin shall say that Satan is not obediently a liar, that is, that he
may obey GOD, we will answer by Caluines judgment, that this also is done
by the power of God, that he should not in obedience be a liar, and not to be
an obedient Satan, because he is not an obedyent liar, because the Lord
commanded him, not to be an obedyent liar.

THE REFVTATION.
ALBEIT thou windest thy self like an Eele into every part, yet thou art
taken captive, for though I grant thee, that Satan is not by the commandment
of God alyer of obedience, yet it shall not follow in respect of this
precept, that there is any injustice in God, or obedience in Satan, for God
has justly inflicted upon Satan this frowardness, not as it is
frowardness, but as the Lord depriving him of the gift of obedience, he justly
wills, that the filthye spirit be every day worse than himself, until,
when the measure is full, he may adiudge him to eternal torments. And does
the Lord seem to thee either idle, or against his will, and not rather
willing, and justly decreeing, to execute ye parts of a Judge, even against
Satan himself? but Satan himself, when the Lord has justly commanded him,
punishing his sins with sins, is not obediently a liar, yet in that he does
not obey, he obeys not, as he which murmureth against God, and against his
will procures to himselfs condemnation.

The eleventh Sclaunder.
God gives will to them that work wickedness, yea he ministers wicked and
dishonest affections, not only by sufferance, but effectually, and that for his
own glory.

THE AVNSVVER.
GOd forbid that any of us should either have spoken or written as thou
wrytest, that evil will, or any wicked or dishonest affections, are either
given, suffered or wroughte of God, seeing that our very thought does abhor
from such blasphemies. This indeed we doubt not to affirm, that God does
quicken and enforce even those that be wicked, and do wickedly, but so, as the
whole lewdenesse of the moving and deed remain in themselves, nor that any
the least pollution does reach so far as unto God. For we say that which is
most true, that God is so the first mouer of all things, as that he has not
only given the common influence to all things, which now also he does further,
but also as he has from everlasting decreed all things, so also the second
causes, as it pleases him, to bend and govern them, that he may stir,
direct and bring them to every determined end, nor that any thing (be it never
so little) can be sequestered from his effectual and governing providence. For
even a Sparowe, says Christ, falls not to the ground, without the will of
my father: nor was there ever any man in his right wits, that thought God to be
like some master buylder who should leave his ship which he had made, to be
governed of others, or when a certain force of nature was given to al things
that he got himself to heaven, that every part of the world might be carried
according to their will and inclynation, or that the world is governed only by
the general influence. All these opinions we have learned out of the word of
God to hold abominable: and in this place we think not with more words to
refute them.

But also we say that, That God is so the first mouer of al things, that yet
every thing be moved by his beginnings, which if they be pure, pure motions
ensue: but if they be unclean, unclean motions do follow. Seeing therefore in
these, which are indeed not only with desire but with understanding and will,
the motions proceed from the beginning, it is no marvel, if by the mean of
diverse beginnings, we esteem the motions and actions themselves diversely. Of
which distinction let this be an example.

The Lord by the hand of a thief will punish another thief: for so he has
often used to join ye wicked with the wicked: as may appear by the example
of the Madianites. He therefore exciteth the wicked will of one thief to kill
another: nor being satisfied with that, Judge. 7.22.
he even guydeth his hand and weapon, that he may be slain whom he has
decreed to just slaughter. For as much therefore as this slaughter springs
from this beginning, that is, from God justly enforcing the will of ye thief,
albeit it be evil, and directing the hand and weapon of the thief, yet is
neither the inforcement evil, nor the work evil, but it is counted of God
just and holy, which punishes the thief with just torments. For God did
neither enforce the thief, nor gave him wickedness, but the will of the thief
which was evil already, he well and justly stirred to a good and holy
work. But for as much as this slaughter proceeds from an other beginning,
that is, of the will of the thief which is so enforced, not as a stone or
block, but as a will, which also it self is so urged, that it works, and is
so mourd, that it moves it self, with an inward motion, and that his own:
thus far I say, both this motion springing from an evil beginning, is evil,
and ends into an evil action, that is manslaughter: which it is so far off
that it should please God, that contrarilye he can not but punish it. But go
too, let us put this example also, whereby this diversity of beginnings may be
vnderstoods. Let us suppose that thou art a crooked Ass, whom I as a Muletor
shall enforce into the milne with whippes. For as much as this action
proceeds from me as from a beginning, it cannot be reprehended, if it be
reasonable: but for as much as it proceeds from thee, it is in it self a
great fault. For indeed I am to thee the cause of going, but all the haultyng
is of thy self, whose beginning was in thy self, albeit I had not stirred
thee forward. Will thou that I speak more plainly, that thou may not
complain of darkness? Thou art made by nature to slander those things,
which thou do not so much as understand, or dissemblest that thou
understand. Yet this (...) poison, is not so much nature, as the deprauation
of nature. Therefore is not his efficient, but rather deficient cause to be
sought for: which indeed seeing we all feel to cleave fast in our
entrails, there is no cause why we should accuse GOD in very deed as author
of these things and of sins. But for that because man is corrupt, therefore
the LORD, by his power, wherewith he governs without exception and enforces
to foreordayned ends, has abasterdized from himself, that which
apperteyneth to him? No indeed. He therefore uses eue^ sinning instruments,
and brings them to an end determined of himself. And that indeed so, that
he does not sin any thing, neither in moving nor directing the instrument.
For the action is of himself, but the defecte is of the instrumente, which
also self thing by an inward moving does enforce it self, and when it is
corrupt, it has depraved motions.

Seeing therefore God has made choice, especially of al others in these
parts, of thee alone, by the deprauation of nature, envious and a slaunderer,
by whom partly he might exercise his own people, and partly punish those, who
having despised the offered truth of the Gospel, do follow lies and
slanders, so often as he sees good he se^sibly stirs up in this thy
depraved nature, those motions, using both ye ministry of Satan, of others,
and also thine own lewdnes: which motions afterward by little and little break
out into those blasphemies, and those contumelyes, in refelling whereof we now
take pains. But when in the years paste we reproved these things; and when
also we reprove them now, what do we else, but that we daily more and more
prick thee forewarde, that thou may proceed to siaunder, and to forge
blasphemies? Yet be it far away, that when we say thou art moved and
enforced of God, we should ascribe to God any of thy sins. Be it also far
away, that there may worthily be laid upon us any blame, because being provoked
with our wrytings. Thou becomest every day worse and worse, for that our
diligence is exercised with thy lewd speaking: for that by this mean the
hypocrisy of many, is daily manifested: for that by thy slanders is stirred
up in us a desire to know the truth and defend it: for that the just judgment
of God against those who have preferred truth before falsehoode, or abused the
knowledge of the Gospel, is so set before us to be seen, as in a most clear
glass, in this thy strength
of lying and error: we acknowledge that we are bound to God for this, which
moves and directs thy lewdenesse to these uses. And whereas thy deceytes are
now espich of many, whose simplicity other ways thou might have deceived:
for that thine (...) doubtfulnesse is now hated of many: for that now those
savage purposes, which thou had taken to oppress ye truth, are now
apparaunt to all: when without respect thou would that heretics should be
borne withal: for that in some forte all men do know what is thine
impudency in peruepting the word of God, godly men also do acknowledge that
they are bound to God for this, and with a thankful mind, they acknowledge
that our diligence was somewhat in that matter, so far it is off that we should
sustain any blame: for that being offended with our writings, thou rushest
headlong in worse, and that by thine own fault, for there is no fault in us:
for that many weak ones are offended by thee, because the course of Gospel is
hindered of thee: for that thou blasphemest the name of GOD: for that without
cause ye credit of ye faithful servant of God is hindered: finally, for that
thou procurest to thy self and others who^ thou drawest to ye destruction:
these finally al men ascribe to Satan, with whose furies thou art driven, and
to thy lewdenesse and impudency. But see now, Sycophant, as I think, an
example sufficiently manifest and apparaunte, whereby thou may understand,
that God does so prompte the will and affections to the very wicked, that al
these motions, for as much as they are ministered of him, are both just and
honest, as they appertain to a just and good work. For the cause of sin is in
our selves, but at what time, and against whom it ought to break out, it is in
the power of God, which instilleth, not a new malice, but according to his
infinite wisdom, when and how it pleases him, he moves,
governs, bends, guydeth, and finally orders to the advancement of the
glory of his own name, that which is bred in men, even the wicked not knowing
of it, and so much the rather determining a quite contrary counsel with
themselves. This is our judgment of the preuidence of God in this argument
which we handle, which it remains that we confirm with the authority of ye
word of God and the fathers. Here to we say it appertains that the Lord is
so often said in Scriptures to have hardened, burdened, and held the hearts
of Pharao, Sehon, the Cananytes and the Egyptians, and the rather turned them
into the hatred of his people. Finally for that the Scripture manifestly
calls the wicked, Psalm. 205.95.
a rod, a hammer, a saw, an axe, which in the hand of God is appointed and
hurled, not so in any wise as if me^ were disburthened of blame, or as if men
had digenerated into logges and blocks, but that we may know the providence of
God not to be idle in any case. Otherways why should God call Nabucadnezer his
servant, and for that cause also have scourged him, because he called the
subuertion of Jerusalem his work. But what? when the kings heart is said to be
in the hand of the Lord, Proverb. 21.1.
that he inclyneth it whether soever he will, is it not manifestly proved, that
we say, that God does stir up even the wicked affections, not in ye they are
evil, but in much as he has determined to use them well? But that also
appears by the example of David, whom ye Lord is manifestly said to set him
on to number the people. If this be blasphemy, go too, even rise against the
spirit of God himself, 2. Pat. 21.1.
and lay to his charge the sin of blasphemy. But thou will say, in an other
place the same thing is attributed to the Devil, therefore the name of the
Devil is to be attributed in the other place understood where it is not
expressed. But the words of the text are on this manner: And the wrath of the
Lord was again kindled against Israel, (...) Sam. 248.
and he moved David against them, in that he said, go and number Israel and
Judah. But who sees not that the name of the Lord is to be taken (...), and
so, that to be confirmed which Solomon has written afterward, that ye kings
heart is turned whether soever ye Lord will. That in no wise as if he did
instill another lewdenesse, but because he stirs up that which he found
either to the punishing of sins, or to execute other of his counsels, as a
certain well learned man has excellently said. But albeit the same motion is
in an other place attributed to Satan, is there therefore no part of the
Lords, seeing it is sufficientlye manifest ye Satan is the executioner of ye
Lords wrath? For what is said of Saul? The spirit of ye Lord departed from
Saul, and there entered into him an evil Spirit sent of ye Lord. But say
wherefore are these words, of the Lord, added? To the end to signify an idle
suffera^ce, and not rather, ye in this matter we may know Satan to have bin
gods instrument, exercising his just judgment? Neither only ye as Calvin has
well and truly written, by ye God commanding, he stirs up ye minds to
these desires, which in respect of Satan and the wicked are evil, but because
he effectually draws the^. For it is not written ye the lord said to ye lying
spirit, I suffer thee to deceive Achab, if thou can: but thou shall persuade
and overcome, Go therefore, and do so. Nor Paul writes ye the Lord did give a
certain power to deceive, but to give strong delusion that they may believe
lies. And ye thou should not think that we have first taught thus out of ye
word of GOD, hear what Augustine has written of these things. Iulianus ye
Pelagia^ (as appears out of Augustine against him in his fifth book, and
third Chapter) did think this same thing ye thou think, that is, when the
Lord is said to blind, or to harden, or to give over into a reprobate sense,
that it signifies nothing but that the Lord leaves and suffers. But
Augustine shows that god does not only leave, but also declare his wrath and
power. Iulianus says, ye these speeches are beyond al credit, Augustine will,
that they be appertinent. Iulianus says, they were burdned before with their
dosires, what need was it, that they should be given over to them? But
Augustine says, do thou think one thing to have lusts, and to be given
over to them? For they are given over to their lusts, not yt they may have
them, but also that they may utterly be possessed of them. Therefore (says he)
eue^ as God works in ye bodies of the wicked by afflicting them, so also he
works in their minds, by sending them headlong into sin. And in that place
Augustine handles the history of Semei. The Lord (says David) commanded
that he should curse me. God says Augustine, justly inclined his will, which
was dehraued by ye own fault, yt he might rail upon David. And there is
adjoined a cause, the Lord shall render me good things for this curse. Li. of
the Predest. of Saints, cap. 20.
The same Augustine says in an other place: when (says he) God wills that
that thing be done, which may not be done but when men be willing, he together
inclines their hearts that they be willing: and not only works in the hearts
by assisting, Of grace and freevvil, to Valent. cap. 20.
but even by iudgyng, that they may perform ye thing which purposed no such
thing, which his hand and counsel has decreed. The same says in an other
place, the Scripture if it be diligently considered, shows not only the good
wills of me^ which himself has made of evil, and directs those which he
has made good into good actions, and eternal life, but also that those which
concern the creature of the world, are so in the power of God, that he
causes the same to be inclined when he will, and whether he will, either to do
good to some, or to inflict punishment to certain. And immediately, who (says
he) would not tremble at these judgments, wherewith God even works in the
hearts of the wicked, whatsoever he will, yet rendering to them according to
their deseruings? Again (he says) it is sufficiently evident by the
testimonies of scripture, that God works in ye hearts of the wicked to ye
inclining their wills whether socuer he will, whether it be to good according
to his mercy, or to evil according to their deseruings: and that by his
judgment sometimes secret, and sometimes apparent, and always just. For it
ought to be fixed in your hearts, that there is no iniquity with God. Hear
thou now Sclauderer, how God works justly, even in the he arts of the wicked,
or that I may speak more properly, by the hearts of the wicked? but when
after Augustine, Calvin has most ple^tifully expressed of what lewdenesse
was these distinctions omitted, which are granted upon the manifest word of
God, to insert the false and counterfayt sequeles of thine own brain, whereof
thou make them the Authoures, of whom they are so wisely and diligently
refelled? But time requires, that we hear thine Arguments.

The Sclaunderers Arguments to the eleauenth Sclaunder.
Calvin attributes to God, that which belongs to the Devil, as the
Scriptures witness euery-where.

THE REFVTATION.
But thou playste the Sclaunderer, which is of the Devil, when thou falsely
accusest Calvin of that blasphemy, which he has refuted, as carefully and
diligently, as any in the world. God being moved with just anger against the
Israelites, pricketh David by the ministry of Satan, that by the numbering
of the people, he might make a way to his just judgments. What reprouest
thou here? Satan inciteth David to this, not that he should obey God: but
that God might be offestded, and if it may be that David and all the people
might perish. David himself, it may be, being provoked with pride or ambition,
commands the people to be numbered. But is this to attribute to God yt which
belongs to the Devil? Art not thou rather a blasphemous mouth, which for the
most part destroyest the providence of god?

The Second and third argument to the eleventh Sclaunder.
If God do prompte in evil and dishonest affections, and yet commands us to
resist evil affections, he commands us to resist himself, and he is
contrary to himself. Every good gift is from above and comes down from
the father of lights. But are also evil affections a good gift, or descend
darkness (for evil affections are in deed darkness) from the father of al
light?

THE REFVTATION.
WE worthyly refer the lewdenesse of affections not to the first cause which
always does most justly, but to those beginnings whence they proceed, that
is, to Satan and the corruption of man. Therefore we say that no affections are
ministered, in that they are evil. But thou when thou sayste that they are
permitted of GOD, do indeed attribute to GOD which is most estraunged
from his nature, albeit we should grant thee, that there is this idle
sufferaunce. For of what sort is Gods justice, if by any means he suffer sins
in that they are sins, or affections, in that they are evil? Thou therefore,
caytife, stranglest thy self with thine own sword: and when thou indeed
gatherest these things, thou do in great earnest approve thy self a wicked
and blasphemous wretch.

The Slaunderers fourth argument to the eleventh Slander.
James writes plainly, that no man is tempted of God, but every one of his
own lust.

THE REFVTATION.
IT is of necessity, that whether thou will or no thou confess that the word
of tempting is no (...) signifying many things. For it is plainly written in
Deuteronomie of the evil Prophet, The Lord tries your and in the same book,
the Lord says, that he tempted the people forty years in the wilderness: and
in another place God tempts Abraham. Yea men also are said to tempte God:
and Paul advises that we try our selves. Yet James denies, that any is
tempted of ye Lord, but rather of his own lust, that is, of the mean whereby
Satan tempts us, or we are tempted of other men, or of our selves. For the
Lord is said after his manner to tempt us, that is, to aproue, that laying
before us the occasion of manifesting of our mind to be manifested, either our
selves may understand what we be, least flattetering our selves, we deceive our
selves, but that rather when we know our weakness, we may begin to repent,
or that our dissembling may be manifest to others. Hence it is that by the name
of Temptation is eftsoon understood affliction, because it tries our faith.
2. Cor. 13.
So Paul advises us, that we try our selves, that is, examyne diligently
whether we be in the faith as himself does very well interpret. So we are
forbiddent to tempte GOD, that is, to seek to find out his mind, as if we
doubted of his faith, and by this mean to provoke his patience to anger. Also
Satan tempts, and therefore he is called a Tempter. We also tempte one an
other, and concupiscence is said to te^pt us. All which, when they are spoken,
the name of Teptation agrees not with God, since it declares nothing else, but
a soliciting to evil, which by no means can have place in God. Yet God is said
to lead into temptation, that is, when he uses the work of Satan, or of some
other, that he may accomplish his decree, does he therefore tempt? in no wise.
For, even then he is not the Authouc of evil, except it be, that he is to be
thought evil, when he executes his judgments, or uses our falls to the
listing up, and finallye, consirming of us, and instruction of the whole
Church. So not without ye ordinance of God, was Adam tempted of Satan, and so
much ouerco^med, but, that he might use that fall, to express ye riches of his
goodness much more apparently in the redemption than in the creation, and
also, that he might make way to his just judgments. So, many of the saints,
long ago by the commandment and will of God himself, have fallen, and
continually do fall into most grievous temptations: but with their great
profitte, and by no fault of God, as the samctes themselves confess. So, an
evil spirit from the Lord exasperateth Saul: and there is no doubt, but
this spirit enforced him headlong into those horrible evils. Did therefore the
Lord tempt Saul, that is, solicit him to evil? No, in no wise, but he
exercised Saul with just punishments. For the evil proceeds from the
beginning, and of the evil instruments, and the good which is drawn out of
the very evil is al due to God. Finally therefore, as a certain right learned
writer has noted, God tempts not, that is, in that forte, that the Devil
and wicked men are wont to te^pt. And the reason is, that God is not tempted of
evil, For he that tempts an other to evil, is first himself tempted and
overcome of evil. The Diueli therefore and wicked men do tempte, that is,
thinking wickedlye, and having foresette a wicked end to themselves, they make
sharp their lewdenesse, and enforce to evil. But God tempts us to an other
end, that we may understand our infirmities, or our strength, that we may
fall into some great calamity, and so may begin to repent, that finally,
when it is requisite, he may punish sins with sins, and with other just
punishments. He that says this, Selaunderer, does he attibute to God that
which belongs to our concupiscence? But there remains a question, why
James making no mention of Satan, should say, that we are tempted of our
lust. Indeed, because that, albeit Satan coth solicit us, and some do
prick forwards others, yet all these appertain to that end, that the
concupiscence which is in us, may be kindled. And this interior motion is the
true and proper beginning of our affections, and therefore of our actions.
Seeing then, that Adam, albeit the Devil prompting him, yet, in the beginning
did deprave himself of his own accord and properly, and men be gotten of
him, do in like sort properly, and of their own accord, move themselves with
this wicked concupiscence, and become daily worse than themselves, why should
they lay any fault upon God, seeing they cannot properly accuse even Satan
or any other, though fellows of these mischiefs, yet as the causes of their
destruction? But to what end be all these? Let us hear Calvin himself,
whose writing does confeunde thee, Call. in the ^^uang^liacal Haymonie.
(beast.) He therefore expressing those self sacred words: And lead us not
into temptation. The name of Temptation, says he, is often universally taken
for whatsoever trial: in which sense it is said, that Abraham was tempted of
God. when his faith was tried. So we are tempted as well by prosperous as
adverse things, because, by this occasion, the affections come to light, which
before lay hid. But here is obsecued the interior affection, which may well
be called the Devils Bellows, to stir our concupiscence. For it were an
absurd thing, to desire of God, that he would make us free from all the
documentes of Faith. Therefore al evil motions which solicit us to sinning,
are comprehended under the name of Temptation. And forasmuch, as it cannot be,
but we shall suffer such prickings in our minds, because, in the whole course
of our life, we have a standing warfare with the flesh, we yet ask of the
Lord, that he do not prostrate us, or suffer us to be overwhelmed with
Temptation. And to the end that Christ might better express, that we depend
inclinable to continual casualties and falls, except God sustain us with his
hand, he has used this kind of speaking, Lead us not into temptation, or as
others expound it, Carry us not. It is in deed very certain, that every
one is tempted of his own concupiscence, as James teaches: but because God
does not only yield us to Satan's lust, that he may kindle the fire of
concupiscence, but he uses that instrument of his wrath, so often as he will
enforce men headlong into destruction, also he leads in his manner into
temptation. In this sense is the evil spirit from God said to have taken
Saul, and to that end sound many places of Scripture. And yet we shall not
therefore call God the Authoure of evils, because in giving men over into a
reprobate sense, he does not exercise a confused tyranny, but executes his
just judgments, although secret. Do thou acknowledge (Slaunderer) that
smooth and succinct briefenes of Calvin? I think not, who use to despise al
men's writings in respect of thine. Indeed, if thou haddestred these, you wast
too wicked, when you would wrest these arguments upon Calvin, but if thou
had not red the^, which I had rather think, what is this thine impude^cie,
to lay to his charge so great a blasphemy, whose opinion, what it is thou
know not?

The Sclaunderers fifth Argument to the eleauenth Sclaunder.
That which thou addest, that God does it for his own glory, they say it is
ridiculous: For glory uses not to be give of a lie. As Nabuchadneser having
experienced the justice and power of God, in that that himself, for his pride
had bin changed into a brutish nature, gave glory to him, that is, perceiving
and judging him to be just.

THE REFVTATION.
There proceeds no lie from God, not even then when he se^deth lying spirits
with strong delusion. For in a lie as in other vices and crimes, there is a
note of wicked affection, which by no means can fall upon God. And whereas a
lying spirit, and me^ liars by nature, do lie, all this is to be attributed to
their own beginnings, not by creation, but depraved by their own volu^tarie
corcuptio^. But in respect of God, it ought to be deemed just judgment, which
in respect of Satan and men, is a lie. But if you deniest, yt God by ye lies of
men does gather a great Harvest of Glory, first of al I can by thine own
example confirm that which you deniest. For how much think you thy lies have
profited our Churches, whilst we diligently compare the^ with Gods truth?
Truly, except you had utterly an other purpose, we should confess our
selves much bound to thee and thy faction for this cause, because you have
given us occasion of s^arching those things more diligently, of the knowledge
whereof we verily take incredible commodity. But so stand together the
increases of the Church with Gods glory, that in deed they cannot in any wise
be known apart. By the lie of Satan Adam is vanquished. By this fact what
^^^fit came to us? what glory to God? verily much more than by the creation of
the world. The wrath of GOD is made manifest against all men, for that they
withholde the truth of God in unrighteousness. This wrath is nothing else, but
the just judgment of God. ^ut do ^hou think, that the glory of God is not
enlarged, when he aduaunceth his justice? But what? when he takes away the
wisdom of the wise, when he reuealeth his wisdom to babes, that is hid from
the wise. What else remains to these wretches but lying? and yet it cannot be
denied, but that self matter does mightily commend the justice and wisdom of
God. Therefore, thou will say, do thou praise lying to us? No in no wise,
but I reverence the indeterminable wisdom of God, which brings even those
things to a profitable end, that is, to his glory, in which he punishes
reproach done against himself, and he draws even out of men's offenses,
matter to advance his own glory. If this content thee not, and thou
proceedest to cavil, if Gods truth by my lie abound to his glory, why am I
any more condemned as a Sinner, or rather why should we not do evil, that
good might come thereon. If I say thou proceedest thus to cavil? I will except
this one thing with Paul, that thou art one of them, Romans 3.7.^.
whose condemnation is just. But in that which thou bring of Nabuchadnezer,
what else do thou, but bewray thy childishness? When Nabuchadnezer had
received ye punishment of his pride, he gave to God ye praise of justice. What
other thing can thou gather of that, but that Gods glory is advanced by his
just judgments? But now, when amongst his most just judgments are
numbered, strong delusion, blinding, hardening, seeste thou not, that thou art
taken in the same nets which thou haste made to thy self.

The Sclaunderers sixth Argument to the eleauenth Sclaunder.
GOD will have himself praised of all nations. All ye nations praise ye the
Lord. It is therefore requisite, that he do those things which all nations
may know and praise. But no nation will ever acknowledge it to be just, that
man be punished for that which God has given him. For we ask, if God should
punish us, because we have a beard, should he not do us wrong, seeing he
has given us a bearde, nor is a bearde in our power? who ever having a
bearde could praise him?

THE REFVTATION.
Thou in deed (as I think) would yield over thy self to all nations, not
so much to be derided, as to be held execrable when thou wrotest these
things. For how ridiculous, yea, how profane is this consequence, when God
will be praised of all nations, that there is no argument of praise left,
except of those things which may be approved by the common judgment of all
nations? But Paul says that he preaches the Gospel, which to the Jews is
a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles is held for foolishness. Whom shall
thou easily persooade, that salvation is to be looked for from him, who of all
men shall he most miserable? Do thou not hear how Paul's teaching was
accepted at Athens? Do thou not hear Paul crying out, that the natural man
conceiueth not those things which are of God? What say thou to these goodman?
For indeed so the matter stands. The Lord communicated the benefit of the
Gospel, with all people, whom therefore the Prophet calls upon to advance
ye glory of God. For neither will the Lord be praised of every one, but only of
the Saints, as it is written: O ye righteous rejoice in the Lord, Psalm. 33.1.
Psalm. 50.16.
it becomes well the just to be thankful. And in an other place, God said
to the ungodly man, why do thou make mention of mine ordinances, and take
my laws in thy mouth? It is therefore necessary, that that thanksgiving
which is acceptable and pleasant to God, proceed from says, seeing that
without says nothing can please God. And faith co^prehendeth God, not such as
we conceive him by our common sense (for as John says, darkness does not
comprehend the light) but such as he has set forth himself to be beholden and
looked upon in his word, in whose hearts the day star has shined. But seeing
now by almost infinite testimonies of both testaments, we have so manifestlye
proved, that not all things universally but even every thing is governed by the
providence and eternal decree of God, even so much that God wills iustlye,
and accomplisheth also those things iustlye, which both Satan, and men, will
iniustly and perform unjustly, and that no infection of the mouings or actions
may reach unto the first cause, but because it proceeds from the depraved
beginnings of the instruments, there also it remains: finally seeing we have
manifestly showed that there is utterly nothing done which redoundeth not to
the glory of God, in so much that even by our lie the truth of God is
advanced, what remains, but ye thou pack hence with thy most foolish and
false argument? And that which thou pratest of a bearde and one having a
bearde, does it not manifestly prove what mind thou broughtest to handle these
secrets of God? For what has a beard, or one bearded to do with ye kingdom of
God? Yea, who will not think yt these so foolish things, are rather uttered of
a child being an infant, than of a bearded man? But in deed thou did
miserably fear least thou should loose ye pleasant scoff. Yet I will
answer thee in few words, least thou complain ye we deride those Arguments
which we can not scriously confute. A beard is of a mere natural motion,
sin of a voluntary motion, and therefore corrupt, because that will is
corrupt, judgment corrupt, understanding corrupt, appetyte corrupt, and
finally whole man enbondaged to sin. Yet that thing causes not, as we have
showed by the testimony of Scripture already set down, yt the Lord should
abandon himself from the sovereignty of his effectual providence: whereby it
is, that he no less iustlye and rightly inclyneth, bends, and directs even
ye evil wills whether soever it pleases him, than if they were not corrupt.
But see thou of what judgment it is to compare things so dissonant, as if
they were utterly like, that is, that which is mere natural, which is
voluntary.

The Sycophants seventh Argument to the eleventh Sclaunder.
If Calvin shall say that this is the secret judgment of God, and to us
unknown, we answer, that in deed there be certain secrets of God which we
know not: but that which belongs to justice, that is known to us, and
manifested in the Gospel: according to which revealed Gospel (as Paul teaches,
and not after that secret judgment of Calvin, will God judge the world: and so
it shall follow from al, as well godly as ungodly: for as well the godly as
ungodly, shall see that it is just that those that have not obeyed the truth,
not secret (such as is Caluines) but revealed (such as is the Gospels) may be
punished: and those which have obeyed, may receive reward.

THE REFVTATION,
There wants somewhat in this thy writing, but it is his fault, to whom thou
co^mittedst thy book to be written. For otherwise in deed with great
trustiness all things are printed out of that very coppie which thou sentest
to Paris, to be printed there by stealth. But to the matter: Why (I pray thee)
make thou mention of these things? For, do we say, that there is another
rule of good and evil, of just and unjust, than the law of God? Do we
show another way of salvation, than the Gospel of the son of God, so as it
remains written? Or do we say it shall come to pass, that God shall judge
the world by any other prescription than by his word? Or rather are not we the
men which not only have avouched the authority of the word of God, for our
vttermoste against the Papists, but also against thy self three years ago,
when thou biddest, that new revelations be looked for, because the word of
God, such as is delivered us by ye Prophets and Apostles, suffiseth not to
decide the controversies of the Churches? But art not thou the very man
which in thy Commentaries upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
affyrmest, that Paul has but only taught us the rudimentes of religion, and
that he had an other more perfect doctrine which he co^mmunicated with
certain his perfect Scholars. How is it therefore, that being so suddenly
changed, thou risest against us, as if we rested not in the only words of
God? Is it that thou may show, that thou haste repented? But truly we be
the same men we were, nor have we learned at any time to rest any where, but
in the only word of God. God shall judge the world by the Gospel, that is,
whosoever he shall find embracing Christ by faith, which indeed will appear
by their fruits, be will forgive and declare them Coheires with Christ, the
rest being worthily condemned, he shall give over to be tormented in eternal
flames. By this will of the heavenly father, I say, Christ shall judge the
quick and the dead. But what madness is this, to gather of that, that all the
counsels or judgments, or all the justice and will of God are manifest to us,
that is, whatsoever he does, is manifest unto us, and whatsoever he has
decreed of every one, and in every one from everlasting? But art not thou
very he which canste express unto us the reasons of all Gods counsels or
also of his justice, which he has used both to wards the gooly, and also
toward the ungodly, from since the foundations of the world were laid, and
also hereafter shall use? do not thou I say, know all these secreats of
Gods eternal providence? Yea thou will say, I grant that there are certain
secreates of God which we know not, but al his justice I say is manifest to
us. But a little before thou denyedst, that any will of God was unknown. But
do not the secreates of God appertain either to his justice or his will?
Away therefore, most sottish coaks, and advise first with thy self what thou
intendest, before that thou oppugn those things which others do well and
constantly set down. But that we wander without the word of God, or decline
so much as a nails breadth, when we say, that God works even by those, and
exercises, albeit his sometimes secreate, yet always his just judgments
upon those, whom he worthily punishes as rebels, and that those things are
not done besides his will, that we (I say) when we cry with the Prophets and
Apostles, that the ways of the Lord are secret and so much unsearchable say
nothing, that God has not plainly manifested in his word, we have enough and
too much proved. For this also, has the Lord manifested to us, that there be
infinite things in that dispensation of matters which he uses, which if
any would search, this one thing should follow, that the nearer he approach
to the brightness of God, the darker he should be, till at the last, he being
devoured with the majesty of the divine light, should perish.

The Sycophants eighth Argument to the eleauenth Sclaunder.
The wrath of God (says Paul) is reucaled against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which withholde the truth of GOD in unrighteousness.
But if Caluins sentence be true, the wrath of God is revealed against al
Innocents. For, if he minister wicked affections, he is angrye, and hates
them before the wicked affections. For, to minister evil affections, is of
hatred: he therefore hates those that be giltlesse: for before wicked
affections they be guiltless, if indeed sin be of wicked affections, or
rather, sin is a wicked affection.

THE REFVTATION.
Good God, what a monster of ignorance and lewdenesse do I see? First of all,
the place of Paul which thou citest, thou do manifestly wreste, for neither
does it appertain to any part of men alone, but in like sort euecy one
without exception. Paul with this word of Justice condemns every man, not
so much as one excepted. For all, insomuche as they are the children of Adam,
and without Christ, (and in this respect they are considered of Paul in
this place) are holden convict of that crime whereof Paul reasons, because
there is not so much as one which does either honor God, or help his
neighbor by the prescription of that knowledge which partelye GOD has
engraven in the minds of men, and partelye proposes to all by the
contemplation of the creatures. This is the natural exposition of Paul's
words, as appears by the order and conclusion of the whole disputation. But
to what end be all these, to that whereof we deal? For is not God therefore
offended with the wickedness of men, because he uses it well, both to the
comforting of the godly, and to the correcting of the ungodly? Furthermore,
whereas thou pratest of the ministering of affections, why do thou wrest it
against us, which teach no other thing, but that GOD does iustlye and
wisely, move, incline, govern, and bring to the end which himself
determined, even wicked wills? (for that which I have already said now a
thousand times) we place the whole lewdness and desarte, both affections
and actions, as it is meet in the wicked and Eclipsed beginnings. Therefore
thou striuest not against us, but against thine own shadow. But now how
sottish, how false, and how wicked be those things which thou addest? For
first thou affirmest, that men are guiltless before lewd affections: because
(saiste thou) sin is of wicked affections. But when thou saiste these things,
art thou not a plain Pelagian? For say how are we borne the children of
wrath, yea, how we are conceived in iniquity, how we have need of the badge
of remission of sins, and new birth, that is, Baptizme even from our
beginning, if there be no sin but of wicked affections, nor that we are
guilty and the children of wrath before we travel with wicked affections? But
if these things be true (as they are most false) from whence should wicked
affections spring? even by wicked education, by imitation, finallye, by utter
free will, which does then first of all enthrall it self in every manne
unto sin, when they begin to boil with wicked affections. Therefore men
should have no need of grace regenerating, seeing sin is not by propagation,
if they would follow nature. And art thou not ashamed, (most filthy Dog) to
dispute of Christian religion, which renuest unto us afresh these reastie
poisons of Pelagius, but rather art thou worthy with these monsters, yt thou
shouldestsee this light? But see thou, that this foundation being
ouerturned, whatsoever thou had builded upon, does fall to the ground? If
(say thou) Caluines sentence be true, the wrath of God is revealed against
all those that be guiltless. Lo, thou lie again Sclaunderer, for so far
it is off that Calvin be allied to this blasphemy, that contrarily he does not
indeed assent to them, which will only have the nature of man to be hurt and
wounded, and which also deny that concupisce^ce in the regenerate is sin. Yea
he shows but of the word of God, that whole man, how much soever he is, is
even from his co^ception, nothing else but Satan's bondslaue, and enthralled to
the just wrath of God. And seeing that Calvin alone, of all them that live at
this day, has most soundly and learnedly defended this doctrine against
Pighius and all Sophisters, what impudency is this of thine, what ignorance
and lewdenesse, to say, if the doctrine of Calvin be true, that it follows,
that God does show his wrath against innocents, seeing Calvin almost in
every page of his books so highly cries out, that no man, even from his very
birth is innocente? But yet thou will say, how does your doctrine stand
together? In deed it accords marvelous well, for we do not say, that God
has either made, or does make evil inclinations, or does give wickedness,
or does minister wicked affections, or entice to mischief. But this we say,
that God does well move the inborne wickedness of men, and to bend, govern,
and incline it whether soever be pleases, Greg. in his moral. Lib. 6. Cap. ^x.
as it is euidente, that Gregory has most aptly written, even when they
endeavor to infringe the will of God that they do it, and that they obey the
council of God when they resist it. Furthermore, if we should grant thee that
which thou addest, that to minister wicked affections, were of hatered, should
it thereof come to pass that God hated those that were giltlesse? No in no
case. For we say that which is most true, that all are borne guilty, and
therefore enthralled to the just judgments of God, except they be delivered by
Christ. But even that which thou say is not simply and always true, that
is to say, that God hates them, whose wicked affections he moves. For the
Lord loved Paul from everlasting, and yet so long as it pleased him, he
incyted and sharpened by Satan his madness and cruelty, till he might have
mercy upon him, and loving him, might declare to him which was plunging
headlong into eternal destruction, that his will whereby he separate him from
his mothers womb. So the Lord, albeit an elect and choice King and Prophet to
himself, did yet stir up David by Satan to number the people. Albeit the
Lord does hate all iniquity, yet he hates not all those, in whom is
iniquity, and also whose iniquity he uses well, how often, howsoever, and
whenever he pleases, otherwise, whom should he love at all: therefore
whethersoeuer thou turnest thee Sclanderer, they are false and foolish
whatsoever thou blaterest against us, or rather against the word of God.

The twelfth Sclaunder.
The wicked in their wickedness do rather Gods work than their own.

The Sclaunderers Arguments to the twelfth Sclaunder.
IF it be so, God is angry with good, for if wickedness be the work of God,
then wickedness is good, for the works of God are good And if ungodliness be
good, then godliness is evil, for it is contrary to ungodliness. Therefore
when the holy Scriptures say, thou shall hate evil, and love good, they com^^
au^d vsto love iniquity, and hate godliness. And further, they say, that this
article tastes I can not tell what Lybertinisme, and they marvel that thou
art so offended with Libertines.

THE REFVTATION.
I set this saying of Augustine against all thy Sclaunders, in that the wicked
sin (says he) it is their own, in that they do this or that in saying it
is of the power of God, dividing the darkness as it pleases him. Seeff thou
Sclaunderer, with how little force they lie in the dust, whatsoever thou have
bent against us? For all these things are false which thou attributest to us,
and here also thou fightest against thine own shadow. But go too, let us
hear Calvin himself speaking, that even children may judge of thine
impudency. These verily be Caluines words. Those that are but meanly
exercised in Scripture, will not call into controversy, but that continually
God does govern the hands of men, now holds them bound, now bends
them hither and thither, to the executing of that which he has determined.
Yea almost it is received in the common judgment of all men, that whatsoever
men go about, the issue lies in the hand of God, but because in so thick
darkness of man's mind, that knowledge is marvelous slender and inconstant,
the Scripture erecteth to us higher sight, whereout we shall behold God so
governing all the works of men, that h^eacute;e may apply them to that end
which he has determined. And the sum tends to this purpose, albeit men
like wild beasts run riot, restreined with no bounds, that yet they are
governed with the secret bridle, that they can not so much as move their
finger, but to the executing of Gods work, more than their own. This last
saying of Calvin, thou Sclaunderer have snatched, that thou myghtest persuade
men, that Calvin has foredone even all difference of good and evil, or
makes God the authoure of wickedness. But how impudently thou gatherest
these, appears by these things, which Calvin has adjoined to the
forgoyng, but thou, because thou have made Shipwreck of all shame long ago,
have secretly ouerpassed: for (says Calvin,) the faithful which yield
unto him a willing obedyence, are to be thought his hand no otherwise than
the Angels: wherefore I chiefly make mention here of them, who determine
nothing less, than to have any thing allied to the council of God, or
agreeable to his will. And indeed, the wicked do glad themselves, as the
masters of their own desires but the matter will at the last make proof,
that by them, although wicked and unwilling, that is accomplished, which was
ordained from above.

Further, God sometimes uses the wicked, to punish the sins of men, as if
they were whyppes, and other sometimes, as if he should draw them by the
neck, he causes them to be instruments of his loving kindness.

To gather into one sum the examples of the first member, should be a matter
of immeasurable labor, only to touch a few shall be the best. After that God
exciting the King of Assure to war, called him the rod of his wrath, ^sai.
20.
and declared him to be armed, not with any other, but with the staff of his
displeasure. Afterward he inueygheth against his pride, because he did not
acknowledge himself to be driven of another, as if it were an axe or saw. By
this means they are called the Lords Sanctified, Isai. 23. and elsewhere in
many places of the Pro.
and hired Souldyoures, and to bestow their labor in his affairs, whom
otherwise their own ambition, cruelty, and covetousness enforces, and the
Lord witnesses himself again with an hiss or sound of a Trumpet, to call
them to war. And that the way to Gods bountifulness is prepared, by the
wicked acts of men, even one place of Hoses does sufficiently declare. The
conspiracy of Iosephes breethren, when they sold him, was more than lewd,
wicked, and cruel. But Joseph transferreth to God the cause of this selling,
Genesis 45.
but in another respect. It is not you (says he) but the Lord that sent me
before, that I myghie nourishe you. It appears therefore when they did
wickedlye, that yet God wroughte by them, that they might find life in
death. As much as was in them they had slain their brother, thence does
life shine unto them. The same is to be seen in Satan the Prince of all
wickedness, and head of all wicked men. God sends him to deceive Achab, with
this commandment, that he be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets: so the lying spirit is the minister of Gods wrath, to blind the
wicked which would not obey the truth. But contrarily, Paul, least he
should ware proud in the strength of revelations, he says, there was given
to him a prick of the flesh, the messenger of Satan, to beat him with
buffets. Here Satan's poison is a Preservative to cure pride. I pray thee what
manner of Physician is Satan, which has learned nothing, but to kill and
destroy.

But God which once commanded light to shine out of darkness, does so often as
he sees it good, maruellouslye bring health, even from the infernalles
themselves, and so changes darkness into light. But that which Satan
works, the Scripture in an other respect does affirm to be the work of
God, that is, forasmuch as God holding him Captive in the obedience of his
providence, enforces him whether he sees it good, that he may apply his
travel upon his own business. Thus far Calvin, whose words, if thou
haste read over, it may be, that thou will be ashamed of these sclaunders.
But surely, we shall never make end of marueling, that there could be so great
impudency in any, that he should lay to Caluines charge Lybertinisme.

The thirtenth Sclaunder.
We sin of necessity by the sense of God, when we sin of our own, or at
adventure.

The fourtenth Sclaunder.
Those things which men commit by their own wicked inclination, the same also
proceeds of the will of God.

THE AVNSVVER.
WE have said in no place, either that man does sin by the liking of God,
as then do expound, that is, so as sin does please him, or that sin is
committed at adventure, than the which there can be nothing spoken more
filthy. Those mo^sters be thine own, but that sins do proceed from the
will of God, as they are sins, if it had but even come in our minds, that we
should have said, or written, we would confess our selves worthy of all
torments. But what punishmente are thou worthy of, which do thus Sclaunder
the faithful servant of God, and a set enemy to the Lyhertines? But of
necessity what has bin Augustines judgment, which indeed we willingly
embrace, as most agreeable to the word of God, appears by many places
sufficiently. The will of God, Books six of Genesis ad Lut. Cap. 25. and. 18.
(says he) is the necessity of things. And again, So God has created
inferioure causes, that that may be of them, whose causes they be, but is not
of necessity, but the higher and removed he has so kept secret in himself,
that it is of necessity to be of them that he has made by them that it might
be. But that this does not of necessity hinder the voluntary motion of will,
the same Augustine teaches thus. Fist Book of the City of God. Cap. 9.
We say not that all things are done by Destiny, yea we say y^ nothing is done
by Destiny, because that where the name of Destiny is used to be put of those
that speak it, that is, that in the constitution of Stars, whereby every one
is conceived or borne, because the thing it self is avouched unprofitably, we
show to be nothing worth, but we neither deny the order of causes, where the
will of God avails most, nor do we call it by the name of Destiny, least it
might be that we understand ye Fatum destiny, is named of Fando, that is, of
speaking, for we can not deny that it is written in the holy Scriptures, God
spoke once, for that it is said he spoke once, it is understood
irremoueably, that is, he spoke inchangeably, so as he inchangeably knew all
things which should come to pass, and which he himself is to do. By this
mean therefore we may call Fatum destiny, of Fando speaking, except this
name is already wont to be understoode in another matter, whereto we will not
that the hearts of men be inclined. And it is no consequente, that if the
order of all causes be certain to God, therefore there is nothing in the
determination of our will. And they even our wills are in the order of
causes, which is certain to God, and is held in his foreknowledge, because
also men's wills are the causes of men's works. Also in the same place, our
wills are auayleable so much, how much God would they should be
available, and foreknewe it, and therefore whatsoever they can, they can it
truly, and whatsoever themselves shall do, they shall utterly do it, because
he foreknewe they should can and do, whose foreknowledge cannot be deceived.
And again, if that be defined to be necessity, according to the which we say
it is of necessity that something be so or be so done. The same Cap. 10.
I know not wherefore we should fear it, least it take from us the freedom
of will. Hitherto I have reported the words of Augustine, and what Calvin
thinks of necessity and casuals, it playnelie appears by his own words.
For when he had taught out of the word of God, that God directs with his
councels those things which seem most casual, and had showed that as
Augustine once, so also himself is much unworthily charged wytly the
Sclaunder of Stoycall Destiny. At the last he adds these, farewell the
Stoykes with their Destiny: to us let the free will of God be governor of all
things, but that casuals be taken out of the world, does seem^ absurd. I
let pass the distinctions which are used in Schools, that which I will
bring, shall be in my judgment simple, and in no wise forced, and also
applied to the benefit of life. So is it of necessity that that come to pass
which God has determined, that yet it neither be precisely nor of his own
nature necessary. I have a familiar example in the bones of Christ. The
Scripture witnesses, that Christ put upon himself a body utterly like ours,
wherefore to grant that he had bones, that might be broken, no wise man will
doubt. But there seems to me to be another question, and that aparte, whether
any bone of his could be broken, for it was requisite of necessity, that they
all remain whole and unhurt, because it was so determined by the immovable
decree of God. But I speak not so as of the customarie kinds of speaking of
necessity by his mean or absolute. Also I abhor the consequent and
consecution^ but least any device seem to annoy the readers, but that every
rudesbi^ may know it to be true that I say. Therefore, if in the bones of
Christ thou consider nature, they were brittle, but if thou consider the
decree which was manifested in his time, they were no more endaungered to
breaking, than the Angels to the miseries of men. But now seeing it stands us
on to behold the order of nature disposed from above, I do in no sort reject
casualtie, as it apperteyneth to our sense. These says Calvin, so in deed
plain^ie and enidently, that he which can stagger in these, may seek a fault
where none is. But least thou should any way complain of our obscurenesse,
because there in scarce any slander which they have more osuallie in mouth,
and which men do more impudently lay to our charge, namely the ignorant, than
this of the necessity of the Stoycall destiny, I will at once that it be
plentifully and evidently made plain, what we think of these things, and that
not with my words, but of the most learned and by many degrees most excellent
man P. Martyr, who albeit he has not published those things which I am to
describe, that were taken out of his lectures: yet this also, I trust, he will
grant to his Beza, not unwilling, that his help being gotten, it may every
where be used to the putting down of a lie. Thus therefore thought P. Martyr,
when he first should expound in the most excellent Church at Tigurine the
first book of Samuel, many very godly and learned men being present and
approving it. The question is (says he) whether Gods providence be
inchangeable. Why not? For it is the rule of al things ye are done. I am the
Lord, (says he) and am not changed, with whom there is no change nor shadow
of alteration. And in the Prou^^. There be many thoughts in the heart of man,
but the Lords counsel stands. Prod. 19.
Esai 46. I say the word, and my counsel abides, and I do all things
whatsoever I will. For seeing the providence is the will and knowledge of God,
What the providence 1^.
and these appertain to the essence of God, it cannot fail except God
himself should be changed. In deed, the second causes, seeing they are
diverse, they often times hinder themselves, which we see does come in use in the
passages of Heaven, that some be hindered of others. But the will of God can be
hindered by no force. But once he allowed the Jewish Ceremonies, afterward he
willed them to be abandoned. How then is not the providence of GOD changeable?

I answer, that there is in GOD altogether one and the self same will, but
that he foresawe from everlasting what was convenient for diverse times.
Augustine says to Marcellinus, That the husbandman does at one time sow,
and at another time mow, at an other time dung his land, and yet that the
trade of Husbandry is not therefore chaungeable. Vinditianus, (says he) a
certain Physician, gave to a sick man a potion, and recovered him He after
many years being fallen again into the same disease^ the Physician not knowing
of it, took the same potion^^. But when he selte himself worse, he came to
the physician, he showed him the matter, and began to complain of the potion.
Then Vinditianus, it is no marvel (says he) for I gave thee not that. Here
when others marvelled, and thought that he had used to add some magical force,
there is (says he) no such thing: he is of another age, and has other humors,
than who I did first give him that potion. But for that cause shall the
Physic be inconstant: So utterly God, albeit he foreseeth all things, yet he
has not decreed, that all things shall be done at one time. Now let us come
to the matter it self, if the providence of God be certain, may it suffer any
chance: Here first I will use two distinctions, and then I will answer. There
is one simple necessity, an other by supposition. For who^ we say, that there
is a God, that God is wise and i^ste, we understand, that that is simply and
absolutely necessary. Other things he necessary by supposition, as that
which is taught in Schools, that which is, in so much as it is, is necessary.
Christ and the Prophets preach, that Jerusalem shall be destroyed, therefore it
shall be destroyed of necessity: not because that necessity is in the nature
of the City, but because Christ and the Prophets have foretold it, which
could not be deceived. There must be heresies (says Paul.) And Christ says,
It is necessary that offense come. For, these causes being set, that is, the
corrupt wits of men, and the devils hatred against mankind, and the end being
set also, that the elect shall be tried, by supposition it is necessary, that
these things come. Also things may be considered two ways, either as they are
secreat in the causes, as they stand out in act, and so they have the reason
of necessity. For they are no more indeterminate, as to write, or not to write,
is casual. But if thou write already, it is no more casual, but of
necessity. Therefore we say, the knowledge of senses is certain, because ye
very things can not be are themselves otherwise. But also things may be
considered as they are secret in their causes, And for that ye causes, are
sometimes of power, sometimes not of power to bring forth effects, therefore there
is no necessary working force in the^. But if ye things themselves be referred
to God, there is a far other reason. For he calls those things which are
not, as though they were. For because he co^passeth al time, and has neither
beginning nor ending, also all things which shall be hereafter by time
indeterminable, are yet present to him. Hereto also comes ye will of God. For
bare knowledge has no place in him, but (...) working. And by this means, I
say, that things themselves have ye manner of necessity. August upon Genes. to
ye Let. in ye 6. book. 15. Chap. There be many means, by which, man, and other
things might be made of God: and those means had some possibility, not
necessity. This also is of the will of God, whose will is the necessity of
things. And albeit such things being referred to God are of necessity, yet we
are to ofteeme the^ of the interior and proper cause, and to term the^
Casualls. For it is of necessity, ye such as is ye efficient cause, such be
also the effect. If thou demau^dest why these two kinds of causes be in the
nature of things, and some limited and necessary, and some infinite and
casual, there can be answered no other thing, than, that God has enjoined
these orders to al things. And God produces, limiteth, and boundeth all
things, yet not that he might confound and dispecse the nature of things.

Boethius in his Topics, says, ye (...) destiny is named (...) of drawing and
yielding consequentlye. GOD indeed draws all things, but so he after a
sort yields, that he disordereth n^thing. So, albeit that things of their
own nature remain indifferent unto both parts, yet of GOD they are more
inclined into the one. The will of Saul was by his nature no more inclined to
go, that to tarrye. But when GOD would send him to Samuel, he began to
incline his will into the one part. Therefore GOD sets before his
understanding the will of his father, and brings to pass that that might
urge, and effectuallye enforce his mind, that all other desires of flouth and
idleness, if any were which might deceive him, should fail. Therefore it
came to pass, that the will of Saul should obey the providence of God. Yet,
in the mean time, the nature of the thing is not violated, but that the will
of Saul was equallye free to both parts. Hence it appears what need we
have of the grace of GOD. For our will as it is depraved in all respects, it
tourneth all into the worse part. Also there be many things which would
dull and make blind our understanding, that will should not easilye incline.
GOD therefore sets before our understanding that which is good: then be
kindles our confidence, and stirs up the dullness, that we may will
effectuallye. But thou will say, wherefore is any thing called Casual, seeing
it is already decreed of God into the one part, and so is made of necessity?
I answer, every thing by his own proper beginning is casual: but the
providence which brings necessity, is a foreign cause, from which the
name should not be given to things. I know there be many that determine
those things, which cannot thereto be brought of God by man's strength, that
our will can either choose or refuse, and that there ye providence of God does
stay, neither proceeds further, and when God fore saw what every one would
choose, and what refuse, that his foreknowledge is nothing hindered. But these
do not sufficiently accord with Divine Scriptures. For they teach, that God
does not so provide for things, that he may leave them, but as we have said,
that he may bring them to their determinate ends: And the end^s themselves do
yield loyalty to the providence of God. For thus Paul says, that God has
done all things according to ye determination of his will. So says the lord by
Esaias, All things that I will, I do. And Christ says, That even a Sparowe does
not fall to the ground without the will of our father. I know that Origin,
Cyrill, Chrysostom, and others, when they are pressed with plain places of
Scripture, of which sort are, it was necessary, that Christ should die: and
it was of necessity, that the Scripture should be fulfilled, do so
interpret these things, not that it came therefore to pass so, because God did
forsee them: but that God did therefore foresee them, because they should come
to pass.

This sentence, if it should speak of simple knowledge, it could not be so
much reproved. For not because I see one writing, he writes: but because he
writes, I see him writing. But in God we cannot place a bare knowledge, will
also must be adjoined which orders, and dyrecteth all things. But yet shall it
be true which they say, if it be understood of the effect, or as they speak,
of the posterior. For we, by that that any thing is done, do understand, that
it was Gods counsel that it should be done so. Otherwise the Scriptures do
manifestly speak. It was necessary, that Christ should dye. It was
necessary, that the Scriptures should be fulfilled. But how was it
necessary, that they should be fulfilled by supposition, because God had so
foreseen it, not because that that necessity was in the nature of the thing.
But it may be, thou will therefore say that the causes in the nature of the
thing it self are infinite, because, I take not the full and entire causes,
for that it should have been requisite to ad ye providence of god. I answer, I
only take the interior and proper causes of every thing, whose effects
because they might and might not be produced from them, they are casuals, and
not the providence from god, for that it is a foreign cause, which if it be
added, it can not be avoided, but by supposition some necessity should follow.
For example sake. Saul met children carrying Kyds, bread and Wine. There will
by the self nature was infinite, cyther that they might have given, or not
given him any thing. But that will GOD by his providence ordered into the one
part. They went to Bethell that they might do sacrifise, they met Saul
wearied in the way, and pressed with famyne: it seemed a point of humanity
to refreshe him. These things preferred GOD to their minds, and if, there were
any things which might hinder their will, those he repressed. And these things
only we dispute of the wills of men.

For in other casual things, I know there be infinite means which GOD is
wont to use. Another example of this matter we have in the 21. Chapter of
Ezechiell, Nabuchadnezer moved into Syria, and when he was in a place that
led two ways, he began to deliberate, whether it did not rather lead to
the Jews, or to Rabath king of the Ammonites: He yielded ye matter to Lottes:
those God guydeth, and brings him to Jerusalem. The nature of the thing it
self was casual: but the same determined of GOD, is made necessary. Joseph was
so sold and carried away into Egipte, as that which belongs to the nature
of the thing, he might either always live in bondage, or in some time be
delivered. But God sent dreams upon the Baker and Cuphearer, and Joseph does
expound them: afterward a vision was sent unto Pharao, and when no
soothsayer could expound it, the Cupbearer put him in mind of Joseph, and so
it came to pass, that Iosephe should be brought out of prison. Let it
therefore be set down that we have often said, that all things if they be
referred to Gods providence, are necessary, and of their own nature casual.
But thou will say, shall the effect be simplye called casual, or rather of
necessity: There be, which for the dignitye of the providence, will call them
necessary. But I had rather call them of their own nature casual. Albeit I
do not any thing withstand it, so that that necessitye be only understood
of supposition: the Grecians therefore have called providence, (...), because
it passes through all things: others (...), because nothing may escape it. Thus
far Peter Martyr, whose vprighte judgment, if it do not suffice thee, it
is in deed of necessity that thou accuse thy self, and it shall never irke
us to dissente from thee, that we may follow the truth. But go too, let
us now hear what thine Arguments be.

The Sycophants first Argument to the thirtenth and fourtenth slander.
If we sin of necessity, all admonitions be in vain, it is said to no
purpose in Jeremy, I set the way of lefe and death before you. He that shall
tarry in this City, shall perish with sword, famine and plague: but he
that shall pass over to the Chaldeis, shall line. These things (I say) are
spoken in vain, if is had bin so impossible for them to pass over to the
Chalde is, as to swallow up a mountain.

THE REFVTATION.
But I have now to do with Pelagius. Therefore I send thee to Augustines
schole: for this disputation would be too tedious. But if we sin not
necessarily, the^ in deed it is in our power not to sin, and therefore not to
will to sin. But Paul cries out, that he is not able so much as to think
that which is good. And in another place considering himself without grace, I,
says he, am carnal, sold under sin. Yea, he complayneth with great
mournings, that he is not fully set at liberty. But where is the deliverance,
if there went no servitude before? where is the new man, if the old man went
not before? But it may be, thou will find some outscape from Pelagius to the
Papisticall Sophysters, half Pelagians, and wilt grant, that there is some
servitude of sin: but only that that which has hurt nature, and cleaves
only in the inferior parts. And what says David: There is not any that does
understand, no not one. And what says Paul? Those that boasted themselves to
be wise, became fools (...) the natural man peceiueth not those things which
are of God. (...) the wisdom of the flesh is enmity before God. And in
another place, he says, that god, and the father of glory, give you the
spirit of wisdom, and lighten the eyes of your minds. Also, be ye renewed
(says he) in the spirit of your minds. Also, when you were the servants of
sin, you were free from righteousnrsse. What say thou to these, good man: If
there be no necessity of sinning, Aug. Epi. 106. to Sixth.
how entered sin into the world, verily by imitation, and not by propagation.
But if it be so, how reigned death upon them which sinned not after the
similitude of Adam: and why does the Church baptize infants, if we be not borne
the children of wrath? Give therefore, wicked Pelagius, glory to God, and if
thou can, acknowledge at ye last ye grace of God, not whereby we were
created, that we might be men, (for this we lostin Ada^, if thou only
exceptest this because we sin willingly:) but that whereby we are justified,
that we might be just men. For God is he which altogether works in us the
will and the deed. And to what purpose shall it be, to undo with more words, the
doubt which thou patchest, seeing Augustine has written so plainly and
plenteously to Valentine of this same matter de correptione and gratia, and
after Augustine also, both that worthy servant of Christ Martyne Luther
against Erasmus, and also Calvin himself, whether thou will or no, a
confident auoucher of the Christian verity, against Pighius, have showed? Yet
I will speak in few words that may satisfy thee, if thou love the truth.
The use of admonitions is manifold, which thou seem not sufficiently to
have understood. The godly are admonished, that so often as need is, they may
be reproved: that the drowsinesse being shaken off, they may stir up
themselves: that being at the least vanquished with shame when they have
erred, they may return into the way: that when they know their weakness,
they may take better heed to themselves. But thou say we strive not about
these. For to these it is given to will and do. Let us come therefore to the
forrainers. Of these there be two kinds. For some, albeit not yet called, yet
by Gods secret election they belong to the kingdom of God. Others are auowed
to just destruction. Thou indeed denyest this difference, but we have proved
it out of the word of God in his place, and experience it self approves it
to be true. But albeit the sun beams be all one and the same, yet if
softneth war, and hardens clay. So also it comes to pass here. For
therefore are admonitions given forth, to them that he elect, that when they
know their own miserable condition, they may run to him, of whom alone
they may be healed. I came not, says Christ, that I might call the just, but
sinners to repentance. Also, I came, that I might save that which was lost.
Also, come to me all ye that travel and be heavy laden and I will ease you.
So says Paul, by the law is the knowledge of sin, and that which more is the
increase of sin, but (...) by accident, not in any wise that the sinner
might be devoured, but that so much the more feruentlye he might ask that of
the Lord, which also he may obtain. For that which appertains to these,
there is the effectual working of the spirit joined with the outward preaching
of the word. Therefore as the Lord says, I have given them precepts. Also he
says in another place, I will cause you to walk in my precepts. And, I will
give them a new spirit, and I will take away their stonye heart out of their
flesh, and I will give them a fleshie heart. And that which apperteyneth to
the others, albeit the word is not ordained to their amendment, yet is it not
preached to them in vain. Wherewith they both may be pricked for the present,
with the testimony of conscience, and also be the more made without excuse
against the day of judgment. For neither does necessity, as I will show
afterward, take away will, or extenuate, or make less the guiltiness of the
wicked.

So Moyles is sent to Pharao and the Egiptians to be hardened by their own
lewdenesse, albeit necessary, yet voluntary. So Esaye is sent to harden the
peoples heart, to stop their ears, and blind their eyes, by no fault in
himself or in the word, but by their own proper faults, as those which not
being enforced against their will, but although necessarilye, yet resist the
truth of their own accord. And whence is this necessity? verily not from
the creation, but from the corruption, in which albeit they be left, yet have
they nothing wherefore to accuse God. But because thou think there is but
one only use of admonition, that is, that those which be admonished, may
return into the way: thou therefore patchest a false conclusion. But this
very thing, thou will say, is unjust, as though in deed we be not all worthy
that the Lord should punish us with whatsoever means. From whomsoever he
takes a stony heart, and gives them a fleshye, let them reverence the mercy of
GOD: and whose stonye hearts he hardens, and whom he more and more holds
guyltie, let them being vanquished with his justice, remain silente.

The Sycophants second Argument to the thirtenth and fourtenth slander.
If Calvin will say that the precepts are therefore given, that men may be
made excuselesse, we answer, that that is in vain. For if thou shall
command thy son to eat a rock, and he shall not do it, he is no more
excusable after the precept, than before. Likewise, if God say to me, steal
not, and I steal necessarily, nor can any more abstain from stealing, than I
can eat a rock, I am no more excuselesse after the precept than before, nor
more inexcusable than afterward.

THE REFVTATION.
Thou indeed opposest thy self against Gods truth like a brazen rock, but
the spirit of the Lord shall also devour thee, and that stone which is cut
without hands shall crushe thee. If we are borne the children of wrath, are we
not, I pray thee, inexcusable before the precept? I pray not for the world,
(says Christ.) But do thou by the name of World, only understand them
which when they can believe the Gospel, yet nevertheless will not? If the
blind lead the blind, they fall both into the ditch: but think thou that
none be borne blind, when on the contrary part manne is nothing else but a
most palpable darkness? The Apostle witnesses, that manne is so inthralled
to sin, that he is not apt, so much as to think any good: but is he to
thee excuseable, except of himself he can not only will, but also work? But
it may be thou will say, that all in some sort are borne blind, but God
gineth this grace to all, that they may open their eyes if they will. But who
will grant thee this? where death reigns, there verily does sin reign: and
death bears sway enen upon very infants: where is then that thine
universal grace? As though in deed men were not borne by their own nature
sufficiently inexcusable in Adam, except also there approach a new divorce of
grace. Again, do thou think that there is any grace, which indeed
properly belongs unto life without Christ, that can be derived unto men? But
how may they obtain any grace by Christ, which are not comprehended within
the covenant, nor ever heard any thing of Christ, so sarre is it off, that
they have embraced him by faith? For Faith comes by hearing. And if thou
denyest, that there have ever bin an infinite number of such in the world, the
truth it self, which every one sees, will sufficiently convince thee. And to
what purpose is this? that is, that al confess, that by their own nature they
are inexcusable, albeit they are borne concluded under the necessity of sin.
For necessity does not take away will, as which albeit necessary, yet not
enforced, but of it self and willingly should not be drawn unwilling, but
might be carried witting, and willing, unto wickedness. But yet thou will
say, there is no man so wretched, that he would desire evil. Yes in deed,
there is in him the very miserable scruitude of man, not freed from the yoke of
sin, so that neither his understanding can do that which is of God, and
therefore perceive that which is good: nor his will allow, nor his sense desire,
but yt whole man deceived with a show of evil, runs headlong into evil, and
draws destruction to himself. And to this cuil there comes another also,
which also what it is thou know not. For he which before the precept was
inexcusable already, after the commandment is much more inexcusable than
before. Paul is witness of that thing, which witnesses, that that light,
with how little socuer men be endued, is therefore left to them, that they
might be made without excuse: For seeing that in dwelling lewdness does by
and by oppress and put out this light, who sees not, that by this means the
offense is doubled? But if also the clear exposition of the law of God do
approach, then indeed concupiscence waxes strong, and the raines let at
liberty, is enforced unto mischief. But what if also the preaching of the
Gospel? then indeed concupiscence breaks out into plain madness, as the
examples of all times and ages do prove, that is to say, in them, in whose
hearts the Lord does not kindle the light of his Spirit. But thou will say, it
is unjust, to command that which thou know cannot be performed, as if
some father should commannde his son to eat a rock. But thou speak
marvelous wisely. Men were never created so, that they could devour
mountains. It shall therefore be unjust to require of them that they should
devour a mountain. But this necessity of sinning, this imperfection, which
causes that we are not apt, so much as to think that which is good: does
it proceed from that first creation? yea from the deprauednesse. But whence
came this deprauation, but because willingly fell from his creator, whence the
necessity of sinning came upon all men? Tasti. cap. 2. did. 76.
If all men be worthily held guilty of this downfall, (says Calvin) let
the^ not think themselves excused by the necessity, in which they have a
most evident cause of their dampnation. Also in another place. Just. ca. 1.
did. 80.
What should man do (says he) when the mollifying of heart is denied him,
which was most necessary to obedience? Yea, what does he seek outscapes when
he can impute the hardenesse of heart to none but to himself? Finally, that I
may make end with thee in some time, hear (if thou canste hear any thing)
how briefly, and to the purpose that Calvin decideth all this controversy,
by whose side thou fightest against the truth.

It is not lawful to pretend an excuse (says he) because there wa^teth power,
Inst. ca. 3. did. 3.
and as banckerout debtors we were never able to pay. For it is not meet,
that we should measure the glory of God after our own power. Of what sort
soever we be, he remains for ever like himself, a friend to righteousness,
and displeased with iniquity. Whatsoever he exacteth of us, because he cannot
demand but that which is just by the bond of nature, there abides a
necessitte of Obeying: And whereas we cannot obey, that is our own fault. For
if we are held captive of our own concupiscence wherein sin reigns, least
we should be loosed into the obedience of our father, there is no cause why we
should allege necessity for our defense, whose evil is even amongst our
selves, and to be imputed to our selves.

The Sycophants third Argument to the thirtenth and fourtenth slander.
If Caluines saying be true, man is without excuse before the commandment:
whereby it follows, that there is no no need of the commandment to the
causing of this inexcusablenesse. For if the resected be wicked before he be
wicked, that is, before he be, that is to wit from everlasting, and
therefore sins necessarily, now he is inexcusable and damned before the
precept, and that against all laws, both of God and man. For all laws con
demne a man after the offense, and for the offense: at this Caluins God has
candemned, and rejected the wicked before they were, much more before they
were wicked or had sinned: and because he has damned them before sin, he
causes them to sin, that is, that he may seem to have condemned them
justly.

THE REFVTATION.
God suppress thee (Satan) who heapest together so many lies without all
shame. We have plentifully proved, that men are inexcusable before the precept,
that is, before the knowledge of the precept, as those which are borne the
children of wrath. Where thou gatherest hence, that there is no need of the
precept to make this inexcusablenesse, it is foolish and ridiculous. Why may
not an evil estate be made worse? And thou art wonderfullye deceived, if thou
think, that we judge al men to be alike inexcusable, when the Lord
testifyeth, that there be many, Mar. 12.40. Luc. 12.48.
which shall be punished with a greater judgment, and beaten with more stripes.
Whereas thou sayste, that the rejected are wicked before they be, that is, from
everlasting, it is not our doctrine, but the Apostles, who witnesses, that
Esau was hated (that is, was ordained to batred, as we have showed in his
place) before be was born and had done any evil, and that God, as a Potter,
makes vessels of dishonor. Therefore this doctrine is true, if in deed thou
considerest reprobation in the purpose of God: but if thou considerest it, in
that it comes forth already into act (as they speak) or in that the Lord
begins now to execute his determination in effect, or foreknoweth the
execution thereof, it is false that thou saiste. For God in effect rejects
none, but those that are corrupted in Adam, and with whom therefore he is
worthily displeased. Whereas thou saiste, that the reprobates sin of
necessity, it is not truly said of thee. For the purpose of necessity is not
the cause of that necessity, but Adams sin which issued forth upon all men.
Whereas thou saiste, that the reprobates are damned before the precepte, it is
false in every respect: for there is no man damned, except for sin. And
where there is no law, there is no transgression. But the law given to Adam,
and transgressed of him, made all men inthralled to the wrath of God, and
therefore to just damnation. Whereas thou say, that God damneth men before
offense, out of our doctrine it is altogether forged, and does bewray thy
gross ignorance. The Lord predestinat to life from everlasting whom he
pleased, yet he saves them not, except justified in Christ, otherwise he
should be unjust. So also he predestinate to death from everlasting whom he
would, yet he does not abandon them to desruction, except corrupt in Adam, to
which corruption also come the other fruits of contumacie and corruption. For
God ordained to destruction, but to just destruction, and therefore, albeit he
ordained not to destruction, for corruption and yt fruits thereof, but because
he so saw it good, whose will, albeit secret, yet it is always just, yet he
damneth not, except for corruption, and the fruits of corruption, for that he
has submitted these causes to the execution of his eternal purpose. What is
therefore thine ignorance, what madness Sclaunderer, when thou mingless
damnation with the purpose of rejecting, and in some place set damnation
before the purpose of rejecting, that is, the end before the beginning? and art
thou not ashamed to dispute of things unknown, and which thou understand
not? Finally, whereas thou say, it is gathered out of our doctrine, that
God inforceth men to sin, what does it bewray, but that thine incredible
impudency? That men sin of necessity, until they be delivered from the
bondage of sin, we freely profess out of the word of God. But necessity
signifies none other thing to thee, than enforcement. So shall it be, that
because all dye of necessity, thou may also say, that all are enforced to
dye, when yet Christ willingly offered himself self to death: and many
Martyrs at this day do willingly dye for Christ, What more? The Devil also
in thee shall not willingly be wicked, nor willingly shall sin, but enforced,
and by constreynt. He that speaks thus Sclaunderer, may he seem to have but
even a very little of that common sense, to whose order and rule thou desire
that we try the wisdom of God, and yet dare thou dispute of the nature of
the true and false God, but how aptly thou do it, go too, let us consider.

The nature of the false God, by the false supposition of the Sclaunderer.
I False God is flow to mercy, and swift to wrath, which created the
greatest part of the world to destruction, and predestinat them not only to
damnation, but to the cause of damnation: therefore he has decreede from
everlasting, and he will, and causes that they sin of necessity, so that no
theftes, nor adulteries, nor murders are committed, except by his will and
enforcement, for he ministers unto them wicked and dishonest affertions, not
only by sufferance, but effectually, and he hardneth them, so that when they
live wickedly, they do Gods work rather than their own, and they can not
otherwise do. He causes Satan to be a liar, so that not now Satan, but
Calvin God is father of lies, as he which often carries one thing in his mind,
and another thing in his mouth.

The nature of the true God, after the opinion of the Sclaunderer.
BUt that God, whom nature, and reason, and Scriptures teach, is flat contrary
to him: for he is ready to forgive, and slow to wrath, which created man,
from whom all men proceeded, to his ^wne likeness, like to himself, that he
might place him in Paradise, and enrich him with eternal life. This God will,
that all men be saved, nor that any perish: therefore he sent his son into
the earth, whose righteousness has superabounded wheresoever sin has
abounded, the brightene^^e of whose righteousness does lighten all men that
come into this world, and cries Come to me all ye that labor and are laden,
and I will ease you This ministers good and honest affections, and delivers
men from the necessity of sin (into the which they had cast themselves
headlong by disobedience) and he heals every grief and disease amongst the
people, in so much that he n^uer denied to any man a benefit that asked if.
But this God is come to destroy the works of that Caluinian God, and cast him
out at the doors. But these two Gods, as they are between themselves by nature
contrary, so also they beget children contrary among themselves, that is he,
unmerciful, proud, savage, disdeynefull, blou^ie, sclaunderers, counterfayte,
bearing one thing in their heart, another in their mind, impatient, malicious,
seditious, contentious, ambitious, covetous, lovers of pleasures more than of
God, finally, full of all lewd and dishonest affections, which their father
does minister to them. But the other God begets merciful men, modest,
mild, well willing, doers of good works, lothing cruelty, plain, speaking
the truth from the abundance of the heart, patient, loving, quiet, peacemakers,
lothing chidings and contentions, despisers of honor liberal, loving God
more than pleasures, finally, full of all honest affections, which their
Father does minister to them,

THE REFVTATION.
WHO is thy God, and the God of thy faction, we shall see hereafter. For first
I will resell your Sclanders, and then I will set before you in his colors
your I doll. We have not said in any place that God is slow to forgive, and
swift to wrath, which continually see the contrary, both in our selves, and
also in the most bitter enemies of the Church, as we have taught largely in the
refutation of the third, and also of the tenth Argument to the first
Sclaunder. That God has created the greatest part of the world to perdition,
how it is to be taken, and what is your falsehode in that matter, we have
expounded in the suppressing of the same first Sclander. Whereas thou addest,
that God has predestinate whom he would, not only to damnation, but to the
causes of damnation. We in deed with Paul acknowledge it to he true, which
makes mention of vessels made to destruction, but that he in deed is just,
because he ordained by the same decree just causes leading to destruction. Yea
also if God should not have created one man to salvation, who art thou that
therefore thou should call him cruel, seeing all are borne in Adam the
children of wrath? And whereas thou adioynest, that God by our doctrine, has
decreed from everlasting, both the will and the deed that finne might be
committed of necessity, it is a forgerie, as almost in every side of lease we
have showed, except thou addest, that sins, in that they are sins, proceed
not from God, but from Satan, and the lewd will of man, as the very natural
causes of sin: and for as much as they are either the punishments of sin,
or exercises of the rightuous, they are justly and holyly ordesned of God. It
is like that thou addest, that offenses are committed by the will and
inforcemente of God, seeing we testify every where, that iniquity can not
please God, which he punishes with just torments, but that the motions also
of the wicked are governed by the iuse Providence of God, the forgerie
therefore of ministering wicked affections, is wholly thine own, as we have
proved in his place. For God also justly moves the hearts of the wicked,
that by wickedly resisting the will of God, they may do the just will of God,
whereby if comes to pass, that God, albeit he execute his work by them, yet
he justly punish them as disobediente and Rebels. God makes not Satan a
liar, nor is he the father of lies, but he justly uses even as it pleases
him, the Devil albeit a liar, and father of lies, both to exercise his, and to
scourge the wicked. And he that has said, that God bears one thing in
heart, and another in mouth, let him be accurssed. Yet we deny that the Lord
does make known all his councels, but so far only as it is meet, as has
appeared in the civil war taken in hand against the Beniamites. Judge. 20.23
But also we distinguishe those things which the Lord says for trial,
reproving, and threatening sake, of those things which he simply commands to
be done: all which because thou understand not, therefore thou patchest
false consequents together, and do verily snare thy self, while thou
would entangle us.

But go to, now let us behold thine Idol, and first what manner of God (I
pray thee) had thou determined to paynt out unto us? forsooth such a one, as
nature and reason do teach. But we owe all idolatry to this thy nature and
reason, as Paul witnesses, and that disputing not of every one, but of the
wysest of all men. The same cries out (...), that the wisdom of the flesh
is nothing else but the hatered of God: that they are passing wicked, which
are not conceived in the covenant: that the world has not known God by
wisdom: that the Gospel is a stumbling block to the Jews, to the Gentiles
foolishness: that the natural man perceyueth not those things which are of
God: that we are not apt so much as to think any good: Christ every where
damneth our blind^^esse, beating into us regeneration, and the denial of our
selves. Finally, even they with whom God talked most familiarlie, do cry,
that the heygth and profoundnesse of God is infinite, and that his ways are
past findyng out. What shall we more? The Philosophers do freely confess
themselves when they come to God, to he blind. But thou contrarily requirest
no other masters to obtain the knowledge of God, than nature and reason,
which verily when thou do, thou do even s^, as if thou should commit
the judgment of couloures to none other, but to blind men. Thou addest yet
in the third place, the holy Scriptures, whereof forsooth nature and reason
should be helped, as also long ago thy Pelagius said. But I ask how if
can be, that thou should couple light with darkness, as if we should
not rather become fools, than be able to taste the wisdom of God. For Christ
says, These things thou have hid from the wise, and revealed them to babes.
And reasoning of the Scribes and Pharisees, who were grieved with this same
disease, If ye were blind (says he) that is, if you did perceive your
selves to be blind in deed, you should see. Do thou see (Sclaunderer)
what be the principles of thy Divinity? But go too, let us hear in what
Schole thou have learned, and with what couloures of darkness thou can
paynte out the light. Thou say therefore that God is swift to forgive, and
slows to wrath. In deed thou gessest truly, seeing thou have drawn these out
of the word of God, and reason may easily seem to admit it, because he
seems not to terrifye her. But it will also appear by and by, that thou
peruertest this truth of God, when we come to the dispensation of his mercy.
Thou addest therefore, that God created the man, from whom all men sprung,
after his own similitude, like to himself, that he might place him in
Paradise, and enriche him with an happy life. That thou alleadgest of the
creation of Man, I grant, and nature and reason might after a sort dyrecte
thee, for it willinglye suffers it self to be praised and advanced. But in
the end of man I dissente from thee, when especially thou considerest not
Adam, as some singular undivided thing, but as the show of man, because all
men should be comprchended in him. And that I may let pass that
foolish dream of Paradise, which the vanity of nature and thy mind has
taught thee, and we have refuted in his place, but whence indeed did thou
learn, so to judge of Gods purpose to make man? for thou shalt find no such
thing in the sacred Scriptures, but thou shalt synde this, that God created
all things for his own glory, even the wicked, against the day of evil.
Therefore thy reason and thine understanding has taught thee this lie, for
say thou, otherwise God should be cruel, and worse than any Wolf, if he
should have created any to myserie. What if I should deny that he were
cruel, which for just causes determines any thing, albeit it be hard and
bitter, so that the sharpness exceed not the rule of justice? Will thou
deny this? I think not. What it I should add that the will of God is the
rule of justice, not the contraric? thou will condescende to it I think. How
is it therefore that when the holy Scriptures do witness, that God created
all things for his own glory, even the wicked against the day of evil,
thou contrarily supposest, that God created all in Adam, to the end that he
might enriche them with an happy life? was it for that thou know not with
what causes God being moved, should worthily ordeyne them to misery that are
not yet borne, forsooth reason does tell thee this, but most foolishly, for
thou take that which is most sottish, and utterly repugnant to the very
nature of God, that is, that God knows no reason of his counsels, so often as
men can not comprehend it. But how much better should thou have done, if
thou had caused nature and reason to keep themselves within their bonds, and
to have drawn their reins so often, as they durst kick against the holy Ghost?

But farther also, let us see how that vain reason of man does dispatch it
self, for not even that same which a little before enforces us to judge
otherwise of the end of man, than the word of God may suffer, judge if to be
most foolish, that that should not be lawful to God the Creator, in creating
whatsoever things, which all men grant to the Potter in making his vessels:
for truly God does far more exceed his Angels, than the Potter his Clay.
But I also demand this of thee,
(...) most reasonable creature, does God seem to thee always like himself,
and omnipo^te^t? I think he does, how is it then ye thou admittest that
ordinance, which once being set, he can neither be always like himself, nor
almighty? For if he created all men with that purpose that he might sane all,
why does he not sane them? is it because he will not now sane those whom he
made in the beginning? Then he has changed his will, and has indeed repented
him of his purpose. Or is it because he cannot sane them? then he cannot be
almighty. But what manner of godhead is this, which is neither always like
himself, nor can do whatsoever he will. Finally, see how the latter may
agree with the first. Thou saidste, that God was ready to forgine, and slow
to wrath. But if his counsel had been ratified, in deed what manner of
counsel do thou say it was, in respect of men there should have bin no place
left to this his nature. Nature and Will therefore do contend in God. For his
nature is to use mercy and wrath, which his will should not have suffered
him to do. For, what place had there bin, either for wrath or mercy, if he
had crowned al men with eternal life in Adam? The truth therefore is thus.
Albeit, that the Lord does advance his glory in manifesting both his mercy
and wrath: yet so he created man, to the end, that in that lining creature
especially, he might manifest both the one and the other. He therefore created
him just, for how should he do otherwise, which is altogether good? nor
otherways he could have justly condemned evil, if he had bin the Author of
evil: but with that condition, that shortly of his own will (for he was
endued with will) and therefore by his own fault, he might decline from his
creator, and might carry headlong into the same ruinous downfall, all those
which were included in him. But wherefore was this? That he might show forth,
in saving certain miserable men, his mercy, and condemning some, his wrath,
and therefore make manifest that his nature in man. But go to, let us go on, to
behold your Idol. Thou saiste, that this God wills, that all men be saved.
And again, thou seeste into what downfalles thou art carried, because thou
submittest the word of God to reason, when on the contrary thou ought to
set reason in obedience to the word of God? And let us see how finelye
this thy reason is knitte in argument. God should not be like himself, except
even as in the beginning he would, so also be should sane all, after Adams
sin. But thou auouchest that which we show to be false of necessity, even
by the judgment of reason. Thou therefore labourest to avoid that
inconvenience which is no where. God should be cruel, except he would that
all should be saved. But I say, that he cannot seem cruel, no not to very
reason, albeit he should have saned not so much as one of Adams posterity,
seeing they have all deserved, that they should perish. Therefore God is
neither inconstant, nor cruel, albeit he sane not all. Yea, if he should sane
all, he should dissent from himself, as he which necessarily (that is his
nature so requiring) has decreed from the beginning for his own glories sake,
to manifest in man not only his mercy, but also wrath, and therefore not to
save all, but certain.

Finally, if I should grant thee this (noble Warrior) I shall wrappe thee in
those snares, wherewith thou wast incombred a little before. For verily, if he
will that all be saned, and saves them not in yt time wherein they are to be
saned, it is thence, because he has changed his mind, or else, that he cannot.
But yt thy guide and Maistresse does teach, that neither of both does agree
with the nature of God. And if these be assigned, to what purpose is this
preposterous end, least God should seem cruel, if he will not that some one be
saned, seeing the goodness of God ought rather to be admired and marvelled at,
which will, yt so much as one of Adams posterity should be saned? But it shall
be labourworth to see what testimonies of Scripture thou abusest to strengthen
this error? First therefore thou bring that place of Paul, in which it
is said, that God wills, that all men be saned. This was an old objection of
the Pelagians, least thou may think thy self to have devised it first, as
if indeed All signify the same as Every, and is not rather to be taken for
All, that all (...) respect of persons might be taken away, as the same says
in an other place, That in Christ there is neither man nor woman, neither Jew
nor Gentile, neither bond nor free.

The LORD commanded his Apostles to preach the Gospel (...) to all
creatures, which (I think) thou will not deny, that it is to be taken for
all men. Did not therefore the Apostles either their office, or have they
preached the Gospel to all men? The Lord is said in Matthew to have healed and
cured all diseases and infirmities in Galiley: but in deed think thou, that
there was no sick folks besides, and not rather to be signified, that every
kind of disease was cured of Christ. Whereas therefore this place and other
like, are cited of certain, much unlike to thee, it tends not thither, that
they would set down, that the kingdom of GOD belongs to every one, but to
this end rather, that whosoever are toyled in the temptation of particular
election, may know that there is an universal calling, that is, that all
men, and guilty of how great sins soever, and in whatsoever age, are
called of GOD, least being feared with the conscience of their own sins,
they should despair, or seek the declaration of their election in ye highest
degree, that is, in the purpose of God, without CHRIST and the voice of the
Gospel sounding in the Church. For utterly after a a contrary manner must
we use this most sure doctrine of eternal election, that is, even so as we
may, come from the effects, apart, to that first cause of our salvation,
where at length, haning found a strong and grounded remedy, we rest together
as in an Haven against all tempests. Otherwise, if that were the indgement of
most^ learned men, whose learning thou understand not, that they would have
a man while he is troubled in the temptation of his election, to take this
saying of Paul and other like places in such forte, as if the Lord would sane
every one, they should rather set down an argument whereby every one might
strength himself in all sin and wickedness, for so in deed he should
think, that it shall be in his power, to repent when he will, because God will
sane every one, and in deed, they cannot pacify their consciences, in whom
this doctrine is graven as with the finger of God, that some be elected from
everlasting, and therefore also some rejected. But contrariwise, when they
teach, that such general propositions are to be set against thoughts,
especially of sins paste, and our unworthiness, which may fear our
consciences, who may not see, that they take them in no other sense, than that
men may persuade themselves, that all are elect of God, so that they embrace
in faith the promises offered. Betwixt us therefore, and certain others, who
teach, that there is an universal grace of God, that is, that it is confusedly
offered to al without (...) without respect of persons, there is in very deed
no difference. But we in deed dos teaching, together with the doctrine, do
join the use thereof. But thou when thou neither understand what this
doctrine is, nor what is the use thereof, nor have with sufficient diligence read
their writings, whose name and authori ti^ thou blemishest with thy
blasphemies, what do thou else but bewray thine ignorance joined with
intolerable lewdness? But that other place of Peter which ye cytest, wherein
it is said that God will have no man perish, we have sufficiently expounded
in the Refutation of the ninth Argument upon the first slander. Therefore I
come to the third testimony. For, thou say, God sent his son into the
earth, whose righteousness did superabounde, wheresoever sin did abound.
Here I can not enough marvel at thine impudency. For I read not in Paul,
Wheresoever sin abounded: but, where sin abounded, that there abounded
grace. But indeed the Apostles purpose in these words is not to show how
largely the benefit of Christ extends, that is, whether it belong to all or
to certain only, but rather to she we this one thing, that the law of
Moses did not therefore exceed the law of nature, that any should be
justified in it: but of the contrary, that men might the rather be holden
convict and guilty: but when men are toyled in that miserable condition, that
the grace of the Gospel has appeared which should abound abone sin, and
should bring the greater benefit to men, by so much, how much more was the
bondage of sin, which had increased by the law. Who may not think, that
thou haste loss al judgment of mind, when thou wrytest these, to that end ye
thou may prone, that God wills that al men should be saned?

Now I come to the place of John, wherein thou think it is said, that the
light of the justice of Christ does lighten all that comes into this world.
But who will grant thee this? For by the name of light, there, I grant that
Christ is signified: but in respect of creation, not rede^ptio^. For John
describes the excellency of the eternal word, by whose power and goodness
seeing all things are created, and men themselves especially being endued with
the light of understanding do line, yet because this light has shined to the
blind, the blind have not acknowledged the light. This when John had said in
ye beginning of the Chapter, afterward interserting mention of John Baptist,
he urges the same in two verses of the same chapter, that is, the ninth and
tenth. Then from the beginning of the eleventh verse he comes to the coming
of Christ.

That this is the natural meaning of this place, I hope they will grant me,
whosoever have diligently weighed those things that be spoken there. For over
and abone that this is the order of speech, say I pray thee, by what means at
the last will thou prone, that they are al lightened of Christ that come into
the world? Is it because they are all made partakers of the grace of Christ?
But John adds, that Christ was not received of his, but of a certain, who
because they were borne of God, did therefore believe. Furthermore, thou can
not deny, that the benefit of Christ is received only by faith. But faith
comes by grace, and not by nature, nor is it given to all men. All therefore
are not lightened of Christ, that is, made partakers of the grace of the
Gospel. But will thou flee to that universal preaching of the Gospel, and
wilt say, that the light of Christ is offered to all, albeit very many will
refuse it being offered? But even this could never be said of every man. For
tell me, before the coming of Christ, how many years passed, in which (as
Paul says,) God suffered the Gentyles to walk in their own ways? where was
then the light of Christ that was to come among the Gentiles? Yet I grant,
that they all had so much light in the mean time, as is sufficient to make
them without excuse, seeing their conscience was to them for a law, and by the
sight of visible things they ought to have been recalled from Idolatry. But we
ask of the light of the Gospel, where with thou say that all men, that is,
every man, is lightened at the least outwardly. But I affirm, that before the
coming of Christ, the greatest part of the world was not lightened with the
beams of this light, neither inwardly nor outwardly. But after coming to
Christ, I grant in deed that the light of the Gospel was dispersed into al
lands: but art thou so sottishe, that thou think that this benefit
belongs to every man, and not rather to certain, that is, to the elect of
all people? look now at the least what is the countenance of the world, and
see how many there be in the universal compass of the earth which die
before they hear never so little report of the Gospel.

Is the Lord therefore cruel? to you in deed, as I see, when a certain
fellow even of thy familiars, in a little book which he published three
years past, of the Largeness of the Mercy of God, had rather defend that
they are nevertheless saned by Christ, to whom the Gospel was not preached,
than think that so many men are inthralled to eternal torments. But we
verily have learned, not to place health any other where than in Christ, nor
Christ elsewhere but in the faithful and the faythfuls house: so far is it
off that therefore we should accuse God of any cueltye, that of the contrary
we say not, that he is cruel, if he had rejected even all to one, seeing we
are all by nature the children of wrath. Let us also proceed further.

For albeit we should not be borne the children of wrath, yet if it should be
ye will of God, for the declaring of his power and wrath sake, to create al to
destruction, let us rest silent, as it is right, in that will, as in the
sovereign and alone rule of Justice. For what is more just, than, that men
judge that to be truly just and good which God does, albeit they cannot
comprehend his judgments. But if be dampne more than he does sane, he does
not therefore seem to us, more ready to wrath, than to mercy, because the
mercy of God by Christ, is so great, that albeit it should appertain to one
manne only: yet, for that it belongs to us, this goodness of God shall be
greater by many degrees, than his just wrath against the rest. For whereas
he is angry with sins, he seems after a sort, to do it of necessity: and
whereas even for the safeguard of one man, he made himself man, that in very
deed seems after a sort more infinite, than infiniteness it self. It
remains, that we consider that most sweet voice of Christ: Come to me all
ye that labor. Thou think that it belongs to all men, as if Christ had
invited every one to him. But I except many things. First I say, that
Christ speaks as a Minister. And this is the office of a Minister, that
because he knows not the secreate counsels of God, he teach indifferentlye
those that are committed to his charge, and bid them to the Lord, and so much
the more, so much as in him lies, to will, that they may be saned. But if thou
gatherest thereof, that all belong to the Lords flock, or that especial grace
to be given in like sort to all, thou art wonderfullye deceived. For the
Lord will, that the Gospel be preached to many blind, to many deaf, and
to many proud people, that they may more and more be blinded, made deaf, and
hardened: nor yet is God therefore an Hipocrite, as we have proved in his
place. Then if this voice of Christ appertain to every one without exception,
to what end did Christ collecting that solemn Sermon, which like an eternal
Bishop he offered, a little before the sacrifice of his flesh, manifestly
show, that he prays not for the world, but only for them whom the father
had given him. Does he understand by the name of the world those, which when
they can believe, will not? No I trow, seeing that there comes to the son
whatsoever the father has given him, whereof it follows, John 6.37.45.
that they indeed can not believe, whom the father has not given to his
son, and those which come to the son, John. 12.37.38 39.40.
not to be therefore given to the son, because they believe: but
co^trarilie, that they therefore believe, John. 6.45, Ephesians. 1.4.5.
because they are given to the son, in whom verily they were elected before
the foundations of the world were laid, and finally that those which are
given to the son, Io^. 6.37. 44. 45.
can not but believe, which impossibility is not in their nature, but
depends of the virtue given from above. For the power of the Spirit of God
is effectual in them whom the Lord draws, that not only the power of
believing, but the very effect of power also, that is faith, might be
ministered. Which things seeing they are so, how is it that thou will have that
note, not so much universal, as infinite, to apperteyne to every one, and
that Christ should differ from himself? for if the world (as thou
comprehendest also those to whom the Gospel is either not preached, or
preached in vain) in these words be called of Christ, how is it that in
another place he says, that he prays not for the World? But whereto is it
to prosecute these with so many words? Christ does not simplye call all to
him self, but the weerie and laden, that is, those which mourn under the
burden of sins, and as it were are ouerloaden, or (as David speaks) which
are of an humble and contrite heart. Prone that all men are such, or coufesse
that this speech of Christ makes nothing to the strengthening of thine
error. But go to, let us come to the rest. That which thou sayste that God
does minister good and honest affections, we think by experience that it is
most true, as they which find sufficiently by proof that we are not apt of
our selves so much as to think that which is good, but this we say is
proper to the children of God: for they only are moved with the Spirit of
God. That which proceeds from the rest, we say that it is sin before God,
albeit to man's judgment it have a show of goodness. Romans 8.9. Ioh. 4.13.
Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6.
Finally, that which thou addest, that God does deliver from the necessity of
sinning, into the which they had by their disobedience thrown down
themselves, that I say, I do so allow, that it cannot content me. And first
in deed that which thou say of the necessity of sinning, I can not
sufficientlye marvel, that thou haste ouershotte thy self, which so often
have reproved us for that cause, because we say, that men do sin, albeit
willingly, yet of necessity. But this indeed is the power of ye truth, that
it even constrain liars oftentimes to disagree with themselves. But there be
two things which I demand here: For I would have thee express how God does
deliver us from this necessity of sinning: that is to wit, by his son; and
that only by grace. And I do not rashely deem, least, albeit it may be, that
thou did never inquire, neither what Pelagius held, nor especially what
Augustine has answered to the Pelagians, yet the same furies enforce thee,
wherewith once Pelagius being driven, did miserably trouble the West parts.

Then that which thou addest of the disobedience of men, does not in deed
satisfy me, because we have already resolved many arguments, of which it
may easily be gathered, that original sin, or sin by propagation, thou
do utterly hold for a fable, or in deed do extenuate and make less, that
that which belongs to propagatio^, thou rather think it to be attributed
to imitation.

The Apostle verily, when he deals of these things, that is, of the first
original of our bondage, he attributes it to the disobedience of one man,
which thou seem to refer to the rebellion of every man, as if in deed
every one did cast himself into the fetters of this necessity by imitation
and long practice, and that we are not rather borne bondslaues even from our
conception. Math 20.22^ Romans 8.26 27^ Iac. 1.6.7.
Therefore I admit not this, except thou expound thy mind in this matter
more plainly. Finallye that which thou adioynest, that God never denied to
any a benefit, praying to him, we acknowledge for true, but with a double
conjunction annexed. For they all do not ask, but only those which are
touched with knowledge of their lack: and many also ask they wotte not what,
or they ask not of faith, and therefore they receive not. Because therefore
none asks, or if he ask, he asks not arighte, except he which is moved
of the spirit of God, and therefore which is the son of God: Romans 8.^.
therefore I affirm, that this benefit of GOD belongs not to every one as
thou would, but only to all the elect of GOD also, whose peculiar badge
this is, that they alone do rightlycal upon the father, and therefore are only
heard.

Lastly, that which thou haste patched of the Caluinian GOD, to what end
should I refute it with more words, except I do again that which is done
already?

But this yet gives me a passage to consider somewhat more nerely of those thy
children of the Gods, I confess my self to be one of them whom the Lord has
instructed in the true and most holy doctrine of his Gospel by his faithful
servant John Calvin: I will never blushe indeed to confess my self to be
his scholar, and one amongst many thousands of men whom he has gained to
Christ.

And indeed why should it repent us, seeing by this teacher especially
(through the grace of GOD) we have learned not only to abhor and reprehende,
but also to refell with voice and firm arguments the errors of the Papists,
Libertines, Anabaptists, Swinkfeldians, Seruetistes, and finally, thine own,
patched of those so many reastic heresies. Our own sins verily, which are
many and mighty, thou can no more detest than we our selves. Albeit it be
lawful for us generally to say this without arrogancy, by many probable
witnesses, that our life is such, as those things which thou obiectest, by ye
loving kindness of god, they may be refelled without much ado. But truly,
we disdain you not of thine and the virtues of thy accomplices or likes, whereof
thou make so large a Cataloge. But in deed thou must, if the same thing use
to befall to your virtues that does to money, that he which possesses them,
the more he spares them, he is by so much the more welthye at home, thou must
I say, if it be so, abound with many virtues, which, so far verilye as we
see, use them so sparinglye. For I pray thee, of what modesty is it, or also
of conscience and honesty, to accuse Calvin, if nothing else, yet verilye of
all others a meste bitter enemy to the Libertines, and all our Churches
professing one and the self same doctrine of wickedness, as if we made GOD
the Aucthoure of Sin? Of what mercy, gentleness, and clemency is it, when
thou would that that most innocent, and whether thou will or no, most holy
manne, and one that so well deserved of the Church of God by all means, that
his memory shall stand most precious through all ages to come, should
spare Seructus, that is, Impiety it self, and all Heretics, and to wish him
with so many slanders and railings to be brought into hatred amongst all
men, and to be dispatched at once? Of what liberality and good will is it, to
dismember him with such filthy railing, of whom thou haste received so many
benefits? Of what truth and integrity is it, to cover so malicious a mind
with the sacred name of Friendship and familiarity? to term himself
sometimes Bellius, and sometimes Theophilus, sometimes to set down no name, and
to abuse these childishe fooleries to deceyne men? to spread abroad books
secreatly, and to send by stelth thine exploits into foraine countries to be
printed? to seek the foraine friendshippes of those men, to whom thou know
that thou art not known, whose begged letters and testimonies, thou abusest,
to deceive the simple, but to dissent from most learned men at home, and to
hear Sermons indeed in appearance devoutly, but privately to set abroad a new
doctrine, to gather Disciples, to have as it were hired men in Alehouses,
which might ensnare the guests that come, and might betray the simplicity of
the unskillful? but of these more than enough. Whatsoever we are, God shall
judge us, before whose tribunal judgment we doubt not to challenge these thy
sclanders. We have more and more certain testimonies at hand, by his singular
loving kindness toward us, ye we worship God the father of once Lord Jesus
Christ in spirit and truth according to his word, and not that ^alse Idol
which thou vrgest vppen us, and also countri^^^ test to thy self, tha^ that
either we our selves canitag^^^ or think that men of sound judgment, and
how little learning soever, can with thy brabbling forgeries be estranged from
our Churches. But there shall be given to refute thy double description, (one
of which you attributest to the nature of the true God, and the other to the
nature of ye false God, seeing neither does represent to us the true God, but
a most vain and manifest execrable Idol) as I trust, an entire book, that
all good men may most plainly understand what thou art, and what we our
selves be.

The conclusion of the Sycophants Sclaunders.
These be (Calvin) the things which thy adversaries do say of thy doctrine,
and they admonish men to judge of this doctrine by the fruit. And they say,
that thou and thy Disciples do yield many fruits of thy God: for they say you
are for the most part quarrellers, desirous of reuengement, long keepers and
mindful of injuries, and filled with other vices which thy God ministers. But
if any man answer them, that it is not the fault of the doctrine, as that it
is sound, and begets no such men, they answer, that it does begette such
men, and that is made evident thereof, because many after they yielded to this
doctrine, become such, when before they were less evil. But now those that
belecued the doctrine of Christ, were made better: but by thy doctrine they
say they are manifestly made worse. Furthermore, when you say that you have
true doctrine, they say, that you are not to be believed. For, if your God do
often say one thing, and think and will another, it is to be feared least you
imitating your God, do the same, and deceive the people.

Truly Calvin, I did once favor thy doctrine, and defended it, albeit I did
not sufficiently perceive it, because I did attribute so much to thine
outoritie, that I thought it a grievous sin so much as to think the contrary:
but now having heard thine adversaries arguments, I have not what to
answer. In deed thy Disciples endeavor to answer, and amongst the
favorers which they have, they brag boldly the truth: but when they come to
the adversaries, they quake, and seek help of thy books, but it is weak.
For thy reasons be dark and almost of that sort, that the book being laid
aside, they slip out of memory by and by, nor can they convince the
adversaries. But the adversaries arguments are plain, sharp, and such as may
easily be committed to memory, and be perceived of the unlearned, and such
almost as were they that followed Christ. Hence it comes that thy Disciples
do more build upon thy authority, than upon reason. And when they cannot
overcome their adversaries, they hold them for heretics and froward men. and
they shun their company, and every where move al men to shun them: But I, who
think it is not to be regarded who speaks, but what is spoken, do judge, that
all are to be heard, and all things approved, and that which is good to be
kept. Wherefore Calvin, if thou haste any true, manifest, and strong
arguments, wherewith thine adversaries may be refelled, I pray thee bring
them abroad, that thou may defend the truth. Thou know that it is
written, I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which none shall be able to
resist. I wheresoever I can take the truth, I am ready to follow it, and to
persuade others to the same. But if by chance thou have erred (for we are men)
I pray thee Calvin, that thou will give glory to God. That shall be more
commendable to thee, than to persevere in error. But he not displeased with
me for this Epistle, if thou be a just and a true man, it is not to be feared
that thou will: First, because it is for thy weal to be put in mind of them:
then because, if thou think (as thou sayste) that all things are done
necessarily, thou will also belecue, that I have written this Epistle of
necessity. Farewell.


THE AVNSVVERE.
THese be the things (Slaunderer) which the Disciples of ye faithful and
constant servant of God John Calvin, do gather out of the word of God against
thy profane and wicked forgeries, and do admonish men, that they beware most
diligently, of thy not no we dissembled, but apparent doctrine, which is
patched together of the Papists, Anabaptists, Seruetus, Pelagius his, and
finallye thine own monsters and miscreants. But whereas thou rulest upon
Caluines Disciples, in that surely I cannot be angry with thee, albeit I do
not only willingly profess my self to be one of their number, but daily
also thank God for it. It pitieth me rather for thee, which haste forgote two
things, one of the which at the least, I would thou had remembered. For
that I may omit many men of all degrees, which have heard Calvin teaching
these things that he does teach, in France and Germany, with great fruit,
and who till this day do keep a-tha^kful memory of this benefit, that I may
pass an innumerable company of most learned men, which at this day depend
upon the teachers voice. What corner in all Christendom do thou think that
there is, wherein there are not many that think themselves to have profyted
by reading the writings of such an excellent Divine? What will become of thee
(miserable caitife) if out of so great a number, but some thousandth man
shall take in hand to oppugn these thy dotages? Verily a large field of
exercising thy patience is opened to thee: and so it may be, it will come to
pass, that thou which of late betwixt those thine accomplishments, sporting
(as I think) saydest, that thou waste but only two miles distant from the
scope of perfection, art even carried beyond the mark. But I do forgive
thee. For in the finding out and describing of our adversaries arguments, thou
waste so wonderfullye occupied (goodman) and for this deserte most dear to
us, that thou did fling thy self at unawares into this danger, that is,
unmindful that thou had to do with proud men, blowdy, sclau^derous,
counterfaite, impatiente, but especially such as will keep an injury long,
with cursed speakers, that they may represent their Master. But how could
that befall thee, that thou also waste Caluins disciple, and to be bound to no
man more than to him alone, as thou also before this have often said, but of
thy fashion, that is, truly and simply, as the thing shows? But it may be
I am too troublesome to thee, whilst I put thee in mind, that thou should
be thankful. Yet, as I trust, thy modesty will bear it, that I may put
thee in mind what thou maiste aunwere our adversaries. Whereas once being
moved with the authority of Caluines name, thou did so favor his
doctrine, that thou thoughtest it an offense even to think the contrary, that
indeed we see not how thou could excuse before these our adversaries,
especially being such sharp disputers. For they will say, the man must needs
be either light and foolish by nature, or not sufficiently serious in the study
of Christian religion, which being brought up in the superstition of
Bishops, would pass unto the Evangelists side, before that be
sufficientlye knew what the Evangelists teach. But those our adversaries
will not so hardly forgive an Academicall man. I come to the rest, for which
thou art sorry. Whereas thou complainest of the obscurenesse of our reasons,
and that thou saiste our adversaries arguments, are easily committed to
memory, and perceived of the unskillful, it does not much trouble us. For we
have learned of Paul, that the natural man perceives not those things that
are of God, and you art wonderfullye deceived, if thou think that to be
unlearned, does any think profit to the understanding of Gods truth. They
were unlearned for the most part which followed Christ, but they followed
him not therefore, because they were unlearned, as that notable Sermon whereof
is mention in the sixth of John does sufficientlye teach. Therefore hold
thou it (...) that to know nothing is the most pleasant life. But as we
despise no man, knowing indeed by experience, that the Spirit of God does
breath upon whomsoever he pleases, yet we have learned to exercise good arts
and disciplines as much as we may, nor do we much fear those sottes,
amongst whom thou delightest thy self. Nor in deed was it very necessary,
that we should be taught, that these arguments proceeded from such kind
of men, when the matter it self exclameth, that such trifles could not come
from any other. Yet we are deceived in one point, for that we thought them to
be dogs, whom thou writest to be Asses. If thou speak in earnest, that
thou art prepared to follow the truth, thou haste (as I trust) where thou
maiste find it, if thou haste not already found in the mind to respise other
men's, but especially Caluines writings.

But if thou can prove, that we do err, we will not only give God the
glory, but we will also thank thee. We read thy writings partly not without
grief and sorrow, for the wicked blasphemies every where dispersed: partly
also not without laughter for ye inumerable fooleries. If we have answered
somewhat more bitterly than thou would, thou must blame thy self, that
might have been silent for us. Yet, as I hope, thou will take al these
patiently, according to thy singular modesty, especially, if you suffer this
law to be objected against, thee which is pretended against us, that we take
in good worth those things which are done of necessity. For in deed it was
more necessary for us to defend our estimation, annexed with the defense of
true doctrine, than for thee to wound the truth, through the sides of a most
innocent and just man.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Ralphe Newberrie and Henry Bynneman.

Anno. 1578.


