The true Picture of John Preston, Dr. in Divinity, and sometimes (...) of
Lincolnes-Inn.



THE FVLNESSE OF CHRIST FOR US.

A Sermon preached at the Court before King JAMES of blessed memory.

By JOHN PRESTON, Dr. in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty,
Master of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes
Inn.

Offendunt homines non cum Christi multa dicurt, sed cum addunt sua: sic quippe
incidunt ex multiloquio in falsiloquium. Ambr. LONDON, Printed by M. P. for
John Stafford, dwelling in Blake-horse-Alley near Fleetstreet. 1639.

THE BOOKE-SELLER to the learned and godly Reader.
COurteous Reader, you know better then I, that the Church has been pestered
with writings falsely fathered upon men of renown. There is scarce an Age in
which many instances are not given. Not only Fathers, and Councels, but
Historians, have been stuffed from other men's Pens with adulterine conceits.
The Devil knows that as Labans sheep have conceived by the eye; so men have
been apt peremptorily to conclude from the opinions of their great Masters: And
men have so cleaved to the persons of men, that they have catched up all shreds
that have fallen from them with admiration and resolution to follow them. This
has been very offensive: it has stained the dead, and corrupted the living.
It is not therefore always safe to trust posthume writings, and to say, This
such a man held, because we find it in the Books published under his name when
he is dead. Yet is there an excellent use of such Works of good men, as may
truly be affirmed to be theirs, though time have brought them forth, when
their owners have inhabited their eternity.

Now Books are of excellent worth (not to satisfy some greedy Tradesmen, who
know how to value them for themselves, though otherwise they care not two pence
for the Author, when their own turn is served,) but to take up, and gain, the
eyes, hearts, and times of many, who would read none except they can read new
ones.

This here presented is certainly the Authors pretended: though not for every
word (for I cannot promise that, from a Copy which has passed through many
hands) yet for the fu^^ ^^stance, and sense: and it is as certain that it is
new, and so, apt to invite unto it as a new fashion. It is wondered that it is
so new, when many of the same Authors are so old. It surely might have been
set in the front both for age, and worth. It was preached before many of the
rest, and savours of the Authors learning, modesty, piety, and affection to
Jesus Christ, and his Church with us. But though it has been formerly
neglected, yet now it is tendered in the Authors own words and hearty
affections, so near as I could. You may see in it a glimpse of the full glory
of Christ, and of that use which we make of him, as we must receive him to
salvation. If it may do any service in the Church, I, into whose hands it has
fallen, am glad. If not, yet I beseech you, accept of my good meaning, and be
to me, as I am to you, a Christian, aiming more at the glory of Christ, and
peace of the Church, then at my own profit.

Farewell. John Stafford.

The sum of this Sermon is this.
1 It propounds the fullness of Christ. 1 In respect of his person 2 In respect
of his Offices uncreated. created.
1 As a Prophet. 2 As a Priest. 3 As a King. 3 In respect of his
righteousness. 4 In respect of his effects.
2 It maintains it above the fulness in the Saints 3 It applies it by four
Corrallaries. Therefore 1 We must be invited to come to him. 2 We must answer
it with full affections. 3 We must be satisfied with full Christ. 4 We must
comfort our selves with the fullness of Christ, against the fulness of sin.
4 It propounds this fullness of Christ for us, Which we must receive if ever
we have it. 5 It applies it for direction of 1 Judgments about the receipt of
Grace. 2 Practice. 1 In not deferring our repentance. 2 In not being idle
though we are receivers. 3 In going to him from whom we receive. 4 In being
affected as receivers. 1 With thankfulness for all receipts. 2 With humility
because we are receivers. 3 With begging grace by prayers both Private,
Public whereof Liturgies. Setformes. Esteem of them.




THE FVLNESSE OF CHRIST FOR US: Or a Sermon upon
JOHN 1. 16. Of his fullness we have all received grace for grace.
SAint Augustine seems to stand amazed at the mystery which appears in this
Chapter. Detonare ab alto.
Calvine says, that God does hear Thunder from on high. Iunius says, that
he was never struck with an apprehension of the Deity, till he read this
Chapter: affirming it to be the first, and chiefest cause of his conversion
from Atheism, to a sincere embracing of Christianity. And in all this Chapter,
I find no richer and fuller sentence then this, which describes Christ's
fullness for us: Of his fullness we have all received grace for grace.

You may be pleased to observe with me three parts. 1 A fullness given to
Christ. 2 Not a repletive fullness here, but a diffusive fullness: that is, not
shut up in his own banks, but running over for our benefit and use. 3 These
receipts are amplified from the variety of them, Grace for grace.


That is, Christ has given us for all the graces which he received of his
Father for us, graces answerable. As the Seal is said to give to the Wax
Print for Print, Character for Character: or as the father is said to give to
the child, limb for limb, member for member, (though not of the same bigness
and proportion:) so does Christ to us in grace and truth. So that here is a
full shop, and many buyers, and receivers; choice of Wares and precious
Commodities: or rather (to use the Scriptures phrase) a full Table, many
Guests, and variety of Dishes, of his fullness have we all received grace for
grace.

Fullness is given to Christ.
that fullness is given to Christ, and that in four respects: In regard of his
person, of his offices, of his righteousness, and of his effects.

his person he is full, In person.
with an uncreated fullness. Moses could have no communion with this fullness,
but with his back (...) the effects of (...) Deity (...) in him are not only
the effects of his Deity, as then; but the Deity it self, which is said to
dwell in him corporally, Col. 2. 1.
or personally in his incarnation. He is full with a created fullness, with all
created and excellent good things, John 1.
which St. John reduces to two heads: first grace, which comprehends all the
beauties and perfections of the will: secondly, truth, which comprehends all
the virtues of the understanding.

In regard of his offices, In Offices*
Prophet he is full of all treasures of wisdom and knowledge. So that all
light that the world ever had, came from him as a Prophet. All the mysteries
that ever were declared to Saint Paul, and Saint John, came from him. All the
revelations of Adam, Noah, Abraham, came from him. Thus all received their
light from this Sun, which from the very first moment of time, shone to the
dark world, without setting (more or less) though the darkness comprehend
it not. As a Priest, he is full of favor with God, whereby he has audience
always: full of compassion to men whereby he is ready to entertain any suite
or suitors: full of merit, by which he is able to prevail in all his requests
and intercession. As a King, he is full of authority. All power is given him
both in heaven and earth. He is full of strength to defend his servants, and
resist his enemies, till he has made them his footstool. Lastly, he is full
of royal munificence, whereby he is ready to supply to the wants of all his
servants, and to give them in the end a full recompense of reward.

In regard of his righteousness, In righteousness.
first, that he that was so Secondly, by this we know what a mediator we have
to deal with, even with one full of love, patience, compassion, which may
invite us to come unto him: Thirdly, that Col. 2.


In effects.
this fullness is given to him, that there is scarce any action which Christ
ever did, but you shall find a fullness in it. At the first miracle he ever
wrought, he filled six water pots with Wine. Afterward he filled five
thousand Guests with five loaves and two fishes. So he filled the nets with
fishes, so as they were ready to break: and (which is the best fullness) he
filled his Disciples with the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, and after
when they were said to be full of the Holy Ghost.

Thus is there a fullness given to Christ: Why fullness is given to Christ.
and there is reason for it, both in respect of himself, and in respect of us
chiefly.

In respect of Christ himself, In respect of himself.


He was the Prince of our salvation: therefore meet it was, he should be like
Saul, higher by the head and shoulders, yea, fully exalted above all
Principalities and Powers.

In respect of us chiefly.
and our emptiness; that with his fullness he might replenish us and our
vacuity. Otherwise we could neither have seen, nor received it of him. Not
have seen; for the glorious beauty of the Divinity was too bright for us to
behold. Therefore it is reason that it should be put in the Lanthorn, and veil
of Christ's humanity, that we might behold it. Neither could we have received
it: for the Deity is an unaccessible fountain: therefore it is reason that
Christ's humanity should be a Cisterne to receive it for our use, and model. O^.
(...)


It may be you will say that S. Stephen, betwixt Christ's fullness, and others.
and other Saints are said to be full of the Holy Ghost as well as Christ; How
then do these two fulnesses differ? Sol.
I answer, that they differ three ways.

First, others are said to be Ioh 3.
but Christ above measure.

As a little dish may be said to be full as well as the Ocean: so they are
filled according to the narrowness of their present capacity. Christ was full
according to all dimensions, length, depth, breadth, and height of fulness.

Secondly, plenitudo 1 vasis. 2 fontis.
there was in Christ, a fullness of the Spring. In them was a derived and
participated fullness, in Christ a fullness of a fountain proceeding from
himself. This is well expressed by the Schoolmen, Igni^ Ignita.
when they say, that Christ's, and the Saints fullness differ as fire, and
things set on fire. The fullness of the Ocean is too little to express it: for
if you take a drop or two from it, it is so much the less: but the fullness of
fire is such, as though you light a thousand Torches at it, it is not
diminished.

Stephen was full in comparison of other lesser Saints: but in Christ it is an
absolute fullness without limits, or comparisons.

What shall we now deduce from hence for our Application.
benefit? Four consequences. We are invited to come to Christ to take of his
full heap.
First, that we ought to be invited to come to Christ to take of his full
heap. This Incentive Saint Paul often uses to inflame the desires of the
Gentiles to come to CHRIST, even the riches of that fullness which is in him,
which in the fullness of time was exposed to all comers; which was hidden
before, but now (as he says) fully revealed; seen before, but in types and
shadows, now with open face; before preached to a few, now to every creature
under heaven; before given by his Spirit, by drops but now he that ascended up
on high, and led captivity captive, has so received for, and given gifts unto
me^, that he has filled all things. Let us therefore be exhorted, when we hear
of such a fullness, not to take the grace of God in vain, but labor to have
our parts therein, that, with the Corinthians, we may be made rich in Christ,
filled with all knowledge, and every grace.

Content we not our selves to know this only, (for that is our common fault to
rest in the notion of such things without practice) but go to Christ as Bees
to a Meddow full of flowers, as Merchants to the Indies, that are full of Wines
and Spices, that you may experimentally feel your selves return from him full
fraught with treasures of truth and grace. In other things fulness invites us
much; Joseph's full Barnes drew Jacob and his sons down into Egypt. Canaan
was a land full of milk and honey, and that invited the Israelites to seek
it. Solomon's abundance and fullness of wisdom invited the Queen of Sheba to
come out of the South to his Court. In every thing, fullness does much allure,
and affect. The Covetous man though he spend but a little, yet he delights to
take it from a full heap. De pleno tollere acerno.
How much more then should the fullness of Christ work in us, seeing there is
in him not only a repletive, but a diffusive fullness; not only plenty, but
bounty?

But, alas, if we look to the actions and lives of men, we shall find that
they seek a fullness in every thing else almost. A fullness in pleasure and
delight; a fullness in honor and preferment; a fullness in profit and worldly
incomes; but this full hony-combe is almost every where despised. But happy is
he the bent of whose heart God has turned the right way, to seek a fullness
of faith and wisdom, a fullness of the holy Ghost. Happy he, who cares not to
be empty of other things, so he be full of these; to be a looser in other
things, so he be a gainer in this. Such an one has indeed chosen the better
part which shall never be taken from him.

Secondly, We must answer the fulness of Christ with a fullness of affection.
we should therefore Christ with a fullness of affection fully to believe, and
trust in him, fully to love and adore him, fully to joy and delight in him. For
it is good reason that the affections should be answerable to the object. A
little excellency deserves at our hands a little love and esteem, more
excellency more love; but when there is a fullness of excellency, we ought to
prosecute it with all fullness of affections.

All excellency of the creature in comparison of this, is but a drop to the
Ocean, and as a spark to the whole Element of fire. If therefore we proportion
our affections to the object, (which ought to be the rule and square of them)
we must bestow upon the creature but a drop of love and delight, but the full
stream of our affections should run after Christ, in whom is all the
fullness of perfection.

It is true, as men hide treasure from thieves under straw, or some other base
covering, so God hides this full excellency from the world, under a base
outside, that his secret ones only might find it: and that others (truly
blinded) might not see but stumble at it. So he hid Christ himself under a
Carpenters son: so he hides divine mysteries under the mean elements of
Bread and Wine* so the wisdom of God is hid under the foolishness of
preaching, and under sheepe-skinnes and goat skins, such as the world was not
worthy of: yet there is a fullness of excellency notwithstanding. For if ever
we saw beauty in the Sun, Moon, Stars, Men, Women, or any thing else; all
must be more abundantly in God, who is the maker, giver, and Author of all
these things. As David reasons, He that made the eye, shall not he see? and
he that made the ear, shall not he hear? So he that made these things shall
he not have them more eminently in himself? For as the worth and value of many
pieces of silver is in one piece of gold: so all the petty excellencies, which
are scattered abroad in the creatures, are united in God; yea, all the whole
volume of perfections which is spread through heaven and earth, is epitomized in
him. Why do we not then with Saint Paul, trample on the glory of the world,
for the excellent knowledge of Christ? Why do we not with David turn our
hearts, eyes, and affections from beholding vanities, and pitch them all in
him? Why do we not recollect our affections, and gather up our thoughts, which
are scattered abroad, and busied about a thousand trifles, and bestow them all
on him in whom is the fullness of all excellency, beauty, and perfection?

Thirdly, We must be content and satisfied with full Christ.
let us also therefore Christ, having our hearts satisfied with him and his
fullness. First, in regard of spiritual things go not to the brooks of Teman,
the broken Cisternes of Rome, as Saints merits, Church Treasures, and the like.
For if there be a fullness in Christ, that needs not, Col. 2.
In him we are complete. Secondly, Christ is our fulness in temporal things
for temporal things, be content with him alone: for he is our fullness even
in them also.

For the better conceiving whereof, we must know that the first Adam brought a
general emptiness over all the world. For though, the world be full of pomp
and pleasure, as Saint John calls them (the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life) yet properly it is empty, because it is not full of
that which it should be. Eve^ as we say, a well is empty, though it be full of
air: so all creatures, if not filled with that they should be. For emptiness
is not so much an absence of entity, (...)
or of something that is, but of that being that is due, and should give
filling to that which should be full. Hence therefore not only the heart of
man, but all creatures also are said to be empty. Vanity of vanities, Eccl. 1.
says Solomon, that is, emptiness of emptiness. The whole creation is
subject to vanity, Romans 8.
says Paul, that is to emptiness. Hence is it that the hearts of men are not
satisfied with the world: but, as the Prophet speaks; they eat and are not
full, they drink and their soul is empty: because now the creature is as the
Husk without the Grain, the Shell without the Kernel, full of nothing but
emptiness; and being empty of it self, cannot give us satisfaction.

But Christ the second Adam has filled all things again. All in all, Col. 3.
that is, not only the hearts of men, but the things also. It is the neuter
gender ((...)) all and in all.

Hence we may observe, that many find a want in the midst of plenty: their
hearts find no rest in all they enjoy, no satisfaction; with the holy
regenerate man it is much otherwise. Though he have but a little wealth with a
little food, yet there is a fullness put into that little which makes it fit
to give him satifaction. This is the meaning of that in the Psalm, Psalm. 37.
A small thing that the righteous has, is better the^ great riches of the
ungodly. The reason is, because that little being filled with the blessing of
the second Adam Christ, they find a fullness, when the wicked find an
emptiness in their greatest abundance.

Lastly, There is a fullness in Christ against the fullness of sin.
hence therefore Christ (as there is) be not discouraged. Romans 5.
Though thy sin abound, yet (if thou turn from sin to Christ) his grace
abounds much more. Thou can not be out of measure sinful, as he is out of
measure merciful.

Remember but the two metaphors used in the Scriptures. I will scatter your
sins as a mist, and they shall be drowned in the bottom of the Sea. Now, the
Sun, by reason of his force, can scatter the greatest mist, as well as the
least vapor: and the Sea, by reason of his great vastnes can drown the
mountains as well as the Mole-hills. So Christ, by reason of that vast
fullness that is in him, is able, yea forward, and as willing to forgive the
greatest sins as the least: I say, as forward, and willing; for mercy, though
it be a quality in us, yet it is a nature in him: now, what is natural, there
is no unwillingnesse, nor weariness in that. The eye is not weary with seeing,
nor the ear with hearing fit objects. Therefore though our sins be never so
great, and many; yet (if this condition be observed that we lie in no known
sin, that God bearing witness to our consciences, we have a full and
resolute purpose not to do the least evil, nor to omit the least good; in a
word, that we make our hearts perfect with God in all things; for without this
there is no remission of sins) then they are not beyond the price that was
paid for them, nor beyond the grace of him with whom we have to do; because
there is fullness in him. Now, I beseech you take not this exhortation in
vain. For there is nothing more effectual to heal a rebellious heart, to
instill sovereign saving grace, to cause a sinner to change his course, then
to be persuaded that he shall be taken to mercy, and that his sins shall be
forgiven in Christ.

Even as the thief while the Hue and Cry pursues him, never returns
willingly; Rebels and Pirates, while the Proclamation of rebellion is against
them, never come in: but if there be a Proclamation of pardon, yea of some
great advancement, if that be believed once truly, that, and nothing but that
causes them to lay down their courses, and become loyal and loving subjects:
so is it with poor sinners upon the apprehension of Christ's willing supply.
Therefore let the fullness of the mercy of Christ moove us to lay down our
arms of rebellion, and to choose God for our God, and to give our selves wholly
unto him. And thus I pass the fullness given to Christ.

Now next view for All grace is received from Christ.
That we may receive grace for grace. Note, that as there is a fullness of
grace in Christ, so is it for this use, that all grace may be received. As all
stars shine in the light of the Sun: so do all the Saints through grace
received.

The Scripture is evident for this. Phil 2. 13.
It is God that works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. So that all grace, and all
preparations to grace, and all ability to accept grace, is all from God, and
not of our selves, (whatsoever men dream) and that for these reasons.

the effect exceeds not the cause. Therefore it is impossible for corrupt
nature to get supernatural grace, or to do any action preparing, inclining,
or bending the will unto it. For as the water cannot heat, which is an action
above the nature of it, until an higher principle of nature be infused into
it: no more can mere nature do any thing tending to saving grace, having no
principle in it self whereby it can raise it.

Indeed, to will is natural, but to will good, is supernatural, and must
needs arise from an higher Wels head then nature is. For as an Hatchet will cut
when it is handled but with a common hand, but to make a Chair, or Stool, or
like artificial thing, except it have the influence of an Artificer,
Influentias artificis.
it cannot: so though to will be natural, yet to will well, to do a
supernatural work in a supernatural and holy way, it cannot except it have
the influence of a supernatural agent to guide and direct it.

From this consideration arise two Corollaries to direct our judgments,
Application.
and practices. To help judgment.
this part shows the error of the Pelagians, who ascribe the beginnings,
preparations, and abilities, of our accepting of grace to our selves, and our
own freewill, although the complement be of God. But you see (by that which
has been said) that not only the full streams, but that every drop of grace
has been received from his fullness.

This error of theirs proceeds from their not distinguishing aright betwixt
acquisite habits, and those that are infused.

Indeed, in acquisite habits the acts go before the habits, and prepare for
it. But in infused habits it is clean contrary. It is with them, as with the
natural powers of the soul. We have first the faculty of seeing before we see,
and of hearing before we hear: so have we first the infused habitts before
we exercise the operations of it. For as the wheel does not run that it may
be made round: so the heart does not first do the action whereby it may be set
in a good frame: but it is first fashioned, and made a new creature by grace,
and then it does perform actions, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of
life. Fabricare fibi domi^ilium.
For that which is said of the soul, it does frame an house for it self, and
frame it self a room, is as truly said of grace; it uses no harbenger: for
nothing can prepare for grace, but grace.

If it be objected, Ob.
that such as Seneca, and Socrates were much enlightened, and did also approve
the Law in the Inner man, and had not only an offer some way, but had a
certain kind of universal and common grace.

This privilege cannot be denied to many of the heathen; Sol.
who as Alchimists, though they miss of their end, yet they find many
excellent things by the way. So though they failed of the right end, of the
glory of God, yet were they not destitute of many common and excellent gifts,
wherein though one did go far beyond another, as Seneca beyond Nero, yet, as
they say of sins that they do all alike pass the rule of rectitude, though
some go further beyond it then others; so were they all destitute of original
righteousness, though some were more enlightened from it then others; all are
alike dead in sins, though some as dead bodies were putrified, and corrupted
more then others.

Now to direct our practice. To help practice.
We must not defer repentance
but what proceeds from sanctifying grace, and that you see, is received, and
given of God as he pleases. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs, but he has compassion on who^ he will, Romans 9. 15.
and whom he will he hardens. As I said, the spirit breaths where, and when
he pleases. Therefore we should do as Millers and Mariners, take the Gale
when it comes, and make use of it, because they have not the wind in a bottle.

Suppose a man were to pass the Seas in twenty days upon pain of death; if
the wind should blow the first, second, and third days, no wise man would omit
that opportunity, because he knows, the winds are not in his power. But if
the spirit shall breath into our hearts good motions of turning to God
unfainedly in our youth, years of age, or whenever, it is the greatest
wisdom in the world to take the opportunity, and not to put it off. Who
knows whether ever it will be had again or no? How many thousands are in
hell, who thought to have repented, and did not, because they neglected the
breathings of the spirit when they were offered?

There are certain acceptable times, after which God offers grace no more to
them that wilfully refuse. Happy is he that knows the day of his visitation,
Luke. 19.
and the things that belong to his peace, which Jerusalem did not, and
therefore Christ wept over it; which Saul and the Jews in Ieremies time did
not, and therefore God forbad him to pray for them. Ioh. 5.
As there were certain times when the Angel moved in the poole of Bethesda,
and he that then stepped in was healed: so are there certain acceptable times
wherein God does, as it were, thaw and soften the hearts of men, and then this
time must be taken. It is wisdom with the husbandmen, then to put in the
Plough when the ground is soft: for the heart in such cases is like to the iron
in the furnace, easily wrought upon; but stay while it is cold, and it will not
so easily be fashioned.

I beseech you therefore be exhorted to take the opportunity: and be not like
them, of whom Esaias complains, Es. 58.
who like Bull rushes do hang down the head for a day, while some storm of
outward, or inward trouble is upon them, but when a fair Sunshine day is come
to dry it up again, they lift up their heads as upright as ever.

If any man would sit down, and cast his thoughts together, but one half
hour, and consider this seriously, I have but a little time to live here, I
have another place where I must live to all eternity: as I spend this short
time here, so shall it be with me there and then for ever no more. If a man's
thoughts (I say) were such, I should wonder if any thing else should take up
our intentions, but to take our seasons, 2. Pet. ^.
and make sure our elections. But, alas, we are robbed of our selves by our
worldly delights, and in great earnestness and contention we spend our selves
in trifles. Magno conatu magn^s nugas agimus.
But if we would not have with he Merchant an estate hanging upon ropes,
Fortunam rudentibus apt^^.
and depending upon uncertain winds; how much less should a man have his
salvation depending upon uncertainties, seeing grace (whence repenance
proceeds) is, as you see, received, and not in our own power?

But here most mistake repentance, and that is the cause why it is deferred. It
is not only a sorrow for sin (as it is commonly thought to be;) nor a
leaving of sin out of fear of hell, and desire to be saved, which a man may
do out of the strength of nature, wisdom, and providence for his own safety:
but it is (when it acompanies salvation) a much different thing, to wit, Ephesians.
2. 1.
an act of life by one that was dead, 2 Cor 5. 17.
an act of a new creature by one that was old: it is the change of the whole
frame of the heart, as if another soul dwelt in the same body, or, as he said,
I am not my self, Ego non sum ego.
by repentance I differ from what I was. In a word, when a man is a quite other
man then he was, serving God out of an inward propension, and having the whole
bent of his heart turned to delight in the Lord, and in his Law, without all
by-respects.

And that this yet may be made clearer, and put out of all doubt, I would ask
you this one question. That repentance which men take up in age, or times of
extremity, whence proceeds it? If from self love, as is usual in such cases
(because the soul is the^ most strongly possessed with an apprehension of
death, and hell, and another life) then there is no more then nature in him:
for the stream naturally rises no higher then the fountain. A beast would as
much, for when he sinks into danger he would struggle to save himself. But if
it proceed from love to God, why is it not done sooper, why not in the flower
of youth? yea, when it is done soonest, would we not be heartily sorry that it
is not done sooner? If it proceed of love to him, it cannot but rise from his
holy Spirit, the breathings whereof as they are most free, so are they most
precious. Therefore when such a spark is kindled in our hearts, let us be
careful to put fuel unto it, and not let it go out again. All the creatures
in heaven, and earth, cannot help us to them again: yea, the best ordinances
are but as pens without Ink, and empty Conduit Pipes which give not one drop
of true grace, except Christ, who is the fountain pleases to convey it by
them.

Therefore let us take heed how we let such motions rise like bubbles, and
break again, or go out like sparks upon wet Tinder; 1 The (...). 5
least often checking, snibbing, and quenching the spirit, in the end we be
found guilty of resisting the holy Ghost, Act. 7.
and then God swear in his wrath, Psalm. 95.
that we shall not enter into his rest.

Here, Though grace be received, we must not be idle.
by the way, observe, that this Doctrine teaches us not to be idle (though all
grace be received from Christ) we must not therefore leave all to God (as we
are slandered to say and do:) but as St. Paul makes the consequence, because
God works in you the will and the deed, Phil. 2.
therefore work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Others may be
thought contrarily to infer, our selves work in our selves the will and the
deed, therefore we need notwork out our salvation with such fear and tre^bling,
seeing we may do it at our pleasure.

But it will be said, Ob.
this is an hard case, although a man would repent, yet he cannot, although he
desire to serve God, yet it is impossible except he receive it. To remove move
this scruple we must know, Sol.
that God is exceeding free and open handed in giving grace, if it be taken in
time. And if ye will not believe it, St John comes here and tells you, I have
received of his fullness, and not I only, but we, that is, I, and all the
Saints that either are, or have been, and since St John's time many thousands,
and shall not such a cloud of witnesses persuade us? If a Beggar hear of an
open house kept, or a great dole given, it affects him, and invites him to
go; but when he sees many coming from it with arms full, and laps full, is
he the^ confide^t, this adds wings to him So if a sick man do but hear. of
a famous Physician, or an healing well, it stirs him up to go and try; but
if he meet with many hundreds, and thousands coming from thence, and saying, I
have been with him and am cured, I have been there, and am healed, then he
makes no question. So does Saint John here, all we have received grace for
grace, therefore come. As a bird that has received from a full heap, calls his
fellows: so do we one another. Say not therefore, Alas my sins are so great,
my wants so many, that I shall not be supplied: but rather think thus, if
there was grace for so many, then surely there is enough for me. Only be sure
to receive it in an acceptable 2 Cor. 6.
time, when it is offered in the hour of salvation, Ephs. 4.
least often grieving the spirit, Genesis 6.
God suffer his spirit to strive no longer, and then though ye strive to enter
ye be not able, Luke 13. 24.
because (as I said,) God has sworn ye shall not enter forever.

We must be affected to grace as receivers
then let us be affected as receivers. First, let us be thankful to God for
all receipts. The most gracious With thanks to God.
Secondly, let us carry our selves in humility toward With humility to men.
For what have we that we have not received? shall our purse or vessel boast
it self against another, because the owner has put more gold, and more
precious liquor into it? or shall the wall that glistereth with the Sunbeames,
exalt it self against another that stands in the shadow? Thirdly, let us beg
With prayer.
For in obtaining any thing merely given, and received, that is the most
proper means; therefore prayer is said to be the banquet of grace: and it is a
true observation, that a man of much prayer, is a man of much grace.

Now, prayer is either public, Both in private.
Private, is that whereby we express our private and public occasions to God
every day; wherein we renew our repentance and covenants of abstaining from the
sin we are most prone unto, and doing the duties whereto we are most unapt:
in a word, that whereby we do every day set our hearts straight before God in
all things. This is the very life of Religion, and in this we must be frequent
and fervent, binding our selves with an invincible resolution to keep a
constant course in it: but of this there is no doubt.

public prayer, And in public prayer.
which because it is more questioned, and not received of all with the
reverence it should, I will add a word or two of it, and so conclude.

That a set form of prayer is lawful, Set forms of prayer lawful.
much need not be said. The very newness of the contrary opinion is enough to
show the vanity and falsehood of it. It is contrary to the approved judgments
of approved Councels, learned Fathers, and the continual practice of the
Church. Tertullian, who lived a little above an hundred years of the Proemissa
legitima and ordinaria oratione, jus est su perstruendi petitiones.
Apostles death, says, Set and ordinary prayer going before, it is lawful to
build upon them other petitions. This shows that they had some ordinary set
allowed prayers, to which some others might be added in words of more liberty. In
Origens time, who lived near Tertullian, it is evident, that there were set
forms of Prayer used in the Church. For, in his 11 Homily, he repeateth and
expounds some passages of them. Upon which Tunc temporis certas quasd^m
orationis formulas proculdubio habuerunt.
Illiricus says, Without doubt, at that time* they had certain forms of
prayer. Saint Basil, in his sixty six Epistle says, that there were used
Letanies in the Neocessarian Churches: And Ambrose in his time affirms, that
the use of Letanies was frequent. (...) esse frequentem.
Constantine the Great prescribed a set form of prayer to his soldiers, which
is set down by E^sc^ius in his fourth book. And Calvine in his eighty third
Epistle to the Protector of England, says, that he does greatly allow a set
form of Ecclesiastical prayer, which the Minister should be bound to observe.
But (as I said before) of the lawfulness there is little question.

That which is to be reprehen^ded, is, Public prayers are highly to be
esteemed.
asecret dis-esteeme of public prayers, by reason of which many neglect to
come to them, and they that do come, do it in a perfunctory, and overly
manner, which is an extreme madness. Better it were that men would come to
this disjunction: either it is lawful to use them, or not: if not, why do
they not wholly abstain? if so, why do they not use them lawfully in a
reverend manner?

One thing there is which if it were well considered, would breed in our men
another esteem of public prayer then indeed there is; and that is, that,
besides the end of attaining what we want, (wherein yet public prayer has a
promise) there is another end of prayer, and that is, to worship God, and
perform, a service to him. For proving of which there are two places of
Scripture unanswerable. Luke 2. 37. (...).
Anna served God with fasting and prayer, night and day. And the Prophets and
Teachers of Antioch, Act. 13. 2. (...).
ministered to the Lord, or observed a Liturgy to the Lord, whence the word
Liturgy is derived: and this should breed reverence.

Ob. Besides, how slight is that which is objected against the lawfulness of
it, to wit, that the spirit is stinted when we are fettered with words
appointed? Sol. I answer, the freedom of the spirit stands not so much in the
extent of words, as in the intention of zeal wherein they are uttered.

Ob. It is again objected that we cannot pray for occasional necessities.
Sol. I answer, that therefore we bind not only to them, but may and ought to
use private prayer wherein we may express our private, particular, and
accidental occasions. And if they be more public, there be prayers both
before and after Sermons (according to order) wherein the Minister is left at
more liberty, according to fuller apprehension of the Lords prayer. And if it
be yet more general belonging to the State and Church, we add to it more
general and public prayers, as in the time of public infection, war, and
the Gunpowder Treason days.

But there needs not much to be said to convince the judgment: that which is
chiefly to be desired is, that they may be better observed, and more esteemed:
especially seeing our public prayers are holy, and good, and (which should be
a great inducement) the Church has commanded them. For if the Church be to be
obeyed in indifferent things (as it is) then much more in Gods own Ordinances.
And if a set form be lawful, then must a set form needs excel, which is
dictated by The excellency of the Lords prayer.
Christ him-himselfe, and is therefore more frequently to be used, and with all
reverence both in mind and gesture.

Nor does this want the practice and approbation of the ancientest. It is Saint
Quanto essicacius impeti amus quod petimus* Christi (...), si (...) oratione
petamus. Discite, and reti^ete (...) dominicam, and iater omnes sanctes conso^o
ore profer^tis.
Cyprians speech, by how much more effectually do we obtain that which we ask
in Christ's name, if we do ask it in his own prayer. And Saint Augustine
says, Learn ye, and hold without book the Lords Prayer, and with all the
Saints utter it with one same-sounding voice.

Thus if we would show our selves affected as good receivers both in private
and public prayers, we shall find that success which both John and the rest
of (...) Saints found, who of his fullness received grace for grace. This God
grant for Jesus Christ his sake.

FINIS.
Perlegi hans Concionem, dignamque judico quae typis mandetur.

THO. WYKES.


