REMAINS OF THAT REVEREND AND LEARNED DIVINE, JOHN PRESTON, D. in Divinity,
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge,
and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes-Inne.

(...)ntaining three excellent Treatises, Namely, IVDAS'S Repentance. The
Saints Spiritual Strength. PAVLS Conversion.

HEBR. 11. Being dead, he yet speaks.
LONDON: Printed for Andrew Crook. 1634.

IVDAS HIS Repentance.

OR, THE LAMENTABLE EFFECTS OF A STARTLED CONSCIENCE.

Delivered in eight several Doctrines, raised from the third, fourth, and
fifth Verses of the 27. Chapter of the Gospel by St. MATTHEW.

All the useful and profitable Observations of that late Reverend Divine JOHN
PRESTON, Dr. in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of
Emanuell College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes-Inne.

Printed at London for Andrew Crook. 1634.

The Contents of JVDAS Repentance.
DOCTRINE I. SVch as a Man's life is, such is his Name after death. page 3
REASON. I. God blessethor curses man according to his works. p. 4 1 In regard
of his Truth. ibid. 2 In regard of his Glory. ibid.
REAS. II. Manappeareth like himself. p. 4 REAS. III. Other men in the end
speak truth without envy or fear. p. 5 USE I. Not to be secretly wicked, for
God is a public rewarder of all. ibid. USE II. To cleansethe heart from sin
by daily repentance, left sin should rot the name. p. 6 USE III. To encourage
good men, their ill reports shall soon vanish p. 7 To discourage wicked men,
their good reports shall not long last. p. 7 DOCT. II. Sin seems small
before it be committed, after, most vile and heinous. p. 8 REAS. I. Lust
blindes the eyes of our understanding. p. 9 REAS. II. The Devil lessens the
sin before committed, aggravates it afterward. ibid. REAS. III. God leaves a
man to himself. ibid. Good men, for sin, sometimes of God, left to
themselves; 1 For increase of Gods glory. p. 10 2 For awakening their
consciences. ibid.
The reason of insensiblenesse in gross sins. p. 11 USE. To beware of the
Devils subtle temptations. ibid. Satan's deceits to draw man into sin, are; 1
Promise of pleasure, profit, etc. p. 13 2 Hope of escape, and going to heaven.
p. 14 3 Hope of leaving it when we will. p. 15 4 Neerenesse to virtue. p. 16 5
Pronenesse of Nature. ibid. 6 Turning away the thoughts to something else. p.
17 7 Beginning by degrees. ibid.
DOCT. III. Tishard to discern false Repentance, Confession, and Restitution,
from true. False Repentance goes very far, both in respect of the Reasons
drawn from the Grounds, and Concomitants. p. 19 I. The Grounds of false
Repentance: 1. Self-love. p. 20 2 Common gifts of the holy Ghost, to
disapprove the foulness of Sin. p. 21 Hate the ugliness 3 Aiarnall
apprehension of beauty, sweetness and excellency in Gods ways. ibid. 4 Good
Education. ibid.
II. False Grounds of Confession: 1 Passion. p. 22 2 Evident discovery of
sin. 3 Torture of conscience. III. False ground of Restitution, is the
burthensomenesse of sin. ibid.
USE I. To show the vanity of Popish Doctrine. ibid. USE II. To exhort men to
try whether their own Repentance be true or false. p. 23 Two things hinder
this judging of a man's self: I. Unwillingness to search: the causes whereof
are, 1 Along persuasion of ones good estate. 2. A desire to taine some
delightful sin.
II. Inability to judge Helps to judge whether ones Repentance be true or
false, are by I. Inward Differences: five. 1 An inward inclination to holy
Duties. p. 24 2 An ability to perform good purposes. p. 25 3 A particular
apprebation of holmesse. p. 26 4 A detestation of all sin. ibid. 5 A love to
God in his Attributes. ibid.
II. Outward Effects: 1 Constancy. p. 27 2 An uniformitie in life. p. 28 3
Generality of obedience. ibid.



The godly man differs from the wicked in his Relapse. 1 In using all means
against his sin, and shunning all occasions. p. 29 2 In not allowing himself
in it. ibid. 3 In laboring to overcome it. ibid. 4 In increasing more and more
in grace. ibid.
Differences between true and false confession, are: 1 Confession of the least
and secretest sins. p. 30 2 Constancy. ibid. 3 A good ground, namely
Humiliation. ibid.
Differences between true and false Restitution, is, a cheerful (not
unwilling) restoring the things we love and delight in. ibid. USE III. To teach
men what to judge of others Repentance. p. 31 USE IV. To show the woeful case
of such as have not gone so far in Repentance as Judas did. ibid. DOCT. IV.
Good things are approved in wicked men's consciences, whether they will or no.
p. 31 REAS. I. Because it is not in man's own power to judge as he list, but
from the light of conscience. p. 32 REAS. II. Because Godwill have glory from
all his creatures. p. 33 USE. I. To teach us to think well of the ways of
God. ibid. USE. II. Not to be discouraged with any opposition. ibid. DOCT. V.
Man's nature apt to excuse sin after it is committed. p. 34 REAS. I. Actual
sinneleaves darkness in the mind. ibid. REAS. II. It begets passion that
corrupts the judgment. p. 35 REAS. III. It weakens the faculties of the soul.
ibid. REAS. IV. It drives away Gods Spirit from us. ibid. USE. To fly sin,
that blindes our eyes, and binders our receverie. ibid. USE II. Being fallen, to
remember how apt we are to excuse sin. p. 36 DOCTR. VI. Companions in evil
least comfortable in times of extremity. p. 36 REAS. I. Gods justice, who sets
them one against another, that join against him. p. 37 REAS. II. Man's nature,
apt to love treason, hate the traitor. ibid. REAS. III. Their own love being
gain or somebase end. ibid. USE I. To make us beware how we join with wicked
men. ibid. DOCTR. VII. The greatest comfort in sin proves commonly the avost
discomfortable. p. 38 REAS. I. The Curse of God. ibid. REAS. II. Sin makes
the soul sick. ibid. USE I. To make men take beed how they turn from God to
sin. p. 39 DOCT. VIII. Gods wrath and sin, charged on the conscience, are
exceeding terrible and insupportable. p. 39 What horror of conscience is,
showed in six Questions. QVEST. I. How horror of conscience wrought. 1 By Gods
Spirit. p. 40 2 By the Devil. ibid.
Notes to discern by which of these it is wrought, are, 1 By the falsehood
mingled with the trouble of conscience. 2 By the Affection it strikes in us. 3
By the extremity of anguish it causes. 4 By the manner of doing it. p. 41
QVEST. II. What a condition such are in? ibid. QVEST. III. Whether God sends
it for a punishment, or preparation of Grace. ibid. QVEST. IV. What is to be
thought of those that are in such trouble of Conscience. p. 42 QVEST. V. How to
be discerned from melancholy. ibid. QVEST. VI. Whether it may befall the
child of God in the estate of Grace. p. 43 As in joy A good thing. The
conjunction of that to us. The reflect knowledge thereof. So in grief A bad
thing. The conjunction of that to us. The reflest knowledge thereof. Reasons of
the Doctrine. I. Sin and Gods wrath in themselves the greatest evils. p. 45
REAS. II. Gods presence is taken from them. ibid. REAS. III. The sensiblenesse
of Conscience. p. 46 USE I. To labor to keep a good conscience. ibid. USE II.
To show the miserable condition of such as go on in sin, altogether
insensible of the burden thereof. p. 47 USE III. To teach us the way to
obtain pardon, is earnestly to sue for it above all other things. p. 49 The
right way to get pardon is, to labor, I. For humiliation by the Law. The Law
humbles, p. 50 1. By declaration of the fault. 2. By Commination of punishment.
II. For comfort by the Gospel.
The way to see the fault, is, 1. To look on some particular gross sin. p.
51 2. To consider the corruption of Nature. ibid.
Faith in Christ, and a particular application of the Promises is the best way
to be sure of mercy. p. 52

Judas Repentance.
Matthew. chap. 27. verse. 3, 4, 5. Then when Judas, which betrayed him, saw that
he was condemned, he repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces
of silver to the chief Priests and Elders,

Saying, I have sinned in betraying of innocent blood; and they said, what is
that to us, see thou to it.

And when he had cast down the silver pieces in the Temple, he departed, and
went and hanged himself.


THese words do contain the repentance of Judas after his great sin of
betraying Christ; The sum of them is to show what Sentence he had cast upon
him.

The parts of the words are these five:

First, a description of Judas, One who betrayed Christ.

Secondly, the occasion of his Repentance; which is set forth by the
circumstance of Time; When he saw he was condemned.

Thirdly; the Repentance itself, in these words, He repented himself, and
brought again, etc. Of which Repentance there are three parts:

1. He made restitution of that he had taken, he brought again the thirty
silver pieces.

2. He confesses his sin, saying, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood.

3. He shows himself sorrowful, so that if it were to do again, he would
not do it; which is another effect of his Repentance.

Fourthly, the entertainment that he had of the Chief Priests and Elders
afterward. Wherein observe,

1. They excule themselves, saying, What is that to us? although they had
little reason to say so; for if he had sinned in betraying Christ, then much
more they who were the causes thereof.

2. They lay more burden upon him, Look thou to it.

Fifthly, the issue of all this; wherein is set down,

1. What comfort he had of those thirty silver pieces; He cast down the
silver pieces.

2. What Judgment God inflicted on him, he made him his own Executioner; He
departed, and went and hanged himself. These are the parts of the words.

First, for the description of Judas (one that betrayed Christ.) From whence
observe, the doctrine is this, That look what a man is in his lifetime, such
shall be Doctr.
his name in the end; if their lives have been bad, their names at their death
will be according; if good, their report shall be thereafter: as it is here
plain in Judas, he has his name according to his desert.

I deny not, but for a time a good man may be evil spoken of, and an evil
man may be magnified: For the former, we may see it in many places; Our
Savior Christ himself was little regarded of the Scribes and Pharisees; David
may for a while be despised; Paul may be reproached; and so Joseph, and many
others. For the second, wicked men for a while may have good report; Judas may
so carry himself for a while, that none of the Disciples would so much as
suspect him for a traytorto his Master. But behold the end of these men, it
shall surely be according to their deeds: Let Jeroboam carry a fair show, let
Ahab have a good report for a while, but mark the end of these men; for
Jeroboam, who mingled his own devices with the worship of God, behold, he has
his brand set upon him for his perpetual infamy; Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
who made all Israel to sin, 2 King. 10. 29. and although Amazia made a great
show, yet at last was marked for an hypocrite; so Ahab at last was branded with
a name of eternal disgrace. On the centrary side, good men's names shall
flourish at their death, though it may be before disgraced. David, although
he had committed many grievous sins, yet at the last his name was most
honorable: And thus is that verified, God blesses the righteous, but the name
of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10. 7.

Now to come to the Reasons of this Doctrine, why the Lord does reward every
man in the end according to their ways in their life time.

The first reason hereof is taken from God himself; he blesses and curses
men's ways according to their works; therefore needs must it be that he must
bless the godly, but curse the wicked; he makes their names to rot, and
rotten things soon stincke: Hence is it that names of so many are so infamous
after their death. And this the Lord does for two reasons.

First, in regard of his truth, he cannot be corrupted. Reas. 1.
And therefore as men are indeed, so he blesses or punishes them; and
although men may be deceived, yet he cannot; For he knows the way of the
righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish, Psalm. 1. 6.
Psalm. 1. 6.

Secondly, in regard of his glory; I will honor them that honor me, says the
Lord: If those that dishonor God should be honored; or if those 1 Samuel 2. 30
that honor God, should be dishonored, it would be an impeachment to his
honor; but God is tender over his honor, and therefore by no means will he
suffer it so to be.

The second Reason is drawn from the men themselves; ordinarily men will be
like themselves: Reas. 2.
Feigned things quickly return into their own nature, if good mettle be
covered over with bad, the bad will soon wear away, and the good will
appear; and on the contrary side, if bad mettle be covered with good, the
good will soon wear away, and the bad will be seen; so a godly man may have
some slips, but at the last it will appear what he is; and an hypocrite may
have many a good fit, yet sooner or later he will show himself to be like
himself.

The third reason is taken from other men; at the end envy cease, and then
their consciences that Reas. 3.
before did but whisper, shall now speak aloud in their ears, that they have
been good men: on the other side, for wicked men, it may be they have been
great men, and so they dare not speak as they thought, but then fear shall be
removed, and then they shall use liberty of speech: for why are wicked men well
spoken of in this life? but only because that men dare not speak their minds;
but then, when both envy and fear shall be removed, then shall Paul be Paul,
and Judas shall be Judas.

Now the Uses are these three:

First, If men's names shall be according to their Use 3.
hearts in their life times, then take heed that thou keep not an evil heart
in secret; for God who sees thy sins in secret, will reward thee openly; Mat
6. 4.
God sees thy secret profaneness, thy secret covetousness; surely without
thou do speedily amend, God in the end will give thee a name accordingly: on
the contrary, art thou secretly upright, holy, etc. God certainly who sees it,
will in the end plentifully reward thee; for if we have not credit with God,
surely all glosses and shifts will do no good: so that this is true both as
well for the evil as the good. Let every man therefore look to his own
conscience, and see how the case stands with him. Art thou an hypocrite? God
will even set a brand upon thee, as he did upon Cain which shall never be
separated from thee, no more Genesis 4. 15.
then the shadow from the body; thou shall never have a good name with men;
yea, and rather then thy wickedness shall be hidden, the very birds of the
air shall disclose it; and although it may be thou think that thy power or
authority will shield thee from an ill report, yet I tell thee thy expectation
will much be frustrated.

Secondly, This should teach us daily to renew our repentance for our sins;
for although it may Use 2.
be our sins be remitted, yet unless we do daily by repentance cleanse our
hearts, God at the length will bring us to shame; and as Joseph's brethren, who
because they did not repent them of their sin against their brother, were
many years after grieved and troubled for the same. Therefore as you love your
names, by daily repentance make up the breaches of your heart and life; for
thus did the Prophet David. Who would ever in the least manner have immagined
that he, after his great sins of murder and adultery, would have recovered
his name; yet because that he unfeinedly, even from the bottom of his heart
repented, behold at the last he recovers again his name, and in the end dies
both full of riches and honors. So likewise Job, though he was in his life
time very impatient yet because that he repented him of it truly; afterward he
is honored for his patience; and hence is it that Saint James says, Remember
the patience of Job. Iam. 5.
A good name cannot but must follow grace and virtue, no less then a sweet
smell will needs follow flowers and sweet ointments. If then thou have
committed any sin either in secret or openly, will thou have thy good name
recovered before thou dye? be sure to make thy heart sure by repentance.

Thirdly, Let not good men be discouraged for Use 3.
evil reports that they may here have for a time, nor let not evil men be
encouraged for the good reports for a time they may have; for at the last all
evil reports that are cast on the godly shall vanish away, and all the good
report that the wicked have had shall quite forsake them, and every one then
shall plainly appear what he is: the reason of this is, because the reports of
the wicked have no sure rooting. Indeed certain it is, that the godly often
have an ill name, yet most sure is it, that at the last God will make their
goodness to break forth as the Sun when it has been long darkened. Yet
here must be one caution premised, that our hearts be substantially good. I
deny not but a man may have some blemishes, but we must daily labor to keep
our hearts unspotted of the world: We must behave our selves blamelesly; but
how? not by stopping the mouths of men; but we must keep our selves unspotted
of the world, and arm our selves against it, by abstaining from sin.

If paper be well oyled, cast ink upon it, and it will soon return off
again, but if it be not oyled Simile.
it will stay on; so if our hearts be well oyled against the world, by our
innocent carriage, then if they have ill reports cast upon them, they will not
remain qut off again presently; and so again on the contrary side. And thus
much for the first part of my Text.

2. The time [When he saw he was condemned.] Hence learn again, That sins
are commonly covered and glosses put upon them until they becommitted, but
after they becommitted Doctr. 2.
they seem most vile and odious.

This is plain here in Judas, before he committed this sin it seemed a
matter of nothing unto him, but after behold how heinous it is. Satan herein
is very ready to deceive us, as we may see in many examples. Thus dealt he
with David when he went to number the people, when Ioab represented the sin
to him well enough, yet it seemed nothing 1 Chro. 21. 3
to him, but he must needs have it done, then afterward see how heinous it was
to him, insomuch that it made him cry out, saying, I have done exceeding
foolishly. But should we trace the whole Verse. 8.
Bible, we can findeno better example then this of Judas; Christ had given him
so many warnings, saying, One of you shall betray me: And again, I have
chosen twelve, and behold one of you is a devil. And again, Mat. 26. 21. John
6. 70.
It were better for that man, by whom the Son Mark 14 21
of man shall be betrayed, that he had never been borne: yet all this would
not serve, but the luster of the thirty silver pieces had so blinded his eyes,
that he could not see.

Now for the Reasons.

The first Reason is taken from a man's self; our lusts within us are so strong
that we cannot see the Reas. 1.
sin; as was that in Cain: for the properties of these lusts are to cast a
mist before our eyes, and to blinde-fold us thereby. As when a man does any
thing in his anger, while his anger lasts, he thinks that he does it with
reason, but afterward he judges himself for it, and considers the thing as it
is in itself; so is it when a man is blinded with his lusts, he goes on in
sin, perit enim judicium, cum res transit in effectum.

The second Reason is from the Devil, who covers our sins before they are
committed with Reas. 2.
some bairs; for he knows no fish will bite at a bare hook: so sin at the
first is covered with profit, pleasures, etc. or else he labors to minse it
with distinctions, but when its committed, then he sets it forth in its own
proper colors.

The third Reason is from God himself, who Reas. 3.
gives men up oftentimes in his just judgment; and then use all the
persuasions and reasons in the world, and you cannot move them from it: hence
is it that the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 28. As they regarded not to know God,
so God gave them over to a reprobate Roin 1. 28
sense, that they were not able to discern of the truth: which is a metaphor
taken from a toughstone, which is able to discern between true gold and
false; but when the virtue of this touchstone is taken away, then it cannot
difcerne; so in like manner, when as God shall give a man up to commit sin,
and take away his right mind, he cannot discern evil from good, no more then
a blind man can judge of colors; yea, and he is no stronger to resist any
tentation, then Sampson was when his hair was cut off, to resist his enemies.

Indeed I deny not but that God may sometimes for sin, leave good men to
themselves; thus God dealt with Ezekias, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. who because he had
showed the Ambassadors of the Prince of Babyion all his furniture, it is said
God left him to himself.

And this is done for these two Reasons:

First, because God is willing to it for his own glory. Reas.


Secondly, because by this their consciences come to be awakened, and begins to
ring a loud peale in their ears.

But here we must know, that there is a great difference between Gods leaving
of wicked men to themselves, and good men to themselves.

For first, for wicked men, their conscience is awakened, but not soundly
until the day of death, although they may have some remorse and sorrow before.
But commonly God awakes a good man sooner. The sins of a good man are either
lesser or greater; if lesser, he is sooner awakened; if greater, he is awaked
with greater difficulty; for a gross sin is always most dangerous; this ye
may see plainly in David, when he had cut off the lap of Saul's garment, he
quickly perceived his sin; but when he had committed the foul sin of
adultery, he was more a great deal insensible of that.

The reason why we are so insensible in gross sins is this, because when a
godly man commits Reas.
but a little sin, for all that his heart still remains in good temper; but
when he commits a great sin, then its all out of order, and cannot perceive
it so soon. Even as a man, if he has a great blow Simile.
on the head with a staff, he is less sensible then if he had a little
scratch or rench; so is it with Gods children in committing of sin. Now the
Use is this:

Seeing that this is the Devils craftiness, first to Use.
cover sins before they be committed, let us then when we are assaulted with
any tentation, take heed; let us not believe that that sin is little, but
rather let us demurre and consider a little the matter; If thou have any good
motions in thee, execute them speedily; but if thou art tempted to wickedness
stay a while, and consider a while. Its the note of a fool to go on he
regards not whether; but its the sign of a wise man, to see a danger a far
off, and escape it. Consider what will follow thy sin. At the first Judas
thought that thirty pieces of silver would have made amends for all, but after
he was condemned, he repented for his former folly. If before we sin we could
but feel the sequences, we would never commit it; if we could but see the
blindness of mind, the horror of conscience, the hardness of heart that
will inseparably follow them, we would certainly shun them; for is any man so
mad as to think that if a man felt the surfeit first, before he eat the sweet
meat, that he would then eat it? no surely: so could we but see the punishment
now that will follow a little pleasure, surely we would reject all the pleasure.

Let us therefore be so wise for to look to the baits that the devil casts
before us, for he is cunning and subtle, and its good for us to think so.

We usually labor and strive against evil company, to abstain from them; why
should we then meddle with the devil, or be in his company? Evah was drawn to
sin through conference with Genesis 3. ^
him, although it may be at the first she intended it not. Gaze not at all upon
these baits of satan. And if he do press sore upon you, consider the
consequents that will certainly follow, and say as Iezabel said (though after
another manner) had Zimri peace, who slew his Master. If he tempt thee to
lying, then say, had Annanias and Saphira peace, who lied to the Lord? If he
tempts you to other sins, look what the Scripture says against such
sins; as if he entice thee to commit fornication, remember that of the
Apostle, Commit not fornication, as some did, whereof dyed three and twenty
thou sands: 1 Corin. 10 Gen 38. 9
or say thus, had Onan peace, who sinned in thus doing. Does he entice thee to
drunkenness, say with thy self, had Nabal peace, who died not for his
churlishness, but for his drunkenness; so for any sin in general, does he
entice thee to it, look to the plain words of the Scripture; for there is no
sin without bitterness.

But now to the intent we may the better be able to avoid his baits, let us
consider the deceits and glosses which he uses to put before us: which are
these:

His first deceit is, that he seldom tempts one to Satansdeceits 1
the committing of one of the lest sins, but he promises either profit,
pleasure, or some reward.

Now to this I answer, first, Here consider, if thou Answ. 2.
do not deprive thy self of a greater pleasure, even of the pleasure of a
good conscience, surely that will bring more joy and comfort then any earthly
thing can, yea, and at the last, more advantage in outward things then sin.

Secondly, when he tells thee of his profitand pleasure; Answ. 2.
tell him that he cannot be as good as his word, for the pleasures of sinare
but for a season, and in the midst of these pleasures there is griese.

Now there is a double misery in every sin:

First, that which is inherent, which is the sin itself. The mind can never
take contentment till it have the proper object; and every thing takes
pleasure when it is as it should be, otherwise it does not, but as alegge or an
arm being out of joint, is full of pain and grief; so when the mind and
faculties thereof are distracted, they were as it were out of joint, and full
of grief. The pleasures of the wicked have sorrow with them, but the sorrows
of the godly have joy.

Secondly, as to good actions there is pleasure adjoined, so there are also
some wills which follow every sin. Satan he presents before our eyes fair
pleasures, when he tempts us to heinous sins; but he never shows us the pain
and grief that will follow. Thus did he with our Savior, when he tempted him,
showing him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; but never
did he show him the grief. Thus likewise did he when he tempted the
Jsraelites, showing them their fleshpots in Egypt, and their onions, etc. but
he never showed them the grievous pain and servitude that there in making
brickes they did undergo.

His second deceit is this; he tells us, that though we sin, yet we may
escape and go to heaven notwithstanding. 2. Deceit.


I answer: Do but remember what God says to this temptation, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
When he shall hear Answ.
the words of this curse, if he shall bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, although I walk according to the stubbornenesse of mine own
heart, quasi dixit, though I commit such and such sins, yet notwithstanding I
shall go to heaven; but mark what God says, I willnot be merciful unto that
man, but my wrath and my jealousy shall smoke against him, every curse that
is written in this book shall light upon him, and his name shall be ro^ted out
from under heaven. So Esd. 28. 12. I will disanull your covenant, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand, qvasi dixit, when a man thinks he shall
efcape hell, and go to heaven, though he commitsinne, he does, as it were,
make a covenant with hell, but God says that covenant shall not stand. So Esd.
44. 11. Destruction shall come suddenly on them, and they shall not know the
morning thereof. Indeed, perhaps they say, we will repent in the mean time;
but I wish them seriously to consider the forenamed places.

Thirdly, the Devil tells us, that though we commit 3. Deceit.
finne, yet we may leave it when we will.

But for the answer of this; know, it is a mere Answ.
delusion; for can a black-moore change his skin, Ier. 13. 23. Suppose a
black-moore should be warned to come before a Prince with a fair skin, and
have a weeks space to prepare himself, and defer it until the last day,
thinking he could do it soon enough; would he not be accounted a fool? yet a
black-moore shall sooner change his skin, then a wicked man depart from his
evil way. Sin is like to sickness, it weakens the strength of the mind, of
the judgment, and affections, and takes away all our purposes which we had at
the first.

If a man that is sick can keep his strength, then may a man that lives in
finne keep his, and rouse himself up by repentance at his pleasure; but it is
not so, its God only that gives repentance, now the spirit blows were it
lusts. If you say, I will be sorrowful, forsake my sins, and repent when
sickness comes, this will hardly prove true repentance, for Judas did so. This
repentance most commonly rises from self-love; every creature loves his own
safety; so at death a man is willing to leave sin, but this comes from nature
and self-love, because he would not go to hell, and most commonly thesemen, if
it please God that ever they recover out of their sicknesses, they fall into
the same courses again.

Fourthly, He will excuse our sin by some virtues wherewith it has affinity;
he will put on us 4. Deceit.
palliata vitia, those vices that have some neerenesse to virtue

I answer: howsoever the devil may use such distinctions to help out his
baits to sin for a time, Answ.
yet in the time of trouble they will not hold out, but appear as they are
indeed.

Fifthly, He makes men believe their nature is prone to it, and they cannot
leave it. If I were as 5. Deceit.
such and such men are indeed I could abstain, but my nature is such that it
will not suffer me.

I answer: Thou must know that this does not excuse but aggravate thy sin; if
thy nature be Answ.
prone to any sin, know, that the sin is much more grievous: we loathe a
toad because of the venomous nature of it; so God loatheth our nature, because
its sinful. As a drunken man that murders another commits a double sin, one
of drunkenness, another of murder, which comes from drunkenness; so, if our
nature be prone to any sin which we commit, its a double sin; first, in that
it is natural to us and original: secondly, that we commit thereby original
transgressions. We had you know, a part in Adams sin by propagation; now if
we have a hand in it our selves by our strong inclinations thereunto, we our
selves are causes thereof: likewise let us not therefore go about to excuse
our selves with this, that because I am of an other temper then another man, I
may take more liberty, and God will bear with us herein; for God certainly
will bear with us the less.

Sixthly, He will turn away thy thoughts from the sin, and fasten them on
something else; so 6. Deceit.
Judas, his eye at the first was fastened on the thirty pieces of silver, but
afterward he thought of his sin.

For this I commend unto you David's practice, Answ. Psalm 119.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. So look thou
first upon thy sin before thou commit it, and labor to see his cunning
therein. If David had seriously looked on the sin of adultery before he had
committed it, he would never have done it; hence is it that the Wise man
councelleth us, Prove. 4. last. Ponder thy ways aright, etc. And this is
commonly the greatest deceit of all.

Seventhly, Helabours to draw men on to sin 7. Deceit.
by degrees, by a little and a little; he never aggravates the sin at the
first, but extenuates it.

I answer: when water has gotten a little passage, it will soon make a great
breach; one little Answ.
wedge makes way for a greater: so it may be a man commits but a little sin
at the first, but afterward the Devil draws him to commit greater. A man that
commits sin is as one in a quick sand, who sinkes deeper and deeper: or as a
little spark that kindles a great fire. Seeing therefore the case stands
thus, we ought to resist the beginnings of sin, and give peremptory denial to
the first temptations. And thus much for this point.

Now follows the third point, viz. the repentance of Judas in these words,
He repented himself, etc. which repentance of his consists of three parts.

1. His restitution, he brought again, etc. 2. His confession, I have sinned,
etc. 3. He was sorrowful.
From which repentance of his learn this Doctrine, That there is a false
repentance, confession and restitution that is very like the true repentance,
confession and restitution, Doctr.
and can hardly be discerned.

This repentance, consession and restitution which Judas made was not true, yet
it was very like to true. Such was that of Saul, Ahab, and the rest. Such is
the repentance of many at this day, who in some good mood, or in some
afflictions seem to repent; but this repentance breaks as bubbles, and
vanishes as the lightning in the air. This repentance is false, yet so like
the true, that the difference between them is very hard to discern, although
in themselus they differ much; as true gold and counterfeit are hard to be
discerned asunder by us, although in themselves there is a broad difference, as
much as between gold and copper.

This false repentance may goefarre,

1. If we consider the substance of it. 2. If we consider the concommitants.
First, if we consider the substance, it may go far, for,

1. He may seriously consider his ways.

2. He may have a kind of sorrow for his sins.

3. He may sue for pardons for his sins, as do many hypocrites.

4. He may desire faith and repentance, as Francis Spira did.

But here we must know that there is a twofold desire of faith and repentance.

First, from a self-love, not out of a love to the graces, but fear of hell;
and this may be in false repentance.

Secondly, From a love to the graces, having sensibly tasted them; this desire
is grace.

5. There may be an amendment for a time, as did Saul and Pharaoh.

6. He may come to that pass, that if the sin were to be committed again,
he would not do it for all the world, as Judas.

Secondly, Trve repentance and false are very like in respect of their
concomitants.

1. This false repentance may cause a remorse, yea it may bring forth tears,
as we may see in Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 17. he lift up his voice and wept.

2. This false repentance may cause confession, freely and fully, as did
Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 27. taking shame to himself, and ascribing glory to God:
thus did Saul, 1 Samuel 26. 21. he confessed that he had sinned exceedingly, so
that one would have thought that it had been true.

3. It may cause them to fast and pray for pardon, as did Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 27.
but it was not in truth, but only in the time of his misery.

4. They may come to Restitution, as Judas did.

5. They may bring forth some fruits of amendment of life; so that very far
this false Repentance may go; as the second and third ground.

And now behold true Repentance in substance and concomitants; what can you
find more in it? hence it is that so many are deceived with false repentance,
which is so like the true; but bring them to the touchstone, and you shall
find a broad difference between them, as after you shall see.

Now the Reasons of this Point are taken from the false grounds from whence
repentance comes, which are these:

1. It comes from self-love; when sin proves hurtful; and the hurt is near
at hand, then it may work, but all out of self-love. An hypocrite when he
finds fire in the sin, he throws it away, but when once the fire is out of
the coal, he will play with it, and fool himself, he fears only the
fire, not the foulness of sin; he hates the sting, not the sin.

2. This repentance comes from the common gifts of the holy Ghost, which a
carnal man may have; as,

First, He may disapprove the foulness of sin.

Secondly, He may hate the ugliness thereof.

But here we must know that the light of nature is extinguished in some more
then in others; as no doubt but that it was rife in Judas. When sins rightly
are propounded to us, far we may go in false repentance.

Thirdly, their repentance comes from the beauty, sweetness, and excellency a
carnal man may find in Gods ways, which may make him amend and turn unto
God for a while: as in the time of John Baptist, they confessed and turned to
him (but it was but for a while;) the reason was, because he was a burning and
a shining light, and they rejoiced in his light. So the second ground found a
sweetness in the Word and left all, but yet returned, as 2 Pet. 2. latter end.
Some in the excellency of Preaching may see a sweetness, and rejoice a while,
but yet return again to their sins.

Fourthly, Their repentance may arise from a good Family, company, or Ministry:
Thus Ioash, (2 Chro. 24.) good, while Iehojada lived, which seems to be
thirty years; so Vzzia, 2 Chro. 26 was good all the days of Zacharia; so
many are good while they are under careful Governors, and in good company; so
long as good means last they will be good. I cannot compare such men better
then to the Swine, which whilst they are in fair meddowes keep themselves
clean (which is no thank to them, but the place) but as soon as they come to
the mire they tumble in it; so will these men, so soon as opportunity is
given them.

2. So likewise confession may arise from false grounds.

First, from passion, being in good moods, they confess sometimes, not
otherways; but sound humiliation,

Secondly, From some evident discovery of his Saul when he evidently saw David's
kindness, could not but confess.

Thirdly, From some extorting cause; as here Judas, when God and his conscience
pressed him to it; so did Pharaoh when he was under the rack.

Thirdly, Restitution may also arise from false grounds.

There was a great difference between the restitution of Judas and Zacheus,
Judas was sick and oppressed with his silver pieces, as a man of meat in his
stomach; therefore no wonder though he would be rid thereof; but Zacheus did
it most willingly and freely.

This shows unto us the vanity of the Popish Use 1.
doctrine, which makes but three parts of Repentance, Confession, Contrition,
Satisfaction, all these had Judas, yet who can say he truly repented; one may
do all that they say, yet be damned.

Let men then look to themselves that have not Use 2.
gone as far as Judas, namely, have not repented, confessed, and restored;
for though these be in false repentance, yet are they in true also; only in
false there are these only, in true there is these and more also: for as the
guilt in counterfeit gold (which makes it like the true) is good; so the fault
is, that it is not throughout, such as the outside is; so these things in false
repentance are good, the fault is, that their grounds are not good also.

And again, they which have gone as far as Judas, and seem to have
repented, let them try themselves, and take heed they be not deceived.

Now there are two things that hinder us from judging aright of our estate.

1. Unwillingness to search. 2. Unability to judge.
First, Unwillingnesse to search, and the causes of that are these:

First, because they have been long sure, and others so judge of them, and
therefore now they are loath to call in question their estate: But let such
know, that nothing can establish their state more; for either your repentance
was sound, and then the more comfort unto you if you search, or else it was not
sound, and then the sooner you discover the falsenesse thereof, the sooner you
may amend it.

2. It is because they are unwilling to make their hearts fully sound; they
would not be perfect; they will have some sin to dally with: but this is
great folly in men, for want of one step more to miss heaven, and to make
shipwreck in the haven of their happiness.

Secondly, inabilitie in judging, not being able to judge whether we have
truly repented or not.

To help this; consider whether your repentance arise from a natural
conscience, or an heart truly changed, for that is all in all. If your heart
be changed; and from that, and not from a natural conscience enlightened,
arises your repentance; but this is hardest of all to know.

You may know it two ways.

1. By the inward differences. 2. By the outward effects.
First, by the inward differences, and they are five:

First, if it come from an heart truly changed, thou shall find thy self
doing all holy duties with a natural inclination, as the fire to ascend;
although thou meetest with many impediments, yet never leavest striving, but
inwardly delightest in Gods law. A natural conscience may do much, but never
make us inwardly from the bent of the heart to will good; now in spiritual
things, its more to will then to do; as Saint Paul would have the Corinthians
not only to do, but also to will. Hence 1 Cor. 8. 10.
is it that Nehemiah desires the Lord to hear the Nehem, 1. 11
prayers of them that did desire to fear him: This is the very Character of a
Saint; The natural conscience, if there were no hell, would sin, love it,
and use it; but inwardly to desire holiness for it self is an infallible
sign; so that were there no heaven nor hell, yet he would choose holiness,
and could do no otherwise, when it is his meat and drink (as our Savior
speaks) to do Gods will. Now a man soundly an hungry, will eat though not
hired; so would he do the works of holiness though there were no reward. If
you have this disposition, sure I am you have truly repented; if you have not,
fear, and labor after it.

Secondly, the natural conscience tells us this should be done, urges it, and
blames if it be not done; and hence arises hearty resolution and purposes,
but it never enables to do it, therefore he never performs what he
purposes; but a heart truly changed enables us to do it: As Paul says, I can
do all things through Christ: not some, but all; whereas the natural man
cannot but sin, because (as Saint Peter says) the will is not stirred nor
changed; therefore although much may be done, yet it will down again; as a
stone, if not changed into fire, though it be lifted up, yet it will fall down
again: Now the natural conscience cannot change the will, therefore cannot he
resist finne; but the true Convert can say, he can be chaste, he can resist
lusts, and the like; the other say (and say truly) they cannot but sin, for
the natural conscience cannot change, and therefore they grow weary of it,
because it is not natural; if they were truly changed, they would do it with
ease.

Thirdly, the natural conscience can go no further then it is enlightened; it
may approve formal civil living, and holiness in the general, but it cannot
so approve of holiness in the particular, that the stricter any man is, the
more they approve him, and desire to be like him: A man truly spiritual is
burdensome to a natural conscience, though never so much enlightened; the high
degrees of holiness do make him distaste him. Wherefore can not thou
delight in them that are good? thou have care to fear.

Fourthly, the natural conscience may make a man abstain from many sins,
but he abstaines from none out of a detestation and hatred of them: he may
indeed hate a moral vice, because he may have a moral virtue contrary to it;
but he cannot hate sin, for nothing is contrary to sin but grace, which he
has not: If therefore you abstain from sin out of a hatred to it, it is
certain you are changed; else though you abstain, it is but from a natural
conscience. Moses and Lot abstained from uncleanness, so that they wept and
were vexed, that was a sign of change; else abstain never so much, it is not
true grace. But if thou hate it because it is sin, and hate all sin both
small and great, it is certain thou art changed.

Fifthly, the natural conscience may make us love some good men, and God also
with a natural love, because he gives them some good blessings; and may
rejoice in God with some flashes of joy; as, Hebr. 6. But to love God in his
Attributes with the love of delight and conjugall love, to love him because he
is holy, just, etc. this an heart unchanged cannot do; and the reason is,
because that all love of delight arises from similitude; and none thus love
God, which are not changed, and so like him.

But you may say, How can I know this love of God? Object.


I answer, It Is easy enough to be known. For, 1. He that loves God, keeps his
Commandments. Answ.
2. The Commandments of God are not burdensome unto him. But besides this,
you may know in your heart whether you love him or no, as you can tell if you
love a friend, for then your heart will be toward him, you will delight in him;
Now if these signs be not in you, you may justly doubt that your repentance is
no more than the repentance of Judas was.

2. But now because these inward effects of sound repentance are hard to be
discerned, we will now consider the outward effects of true repentance, which
are four.

First, Constancy; true repentance holds out, all false repentance is
inconstant; for it arises from passion which is ever inconstant, and therefore
the repentance coming from it, must needs be inconstant; whether it be from
fear or from novelty of holiness, or persuasion, or company, or some sudden
joy, whatever it be (not being a true change) it cease, as heat that arising
from rubbing goes away when the rubbing is ended; but it would continue if it
arose from a soul giving life to the body. Indeed I confess some passion may
stay longer then other, as Ioash, Amazia, but when once Iehoida dies, they will
cease.

Secondly, an evennes and uniformity in their lives; counterfeits cannot ever
be the same, but the godly are still the same, in all courses and places:
Indeed they may be often uneven from the suddenness of the occasion, as the
newness of the air in the new Country, may make one sick, but it kills not;
so a godly man, in what place or time soever; remains the same, though he get
disadvantage by it; as a sheep falling into a ditch may be fouled, but is a
sheep still; but the wicked is clean another man; he casts off the passion of
goodness, and is clean changed; but the godly man cannot cast off his nature,
because he is borne of God, therefore cannot sin; that is, in the manner he
did before.

Thirdly, generality of obedience; the hypocrite ever rowles some sweet morsel
under his tongue, and so does something wherein he savoureth himself, but the
godly man leaves all sins.

But you will say, the godly also have some beloed sin, and some infirmities to
which they are inclined Object.


I answer: there is a great difference between the hypocrite and the godly man;
for an hypocrite purposely Answ.
keeps some room for his sin; but the godly man desires to be reproved, and
will willingly suffer admonition, and desires no exempt place for his decrest
sins, but would thoroughly be tried.

But you will further object, that godly men both Object.
have and do often relapse?

I answer: he differs much from the wicked: for, Answ.


1. The godly man strives against that sin most to which he is most inclined,
by using all means against it, and shunning all the occasions thereof, which
the wicked man does not.

2. Although the godly man relapse, yet he never comes to allow himself in
that sin: the wicked, finding sin pleasing, sits down and follows it: as
Saul, who purposed not to persecute David, but finding it pleasing to his lust,
continued therein. Pharaoh for a time would let the people of Israel go, but
afterward for his pleasure stayed them.

3. They differ in the issue; the godly man gets the victory over his sin, but
sin gets the victory over the wicked man.

4. Hypocritical repentance is violent and earnest at the first, and slack
afterward; but true grace grows more and more: false, is like a land-flood,
great on a sudden, but quickly dried up again, but in true grace it is as in a
natural birth, the beginning is small, but it grows stronger and stronger;
hypocrites are hot at the first, but quickly grown cool. I deny not but that a
godly man may abate of his strength of grace as a child may fall sick and
abate of his strength and beauty; but it is but a sickness, and commonly after
it they shoot up the more: so the godly, though for a while they may be sick,
yet afterward they grow in grace the more for that sickness. The motion of the
wicked is violent, swiftest at the first, but slack afterward; but the motion
of the godly is natural, slowest at the first, but after it is swifter and
swifter.

2. Having already shown the difference between true and false repentance, I
will now show the difference between true and false confession.

True Confession is an infallible sign of grace; many think it an easy
matter, but to confess aright is a very hard thing: Many confess for some
byends, or some extorting cause; but true Confession has these three
properties.

First, it is particular; it confesses the least and secretest corruption in
the heart; and not only gross sins: But the hypocrite, although he may
confess some gross sins, yet never comes to full particular Confession.

Secondly true Confession is constant, but false is only in some good mood, or
in some affliction, as sickness, etc.

Thirdly, true Confession arises from a good ground; namely, a base conceit of
our selves, a true shame, and an earnest desire only to glorify God, with a
full purpose wholly to debase themselves, and a perfect resolvtion to forsake
the sin he confesses, which the wicked never do.

3. Restitution that is true and right, differs from false.

Because hypocritical restitution is in necessity when he cannot help it,
but it is a burden to him, then he casts it away as a dog does his vomit,
when he is sick by it; thus Judas restored; but when we care for it, and it is
pleasing to us, then to restore it is a sign of grace; thus did Zacheus
chearefully, when he might have kept it. The hypocrite restores as the
Merchant that casts his goods into the Sea, unwillingly; yet will rather lose
them then his life.

Thus have we seen that there is a false repentance, confession, and
restitution, much like to the true, and how they differ.

Then seeing there is such similitude between false repentance and true, this
should teach us what Use 3.
to judge of such men's repentance which is only in the time of sickness; it is
greatly to be feared that it is even such as Judas his was, false and
hypocritical, only in some mood.

Lastly, if this Repentance of Judas was not true, Use 4.
what shall we think of them that have not gone so far as Judas did, to
repent, confess, and restore, surely this is the case of many now adays! All
these things that were in the repentance of Judas, are good and commendable in
true repentance, but we must exceed it before we can come at heaven; and
therefore if they that do not exceed it shall never come there, what shall
become of those that come far short of it?

Next, mark the name Judas now gives Christ; he calls him Innocent; I have
sinned in betraying of Innocent blood. Whence learn, That those things which
are good, are approved to men's Doctr.
consciences, whether they will or no.

Judas confesses Christ innocent now; this put not a new conceit of Christ
into his conscience, but made him confess what before he thought in his
conscience to be so.

But some may say, that many men that are worthy Instruments of Gods glory,
find envy and hatred Quest.
here amongst men?

Indeed it is true; but it will be but for a short time before the mist will be
expelled from before Answ.
their consciences; and afterward, although their consciences for a while may
be tongue-tyed, yet they will openly approve them to be good men, as 2 Cor. 4.
2.
Judas here did Christ.

First, because it is not in the power of men to judge as they will, but they
must judge according to the Reas.
light of conscience that is in them, they cannot but see what is presented unto
them by conscience: as the eye being open cannot but see what is showed to it;
and it is so natural to the conscience to see truth; for light is put into the
conscience even of the wicked by God himself: Hence is that that the
Evangelist Saint John says, Ioh. 1. The light shined in darkness: Where by
light is meant the natural light of conscience, which although it makes not
men obedient to the truth, yet it makes them to acknowledge the truth.
Therefore Conscience by the Schoolmen is called a Virgin, because it is not
defiled by untruths, but ever murmurs against evil, and assents to truth and
good; it may be oppressed somewhat, but ever keeps it self straight in
judgment; therefore the false judgment of the wicked comes not from
conscience, but from lusts, which when they are gone (as in death, or often
before) then they speak the truth.

Secondly, because God will have glory from all the creatures that he has
made, and they cannot but acknowledge it to be right; therefore they which sin
against the holy Ghost, though they hate goodness, because they count it not
good to them, yet in it self they think it to be good; therefore the Devils
believing and trembling comes from their conscience.

This should teach us to think well of the ways Use 1.
of God, although others speak against them; for it is for some secret cause,
and inwardly they do approve of them in their consciences while they live, and
often witness the same at their deaths.

2. Be not discouraged for any opposition or hatred that thou shall meet
withal; what though they hate thee, yet they have that within them that will
approve thee: We cannotapprove our selves to their wills, affections, or lusts;
but whether they will or not, we may approve our selves to their conscienees.
It is therefore a baseness when we labor to approve our selves to any by doing
evil; the best Galat. 6.
way is to approve our selves to their consciences, and take David's course, who
when Micholl scofsed at him for dancing before the Arc, says, If this be
vile, I will yet be more vile; so shall I be had in honor of the Virgins: So
likewise, Art thou hated for Religion? Labor to exceed in that; so shall they
honor thee in their consciences; and it is better to approve thy self to their
consciences, for they endure; then to their lusts, for they are vanishing, and
their good opinion of thee shall vanish. He that reproves, shall find more
favor in the latter end, then he that flatters; because he approves himself
to the conscience, this only to the lusts.

Now follows the carriage of the Elders toward Judas; they excused
themselves, (saying, What is that unto us, Look thou to it?) although they
were the chiefest Agents therein. Whence learn this Doctrine, That there is a
mavelous aptness in the nature of man, to excuse a sin when he has
committed Doctr.
it.

The Pharisees here were the men that moved and hired Judas to betray Christ:
Judas was but the Instrument they used; and they had purposed to have put him
to death, although Judas had never betrayed him; yet they say, What is that to
us? Thus also Adam having done that that was directly contrary to Gods Command,
yet excuses himself. Thus did the Kings of Israel; as Asah, when he had
committed an evident sin, he would not acknowledge it; but when the Prophet
comes to tell him of it, he falls a threatening of him. Thus also did Amaziah.

First, because all sin after it is committed, leaves a blot in the mind,
which is compared to a Reas.
shadow, which darkens the mind, so that it cannot see: For that that the
Apostle says of hatred, 1 John 2. 9. that such an one as hates his brother,
lives in darkness; the same may be said of all other sins.

Secondly, because actual sins increase the passion which at the first made
us commit it; now the stronger the passions are, the more is the judgment
corrupted.

Thirdly, because sin works on those faculties which should judge, it
weakeneth the judgment, and is like a blow on the head that takes away all
sense.

Fourthly, because actual sin grieveth the holy Ghost, and makes him depart,
and it is he only that convinces us of sin; and therefore how can we see
when he is gone, that enlightneth us? And when this holy Spirit is gone, then
in comes the evil spirit which puts into us false reasons, and so we by them
excuse our selves.

The Use is, first, therefore to let us take heed of Use 1.
declining from God, and falling into any sin, seeing it is so difficult a
thing to get out of it again. What makes us to recover, but a sight of our
sins? Now falling into sin, blinds our eyes, wherefore it must needs be
very hard to recover. Seeing then it is so hard to recover, take heed of first
falling into sin; for a man that is a little fallen into sin, is like a man
in a quicke-sand, ready to sink deeper and deeper. Suppose a man does pollute
Gods Sabbaths; at the first there is sorrow for it; afterward he begins to
do it more and more; but at last he does it with delight. What is said of
uncleanness, is true of all sins: Prove. 30. 20. She wipes her mouth; i. e.
excuses: so that although she must needs confess it to be a sin, yet in
that case she accounts it none.

Secondly, if thou art fallen into any sin, remember Use 2.
thy aptness to excuse it, and labor to get out as soon as thou can.

1. Remember what thy judgment was of that sin before thou fellest into it,
although now thou judge it small. Thy judgment is like a glass; before it is
cracked, it shows true; but after it is cracked, it represents things
otherwise then they are. Think with thy self therefore how ill once thou
thoughtest that sin; and seeing thy own judgment is blinded, help thy
self with other holy men's judgments concerning that sin.

2. Labor to abstain from the acting of that sin, and so will light come in
again by a little and a little, and then thou will see the ugliness of it;
for no man sees the ugliness of a sin, until first he comes out of it.

And now we come to their Answer.

What is that to us, look thou to it. From hence again learn this Doctrine,
That for the most part, in the time of our extremity, we have least comfort
from those which were our Doctr.
companions in evil.

Judas here comes to the High Priests, which were his companions in the
betraying of Christ; but they give him poor comfort, What have we to to do
with that, look thou to it: Miserable comforters to a man in his extremity.

Now the Reasons are taken, first, From Gods Justice; it is just with God, when
men join against Reas.
him, to set them one against another. Thus he set Abimilecke and the men of
Sechem one against another: God sends an evil spirit between them; he can
make enemies to be friends, and friends to be enemies. There are abundance of
such examples in hystories.

Secondly, from man's nature, which is apt to love the treason, and hate the
Traitor: he has a love to the lust, and so may love the treason; he has a
principle in him to hate the Traitor.

Thirdly, from the nature of their love; it is for commodity or gain, or some
by end or other, and therefore when the commodity cease, that also cease;
yea, and often turns to hatred, as Ammons love to Thamar did.

This should teach us to take heed how we join with men to do evil: It Is
better to Use.
join to their consciences in doing well, for their consciences will continue;
then to their lusts, for they will end, and then their love to you will end also.
Hence it is said in the Proverbs, That he that reproves, shall find more
favor in the end than he that flattereth. Many rejoice in the love of evil
company; but all that love is but like glass sodered together; when God
sends the fire (as he did to Abimilecke) to melt that, they fall asunder, and
all their love cease.

Now the next thing is, He cast down the thirty pieces of silver. And here
the Doctrine is this, That, that that is the greatest comfort, when God once
turns his hand against us, proves most discomfortable. Doctr.


Judas here thought these thirty pieces of silver a great matter, but when once
God moved his conscience, he casts them away: So, suppose a man get favor,
honor, riches, or any other thing naughtily, it will prove but a trouble.

1. From the curse of God; although the thing in it self be good, yet God ever
mixeth some evil Reas.
with it, which makes it bitter. Stolen bread is sweet, but God fills the
mouth with gravel. All misery with Gods favor is most sweet, as Paul's
imprisonments, and whippings, and Joseph's: but on the contrary side, all
pleasure, with Gods displeasure, is bitter.

2. Because sin makes the soul sick, and then it is never well, until it
casts up; and thus Judas, the thirty pieces, burdening his soul, must cast
them up.

Many go on in sin, and are never troubled. Object.


As in our bodies, though there be ill humors, yet they make not a man sick
until they be stirred; Answ.
so does not sin until God stirs it, as here he did in Judas, and then it
makes us sick.

This should therefore move men to take heed how they turn sail for their
own advantage. Use.
Suppose by going from God thou gettest what thou would, yet God can make
that comfort to prove but a burden unto thee, as he did Judas his thirty
silver pieces. Be therefore content to lose all before thou lose God.

Now follows the event of all, He went and hanged himself. Whence learn,
That Gods wrath and sin are exceeding terrible and Doctr.
unsupportable, when they are once charged on the conscience.

This made Judas to hang himself. Do but a little consider man's nature, how
loath to destroy himself, how afraid to be killed, and you shall find it to be
some great matter that must cause him to make an end of himself, and to cast
himself into that which he feared; namely, hell: thus heavy is sin when God
once charge it on the conscience, that it makes a man do all this. Indeed
sin was as heavy before, but then it lay at our foot, and we felt it not; but
when God lays it once on our shoulders, and on our Consciences, then shall we
feel the burden thereof to be far beyond all torments that can be imagined.
See this in Christ, when God did but charge our sins on him, how intolerable
werethey?

Now for your better understanding of this point, ^. 3.
I will first show you what this horror of conscience is; which I will do by
explaining these five questions following.

By what means is this horror of conscience Quest. 1.
wrought?

Two ways: sometimes by Gods own Spirit; Answ.
sometimes by Satan.

First, it is done by Gods own Spirit, when by it the mind is enlightened to see
that he is in bondage by reason of sin; Hence it is, that it is called the
Spirit of bondage, Romans 8.

Secondly, and more frequently, by Satan, when he, by Gods permission, does
vex and terrify the souls of men, and drive them to despair; and this is
called horror, and the vexing of the soul.

Now whether this horror of conscience be wrought by Gods own Spirit, or by
Satan, we may know by these four differences:

1. If we find any falsehood mingled with this trouble of conscience, then it
comes from the Devil; for the holy Ghost mingles no falsehood, but only
enlightens, and shows the truth: light makes a thing seem as it is.

2. You may discern of it by the affection it strikes in us; for that that
the Devil causes in us, strikes a hatred of God; but that that Gods Spirit
works in us, causes a servile fear.

3. You may know it by the extremity of anguish it causes; Gods Spirit works
by meekness and consolation; but the Devil works by extremity of terror
and fear. Answ.


4. You may know it by the manner of doing; for the Devil does it disorderly,
suddenly, and violently, without any equality; but the Spirit proceeds
orderly: first, it enlightneth the mind, and then it raises objections; and so
goes on by a little and a little; but the Devil works violently. Hence is
that that Satan is said to buffet Paul; for all buffeting betokens violence.
Indeed, sometime the Spirit does unequally, but yet there is a great difference
between Satan's working and his.

What is to be thought of such a condition? Quest. 2.


I answer, That such a condition being simply Answ.
in it self considered, is very miserable; because it estrangeth and draws
the heart away from God, yea, and from Christ, who is the end of Gods works,
and so therefore must needs be a most heinous sin; but yet as God uses it, it
is a sign, or one of the first steps to faith; and a good means to subdue and
weaken the stubbornness of our hearts.

Quest. How may we know whether God intends this for a punishment, or for a
preparation of grace?

Answ. You may know it by the event; for when God does it for the salvation of
the creature, then after it there follows grace; but if it brings not grace
after it, if there be only a plowing and no harvest, the pricking with a
Needle, and no thread, then it is a spark of hell fire, and the very praludium
of hell.

What shall we then think of those that never Quest. 3.
had this horror and trouble of conscience?

Their estate for all that may be very good; for this vexation is not
absolutely needful, although Answ.
humiliation is; wherefore if thou have it not, seek not after it; for God
uses many means: yet thou may take hence occasion the more to try thine
estate.

Whether comes this horror from mellancholly, or how shall we disceme it from
mellancholly? Quest. 4.


If thou apprehend sin and the wrath of God, Answ.
then it is horror of conscience; for when the faculty is pinched upon the
right object, to wit, sin; then it is no melancholy; but in horror the
conscience is pitched upon the right obeject, viz. sin; for that is the
proper object of the conscience: As for melancholy, that is not grief, but
extends grief; as varnish is not color, but does extend the color. Indeed
melancholy may be joined with it, and draw it forth, but it comes not wholly
from that, but from some other inward principle. As the fatness of the soil
may bring forth the corn the sooner, but yet that is not the cause thereof,
but the root that it has.

Again I answer, that all diseases are healed by their contraries; If that
this were melancholy, then might it be healed by merry company, which is the
contrary unto it; but if it be the horror of conscience, then must it only be
healed by the apprehension of Gods love in Jesus Christ.

Whether may it befall the child of God to Quest. 5.
be in this case after he is in the estate of grace, or not?

I answer, That this extremity of horror which Judas here tasted of, never
befalls the child God Answ.
after he is in the estate of grace; and my reason is this, Because that as
perfect love casts out all fear; so where there is some love left, there is
no perfect fear. Indeed Gods children are never wholly without fear, Romans 8.
yet in their greatest fear there is in them the root of comfort remaining.
There are many examples that may be brought to prove the same, but I know none
like that of our Savior Christ, who although he was in such unspeakeable
horror of conscience, that it made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou
for saken me? yet this horror was mingled with faith, comfort, and the
assurance of Gods favor. So Gods Children may have such sorrow, and be so
drunken with wormwood, that it may make them not to know what to do; yet in
all this grief the fire of Gods love is not quite extinguished, but there are
some sparks thereof remaining under these ashes.

Here is a Caveat to be given of two things.

First, Let those that are in this disposition of Caveat.
mind, take heed of that that Satan in this condition may labor to bring us
unto; for then they are in a disease; and those that are in a disease, incline
unto some thing: Take heed then of polluting the Sabbath, and other sins that
he may entice thee to; for Sanus and AEger differ, the one desires one thing,
the other another.

Secondly, Something must be done positively Caveat.
for the healing of our grief: when that we are in sorrow, we must pitch it
upon the proper object, to wit, sin; and put away all worldly sorrow, for
that brings death; but sorrow for sin, that brings life.

All these things thus being expounded, the point is manifest,

That sin and Gods wrath being charged on the conscience are exceeding
terrible. Doctr.
Indeed, when the burden lies on the ground, we feel it not, but when it lies
on our shoulders: So, before this horror is charged on the conscience we feel
it not, but then is it exceeding terrible.

It is with grief as it is with joy: There are three things in all joy.

1. There is a good thing. 2. There is the conjunction of that good thing to
us. 3. A reflect knowledge thereof.
So also in grief there are threethings.

1. There is a bad thing. 2. The conjunction of that to us. 3. The reflecting
of the understanding, whereby we know the hurt that comes to us thereby.
When a man feels, and sees, and knows his sin, then is it unsupportable,
and the reason thereof is, because that then a man's spirit is wounded, and
cannot bear it self.

The Reasons of this point are these three:

First, because that sin and Gods wrath are in Reas. 1.
themselves the greatest evil, as righteousness and Gods favor are the
greatest good: Men may think that punishment were the greatest evil, but it
is not; for that is but the effect of sin, sin is the cause thereof; now we
know that the cause is always greater than the effect: Now when God shall open
our eyes to see this sin and Gods wrath, then it will be an insupportable
burden. This is the reason that at the day of Judgment the wicked shall cry,
Hills and Mountains fall upon us, to hide us from the presence of the Judge,
because that then God shall open their eyes to see their sins; which if he
should do now while they are here on earth, would make them cry out as much.
As it is with comfort, so it is with grief: If we know not of it, it affects
us not: As the Army that was about Gebezai, it comforted not him, because he
saw it not: So for grief; although hell and damnation be about us, yet if we
see it not, we do not regard it.

The second Reason is taken from Gods manner Reas. 2.
of working on the spirit of the creature; he then leaves it; now we are to
know, That the greatest comfort the Creature has, is the fruition of Gods
presence, and the greatest grief is his absence; if we want that, we are
deprived of all comfort; as if the Sun be absent, we are deprived of all
light. If there were but a little comfort remaining, that would serve to hold
the head above the water; but if all comfort be gone, it then presently
sinketh. The proper object of fear and grief, is the absence of good, and
prelence of evil, and both them come by the privation of Gods presence.

The third Reason is taken from the nature of conscience it self when it is
awakened, because that Reas.
then it is sensible of the least sin; for every faculty, as it is larger, so
it is more capable of joy and grief; therefore men are said to be more capable
of joy and grief, than the bruit beasts; and in man the soul is more capable
than the body; and in the soul, conscience of all other parts most capable;
and as the conscience is capable of the greatest grief, so also of the
greatest comfort; it is capable of the peace of God, which passes all
understanding. And surely this horror of conscience is nothing else but a
spark of hell fire, which the Heathen had some inkling of, when they said they
were exagitated with the furies.

Seeing then that the wrath of God is thus insuppartable, this should teach us
in all things especially Use 1.
to labor to keep a good conscience, and to labor to be free from the guilt
of sin: if the wrath of God be the greatest evil, then should the whole
stream of our endeavors be to take heed thereof, by laboring for to keep a
pure conscience: Proportion your care herein to the good that will come
thereby; it will bring the unspeakeable comfort; without this labor to keep a
good conscience, thou will never have thy heart perfect; therefore labor for
it, consider the good it brings: Men busy their heads here to the utmost for
other things, as for Learning, Credit, Riches, Honor, and all because they
think that they are worthy their labor; Let us then but consider the fruit
that this peace of conscience will bring; let us but gather up our thoughts
that are busied so much about other things, and but consider this a little;
which if men would but do, they would spend more time about it then they dee;
for now these things are done but by the bye, and have not that tithe of the
time spent about them that should be, which we spend about other things: But
let such know, that it is but a folly to go about that work with a finger
which requires the strength of the whole body: When this work of the building
of grace does require the whole strength of a man, and we put not our whole
strength thereto, it is no marvel if we do not prosper therein. Let us
therefore seriously consider our ways, let us consider with what tentations
the Devil daily assayeth us; Consider that it were as good get ground of the
raging Sea, as of raging lusts; Consider these things with thy self; I am
verily persuaded, that the chiefest cause why there is so much deadness in
those that belong unto Christ, is, because they consider not their ways. Take
time therefore to consider thy ways. It is no wonder to see men complaining of
their weakness, when as they will not labor to keep a good conscience; it is
all one as if a sluggard should complain of his poverty, or an idle scholar
should complain of his ignorance. Be exhorted therefore to prize the peace of
conscience, spend the chiefest of your cares for it; what if you loose some few
other things, so you get that, they are all nothing in comparison to that; but
the common fashion now is to spend but a little time in such things as these
are, and so think that enough too.

This shows us the miserable condition of those that still lie in their
sins, it may be they think Use 2.
the burden thereof to be light, and account it not; but when the burden of
their sins shall be laid upon them, they will find to be intolerable; now
while the burden lies not on their shoulders they feel it not, but when God
shall once say, Let him bear the burden of his sins, we shall find them to
be unsupportable, even able to press us down to hell, as here they did Judas.
The common fashion of men is not to regard what sin they run into for the
escaping of some outward cross, thinking that to be the greater, but they
shall one day, to their cost, find the contrary, that these outward
punishments and losses are nothing in comparison to the inward; that as outward
cold and heat is nothing to the inward, the heat in summer is nothing to the
heat of the fever; so that these outward crosses are but as the heat in
summer; inward, like the heat of the feavor. But its a wonderful thing to see
how men, like little children, rejoice and tremble at appearances. Children cry
not at things to be feared, but at things not to be feared; as Hobgoblins, and
the like, they cry: so do men most commonly fear those things that are but
umbrae doloris; for outward evils are like the scabbard without the sword,
which cannotcut; they are only inward evils which are like a deep pit, out of
which we cannot be recovered. Set your hearts therefore in a right disposition
of judging of sin, that you may judge aright thereof as it is in it self;
labor to apprehend Gods wrath for sin, and beat down those lusts that like
mists hinder us from the sight thereof: Judge of sin as the Scripture judges
of it, for that is the true glass; judge of these outward things as they are;
see how you should judge of them in the day of death, and so judge of them now,
and by this means you shall foresee the plague, and prevent it.

Seeing then that sin is so unsupportable when Use 3.
once it is charged upon the conscience, this should teach us earnestly to sue
for pardon for it above all other things, if we mean to have it. It is now
become the fashion of the world to pray for the pardon of their sin in a
superficial manner; but such shall never obtain it, but only those that are
fervent in prayer for it: for God will be glorified of every man, both of the
unjust and just. 2. For the wicked, he will be glorified of them at the day of
Judgment, in their destruction. This is the meaning of that place, Rev. 1. 7.
Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also
which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wayle because of him.
But for his own servants, those that he calls he first wounds; he causes
them for to see their sins, and the pitiful case they are in by reason of
them; and then he causes them to see him in his Attributes of Love, Mercy and
Judgment; and makes them to sue unto him for pardon, as a man condemned, and
ready to be executed: and thus he is also glorified by them.

Seek therefore for the pardon of your sins; if you did but feel the
burden thereof a while, as Judas did, you would: if you cannot see your
sins, labor to see them.

Some may here say, How shall we do to get pardon? we desire it with all our
hearts. Quest.


Use a right method. Answ.


1. Labor to be humbled by the Law. 2. Labor to be comforted again by the
Gospel.
1. For the Law that must humble us.

1. By the declaration of the fault. 2. By the commination of punishment.
Which thou must apply unto thy self.

1. Thou must apply unto thy self the corruption of thy nature, by reason of
thy sins.

2. Thou must consider what thou have deserved for this thy sin: Thefirst
being as the Jury, that tells a man he is guilty; the second being as the Judge
that pronounces the sentence of death.

This is the way to be humbled, and so to come to sound repentance. Thus did
Paul with Foelix, Act. 24 25. He reasoned of temperance, righteousness, and
judgment to come.

1. He reasoned of Righteousness and Temperance; that is, he told him what
righteousness and temperance was required of them that should be saved.

2. He added judgment to come; that is, he threatened the terrors of the Law,
and so made himto tremble. So likewise let us do, first consider what
righteousness, temperance, purity and holiness is required of them that would
be saved; then in the second place considerthe judgment that is threatened if
we do not perform these things.

Now that we may the better see the fault,

1. Fasten thine eyes upon some particular gross sin, as suppose it be of
drunkenness, uncleanness, lying against the conscience; see if thou art
guilty of such sins first, as the woman of Samaria did by her adultery, Ioh. 4.
So David, when he had committed adultery, first he saw that, and the seeing
that, he came to see the corruption of his own nature: for it is a loud sound
that must first awaken a man, then being once awakened, he will hear lesser
sounds.

2. After thou have thus done, then consider the corruption of thy nature;
look on all the faculties of the soul, see how they are out of square; the
understanding is dulled, the conscience, when it should cry, then its still;
and when it should be still, then it cries; the memory ready to forget good
things, but prone to retain privy grudges toward our neighbors; the will will
do a thing when as the understanding tells it, that it is contrary to Gods will,
and therefore should not be done; and so likewise for the other affections; all
which when we have done, let us look on the straightness of the law, and the
crookednes of our lives, how short we come of doing that we should, and then
see what we have deserved for it.

2. This being done, let us comfort our selves with the Promises of the
Gospel, for grace can never truly be wrought, until by the Gospel we
believe, humiliation cannot do it: we must therefore know that God is exceeding
merciful more the^ we canimagin, and lay hold upon his love in Christ, by a
true faith.

Every man knows that God is merciful, but we are not fit for to receive his
mercy. Object.


I answer; you know not what mercy is; It may be thou think, if thou had
more repentance, or more Answ.
humiliation, then thou were fit for mercy; but thou art deceived, for the more
thy heart is out of order, the fitter thou art for mercy; for the greates thy
sin has bin, the more will his mercy be seen in the forgivenes thereof. And
therefore never look what your sins have been in time past, but see what your
purpose and resolution is for the time to come; and (which is the hardest thing
to do) labor to believe in Christ for the pardon of thy sins, and apply the
promises to thy self, for a sin is never soundly healed until we apply the
promises; for unless we apply the promises, we cannot truly delight in God,
and until we do truly delightin God we cannot hate sin, and think well of God
and goodness. And therefore, to conclude all, let us here be exhorted to labor
for faith above al things which daily will increase grace in us.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS SPIRITVALL STRENGTH.

Excellently and Amply set forth in three Doctrines drawn from EPHESIANS. 3. 16.
That he would grant you, etc.

By the late Reverend and learned Preacher, JOHN PRESTON, Dr. in Divinity,
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge,
and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes-Inne.

LONDON: Printed for Andrew Crook. 1634.

The Contents of the Saints Spiritual Strength.
DOCTRINE I. STrength in the inward man is to be desired above all things, of
every good Christian, page 66 A twofold strength: Natural: strength in mind p.
67 Supernatural, body. Supernatural strength proceeds 1. From the evil
spirit, to work evil, ibid. 2. From the sanctifying Spirit, to do good, p. 68
Spiritual strength consists in, 1 Bearing wrong patiently, ibid. 2 Thriving
under afflections, 3 Believing against Reason, The description of Spiritual
strength. p. 69 Of weakness, two kinds: 1. Of Grace. p. 70 2. Of Relapse.
ibid.
Of weakness, two degrees: 1. Sensible, in the will and affections. p. 71 2.
In the change of the heart. 1 General, in all parts of the soul. p. 72 2
Particular, in some parts weak, though generally strong. ibid.

Reasons of the Doctrine. I. Strength in the inward man fits us for many
employments. ibid. REAS. II. It brings most comfort: for, 1 It makes us dee all
things with facility. p. 73 2 It makes the soul healthy. ibid. 3 It brings
cheerfulness into the heart. p. 74 4 It brings plenty of all good to the
soul. ibid. 5 It strengthens against temptations. ibid.
USE. I. To reprove such as care not to get this spiritual strength. p. 75 Let
them consider, 1 The excellency of the inward man, fitting for great
employments. p. 76 2 By it they are made like unto the Image of God. p. 77 3 By
it they are enabled to do things Honorable to God. p. 78. Profitable to men. 4
It is an immortal soul they labor for. p. 79 Differences between the
natural and spiritual strength:
1. The spiritual strength goes further than the natural. p. 80 It inables a
man, 1 To see more. p. 81, 82. 2 To do more. 3 To judge better. 4 To increase
in all parts. II. It has another beginning, Gods Spirit; another end, Gods
glory. p. 83 III. It has a strong faith. p. 85 A double work of faith: 1 To
empty a man of all his own righteousness. 87 2 To stir up a desire after God
in Christ. ibid.
IV. It leads a man to the power of Godliness. p. 92 V. It is always joined
with reluctance of will. p. 93
USE. II. To exhort all men to labor for strength in the inward man. p. 95
Motives to persuade hereto, are, 1 Comfort lies most in the inward man. p. 96 2
It is pleasing to God. p. 99 3 It prospers the outward strength. p. 101 4 It is
the being of a man. p. 102
USE. III. To direct a man how he should get his inward man strengthened. p.
105 Means to strengthen the inward man, are, 1. Abounding in spiritual
knowledge. p. 107 2. Diligence in the use of the Means. p. 110 Rules to be
observed in using the Means. 1. To use all the means, p. 111 2. To perform
holy duties strongly, p. 112 3. To be constant in the use of the Means, p. 113
4. Not to depend on the means without God. ibid.

3. Laboring to get rectified Judgments. p. 114 Signs of a rectified
Judgment; 1 Constancy, 2 Strong affections to good, p. 115 3 Patience under
the Cross, p. 116 4 Hardness to be deceived with the things of the world, p.
117 5 Strength in the time of try all. p. 118
4. Removing excuses and hindrances. p. 119 Hindrances are, 1. The spending
strength upon other things, p. 121 2. Strong lusts and unmortifi'd affections,
ibid.
5. The getting spiritual courage and joy. p. 122 6. The getting a lively
faith. p. 124 7. The getting of the Spirit. p. 125
DOCT. II. ALL saving grace, or strength of grace a man has, proceeds from the
sanctifying spirit. p. 126 The Spirit strengthens the inward man: 1. By
infusing into the soul an effectual operative and powerful faculty, p. 128
2. By enabling the soul to doc more than it could by Nature, ibid. 3. By
putting new habits into the soul, p. 129 4. By giving efficacy and power to
the means of growth. p. 131
USE. I. To teach us, he that has not the holy Ghost, cannot have this
strength in the inward man. p. 132 Signs to know whether a man has the
Spirit, or no: 1. Fullness of zeal. p. 134 2. Doing more than Nature can. p.
141 Holiness. p. 143 3. Examination of the Means by which the Spirit came
into the heart. p. 144 You may know whether the Spirit was received by
Preaching of the Word. 1 By a deep humiliation that went before. p. 145 2 By a
through change in the soul. p. 146
4. Putting life into the soul. p. 149 'T is no true life, 1. If but the form
of godliness, p. 150 2. If not in a feeling manner, p. 151 3. If only for a
time. ibid.
5. By trying whether it be the Spirit of adoption, 153 6. Manner of working,
p. 154 7. Carriage of words and Actions, a man's conversation, p. 156
To do evil of set purpose, and to be forced unto evil unwillingly, is the
maine difference between the wicked and holy man. p. 157 USE II. To exhort us
above all things to seek the Spirit. p. 159 Benefits that come by having the
Spirit: 1 A good frame of grace in the heart. p. 160 2 An ability to believe
things he otherwise would not. p. 161 3 The breeding heavenly and spiritual
effects in the soul. p. 163
Holy affections do much advantage us, 1. Because we are the better men. p.
165 2. Because they are the means of good. p. 166 3. Because they enlarge the
soul. ibid. 4. Because they cleanse and change the heart.
DOCTR. III. THe Spirit is a free gift. p. 168. How said to be a free gift in
five particulars. p. 169 USE. To terrify those that be not sanctified by the
spirit, lest they be deprived. p. 170 Means to get the Spirit. I. Knowledge of
him. p. 171 Simon Magus, and some men, now commit the same sin in three
particulars. p. 172
II. Faith. p. 173 III. An earnest desire joined with Prayer. p. 174 IV.
Obedience. p. 176 V. Waiting on the Means.

THE SAINTS SPIRITVALL STRENGTH.
EPHESIANS. 3. 16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to
be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man.
THESE words are part and the sum of that Divine Prayer that Paul made for
the Ephesians: the principal thing that the Apostle prays for, is this, That
they may be strengthened by the Spirit in the Inward man: and this he sets
down in such a manner, that he answers all doubts that might hinder the
Ephesians from obtaining of this grace.

For first, they might demand this of Paul, you pray, That we might be strong
in the Inward man, but 1.
how shall we? or what means shall we use to get this strength? the Apostle
answers to this, and tells them, the means to be strong in the inward man is,
to get the Spirit, that you may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inward man.

Secondly, they might demand, I, but how shall we do to get the Spirit? the
Apostle answers to 2.
this, you must pray for him, for your selves, as I do for you: For, I pray
that he would grant you the Spirit, that you may be strengthened in the inward
man.

Thirdly, they might demand, but what should moove God to give us his Spirit,
and to hear our 3.
prayers? to this the Apostle answers, that the motive-cause is, the riches of
his glory, that he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, that
you may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inward man.

Fourthly, they might demand, I but what shall we be the better for this
strength if we get it? to 4.
this the Apostle answers in the verses following, then says he, You shall be
able to comprehend with all the Saints, what is the length, and the height, the
depth, and the breadth of the riches of the love of God toward you in Christ,
Now in that the Apostle above all other good things that he wishes unto them,
prays for this, That they may be strengthened by the Spirit in the Inward man,
I gather this point.

That which is to be desired of every Christian Doctrine.
and to be sought for above all things, is this, that he may be strongthened in
the inward man. I gather it ^^^r it thus. Paul was now to pray for some good to
the Ephesians, and considering what might be most profitable for them, he
makes choice of this above all other good things, making it the sum, and
substance of his prayer, that they may be strengthened by the Spirit in the
inward man: I shall not need to prove it by any other place of Scripture,
because this in hand sufficiently proves the point, as being the maine scope
and intent of the Spirit in this place, to show the necessity of this doctrine
of strengthening the inward man. But for the more fuller explaining of this
point, we will first show you what this strength is, and then we will come What
this strength is.
to the uses.

There is therefore a twofold strength: First, there is a natural strength:
Secondly, there is a supernatural strength. First, I say there is a natural
strength, and this is when a man is naturally 1.
strong either in the parts of his body, or in the gifts of his mind: as for
example a strong memory in a man, that is a natural strength; and so other
qualities of the mind: so likewise when a man is strong in the parts of his
body, as in his arms or legs or neck, these are natural strengthes, but
this is not the strength, that is here meant. Secondly, 2.
there is a supernatural strength, and this is twofold, the first is a
supernatural strength, which is received from the evil spirit, that is, when
Satan 1.
shall join with the spirit of a man to do evil, then he adds a
supernatural strength, and so makes him to do more or suffer more then
otherwise by nature he is able to do: with this spirit are all the enemies of
the Church strengthened withal. Paul himself before he was converted was thus
strengthened: and so was he that killed the French King, he had more then a
natural strength to undergo all those torments, and not to shrink at them:
but this is not the strength here meant; but there is (2.) a supernatural
strength, and this is that strength which comes from the 2.
sanctifying spirit whereby a Christian is able to do more then naturally he
could do, and this is the strength, that is here meant in this place, and with
this strength all the Saints are strengthened withal. This was the strength
that Eliah, Stephen, John Baptist, and the Apostles had: this made them speak
boldly in the name of Christ.

But you shall the better understand what this Particulars of this strength.
strength is, if you do but consider the particulars of it which are these:
the first particular in which The first particular. Bear wrong patiently.
this spiritual strength is seen is this, if a man can bear any wrong
patiently without seeking revenge any way, it is a sign that they are
spiritually strong: the second particular, wherein this spiritual The second
particular. Thrive under any affliction.
strength is seen is this, if a man can thrive under many afflictions
rejoicing under them, he has this this strength: as in the Acts 5 41. it is
said of the Acts 5. 41.
Apostles that they departed from the Council rejoicing that they were thought
worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ: he that can bear some
troubles has some strength, but to bear great troubles is required great
strength, that is, to stand fast to Christ to profess his name there (as the
holy Ghost says in Revelation 2. verse. 13.) where Satan has his throne must
needs be a great supernatural work of the spirit: the The third particular.
To believe.
third particular wherein this spiritual strength is seen, is this, If a man
can believe though he has all reason and strength of reason against him, or
if a man can do all things of knowledge, this is to be strong in the inward
man. But to go further, that you may the better know what this strength is, I
will give you a description of it, that is, I will describe what the strength
of the inward man is more fully. First, I say it is a general Description of
spiritual strength.
good disposition or right habit, temperature, or frame of the mind, whereby
it is able to please God in all things. I say it is a general good disposition
or right habit, because, if it be only in some particulers, and that at
sometime only, it is not strength: as for example, to have a passion to good,
and not to continue argues not strength in the inward man: or to have the
understanding strong, and yet to have the will and affections weak to good, is
not to be strong in the inward man; but they must be all strong: as for
example, a man or a woman is not said to be perfectly beautiful, except they
be beautiful in all parts, for beauty is required in all parts; so likewise a
man is not thoroughly strong, but imperfectly, except he be strong in all
parts: strong in the understanding, strong in the will, strong in the
affections, etc. Secondly, I call it a temperature or right frame of the mind,
because it sets the soul 2.
in order, that is, it sets a new habit on the faculties, and fixes the soul
on fit objects for these habits: the soul was before like a disordered clock
that went at random, every thing was out of its place, but when the strength
of the inward man comes into the soul, it frames it anew, and puts it into a
right temper again. Thirdly, I say, whereby a man is able to please God in all
things, 3.
because it sets a good hew upon all our actions: for as Varnish makes all
Colors fresh: so does the Inward man, it sets a deep dye upon all our
actions; a glass upon them, and makes them beautiful: nothing without it will
hold trial: every thing that has the tincture of the inward man upon it, will
hold good: this sets the stamp of holiness upon them: and therefore they are
acceptable to God.

Now that you may know the better what this strength is, you must first labor
to know what weakness is: by weakness I do not mean weakness before a man
be converted, for that cannot properly be called weakness, but wickedness:
and therefore know that this weakness, which I speak of here, which is proper
unto Christians, is of two sorts; The first is weakness of grace, as in the 1
Cor. 3. 1. I speak unto you as unto babes in Christ, 1.
that is, as to those that are weak in knowledge, 1 Cor. 3. 5.
babes. The second kind of weakness is this, 2.
when one, that has been strong is new fallen sick, and weak into a
consumption of grace that he cannot use grace, and his strength, so as
formerly he could: now they who are weak in the first sort of weakness, grow
strong; but they who are weak in the second sort, grow weaker and weaker:
therefore if there be any here that are such, that has once truly loved God
and his Kingdom, but now is fallen unto the love of the world, that once was
lively and quick to good, but is now backward and cold, my Counsel to them
shall be the same which Christ gives unto the Church of Ephesus, Revelation 2.
v. 5. to remember and repent, and to do their first works, lest their
Candle-sticke be taken from them; let them remember what they were in times
past, and what they are now, and then let them humble themselves and turn
again into the right way and be ashamed of themselves, that they run so
far away from Christ; and that in time, lest their Candlestick be taken away
from them, lest these opportunites to good, and the offer of grace be taken
from them.

Again as there are kinds of weakness, so there are degrees of weakness.
As touching that kind of weakness that follows upon a relapse, (to speak of
this first,) there are two degrees of this. First, sensible: Secondly,
unsensible. First, I say, 1.
sensible, and that is when the understanding is 2.
good, but the will and affections are desperately 1.
wicked: the understanding, I say, is good in regard of the good it knows,
whereby the weakness that is in our wills and affections becomes sensible unto
us. Secondly, there is a weakness, unsensible, and that is such as cannot be
felt, and 2.
this is when men change their opinions of sin, when they have thought
otherwise of it then now they do: as for example; before, they thought every
sin a great sin, but now little or none at all: Now as touching that
weakness, which follows upon the new birth, there are two degrees likewise
of this; the first is general, the second particular: The first is a general
weakness, and that is when the Judgment, will, and affections are 1.
all weak. When a man is weak in all the whole parts of the soul: The second
degree, is a particular weakness, and that is when a man is generally 2.
strong and yet weak in some parts; as for example, a ship may be strongly
built or generally strong, and yet having a leake in it cannot be said to be
strong in all parts, because it has that leake; that is a weakness in one
part of it: so the soul may be generally strong, and yet weak in some
particular: therefore a man must take heed of all particular weaknesses. Now by
way of opposition unto these weaknesses you may conceive of inward strength.
But to come unto the reasons wherefore we should strengthen the Inward man; and
they are these.

The first reason wherefore you should be strong Reason. 1.
in the Inward man is this, because it will fit you for many employments, it
will make us go through much work with great ease, to perform the weightiest
duties of Religion in such manner as otherwise we could never be able to do,
and this should persuade men the rather, because God rewards men according to
their works: it is not riches, beauty, honor, or dignity that prevail with
God in his giving the reward, but according to our works so shall his reward
be. And this reason should make men to haste to get into Christ, because the
longer they are in Christ, the stronger they are in the Inward man.

The second reason wherefore you should desire to be strong in the Inward man
is this, because it Reason 2.
brings most comfort and cheerfulness into the soul. (1) Because it makes us
do all that we do with facility and easiness, so that that which we 1.
do is easy unto us; as for example, a man that is weak in Judgment and
weak in understanding, any high point of religion is weariness unto him,
because he wants a capacity to conceive: now that which is not rightly
conceived or understood, we have little or no comfort or delight in it, but it
is irkesomenesse and weariness unto our nature: whereas the same things unto a
man that is of a larger capacity are easy unto him and he delights in them
(2.) The more strength a man has in the Inward man, the more health he has in
his 2.
soul, for as it is in the body, the more natural strength, the more health;
so in the soul, the more strength in the inward man, the more healthful in
grace (3.) It brings the more cheerfulness into the heart, because it brings
Christ and God 3.
thither, who is the God of all comfort and consolation, as the Apostle calls
him there. For that must needs be the best thing in the world to be strong in
the inward man; and the joyfullest heart, that has his inhabiting with God,
and Christ. (4.) Because it brings sufficiency and plenty of all good into the
soul, and we say, that if a man has 4.
a good outward estate, he is like to hold out if a famine should come; so it
is with a Christian if he be strong in the inward man, though a famine should
come, he is likely to hold out and keep that which he has: but on the
contrary, when a man is poor in the inward man (as it is with a body that is
weak) every thing that it has is ready to be taken away. But as a bowl that
has a byas, the strength of the arm takes away the byas, so strength in the
Inward man takes away the byas of shame and reproach, which otherwise would
draw us to despair, and makes us to go on stoutly and to bear afflictions
strongly; babes you know cannot bear that which a strong man can, neither are
they able to hold out in any thing as a strong man is able. Therefore that you
may hold out, labor to be strong in the Inward man, (5.) because it
strengthens a man against temptations, and 5.
therefore the Apostle says, Be steadfast and unmooveable, for it makes us to
stand fast in Christ, so that nothing shall break us off from Christ; neither
temptation, nor affliction, nor reproach. Contrary, what is the reason that
temptations press men so sore as they do, but because they are not careful
to grow more strong in the inward man.

This shows how they are to be blamed, that Use 1.
seek this strength least of all, or not at all; for let us look upon men,
and we shall see how busy they are, to get the riches and honor, and pleasure
of the body; but few or none regarding this strength which is the riches, and
honor, and pleasure of the soul: for the health, beauty, and strength of the
outward man, all take great care, spend much time about them, much labor in
them, to add any thing unto them; but for the beauty of the Inward man, they
care not for that, they respect not that: All their care is, for their backs
and bellies, still regarding the things that may raise their outward estate,
but never minding the strengthening of the inward man; which will appear more
plainly by this. Ask but such men why they do not pray, or hear, or receive
the Sacrament oftener then they do: to this you shall hear them answer, that
they cannot for businesses; they have great employments in the world, and they
must not neglect them, to do such and such things; as if the inward man were
neither worth the getting or having. And yet these men will be as good men as
the best.

Again, see it in your selves: This day is appointed for the strengthening of
the inward man, but how do you neglect it, how often were you in prayer, and
holy meditation before, or how often since have you seriously considered on the
things that you have heard, or how have you cast aside your occasions of
businesses in your callings, or whether be they not now fresh in your memories:
nay, do not your hearts run after them, even now when I am persuading you to
the contrary; If they be, whatsoever you say of your selves, you have not the
care you ought to have, to grow strong in the Inward man. And yet that you may
see, that you have good reason to strengthen the inward man;

First, you old men, consider you and bethink with your selves, how soon your
inward man may 1.
be thrown out of doors. Therefore you have great cause to strengthen it, and
grow strong in it.

Secondly, you young men, as for you, you have need to strengthen the inward
man, because 2.
as there is a time of springing and growing strong for you in the inward man,
so there is a time of not springing, that is, when you will have much to do to
keep that which you have, without increasing of it; therefore whilst the time
is, take heed of neglecting the time; It is no rule to be followed, That God
calls at all times, for thou know not whether he will call thee and therefore
do thou labor to grow strong in the inward man, and to persuade you the more
consider these particulars.

1. Consider the excellency of the inward man that 1.
it will fit you for great imployme^rs; as for example, it will make you to see
God in his holiness and to converse with God, and to have such a holy
familiarity with Him, as will joy the soul: this will bring you so acquainted
with God, that you will be esteemed of him as one of his familiars: therefore
this should persuade you to strengthen the inward man.

Secondly consider, that you are to be made like 2.
unto the Image of God, if you will be saved; but this cannot be, except you
strengthen the Inward man, and therefore the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 1. As he
that has called you is holy, so be you holy in all manner of conversation:
that is, seeing you are called unto such a high place, as to be the sons of
God by grace, what a base thing is it for you to stoop unto base things? what
a base thing were it that an Eagle should stoop at flies? And although it is
unseemely in that creature, yet men do the like, and are not ashamed: men will
stoop to the world, and will be any man's vassal, and be any thing what any
would have them to be, if it may but enlarge their outward estate. But beloved
there is a great loss and baseness in it: for what is Gold, or honor, or
pleasure to Christ, grace, and holiness? In every thing wherein there is
loss, it grieves and pains us: we grieve when we see Wheat given unto Hogs,
which would be man's meat: we grieve when we set up a fair building, on
which we have bestowed much cost and labor, and then to have Iim, and Chim to
dwell therein, and not our selves: And if we be subject to grieve for these
things, then how much more have we cause to grieve, when we see men give
themselves unto their lusts, that is, they give their souls to be a harbor
for their lusts, which ought to be a Temple for the holy Ghost.

Thirdly, consider that it is the inward man that enables a man to do those
things that are honorable 3.
unto God and profitable unto men; no man can truly honor God that does it
not by the strength of the inward man; neither can any man truly be said to
profit another, except what he does, flows from the inward man unto him,
therefore the Apostle says, Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things above,
and not on things below: but Satan comes and robs us of all the good that
otherwise we might do: and first he robs us of our selves, by stealing from
us the strength of the inward man: and then secondly, he robs our parents of
us, making us the objects of their grief: and thirdly, he robs the Church, and
Commonwealth of us, by making us unprofitable instruments? and beloved, if you
look into the world, you shall find it true; as for example, look unto young
men, they are busied in eating and drinking, and rising up to play, but never
regard at all the strengthening of the inward man; whereby they may become
profitable unto all. When the soul is unto some, but as salt is unto meat,
only to keep it from Putrefaction: and the body, that is put into the souls
place: but what is the reason we put it thus, does not this prove that true,
which Solomon says, I have seen servants ride, and Masters go afoote. When
you employ your selves and spend your time and pains in getting of outward
dignity, in decking the outward man, and little regard the beautifying of the
inward man, you prefer dross before Gold, Copper before Silver: you set the
body in the souls place, you set the servant on horseback, but the Master
must go on foot; in a word, you do not things like or beseeming Christians,
and on the contrary you do things like your selves, when you prefer the
inward man first.

Fourthly, consider that it is an immortal soul: why do you labor for the
meat that perishes, in the John 6. 27.
use of it; that is, why do you dote upon the outward man that perishes in
the getting, which perishes in the using, that will stand you in no stead if
you keep it? and why do you not rather labor for the meat that perishes
not? why do you not labor to get the strength of the inward man which is of
an immortal substance that will never fade nor perish in the use: you have
built a Temple here, which is in it self a good work, but I say, except you
build also in your souls the Temple of the inward man, all your labor, all
your pains and all your cost is but lost labor: it will perish and stand you
in no stead when you shall need it. And this is one maine drift of the
Scripture to show you the vanity of earthly things, that you should not set
your affections upon them, because they perish in the use, and that you should
not lay out money for that which profits not, as the Prophet speaks.
Consider therefore that it is a spirit, and again borne and infused into this
body to bear rule there, and the body to be but a servant to the inward man.
But that you be not deceived, there is a natural strength whereby some men
will go very far, and there is a moral strength, and yet take heed you rest
not in that: not that I speak against natural strength, because it comes from
God and is good. For I say, we do not take away those affections, but we alter
and change them, and therefore I beseech you look that you do not content
your selves with them, but labor to strengthen the Inward man. And here a
question arises, seeing that there is a natural and spiritual strength, how
shall a man come to know whether the strength which he has, be a natural,
moral, or spiritual strength: yet as I said, we do not destroy natural
strength, but we use it as men do wild Horses and beasts, they tame them, to
make them fit for service; so we should use these as means to carry us unto
their right ends. We will therefore come to show the differences betwixt the
natural and spiritual strength.

The first difference is this, The spiritual strength 1. Difference.
goes further then the natural strength. Look what the natural man with the
natural strength can do, the spiritual man can do more, he can go further
both in degree and measure: and the reason is, because grace elevates nature,
it brings it unto a higher pitch; grace is unto the soul as a prospective
glass is unto the body, it brings that which is a far off, to be as it were
nigh at hand, it turns a man to see things in a more excellent manner: for as
water that is elevated by fire, so is he that has this strength; that is, he
is abler to do more then a natural strength can do: this was that which made
a difference between Sampson and other men, he had a natural strength, and he
had another strength to do more then another man could do: and that this
strength does go further then a natural strength, we will prove by these
particulars. First, the spiritual strength enables you to see more, and to
prize grace more; 1.
the natural strength shows you something in your journey, but it shows you
not unto the end of your journey; whereas the sight that the inward man brings
unto the soul, adds unto it Jeremy 31. 34. Then shall ye know me; that is:
Iere. 31. 34.
they knew me before, but now they shall know me in another manner then
before: grace presents things unto the soul in another hue. Secondly, in
performances: all natural strength leads a man but unto a form of godliness,
but this strength gives a man power and ability to do good. Labor,
therefore, labor for this strength that your hearts may be in such a frame of
godliness, that you may do Gods will in earth as the Angels do it in heaven,
which the carnal man will never do: he that has not this strength, he will
never labor to please God after that manner, because he cares not for grace
if he can but escape hell, but the spiritual man will not be contented to have
the pardon of sin, except he may have grace and holiness too. Thirdly, it
inables 3.
him to go further in Judgment, the natural man he cares not, if he can get
but just so much holiness as will bring him to heaven; but the spiritual man
will not be contented with any answer; but it is with the spiritual man as it
is with the Sun; the cleerest Sunshine shows the most motes; the cleerest
glass the best; and best water is next the fountain; even so when the
spiritual man is strong in the inward man, it sees the more motes and bracks
in the spiritual strength, and labors for more strength against weaknesses,
which a natural man cannot conceive of, as 1 Pet. 4. 4. They think it strange
that you run not with 1 Pet. 4. 4. 5.
them into the same excess of riot; they know not the reason, or they cannot
conceive what should keep you from loving such and such vices which they love:
like blind men, they hear the pipe, but they see not the persons that dance,
so they hear the pipe, but they see not the rule by which the spiritual man
goes; as a countryman that comes and sees a man drawing the Geometricians
line, he marvels what he means to spend his time about such a thing, when as
he that draws it knows that it is of a great use: Fourthly, in degree, that
is, in the generality of the 4.
growth, when you grow in every part proportionably: a natural man may grow in
some parts, but not in all parts; as for example, he may have a large capacity
of knowledge in divine Truths, yet he has but weak affections to God: or it
may be his affections are strong, but his Judgment is weak: or it may be he
is strong in both, that is, he knows the good, and after his manner of loving,
he loves the good: but yet there is such weakness in the will, that he will not
yield any true obedience unto God: but it is not thus in the spiritual
strength, that is, in the growth of the inward man, for that leads him unto all
growth in all parts: now in the natural growth, we say, it is not a proper
augmentation, except there be a growth in all parts: as for example, if a man
should grow in one member, and not in another, as in the arm, not in the
leg, we would not say that it were a growth, but a disease, and that many
humors of the body were met together in his arm, and that it were rather a
sign that it should be cut off from the body, then a help unto the rest of
the body; even so the growth in any part of the soul, if it be not
universal, rather hurts then helps, that is, it rather shows a disease in
the soul, then the health of the soul: but the true spiritual strength, that
grows in all parts: so much for the first difference.

The second difference is in the beginning and ending of that strength: it has
another Alpha 2. Difference.
and Omega: for the strength of the spiritual man is wrought by the Spirit and
Word of God; as thus, the principles of religion being taught him out of Gods
Word, hence there is a spiritual strength conveyed into the soul, for I say,
no man can receive the spirit of this spiritual strength, but by the Gospel,
therefore consider what the goodness is that you have, and how you came by it,
whether it came by the Gospel or no, if it did you shall know it by these
particulars. First, examine whether ever you were humbled: that is, 1.
examine whether by the preaching of the law, you have had such a sight of
sin, that has broken your hearts; if thus in the first place you came by it,
it is a sign that it is the true strength, for this is the first work of the
Spirit, when it comes to change the heart of a Christian, and to make him a new
Creature; First, thoroughly to humble him; Secondly, examine whether there has
followed a comfortable assurance of Gods love in 2.
Christ, which has not only wrought Joy and comfort against the former fear,
but also a longing desire after Christ, and holiness, therefore if the
holiness that is in you be thoroughly wrought, it does proceed from the Spirit,
for this orderly proceeding of the Spirit does make it manifest, but as for the
natural strength, it has not such a beginning, it is not wholly wrought by
the Word, it may be he has been a little humbled and comforted by the Word,
but it is not thoroughly and soundly wrought by the same Word: but is a mere
habitual strength of nature picked out of observations and examples. Again as
the spiritual strength has a different beginning, so it has a different end:
the end of them are as far (if not further) differing as their beginnings:
for as the holiness that is in a Holy Man, arises from a higher Wellhead, so
it leads a man to a more nobler end then the natural strength: for the end of
the spiritual man's strength is Gods glory, that he may yield better obedience
unto God, that he may keep truth with him and keep in with him that he may
have more familiarity with him and more confidence and boldness in prayer; in
a word, that he may be fit for every good work: But the end of the natural
strength, is his own ends, his own profit and pleasure, and his own good;
for as the rise of any thing is higher, so the end is higher, as for example:
water is lift upon the top of some Mountain, or high place because it may go
further, then if it were not: so when a man is strong in the inward man, he is
set up higher for another end, and that is to please God, and not himself, and
thus much for the second difference.

The third difference is this, he that is spirituallystrong, is strong in
faith. The strength of the inward 3. Difference.
man is faith: but the strength of the outward man is but moral strength, an
habitual strength of nature: it is faith that gives strength: a man is not a
strong man in Christ, or in the inward man that has not a strong faith. Strong
faith makes a man or woman strong: that is, it is that which makes a difference
between a spiritual man, and a natural man: for as reason makes a difference
between men and beasts, so faith makes a difference between a holy man, and a
wicked man: as for example, take a Philosopher that does excel in other
things, as in humane knowledge: such go beyond other men, yet in matters of
faith and believing, they are as blind as beetles; and the reason is this, the
one sees and does all things by faith, but the other only by the light of
nature and this is the same that the Apostle speaks of in Hebr. 11. of weak
they became strong, that is, because they had faith, and Heb. 11. 34.
were strong in the faith, and trusted and believed, and hoped in God,
therefore they became strong, they did that which other men could not do that
wanted faith. Sisera might do as great things as Gideon; but here is the
difference, Gideon does them all out of Faith, but the other does them but from
nature, and so Socrates may in worldly things, be as wise as Paul, that is, as
wise in understanding, and in policy by reason of excellent outward parts as
Paul: but here is the difference, Paul does all things out of faith, but
Socrates does not: therefore the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 4. 10. We are strong
because we stand in God: that is, we have a strong 1 Timothy 4. 10.
faith in God, and that makes us to withstand all the assaults of men and
devils. I say, this is that which makes a difference betwixt us and the men of
the world. Diogenes may trample under his feet the things of the world as well
as Moses, but Moses by faith chose rather the one then the other, Hebr. 11. 24.
Faith in Christ made him to choose grace before the things of the world: but it
was Heb. 11. 24.
not thus with the other, his contempt of earthly things, was not out of faith,
as Moses was, who had respect unto Gods Commandment, and to his promise; for
then and not till then is a man spiritually strong, when he will let life and
riches, and honor, and pleasure, and liberty, and all go for Christ: the
natural man will never do this, this is the only property of faith, a
supernatural work, and change in the soul, and therefore the holy Ghost
says, they suffered with patience the spoiling of their goods, that is, they
let them willingly go; life and liberty and all shall go ere Christ shall
go. A noble Roman may do something for his country, and for himself but
there is a by-end in it, he does it not in a right manner unto a right end, but
the spiritual strong man does all things in a spiritual manner unto a saving
end, the one does it for vain glory, but the other in uprightness of heart:
for there is a double work of faith. First, it empties a man, as a man that
has 1.
his handful cannot take another thing till he let his handful fall, so when
faith enters into the heart of a man, it empties the heart of self love, of
self will: it purges out the old rubbish, that is naturally in every man's
heart, and lets all go to get hold on Christ, all shall go then, life, and
honor, and profit, and pleasure, and he is the truly spiritual man that can
thus loose the world to cleave to Christ, and miserable are they that cannot.
Secondly, as it empties the heart of that which may keep Christ out of the
soul: so in 2.
the second place he seeks all things in God, and from God, that is, he first
seeks Gods love, and Gods blessing upon what he does enjoy, and then he goes
unto secondary means, and uses them as helps: but a man that wants faith,
he will not let all go for Christ, he will not seek first unto God in any
thing, but unto secondary means, and then if he fail, that is, want power to
supply, then it may be he will seek unto God: and hence it is, that he will
not loose his life, or liberty, or honor for Christ; because he sees more
power and good in the creature then in God. Again, this makes the difference
between Christian and Christian, namely faith, and hence it is, that some are
weak, and others are strong; hence it is that some are more able then others
for the greatest duties of Reiigion: as for example, Caleb and Joshua can do
more then the rest of the people, and what is the reason, but because they were
stronger in the faith then others, and so Paul said of himself, that he could
do more then they all, because Paul had a stronger faith: For the truth of a
man's strength, is known by his strength of faith that he has, whether he be
naturally strong, or spiritually strong, for this is the first work of the
Spirit after the humiliation of him in the conversion of a sinner, namely, to
work faith in him; and no sooner faith, but as soon by degrees, strength, and
then the promise follows faith, He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. and this is the
course Mark 16. 16.
that we take in preaching: first we Preach the Law unto you, and we do it
to this end to humble you, and to break the hard disposition of your hearts,
that so they may be fit to receive Christ, and when we have thoroughly humbled
you then we preach unto you the Gospel, beseeching and persuading you to
believe in Christ, for the pardon of sins past, present, and to come; and to
lay down the arms of rebellion which you have taken up against Christ and you
shall be saved, but yet notwithstanding, you are neither humbled by the one,
nor persuaded and provoked by the other, but are as the Prophet says, You have
eyes and see not, you have ears but you hear not, seeing you do not see, and
hearing you do not hear; as for example, when a man is showed a thing, but
yet he minds it not, when the eye of the mind is upon another object, that
man may be said to see and not to see, because he does not regard it, or a man
that has a matter come before him, he hears it, but his mind being otherwise
employed he regards it not, in which regard he may be said to hear and not to
hear, because he minds it not. And what is the reason that though we preach
the Law and the Judgments of God so much unto you, beseech and persuade you so
often to come in and receive Christ and you shall be saved, time after time,
day after day, yet we see no reformation at all? what is the reason that the
word wants this effect in you, as to humble you, and that you are no more
affrighted with the Judgments of God then you are, and that you remain as
ignorant and careless as ever you were, the reason is, because you do not
believe: you want a true saving and applying faith, for if you had that, the
word would work other effects in you, then it does. If one should tell a man
that such or such a benefit or legacy is befalne him, that would raise him
unto great honor, though before he lived but in a mean condition, now if
this man did but believe it, then surely he would rejoice. Truly so, if you did
but believe that Christ, and grace, and salvation were so excellent, and that
holiness and the strengthening of the inward man, would bring you unto so happy
a condition and estate as to be the heirs of heaven, you would rejoice in
Christ and grace only. Again, if you did believe that the Word of God is true,
and that God is a just God: if the drunkard did but believe that drunkards
shall be damned; or if the Adulterer did but believe that no adulterer should
inherit the Kingdom of God and Christ; or if the profane person and the
gamester, did but believe that they must give account for all their misspent
time and idle words, and vain communication, they would not sport themselves
in their sins as they do. Again, if men did but believe that God calls,
whom and when he lists, and that many are called, but few are chosen, that is,
here is a Church full, but it may be but a few of you shall be saved; I say, if
men did but believe this, they would not surely defer their repentance, they
would not put off the motions of the Spirit, but they would strik whilst the
iron is hot, and grind whilst the wind blows, but men will not believe, and
therefore it is that they go on in sin as they do: It is not so for earthly
things, men are easily brought to believe any promise of them: as for example,
if one should come and tell a man of a commodity, which if he would but buy
and lay by him, it would in a short time yield a hundred for one; oh how ready
will men be, to buy such a commodity with the wise Merchant, Mat. 8. 44. They
would sell all that ever they had to buy this: oh that men would be but thus wise
for their souls: beloved I tell you this day of a commodity, the best, the
richest, the profitablest commodity that ever was bought, even Christ and
grace, and salvation; which if you will but lay out your stock of grace to buy
him, you shall have him, that is, if you have but a desire to receive Christ,
and lay him up in your hearts, I tell you it will yield you a hundred for one.
Nay, Christ the commodity himself says, in Mark 10. He that for saketh
father and mother, and wife, and children, and life for my sake, shall Mark
10. 29, 30.
receive a thousand-fold in the life to come: but men will not believe it, but
a time will come when you shall see it to be true: and befoole your selves,
that you lost so precious a bargain as Christ and salvation is, for the
disbursing of a little profit and pleasure, but as I said before, the
difference lies here, men want faith, and hence it is, that they neglect the
strengthening of the inward man, and are so over-burthened with losses and
crosses, because they want faith; And so much for the third difference.

The fourth difference is this, the natural strength leads a man but unto a
form of godliness, 4. Difference.
but the spiritual strength leads a man unto the power of godliness: I call
that the form of godliness, when a man does perform, or do any thing with
carnal affections not to a right end, and this is known by this, when they
fall away from that steadfastness, or form and show of holiness that they
seemed to have: this form of godliness is the same with that in Heb. 6. A
tasting of the Word of life, and yet notwithstanding fall away: they seemed to
have tasted of saving grace, and to have the power with the form, but it was
not so, because they continued not: they lost that form which made them seem
to be that which now it appears they were not. Again, I call that the power
of godliness which is performed by the divine power, force and efficacy of the
Spirit. Romans 2. 14. it is said, that the Gentiles, that were Romans 2. 14.
not under the law, did by nature the things contained in the law: that is,
they did it by the efficacy and power of nature. Semblable unto this is that of
the same Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 3. in the latter time men shall come in a form of
godliness, that 2 Timothy 2. 3.
is, with a form in show without substance or power of the Spirit: but the
inward strength which is the inward man does not only teach you to do, but
also it teaches you how to do them; but men that have but a common strength,
have some bubles to good and they seem to have this strength because they have
the law of nature written in their hearts and they may promise much and yet he
is not spiritually strong, because he cannot do spiritual actions in a
spiritual manner, for he goes about that with a natural strength which
should be performed with a spiritual strength, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by
the power of God through faith, unto salvation: when a 1 Pet. 1. 5.
man is truly regenerated when he has not power of his own to do the Will
of God, then he has the spirit to help him, that is, they are not only kept
by the power from evil, but also they are enabled to do good by it.

The fifth difference betwixt the natural and spiritual strength, is this,
that which proceeds 5. Difference.
from the spirit is always joined with reluctance of the will, but in the
natural strength there, as no reluctance, because there is no contraries, but
in the spiritual man there is two contraries, the flesh, and the spirit, and
you know these can never agree, but they are still opposing one another as for
example, a man that is going up a hill, he is in labor and pain, but a man
that is going down a hill goes with much ease: so there is much labor and
pain, which a spiritual man takes to subdue the flesh, but the natural man
has no reluctance at all: he has no fighting and struggling with corruption,
but he goes without pain because he is but one, and one man cannot be divided
against it self, but in every spiritual man there are two men, the old man,
and the new man, the flesh and the spirit, and hence grows that spiritual
combat, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, that they cannot do the things that they would: these two
men in a regenerate man strive for masteries, and so hinder one the other. Yet
know also that in the natural man there may be reluctance in the will against
some particular sin, as covetousness may strive against pride, and pride
against nigardnesse, yet not fight against it as it is a sin, but as it
crosses and thwarteth his pride. Again, know that a natural man may have
reluctance in some part of the soul, as in the conscience, which is sensible
of sin; and hence it may convince the man and the rest of the faculties,
notwithstanding they are at peace: but where this spiritual strength is, it is
in all parts not one faculty against another but all are fighting against sin
in the whole man: now the reason that there is not this reluctance against
sin in every faculty in the natural man, is, because he wants saving grace;
grace is not in the faculty opposite unto the corruption that is in it: but in
the holy man there, is and therefore he is like Rebecka; they have two in them,
Jacob and Esau: the flesh and the spirit, and Paul complains of so much, Romans
7. I find another law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind,
that is, I find Romans 7. 23.
something in me that is contrary unto me: In my members, that is in my body
and soul, notwithstanding; first, I hate the evil of sin as being 1.
most contrary unto grace, but yet I cannot avoyde it, I cannot do the things
that I would: but the natural man does not hate the evil of sin otherwise
then as it brings punishment: Secondly, I delight in the Law of God in the
inward man, that 2.
is, howsoever I am violently carried unto the committing of sin, yet it is
against the desire of his soul, he has no pleasure, he can take no delight in
it for his delight is in the inward man: but the natural man takes Gods Laws
as burdens, and therefore he will not submit himself unto, them because he is
not strong in the inward man: he promises, but he performs not; he yields,
and yields not; he yields to something, but not to every thing: And thus much
for this last difference betwixt the natural strength and the spiritual
strength.

Is it so, that the strength of the inward man is to be desired above all
things, then as it was in the Use 2.
first place for reproof, so in the second place it may serve for exhortation
to all men, that they would labor to grow strong in the inward man, and that
they would now at last gather the fragments of their thoughts and desires which
have been formerly set to get other things, and now wholly employ them for the
getting of this strength, and so much the rather because other things are but
as the husk without the kernel, or as the scabberd without the sword, which
will do a man no good when he stands in need of them; as for example, to be
strong in riches and honor and credit, and (and yet this is all the strength
that most men desire) will do no good when ye come to wrestle with sin and
death. But for to be strong in the inward man who seeks or enquires after it?
I know you would be strong in all earthly strength: but I beseech you above all
things labor to be strong in the inward man. It is the folly, weakness, and
sickness of men, they look all without the doors, unto the strength of the
outward man, oh that I could but persuade you as I said before to gather the
rest of your thoughts and desires together and set the soul in a frame of
grace that you may mortify these inordinate affections which keep back the
strengthening of the inward man as covetousness, pride, pleasure, love of vain
glory, and the like; then it would be but an easy work and no burden unto
you to strengthen the inward man; but here men stick, the way is too narrow,
it is a hard matter to persuade men unto it, that there is such excellency in
the one and not in the other, that grace is the better part. Therefore that I
may the better prevail with you to strengthen the inward man, I will lay down
some motives to persuade you to it.

The first motive to move you to strengthen the inward man, is, because your
comfort lies most in 1. Motive.
the inward man: even all your comfort and therefore to strengthen that, is to
add unto your comfort: as for example, the Sun brings comfort with it
because it brings light, therefore the more light the more comfort, so the more
of the inward man you have, the more light and joy. Now the reason wherefore
the inward man brings the most comfort is, because it is the greater faculty,
and the greater the faculty is, the greater is either the joy or the sorrow, as
for example, take a man that is troubled in mind. None so humble, so penitent,
so sorrowful as he: and therefore it is said, that the Spirit of a man will
bear his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? a man may be able to
bear any outward trouble, but the grief of a troubled mind who can? on the
contrary take a man, that is at peace with God, who so joyful and comfortable
as he? now the outward man is the less faculty, and therefore it is capable of
the less comfort: it does not in any measure know what true comfort and joy
there is in the inward man: Again, what joy the outward man has in outward
things, it is but in the opinion of the inward man, they comfort no more, but
as they are esteemed of the inward man, if the inward do not esteem them as
worthy the rejoicing in, they will not bring comfort; Again, all the pains
and labor that you bestow on the outward man is but lost labor, that will
bring you no great advantage: but the strength of the inward man will arm you
against losses, and crosses, and reproach, that you shall meet withal in the
world, whilst you are in the way to heaven: Again, consider that though you
be strong in the outward man, yet you are moveable; subject to shaking and
fleeting; but it is otherwise with the inward man, it makes a Christian sted
fast and unmovable; it will so establish the heart in grace, that he will
stand firm unto Christ in all estates. It is with the outward man as it is
with the Seas, though the strength of the stream run one way, yet if the
wind blow contrary, it moves and stirs, and strives, and disquiets it: so
when losses, and crosses come, they break the frame and strength of the
outward man, but the inward man is like the dry ground, let the wind blow
never so violent, yet it moves not, it stands firm. Again, in the abundance
of outward things there is no true contentedness: Neither in the want of them,
where the strength of the inward man is, is there cause of dejectedness. This
we shall see in Adam and Paul: Adam though he was lord of all things, and had
the rule of all the creatures yet when he was weak in the inward man, what
joy had he, nay what fear had he not, when he hid himself in the Garden?
Again, look upon Paul in the want of these outward things, he is not dejected
at all, as in Acts 16. 25. it is said, that when Paul and Silas were in prison
in the stocks, the prison rung Acts 16. 25.
for joy: now what was the reason of it, but this because they were strong in
the inward man? And therefore you see that all true joy is that which comes
from grace within, and when you rejoice in that, your rejoicing is good, you
stand then upon a good bottom! Alas, you think to have contentment in your
riches, but you will be fooled by them: they will deceive you, if you build
upon them you will build without a foundation, and go upon another man's
legs: now were it not far better for you to get legs of your own, and
build upon a sure foundation? and this you shall do if you will strengthen the
inward man. Again consider, that if you do not strengthen the inward man, you
will have wicked thoughts in your hearts and evil actions in your hands; were
it not better to be strong in the inward man and to have holiness, and grace
in the heart? Let this therefore move you to strengthen the inward man, because
your comfort lies most in the inward man: Thus much for the first motive.

The second motive to moove you to strengthen the inward man, is this: if you
labor to strengthen 2. Motive.
the inward man, you shall thereby please God. If a man had never so much
strength, yet if it be not the strength of the inward man he cannot please
God, he cannot perform any holy duty, in such a holy manner as God will
approove of, and therefore the Prophet says, That God does not delight in any
man's legs. He cares not for any man's strength, be it never so great and
excellent, except it be the strength of the inward man, and on the contrary,
he regards the holy man with his strength, though outwardly weak, as in Esa.
56. 2. I will dwell with him that is of a Isaiah 56. 2.
contrite and humble spirit, he that is of a contrite spirit, he is
spiritually strong, and therefore I will dwell with him: now what is the
reason, that men seek so much the favor of Princes, but because they may be
exalted unto honor, then why should not you much more labor to be in favor,
and have familiarity with God, who is the King of kings, and Lord of lords,
who has power to exalt one, and pull down another; now if we could but bring
our hearts to believe this, that in strengthening of the inward man, we should
get and grow in favor with God, then men would be stirred up to set upon this
work: yet withal, you must know that by the strength of the inward man, you
do not please God by merit, for so Christ only, and none but Christ pleases
God: but when you strengthen the inward man you please God, by object, because
you choose grace and holiness, and his favor above all things: Merit was the
same argument which Christ used unto his Father, when he would have his Father
to glorify him, Ioh. 17. 4, 5. Father I have glorified thee on earth: I have
finished the work, etc. therefore, Ioh. 17. 4, 5.
Father, glorify me, that is, I have merited this at thy hands, that thou
should glorify me, because I have perfectly pleased thee in doing thy
will. But an argument drawn from the object, is that, which Christ uses to
his Disciples, Herein Ioh. 15. 8.
is my Father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit: when you grow strong
in the inward man, and can bring forth fruit agreeable unto his will you
please God: And therefore it is, that the Scripture sets forth the members of
Christ by the Olive tree, and by sweet oil, the one full of fatness, the
other full of sweetness; so the inward man makes a man fat, rich in grace and
oil, as the nature of it is, to cheer and beautify the countenance, so does
grace; it sweetens the soul, and makes it beautiful unto God: Therefore let
this moove you to strengthen the inward man, that thereby you may please God.

The third motive, to persuade you to strengthen the inward man, is this,
because this inward 3. Motive.
strength draws on the outward strength, that is, it makes the outward
strength more prosperous. Now who would not thrive in the things of the world?
but if you turn it, the contrary will not hold so, for the outward strength
will not draw on the inward strength; therefore our Savior says, Seek you
first the Kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and then all
things shall be added Matthew. 5. 33.
unto you; the way for you to thrive in the outward man is, first to get
strength in the inward man; Seek you first grace and Christ, and holiness:
and then the effect will follow, All things, that is, what you shall stand in
need of, shall be given you, and Esa. 48. 18. The Lord says, O that my people
had but a heart to consider, that is, oh Isai 48. 18.
that my people would but be wise; First, to strengthen the inward man, and
then as it follows, your prosperity should be as the floods, then your
outward strength and prosperity should abound like floods: again Prove. 22. 4.
The wise man says, that the reward of holiness is, riches, Prove. 22 4.
and honor, and life: he that is strong in the inward man, shall have
whatsoever may be necessary or good for the outward man: and therefore we
should strive to grow strong in the inward man, that is, to be full of grace
and wisdom, especially against evil days against they come, that when they
come we may have strength to bear them: now the inward man will bear a
mountain of afflictions and reproaches, which will press and squeese the
outward man to powder: The spirit of a man will bear his infirmities, but a
wounded conscience who can bear? If the inward man be weak, who can bear,
the burden of afflictions and the like, but if the inward man be strong then
the Will, will bear a part, and the affections will bear a part with the
conscience, and so the burden will be the lighter, but if you be not strong
in the inward man, it is unpossible that you should bear them: therefore let
us not busy our selves about fantasies, and vain things that will stand us in
no stead, but let us labor to strengthen the inward man.

The fourth motive, to persuade you to strengthen 4. Motive.
the inward man, is, because a man is that which he is, in the inward man, a
man without the inward man, is but as a scaberd without a sword, that is, worth
nothing, and therefore the wise man says, That the righteous man is more
excellent then his neighbor, the excellency wherein he does exceed him, is in
the inward man: and therefore Christ in the Canticles, when he would set forth
the excellency of his Spouse, he says, That she was fairer then the
daughters of men, she is fairer in regard that she is stronger in the inward
man, she is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. that is, the Psalm. 45. 13.
holy man does as far exceed the natural man in beauty, as pearls exceed
pible stones, or gold brass, or silver copper. I know any man does desire to
be in some excellency, I say, it is a property in nature to seek out some
excellency: then is it not the best wisdom to seek it in the best things in
the inward man? Now as there is means to be rich in the outward man, so there
is means to be rich in the inward man; therefore I beseech you, use the means
that you may be rich in grace and holiness, Prove. 30. 29, 30. the Wise man's
speech Prove. 30. 29, 30.
there, may serve to set forth the excellency of that man, that is strong in
the inward man: there are 4. things, says he, that are excellent, a Lion, a
He Goat, a Greyhound, and a King, before whom there is no standing. So he
that is strong in the inward man: First, he is as a Lion, that is, he is
strong in grace: Secondly, he is as a Gray hound, that is, he is swift in the
performance of all holy duties: Thirdly, he is as a He Goat, profitable to
God and the Church. Fourthly, he is as a King, to rule and overruled his base
affections and lusts. Every spiritual man is a King, because he bears rule in
the soul, but it is not so with a wicked man, his lusts rule him: he is a
slave and not a king, and therefore the Apostle says, Let not sin reign in
your bodies, to obey it in the lusts thereof. If it Romans 6. 12.
once reign it will rule, and if it rule you must obey, unto whatsoever
drudgery or slavery it enjoynes you: therefore labor to get strength in the
inward man, and know also, that you shall not only be free from the inward
slavery of sin, but also you shall keep your excellency, and therefore it
may be said of every one that is weak in the inward man, as Jacob said of
Reuben, Genesis 49. 12. thou art become as weak as water, as if he Genesis 49. 4.
should say, thou wast that which thou art not now: thou wast excellent, but
now thou have lost it. So I say unto you, if you lose the strength of the
inward man, you will lose your excellency: now no man would willingly lose his
excellency; if you would not then, you must keep strength in the inward man.
In the 1. Psalm, the Psalmist sets forth the excellency of that man that is
strong in the inward man, He shall be like a tree that is planted Psalm. 1. 3.
by the rivers of water. First, he sets forth the property of the spiritual
man, he shall be green. Secondly, his stabilitie, he shall be as a tree
planted, that is, which shall not easily be plucked up. Thirdly, his
perpetuity, his branches shall never wither, he shall never grow unseemely to
God. Fourthly, his fruitfulness, he shall bring forth fruit in season, that
is, he shall be fruitful in grace; but on the contrary, when a man grows
weak in the inward man, it will be far otherways with him, he will be like
a tree that has lost both sap and root, leaf and fruit, set in a barren
soil with withered branches, and fruitless, fit for nothing but the fire: but
if a man can keep his strength in the inward man, neither reproach, nor
disgrace, nor shame, nor the devil shall be able to make that man miserable.
Therefore keep the Image of the inward man safe, whatsoever becomes of the
outward man. And there is good reason why you should keep the inward man safe,
because it keeps the soul, and directs it unto its right end. In Eccles. 12.
the Wise man says, All things are vanity and vexation of spirit: when a man
loses his happiness in the inward man, though he keep the outward man
secure, yet it were but vanity and vexation of the spirit. For he goes
besides the rule he should go: there is a rule unto every creature that it is
to go by, and the nearer the creature comes unto the rule, the more excellent
is the creature; but if it goes besides the rule, it loses its excellency: as
for example, the fire and water are excellent creatures if they keep to their
rule, but if they exceed their rule, then they become hurtful: So the rule of
the soul is the inward man, that he grow in grace and holiness, and the
closer you keep to this, the more excellent you are: therefore that you may
keep your excellency, which you cannot do, except you strengthen the inward
man, let this moove you to do it.

In the third place, this may serve for direction Use 3.
for you may say unto me you have showed us what this inward man is, and the
differences betwixt the inward strength, and the outward strength and you have
also laid down motives to move us to strengthen the inward man, but alas, how
shall we strengthen the inward man: what means shall we use to do so? To
help you in this work I will lay down some means by the use of which you
may be strengthened: but before I come unto the particulars, it will not be
amiss to stand upon the general, and a little to persuade you, but to desire
to be strong; for if you could but bring your hearts unto this, but to desire
to be strengthened, it will be a great means to move you to prevail against
whatsoever may seem to hinder you from it; I say, if you did but desire it: if
you did but know the excellency of the inward man, it would work a holy desire
in you, and a true desire will let no means escape, that may further it. This
is the same means that Christ uses unto his Disciples, when he would have them
in love with Faith, if you had Faith, yea, but as much Faith as this grain of
Musterd seed, you should be able to remoove mountains: if you did but know the
excellency of this Grace of Faith, you would desire it, and if you did but
desire it, you would never rest till you get it: so if you did but prize grace,
and the inward man at a high rate you should be sure to have him: you know the
promise, Matthew. 5. 6. Blessed are they that hunger, and thirst after
rightcousnesse, for they Matthew. 5. 6.
shall be satisfied: therefore if you could but bring your hearts unto this
frame as to hunger after the inward man you should have him, or if you can but
bring your hearts unto this temper, as to desire him, or seek after the
strength of the inward man you should find him: Prou. 2. 4. If thou searchest
Prover. 2. 4.
for her, as for silver, and diggest for her as for hid treasure, then thou
shall find, etc. If you did but esteem the inward man, as men do silver, and
prize it as a rich treasure at a high rate, then the effect would follow, you
should find: so then, if you will desire salvation, and happiness, and the
strength of the inward man, you shall be saved; but you will never thrive in
grace till you have a desire to thrive, grace will not grow till there be a
desire wrought in the soul: for when men do not delight in the inward man,
they never grow in grace and holiness; they are not as trees planted that
bring forth seasonable fruit but barren: do what you will to it, the soil is
naught, for the spirit has not yet tilled the heart, and sown in it the first
beginning of the seeds of grace, which is a desire after it: now, as it is good
in the bodily sickness to know the means of recovery, so in the sickness and
weakness of the inward man: it is good to know the means by which it may be
strengthened, therefore we will now come unto the particular means for the
strengthening of the inward man.

The first means to strengthen the inward man is to abound in spiritual
knowledge: because the 1. Mean.
more knowledge the more strength, for the spiritual knowledge of divine
truths is the strength of the soul; for as the soul is unto the body, so is
the knowledge of the word unto the inward man. The body is dead without the
soul, not able to do any thing, so the inward man without this spiritual
strength which is wrought in the soul by the saving knowledge of the Word, is
nothing but weakness, therefore the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As newborn
Babes desire the sincere milk of 1 Pet. 2. 2.
Word, that ye may grow by it: knowledge in the Word will make them grow in
Christ: the contrary unto this we see the Apostles upbraides in the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3. 1. and Heb. 5. 13. because they were weak in knowledge,
he calls them 1 Cor. 3. 1.
Babes, for says he, He that is not expert in the Word of righteousness, is
a Babe, therefore labor Heb. 5. 13.
to abound in spiritual knowledge. I press this the more because I fear many
of you are weak, because you are ignorant; you want this spiritual knowledge:
you know in our ordinary talk we count ignorance folly, when a man does any
thing that he should not do, or would not do, if he did but understand
himself; we say, that man is weak in judgment, or it is folly in him: surely
this weakness in the inward man is folly indeed; and a man cannot show his
weakness more then to be weak in spiritual knowledge, and yet you must
know, that a man may have much knowledge, as worldly knowledge, and the
knowledge of divine truths, and yet be but weak in the inward man: for there
is a knowledge of Arts, which fills the brain with knowledge; but the spirit
goes no further, that is, it does not sanctify that knowledge in the heart?
Again, there is a knowledge of the spirit, which is an operative working
knowledge, which goes with this other knowledge, and leads it to sanctification
and is practical? But yet I say you must know before you can be strong; there
must be some proportion between the spiritual knowledge, and the spiritual
strength: as for example, one man eats and is fat, another man eats and is
still lean; so some have as much as others have, and yet are not so strong as
others, and yet we say, fatness comes by eating, so does the strength of the
inward man by knowledge: and where the Lord works by his Spirit, by his Spirit
I say, the most knowledge; there is most strength: therefore I beseech you
labor for a full measure of saving knowledge, for a working, purging,
convincing, operative, and powerful knowledge. And this I do not only speak
unto you that are weak, but also unto you that are strong, that you be
careful to add unto your knowledge: for what is the reason that you do not
grow in grace, but because you are not careful to add more knowledge unto
that which you have: it may be you pick some good things from some Sermon, or
good book, but presently you forget it, you do not make it your own by
meditation, and so it does you no good; but if you would be careful to add
unto it; you would grow stronger in the inward man then you do: and here is
the misery of us builders; other builders when they have built a house, the
owner looks to it himself, and keeps it in repair; but when we have done
what we can to build you up in the inward man, and think that you will put to
your hands your selves, when we are to further the work of grace, you begin to
pull down your building again your selves, by your loose lives: by following
your pleasure, your sporting, and gaming, and profaning of the Lords day.
Therefore you must labor to grow in knowledge, if you will grow strong in the
Inward man.

The second means to be used, if you would 2. Means.
grow strong in the inward man, is this, you must be diligent in the use of
the means, as the Wise man says, the hand of the diligent makes rich; as
diligence in a calling makes rich, so where there is much diligence in the use
of the means of grace, there is much strength in the inward man; but no man
gets spiritual strength, save they that are diligent, and therefore this is
the reason, that men are not strong in this spiritual strength; because like
the sluggard, they are not diligent in the use of the means, they take no
pains for grace, and therefore it is that they get no increase: for according
unto the proportion of your pains, so is the inward man strengthened, and as
you use them more diligently, so you find the strength of them more operative
and powerful: for it is in the soul, as it is in the body, if you be not
diligent and careful to feed the body, it will wither and consume away, and
grow weak; so if you feed not the soul diligently and use the means
constantly, you will breed weakness in the soul, and the more secure and
remiss you are in the performance of holy duties, the weaker you are: it may
be you think it will not weaken you to neglect private prayer; but omit it
once, and it will make you careless, and the more you neglect, the more unfit
and undisposed you will find your selves? So you may think you may profane
one Sabbath, neglecting therein the duties required, and serving not God, but
your own lusts: but beloved, it will make you secure, the more a man does in
this kind the more he may do: for this is true in every Art every act begets a
habit, and a habit brings custom: so it is as true in good things, the
beginning of good brings many particular good things, and therefore if you can
but get your hearts in a frame of grace, you shall find a supply of grace,
because Christ says, Whosoever has, to him shall be given: he that has
grace, and is careful in the use of the means by Gods appointment, he shall
thrive in holiness: for if you but once get the beginnings of saving grace and
be industrious, and vigilant, and careful to employ them, you will in time
grow strong: you know what Christ said unto the servant that had used his
Talent well, he had more given him, so if you be diligent in the use of the
means, the inward man will grow strong: but for the using of the means
observe these rules.

The first rule, that I would have you observe, if you would have the means
effectual is this, Rule. 1.
you must use all the means: for if you use but a part of the means you will
not grow strong: at it is with the body, so it is with the inward man: a man
for the health, and growth of the body, will use all means, labor in health,
Physic in sickness, recreation for the whetting of the faculty: in a word,
he will use every thing that he may strengthen the body, thus you must do for
the strengthening of the inward man, you must use all means as hearing the
Word, receiving the Sacrament, Prayer, Meditation, Conference, the Communion of
Saints, particular resolutions to good, or else the inward man will not grow
strong: these are the food that the inward man feeds upon, it is with the
inward man, as it is with a plant, if you would have a plant to grow, then you
must set it in a good soil, you must dig about it, and dung it; but if you
be careless where you set it, It will not prosper and thrive: even so if you
do not add fatness of soil unto the beginnings of grace; if you do not use
all the means, as the Communion of Saints, and Prayer, the inward man will not
grow strong, but wither and dye; you will be dwarfes in grace, and holiness.

The second rule, if you would have the means effectual, is this, you must
look that you perform 2. Rule.
holy duties strongly; for then the means strengthen the inward man, when they
are done with strong affections: when he uses them not remissely and coldly,
for remiss actions weakne^^ the habit: as for example, take water that is
exceeding hot, and put cold water to it, and you will weaken it: so perform
holy duties, and use the means of grace remissly and they will weaken the
habit to good: it will work an Indisposition in the soul: therefore do them
strongly, with much zeal and strong affections, that the inward man may grow
strong by the performance of them.

The third rule; if you would have the means 3. Rule.
effectual, then you must be constant in the use of the means, forwhat is the
reason that there is so little thriving in grace, that men remain cripples in
grace; but because they use means of growth, but by fits, and haltnesse, that
is, they are not constant in a good course of life, they are still off and on
the rule: sometimes the shot will be short, and other times they hit the
mark: they come seldom unto the means, now and then they pray, and now and
then they make use of the Communion of the Lord; this inconstancy jogles the
faculty, and weakens the habit: and therefore it is unpossible that you should
thrive in grace except you be constant: the Apostle James calls them Iam. 1. 8.
unstable men, let these never think to receive strength in the inward man,
till they come to more constancy in good. Therefore labor to be constant in
prayer, constant in hearing, in meditation, in the Sacrament, in Conference,
which if you be not, you will not grow strong in the inward man.

The fourth rule, if you would have the means effectual, is this, you must
take heed of depending 4. Rule.
upon the means without God. For know that the means without God, is but as a
pen without Incke, a pipe without water or a scabberd without a sword. They
will not strengthen the inward man without God: for it is the Spirit that puts
life in the means, and yet you must not cut off the pipe from the wellhead:
you must not depend upon God without the use of the means, but you must use
both: that is, first seek to God and depend upon him for the strengthening of
the inward man, and withal use the means constantly, because as water is
carried from the Wellhead unto the pipe, and so from the pipe unto many
places, so the means are as pipes to carry grace into the soul? Therefore use
them and cut them not off by carelessenesse; if you do, you will cut off the
strength of the inward man.

The third means, if you would strengthen the inward man is this, you must get
rectified Judgments: 3. Means.
that is, you must see that your judgments are right: for men do deceive
themselves in their judgments; they think that they have strong judgments,
and that they are able to judge of things, when indeed they are mavelous
weak. Now that you may not deceive your selves, I will lay down some signs
of a rectifyed judgment.

The first sign of a rectified judgment, is this, you shall know it by your
constancy: so much constancy 1. Sign.
in good, and so much is your judgments rectified, and on the contrary so much
inconstancy, and so much weakness; as for example, when a man has propounded
a rule unto himself, and is not constant in it, it argues that he is weak in
his judgment, because he keeps not close to the rule; or that there are
stronger, or more arguments to the contrary, which makes him to fall away, and
sit down from the rule; and he is thus posed, because he is but weak in
judgment: as for example, if a man should come and proffer a man one hundred
pound, not to leave such an action, and another man should come and offer him
two hundred pounds to leave it, if the man be weak in judgment, he will be
drawn by the greater reward, though it be evil: therefore if you would not
be beaten, and made to sit down by stronger seeming arguments, than you have
indeed in your self, then you must get your judgments rectified: therefore
examine your selves whether your judgments be rectified, which you shall know
by your constancy in holy duties: if a little profit or pleasure will draw you
away; whatsoever you think of your selves, your judgments are weak.

The second sign, whereby you shall know 2. Sign.
whether you judgments are rectified, is this, examine whether your passions
be strong, for strong passions have weak affections unto good, when the
passions of a man are strong, they weaken the understanding, they weaken the
will, and the affections, as touching the truth, and therefore Paul in Acts 14.
15. when they would have made him a Acts 14. 15.
god, he cries out, We are men subject unto passions as you are, that is, full
of weakness, as if he should say, your passion in this thing proves your
weakness of judgment: therefore labor to have strong affections to good,
for this strength in the affections, comes from the inward man. Again, the
strength of the affections unto good, show the abiding of the Spirit in the
soul, as 1 Samuel 11. 6. It is said, that the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul,
and he was angry: that is, his affections 1 Samuel 11. 6.
were strong for Gods glory. In Acts 4. 32. After that they were filled with
the Holy Ghost Acts 4. 32.
they spoke boldly: they had strong affections for Gods glory, and therefore
the Spirit is compared unto fire and Oil: Fire, that burns and consumes, and
Oil that mollifies and softens, so does the Spirit. Therefore examine, whether
you burn in the inward man: see whether you have strong affections to good; if
you have, you are strong, if not, you are weak: and again, see what
cheerfulness you have: examine whether your hearts are soft and tender, and
pliable, then it is a sign that the Spirit is there: it is true, a strong man
may have passion, but it is but now and then, it continues not, it is not
always, yet so much passion as he has, so much weakness there is in him:
therefore labor to overcome your passions.

The third sign whereby you shall know whether your Judgments are rectified
or no, is this, 3. Sign.
examine what contentment you have to bear losses and crosses. I gather this
out of Phil. 4. 12. I can, says the Apostle, want and abound, I can Phil. 4.
12.
do all things through CHRIST that strengthens me, examine therefore when
you are abused and reproached for Christ, whether you can take it patiently,
can you be content to suffer disgrace and reproach for Christ; if you can, then
it is a sign that you are strong in Judgment, if not, you are weak,
whatsoever you think of your selves. Proverbs 27. says the Wise man, a wise
man is known by his dignity, so I may say, a man that is strong in the inward
man, is known by his bearing of reproach without seeking after revenge again:
this man is spiritually strong in Judgment: therefore try your Judgments by
your contentedness.

The fourth sign, whereby you shall know whether you have rectified
Judgments, is this, examine 4. Sign.
whether you find your selves easy to be deceived, if so, it is a sign that
you are weak in Judgment, and therefore this is the argument that Paul uses
unto women, that they shall not usurp authority over the man, 1 Timothy 2. 12. I
permit not a woman to bear rule, because she was first deceived, 1 Timothy 2. 12.
she is easier to be deceived then the man, in the judging between good and
evil: as for example, a man that is weak in judgment is like a child, and
you know that children will be won with Counters, and feared with bug-beares;
so if you love the world and the things of the world and are won by them,
feared with the loss of them, you are weak in judgment: Again, in things
that are good in themselves, if you use them immoderately, and then seek to
excuse this by putting a false gloss upon your doing, you are weak in
judgment: as for example, in studying the Law, the thing in it self is good,
but if by studying of it you seek to excuse you from strengthening of the
inward man, that you have no time and leisure, you are weak in judgment,
because you are easy to be deceived: therefore as you are affected with these
things, and as they prevail with you, so you may judge of your selves.

The fifth sign whereby you shall know, whether your judgments are rectified,
is this, examine 5. Sign.
what you are in the times of trial; as you are in these times, so you are
either strong or weak, and so God esteems of you; for God esteems a man
strong, as he is in the time of trial; thus he approoved of Abraham; Abraham
in the time of trial was strong, and Paul in the time of trial was strong;
and therefore God set a price upon them; he priseth them at a high rate,
Abraham is his friend, and Paul is a chosen vessel, and not only when the
temptation is past, but when the temptation is present, then see your strength
whether you have strength to master particular corruptions, if in this time you
start aside, you have flawes and much weakness in you: you are like a broken
bow that will seem for show, as well as the best, but when a man comes to draw
it, then it breaks, so some men seem to be strong in Christ till they be
tried, but when they are drawn then they break, they have no strength to
withstand sin; and therefore it is that God many times sends temptations and
afflictions to this end to try men, to see what is in them, whether they are
such as they seem to be or no: not that he knows not before, but because that
by his trial, others may know what they are: And here God makes a difference
in trials, some are tried by small, others by great trials, partly because
hypocrites may be known, and partly, because he may stir up the godly to
get more strength; as also to weane them from depending upon their own
strength; therefore in Esa. 40. 30. it is said, Even the youths shall faint and
be weary, that is, he that thought himself to be strong in his own
apprehension, shall prove weak; And thus much for the third means.

The fourth means, if you would grow strong in the inward man, is this, you
must remoove the 4. Means.
excuses and those hindrances, which hinder the grows of the inward man, and
these are especially two.

The first hinderance is this, when you spend your strength upon other things,
and not in the 1. Hinderance.
strengthening of the inward man; this makes you not to grow strong in the
inward man: therefore you must be wise to take away from these things, and
spend more time, and take more pains in strengthening of the inward man: for
this is the reason that you grow not, all your time and affections are after
the things of the world, and how you may grow strong in that, that you cannot
mind heavenly things. Again, you hinder the growth of the inward man, when
you set your affections upon base and vile things, this hinders the growth of
the inward man, this man is a weak man in grace; as for example, a man that
has money to bestow at Market, if when he shall come there, he shall bestow it
on bables, and not on the things that he went to buy, this man were a foolish
man, especially he knowing, that he shall be called to an account for it, how
he has laid it out: even thus and much more foolish are men, when they spend
their time on their pleasures and lust, which are base things, and not on
strengthening of the inward man, they befoole themselves: and this is that which
the Wise man says, that there is a price in the hand of a fool, but he has
no heart. When men neglect the strengthening of the inward man, they forsake a
great price, that would enrich them: but because they want knowledge, because
they are weak in the inward man, they are not able to Judge in the inward man
of spiritual things: therefore never brag of your strength, except it be the
strength of the inward man, and take heed of neglecting the time. Paul would
have the gathering for the poor to be before he came, that that might not
hinder him from strengthening of the inward man, though that was a holy work:
It was a good speech of one, who after that he had spent much time in writing
about Controversies at last concludes, I have says he, spent a great deal of
time, but not in strengthening the inward man, the devil has beguiled me, but
he shall go beyond me no more: that time that I have, I will spend unto
another end: It were wisdom in you to do the like, you that have spent and
do spend your time about trifles and bables upon your lusts, conclude, that
now for the time to come, you will gather your strength, and bend all your
labor and pains to this end, for the strengthening of the inward man, and say
in your selves, we had a price in our hands, that is, we had much time whereby
we might have strengthened the inward man, but we had no heart, that is, we
were befooled, because we did not know the excellency of the inward man, but we
will do so no more, the time now that we have, shall be spent in this, how
we may be strengthened in the inward man and grow in favor with God.

The second hinderance that must be remooved, which is contrary unto the growth
of the inward 2. Hinderance.
man is strong lusts, unmortified affections: there are inward hindrances
which must be remooved before the soul can grow strong in grace; these venom
the soul, and keep off the stroke of the Word, it keeps the plaster from
the sore; as for example, if a man be wounded by an arrow, so long as the arrow
head is in the wound no plaster will heal it: now as it is in the outward
man, so it is with the inward man, if you retain any lust, any beloved sin,
and so come unto the ordinances of God, you will come without profit, because
the arrow head is in the wound, your lusts you keep unmortified, and so long
you cannot be healed, this keeps the plaster off the sore: you know what
pains the humors of the body will breed in a man, when they gather into any
part of the body, and how they will hinder the augmentation in other parts. So
when these evil humors of the soul gather together, and begin to reign and
bear rule in the soul, it is unpossible that the soul should grow in
holiness till they be purged away, therefore be earnest with God to purge out
these humors, whether they be profit or pleasure, or honor, or any other
thing, and in thus doing, you shall strengthen the inward man, and the stronger
that the inward man is, the healthfuller the soul is; I say, it is unpossible
that you should thrive in the inward man, so long as you retain any sin, and
therefore our Savior says, How can ye believe, seeing you seek honor one
of another, if you retain the love of credit and reputation in the world,
before grace, how can you believe? You cannot be strong in the inward man.

The fifth means, to strengthen the inward man, is this, you must get
spiritual courage, and joy: 5. Means.
you must get joy in the new birth; the contrary unto this, is discouragment,
and sorrow, nothing so much weakens the inward man, except sin, as
discouragement: and again, nothing so availeable to make a man strong, as
courage and joy; this was the means that Nehemiah used, Nehe. 8. when he would
build up the Walls of Jerusalem, says he, be not discouraged or sorrow, for
your joy, shall be as the joy in harvest. Nehemiah had a great work to do,
and what argument uses he to make them to hold out, but this to be full of
courage and joy: as if he should have said, if you hold your courage, you will
hold your strength, and then the work will be easy unto you: and this we see
by experience: In war, great courage, where there is but little strength, will
do more then great means with little courage; Joshua can do more with a
small army full of courage, then a great army with little courage? Again, I
say unto those that are travailing toward Heaven, take heed of giving
discouragements unto any, for this is the property of the devil, to discourage
men: and therefore this is the reason that he makes men doubt of their
salvation, to fear their calling, to question Gods love toward them in
Christ, that the way to Heaven is narrow and hard, and God is pure and just
withal, and thou thy self art full of strong lusts; thou shall never subdue
them, it will be in vain for thee to set upon them; hereupon he is so
discouraged, that he neglects the mortifying of sin: but be not discouraged,
but know that strength to resist the least temptation is not of your selves, it
is not your own; Well then, if it comes not by any power of your own, but it
is by the strength of another. Then for your comfort know that he that gave
you power against a small temptation, is also able and willing, and will
certainly help you against a raging lust: and so likewise for the performance
of holy duties, though you find your selves indisposed to pray, or hear the
Word, or the like, yet know, that it is God that fits the heart: he can of
unfit, make it fit, and of unwilling, make it willing: and remember the
promise. Luke 11. 14. he will give the holy Ghost unto them that ask him: he
will give such a supply of grace, that ye shall be enabled to withstand any
temptation, therefore if you would grow strong take heed of discouragements,
and let one Christian take heed of discouraging of another Christian by any
speech, action, or behavior, and let Ministers take heed of discouraging of
their flocks: for it is the property of false prophets, to discourage the
people from God. And this is the sin of this land, especially of profane
people that never think themselves well, but when they are casting
reproachful speeches against those that labor to strengthen the inward man:
but this discovers a great deal of corruption in them, and it is a means to
pull down the Judgments of God upon them. Again, take heed of
discouragements, be not cast down when you meet with such as will revile
you, and speak evil by you, this will weaken the inward man.

The sixth means, if you would strengthen the 6. Means.
inward man, is this, you must get faith: you must labor to be strong in the
Lord, you must go about all things with Gods strength, and not with your own:
and therefore the Apostle says, When I am weak, then I am strong: 2 Cor. 12.
13. And I 2 Cor. 12. 10.
rejoice in my infirmities, that the power of God may be seen in my
weakness, that is, I rejoice in those infirmities that discover my own
weakness to God, that I may not put any confidence thereby in my self.
Again, I rejoice in my infirmities, because they are means to humble me.
Again, I rejoice in my infirmities and weakness, because hereby I feel my
weakness, that I may go out of my self, and depend wholly upon God:
therefore when you go about any business, or perform any holy action unto
God, as you must do it in Faith, so you must renounce all strength in your
selves, and then God cannot but prosper your business or whatsoever good you
go about, when you go about it with Gods strength, as Gideon did: and on the
contrary the Lord has pronounced a curse against him, that shall go about any
thing with his own strength. Iere. 17. 5. Cursed is the man that makes flesh
his Ier. 17. 5.
Arm, that is, that goes about any thing in confidence of his own strength
without Faith in me: thus you see, that if you would be strong in the inward
man, you must get saving Faith in Christ.

The seventh means, if you would strengthen the inward man, is this, you must
get the spirit, all 7. Means.
other ways will nothing avail you, except you get this, for this is that
which makes them effectual, and makes a difference betwixt men. Sampson was
strong, and so were other men, but Sampson was stronger then other men, because
he had the Spirit, and it is said of John Baptist, that he came in the spirit
of Eliah; that which made a difference between John and other men was the
Spirit, he came in the spirit of Eliah, he had the same spirit that Eliah had,
and therefore he had the greater efficacy, if John had not had this spirit, he
had been but as other men, therefore whatsoever you do, labor above all
things to get the spirit, nothing will strengthen the inward man, except you
have the Spirit, it is the Spirit that makes the inward man to grow strong in
the soul: And thus much for the means of the strengthening of the inward man,
and for this point: we now proceed.

[By the Spirit:]

The next thing that is to be considered, is the means which the Apostle lays
down, whereby they may be strengthened in the inward man, and that is, to have
the Spirit: that he would grant you, etc. that you may be strengthened by the
Spirit in the inward man: as if he should say, if you would know what will
strengthen you, it is the Spirit. Hence note this point.

That whatsoever saving, or sanctifying grace, or strength of grace, every man
has, it all proceeds from Doctrine.
the sanctifying spirit: I say, all the saving grace, all strength of grace
comes from the Spirit, yet do not mistake me, as if I did exclude the Father
and the Son, for they work together in every act; the Father works not
without the Son, the Son works not without the Father, the Father and the
Son work not without the Spirit, neither does the Spirit work without the
Father and the Son, for what one does all does: but I ascribe the work of
sanctification unto the Spirit, because it is the proper work of the Spirit to
sanctify, and he is the strengthner of all grace, that is, all grace comes
from the Father, as the first cause of all things; and then through Christ by
the Spirit, Grace is wrought in the Soul; Therefore these three distinctions
of the Trinity is good, the Father is of Himself, the Son is of the Father,
and the Holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son, that is, the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is sent unto the hearts of his
Children to work Grace, and Holiness in them, and it must needs be so that
the holy Ghost is the only Worker, and Strengthner of Grace, because
proceeding from such a Holy Fountain, as the Father and the Son is, he must
needs be Holy, and the way to get Sanctification and Holiness, is to get the
holy Spirit. For in a thing that is sent to sanctify, two things are required;
First, he that is sent to sanctify must proceed from a holy Fountain, but
the Spirit does proceed from a most holy and pure God; therefore it cannot
choose but be a holy work, that He works: Secondly, the second thing required
in him that is sent to sanctify, is this, that he subsist in sanctification,
that is, that he depend not upon another for sanctification, but that he be
able to sanctify himself: now this is the excellency of the holy Ghost, He is
sanctification and holiness it self, that is, subsisting in sanctification
and abounding in holiness, and therefore able to strengthen the inward man.
But that you may more fully understand this point, I will show you how the
Spirit strengthens the inward man, and works holiness and sanctification, and
this will appear in four things.

The first way how the spirit strengthens grace in the soul, is this, by
giving unto the soul, an effectual 1. Work.
operative and powerful faculty, and that is done by rearing the inward man
in the soul, and setting up the building of grace, and this He does by
shedding abroad in the heart the blessed effects of grace unto every faculty:
as the blood is infused into every vein, or as the soul goes through every
part of the body, and so gives life unto it; so does the Spirit go through all
the parts of the soul, by infusing spiritual life and power into them, and
therefore the Apostle calls it, Ephesians. 1. his effectual power, that is, he has
such efficacy in working, that he infuseth spiritual life unto the whole soul.

The second way how the Spirit strengthens 2. Work.
grace is this, when he has set up the building, and swept every corner of the
soul, then he inables the soul to do more then it could do by nature, by
putting new habits and qualities in the soul: as first, when a man can do
more then a natural man can do by nature, then the Spirit has added new
habits; as for example, any hand can cut with a Chissell or the like
instrument, but if he can by it make a picture, this is a work above nature
because no man can do it unless he has been raught it. So when the Spirit
comes into the heart, then it makes a man to do more then naturally he can
do: water you know the nature of it is cold, but if you would have it of
another quality, then you must put a quality of fire into it. So the soul is
dead, and cold by nature, but if a quality of the fire of the spirit be added
unto it, then it will be able to do more then it naturally can do: therefore
examine what new habits and qualities be in you: whether you have a new habit
of patience, love, hope, and experience, that is; as patience begets
experience, and experience hope, so where the spirit is, it does beget new
habits, and qualities in the soul, by which it is able to do more then
naturally it can do: as I said, it first builds the house, and sweepes the
rooms and then it fits, and furnishes the rooms with new habits and qualities
of grace.

The third way how the Spirit strengthens 3. Work.
grace, is this, when it has given us new habits, then it inables and helps
us to use these habits to good.

And herein appears the power and excellency of the Spirit, not only to give
spiritual life, and strength, but also to enable us to use that strength for
the strengthening of the inward man: there may be qualities, and habits in the
soul, and yet want power to use them: as for example, a man that is asleep,
he has habits and qualities, but he wants power to use them, or as a man
that has an instrument that will sound well, but he wants skill to use it, so
many men they have habits and qualities, but because they want power to use
them, therefore they are not strengthened in the inward man: but he that has the
Spirit has withal power to use those habits to good: therefore it is said,
that they spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance, that is, they had power from
the Spirit, to speak, to do, to use those habits which were in them: thus
Sampson by the power of the Spirit, had power to use his strength, Acts 4. 32.
It is said that the Apostles spoke boldly, that is, they had power, for you
must know that there Acts 4. 32.
may be common graces in the heart, and yet want power, but when the Spirit
comes, then it puts strength in the inward man to work accordingly. Thus it is
said, that the Spirit came upon Saul, and he prophesied, that is, he was able
to do more, then before he could do: and yet know that you may have true
grace, and yet now and then for the present want action, you may want a power
to do ought with it, and it is then when the Spirit seems to absent himself
from the soul, and this was that which the Apostle spoke of in Heb. 11.
Brethren you have forgotten the consolation, that is, your spiritual strength
and power be hid as dead and forgotten, but the Spirit will return, and you
shall find your power to good again.

The fourth way whereby the Spirit strengthens 4. Work.
grace in the soul, is, by giving efficacy and power unto the means of
growth, which is a special means for the strengthening of the inward man, for
as he sets up the building, and furnishes the rooms, and gives power unto
the soul to use them, so that which makes all these effectual, is this, when
he gives power and efficacy unto the means that are for the strengthening of
the inward man: now you know that the Word is the only means to work new
habits, and qualities in us, to call us and beget us unto Christ. And if the
Spirit should not add this unto it: namely, efficacy, it would never beget us
unto Christ: therefore this is the means to make all effectual, it gives a
blessing unto the means of grace; the Word alone without the Spirit, is as I
told you, but as a scabberd without a sword, or a sword without a hand, that
will do no good though you should stand in never so much need, therefore the
Apostle joins them together, Act. 20. 32. he calls it the Word of his grace,
that is, the spirit must Acts 20. 32.
work grace by it, or else the Word will nothing avail you. Again, prayer is
a means to strengthen the inward man, but if the Spirit be nor joined with
it, it is nothing worth, and therefore the holy Ghost says, pray in the holy
Ghost, that is, if you pray not by the power of the holy Ghost, you will never
obtain grace or sanctification. The Spirit is unto the means of grace, as
rain is unto the plants; rain makes plants to thrive and grow, so the spirit
makes the inward man to grow in holiness: therefore it is the promise that God
makes unto his Church in the Scripture, that he will power water upon the dry
ground. The heart that before was barren in grace and holiness, shall now
spring up in holiness, and grow strong in the inward man, and this shall be
when I shall power my Spirit upon them, therefore you see how the Spirit does
strengthen grace in the soul, by building and setting up the building of grace
in the soul, and then by furnishing the rooms with new habits, and qualities
of grace, and then by giving power unto the soul to use those habits to good,
and then by giving a blessing unto all the means of grace.

The use of this stands thus; If the Spirit be the only means to strengthen
the inward man, then Use.
it will follow that whosoever has not the holy Ghost has not this strength,
and whatsoever strength a man may seem to have unto himself, if it proceed
not from the Spirit, it is no true strength, but a false and counterfeit
strength: for a man may thus argue, from the cause unto the effect: the true
cause of strength must needs bring forth strong effects, and on the contrary
that which is not the cause of strength, cannot bring forth the effects of
strength: so I may reason, that no natural strength can bring forth the
strength of the inward man, because it wants the ground of all strength which
is the Spirit: and therefore you may have a flash or a seeming power of
strength, such as the Virgins had, Matthew. 25. Matthew. 25.
that seemed to be strong in the inward man, but it was but a fained strength
because they had not the Spirit: it is the Spirit that must give you assurance
of salvation and happiness. And I have chosen this point especially in regard
of the present occasion, the receiving of the Sacrament, before which you are
especially to examine your selves whether you have this or no, which if you
have not, then you have neither strength in the inward man, nor any right or
interest unto Christ: For I may well follow the Apostles rule, that they that
are Christ's have the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches the deep
things of God, which he has revealed 1 Cor. 2. 10.
unto us by his Spirit: Ephesians. 1. 13. You were Ephesians. 1. 13.
sealed with the Spirit of promise, Romans 8. 11. That they should be raised by
the Spirit that dwells in Romans 8. 11. 14.
them: and again, as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God: thus you see that it stands you upon to examine your selves whether you
have the Spirit: but above all places, there are two places, which prove the
necessity of having the Spirit, the one is this place which is my text, That
you may be strengthened by the Spirit in the inward man, and the other is the
place which Saint John has in 1 John 3. 14. By this we know that we are
translated from death unto life, because we 1 Ioh. 3. 14.
love the brethren: it is a sign to judge of your spiritual strength by your
love; if we be united in the bond of love, it is a sign that we have the
Spirit, and having the Spirit, it is the cause that we are translated, that is,
changed; so that you must be changelings from sin to grace, before you can be
saved. Examine therefore, what effectual spiritual strength you have, what
spiritual love there is amongst you, and so accordingly you may judge of your
estates, whether you have any right or interest unto Christ: and that I may
help you in this thing, I will lay down some signs by which you shall know
whether you have the Spirit.

The first sign whereby you shall know, whether you have the sanctifying
Spirit or no, is this, 1. Sign.
if you have the sanctifying Spirit you will be full of fire, that is, it will
fill you with spiritual heat, and zeal; now if you find this in you, then it
is the sanctifying Spirit, and therefore John says of Christ, Matthew. 3. 11.
that he will baptize them with the Spirit and with fire, that is, he will
baptize Matthew. 3. 11.
you with that Spirit whose nature is as fire, that will fill you full of
spiritual heat and zeal, and therefore it is said, Act. 2. 3. that they had
tongues as of fire, and again, it is said that the Apostles Acts 2. 3.
were stirred up with boldness to speak, that is, when they saw God
dishonored, this Spirit kindled a holy zeal in them, it set their hearts on
fire, it set their tongues on fire; so when the spirit enters into the heart of
a Christian, it will fill it full of heat, and zeal, the heart, the tongue,
the hands, the feet, and all the rest of the parts will be full of the heat
of the spirit. And it is unpossible that any man should have true zeal, except
he have the spirit: therefore it is said that they spoke with new tongues, as
the spirit gave them utterance, they spoke with a great deal of zeal, of
another nature and quality then they did before: Well then, examine what heat
and zeal you have in your actions; so much heat, so much spirit: He shall
baptize you with the Spirit and with fire. If you have the sanctifying Spirit
you shall know it by the zeal that is in you, in the performance of holy
duties, therefore, I say, this is an excellent sign, whereby a man may know,
whether he have the spirit or no. Now, that a man may know this the better, I
will make it clear by this example; Take a bottle that is full of water, and
another that is full of Aqua-vitae, look upon them outwardly and they are all
one in color, but if you taste, the one is hot and lively, but the other is
cold and raw, so if you look unto the outward formal actions of wicked men,
they have the same color that the actions of the holy men have, but if you
taste them, examine their lives, and search into their hearts, you shall find
a great difference; the one of them it may be, may seem to have life and heat
in them, but they want the Spirit: for they have neither a loathing of sin,
nor power to resist sin; they may put a false color upon their actions but
it will not hold, they may restrain some lusts for some ends, but such cannot
master and subdue them, and it may heat a part of his heart, but it cannot heat
all his heart; but where the sanctifying Spirit comes, it heats all the soul,
kindles a holy fire in all the faculties, to burn up sin which is there; And
this was the difference between John Baptists Baptism, and the Baptism of
Christ. John would baptize them with water; but Christ in the spirit and with
fire: therefore examine what heat there is in you against evil, and what zeal
there is in you to good, are you cold in prayer, in conference, in the
Communion of Saints, it is a sign that you have not the spirit: it may be you
hear, and read, and pray, and confer, but see with what heat you do them.
Is it with you in these things, as the Apostle would have you to be in earthly,
1 Cor. 7. 30. 31. To sorrow, as if ye sorrowed not; to use the world as if you
used it not: do you perform holy 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.
duties with that coldness as if you cared not whether you did them, or did
them not, do you hear as if you heard not, and do you receive the Sacrament
as if you received it not, and do you pray as if you prayed not, and do you
love as if you loved it not: then surely, you have not the Spirit: And on the
contrary, if you find spiritual heat and zeal in you, a nimblenesse and
quickness to good, it is a sign that you have the Spirit, for it is the
property of the Spirit to heat the soul; therefore the Prophet says, That
the zeal of thine House has even eaten me up: Intimating, I have such a
measure of zeal wrought in me by thy Spirit, that I cannot see thee in the
least measure dishonored, but I must burn with zeal. Therefore examine, what
zeal you have for God and godliness; are you hot for the things of the world,
and cold for grace and holiness; whatsoever you think of your selves, yet you
have not the sanctifying Spirit. There is not a holy man or woman, that belongs
unto Christ, but they have this holy fire in them, and yet I would not have you
to mistake me, as if every Christian did attain unto the like heat and zeal
as others do: For you must know that some have more, some have less,
according unto the measure of the sanctifying Spirit that they have, but this
you must know, that you must be full of heat, full in some measure answerable
unto the measure of the sanctifying Spirit; but if you find no heat at all in
you, then you have not a grain of the Spirit: not to be hot is to be
lukewarm, and luke-warmenesse, is that which God hates; it is a temper mixed,
which is both loathsome to nature and odious to God. Revel. 3. 15. the
Laodiceans were neither hot nor cold but lukewarm, that is, they had
neither heat Revel. 3. 15.
to good, nor so cold as to forsake the truth. Sin and holiness stood in
aequilibrio together, and they had as good a mind unto the one, as unto the
other; now because it was thus with them, therefore says God; I will spue them
cut, and then in the next verse, he exhorts them to be zealous and amend;
except you labor to be hot in the Spirit you cannot be saved. Titus 2. 14.
the Apostle says, That Christ dyed, that he might purchase unto himself a
people zealous of good works: this zeal must not be a constrained zeal, but
a willing zeal, and if there were no other motive to move men to be zealous
but this, because Christ came to redeem them, for this end that they might be
zealous for his glory, if there be any spark of the fire of the Spirit in
him, it will burn at Christ's dishonor: and if Christ came unto this end to
make men zealous, then surely Christ will not loose his end, but they that
Christ will save, shall be zealous: therefore I beseech you labor to be strong
in the inward man, and labor to get the Spirit that you may be zealous: but
alas, men have drunk too much of this Cup of giddiness, they think they need
not be so zealous as they are: but I say, if you be not, it is a sign that you
have not the Spirit: especially it stands men now upon, if they have any holy
zeal in them to show it: I say, it is time you should show it when you see
such halting between two opinions, show your zeal by hating, and abhorring
popery, and by laboring to draw men from it: especially, now when we see men
so desirous to go into Egypt again, which is to be lamented in these days,
for which the Lord has stretched out his hand against us: but where is our
zeal? what spiritual heat is there in us, where are these men that at such a
time would have been hot and zealous? nay, where are the generation of these
men? surely, they are all gone, for there is no heat and zeal left: it is
true we abound in knowledge; we have the same knowledge that they had, but we
want their zeal and spirit, and we have the same gifts but we want their
Spirit: but let us now at length show our selves to be in the spirit, to have
the Spirit in us, by our zeal against evil.

But you will say that many holy men that have Object. 1.
the Spirit, yet are not so hot and zealous against evil but are mavelous
mild and patient: therefore a man may have the Spirit, and yet not be zealous.

First, to this I answer, that holy men may have pits, wherein they may be
fallen. They may have Answ.
dross as well as Gold, and hence they may be drawn by a strong passion and
lust, not justly to weigh sins aright, whence arises remissness, and
neglect, both in doing good, and resisting evil: but this in a regenerate man,
I call but a passion because it continues not: for prayer, and the preaching of
the pure Word, will recover this again, that is, will recover his strength and
make him zealous against sins, but if you see a man (whatsoever profession
he makes of Christ) that can wink at sin, and not be moved at it, and the
Word nor prayer does not kindle this holy Fire in him, then certainly that man
is a dead man; there is no spark of holiness in him: therefore I may say unto
every holy man, as they were used to say to Haniball, that he had fire in him,
but he wanted blowing: so I say unto you if you have the Spirit, you have
heat in you, but if this heat does not appear at all times, or at sometimes,
it is because it wants blowing; for when they have a just occasion to exercise
the strength of the inward man for Gods glory, they will show that they have
zeal in them, and be hot and lively to good, and not dead in sin: for this
is the difference between a man that is dead, and a man that is in a swone,
take a man that is in a swone, if Aqua-vitae and rubbing of his joints will not
recover him it is a sign that he is dead, so if the Word will not work heat
in you, it is a sign that you are more then in a swone, you are already dead
in the inward man: it is said of the Adamant it will not be heated with fire,
so I may say if the Word will not heat you when you are rubbed with it, is a
sign you are like the Adamant dead unto grace.

Secondly to this I answer, that howsoever some men that are sanctified are not
so zealous as are Answ. 2.
some hypocrites, which is true; yet I say it is no good argument to say, that
because counterfeit druggs, and wares have the same sent and smell, that the
good wares have, that thererefore they are as good, or that the good wares have
not the like; but it were better to say that they have not the same, and that
the difference is in this, that the affections have a false dye and gloss put
upon them: and so there is a false and counterfeit zeal, and there is a true
zeal. As there may be yellow pieces counterfeit, as well as yellow pieces true
metal, so there may be counterfeit fire, as well as true fire; this then I
say, men may be sanctified, and yet be mild, and not of so hot and fiery a
disposition. They may not so burn in the Spirit as others do, but yet it is
not good to conclude that it matters not therefore whether you be zealous or
no: for howsoever it is true in him, yet it may be false in thee, and know also
that this meekness is joined with much holy Zeal, though it be not outwardly
expressed; for as certainly, as where true fire is, there is heat, so where
there is the Spirit, there is zeal, therefore examine whether you have heat
in you, if you have not, you have not the Spirit.

The second sign whereby you shall know, whether 2. Sign.
you have the sanctifying Spirit or no, is this: If you find that you are not
only able to do more, then you could naturally; but you have also holiness
joined with it.

This sign I make of two parts, because a man may do many things that may
carry a show above Holiness.
nature and yet want holiness; but if they be above nature, and then have
holiness joined with them, then it is a sign that you have the sanctifying
Spirit.

First, I say, it will make you to do more then you could do by nature, it
puts another manner 1.
of strength in you, by which you are able to do these things, which before
you were not able to do; as for example, it will work in you a patience above
a natural patience; this we see in Christ himself when he was crucified he
opened not his mouth, he was like a lamb; he had more then natural patience:
this is true in Paul, Peter, and the rest of the Saints. Again, it works in us
love above a natural love, therefore it is said, that Christ was full of love,
he had compassion on the Matthew. 15. 3^.
multitude. Again, it works in a man a joy more then natural joy; this we
see in Paul and Silas, when they were in prison they sang for Joy, and the Acts
16. 25.
Disciples in the Acts, rejoiced that they were thought worthy to suffer for
Christ. Again, it works in a Acts 5. 41.
man boldness, above natural boldness; and therefore it is said, Acts 4. 14.
that they preached Acts 4. 14.
the Word with great boldness, that is, with a boldness above a natural
boldness: and so Luther, he was endued with this Spirit of boldness; because
else he would never be so bold in the defense of the truth, if he had not had
another Spirit in him. Again, it works in a man wisdom, above a natural
wisdom, 1. Sam. 18. 12. it is said of David, that the Spirit of the Lord was
with him: and therefore 1. Sam. 18. 11.
Saul was afraid of him; and so Abimelech feared Abraham, because he saw in him
a great measure of wisdom and discretion. Again, it works in a man strength
above natural strength; because with the strength of nature, they have another
added to it. Again, it will make you see above a natural sight; therefore it
is said, they shall not need to teach one another, but they shall be all
taught of God: they shall see into the excellencies Ierem. 31. 34.
that are in God. Now examine your selves, whether you have the Spirit or no, I
say, by this if you have this power to work above nature. For if you have the
Spirit, you shall find your selves able to keep down your lusts, have power
and ability to sanctify the Sabbath, power to pray, power to hear, power to
confer, power to meditate, power to love, power to obey, all above nature; a
power to forsake life, and liberty, riches, and honor, pleasure, and all
things if they come in competition with Christ, which no man will do except
he have the Spirit.

Secondly, as it gives strength and other excellent qualities above nature, so
it adds unto it holiness; 2.
it puts a tincture, and a good dye upon all your actions, it warmeth the gift
of the mind, and puts the heart in a frame of grace: many men have a kind of
strength, but they want holiness and sanctification with it; now a man is said
to be a holy man, when the soul is separated and divorc'st from things that
are contrary to its salvation and happiness, and joined and united unto Christ
wholly and totally; then and not till then, is a man a true holy man: it is
with a holy man in this case, as it is with a spouse, she is separated from
others, and united unto her husband: therefore they that have the Spirit, have
holiness with it: the vessels in the time of the Law they were holy vessels;
because they were appointed for Gods worship: in like manner, when the Spirit
comes into the heart, it sanctifies it, and makes him a holy man, by making him
in all his aims and ends, to pitch upon Gods glory, and this can no man do
till Christ be his. As in the Canticles, the Church says, I am my beloveds,
and my beloved is mine: that is, because he is my husband, and I am his
spouse; therefore I will labor to be like him in holiness, and our Savior
prays for this holiness for his Disciples, John 17. 17. John 17. 17.
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is truth: the Word is the means to
work holiness in them: when the Word comes, then comes holiness, but when
profit or pleasure comes to take place, then the Spirit of holiness is as it
were plucked from them, but when they have the Spirit then they see the vanity
of these earthly things, and therefore it is that men are deceived with false
and counterfeit wares, because they want the Spirit of discerning, but when the
Spirit of God comes into the heart of a Christian, then it shows him the
vanity of these things, and this he does by enlightening the mind: and therefore
it is that they are kept from playing the adulteresses with these things,
because they have the Spirit of discerning: Now examine what strength above
nature, what conjunction of holiness have you with it, what Spirit of
discerning have you: are not these things in you? then you have not the Spirit.

The third sign, whereby you shall known whether you have the Spirit or no,
is this, examine 3. Sign. When by what means the Spirit comes into the heart.
Gal. 3. 2.
when, and by what means it came into the heart, this is the sign that the
Apostle makes in Gal. 3. 2. Did you says he, receive the Spirit by the works
of the Law or else by faith Preached, that is, if you have the Spirit, then
tell me how came you by it, when, and by what means came he first into the
heart.

But here all the question is, how a man may know whether the Spirit be come
into the heart in Quest. 1.
the right manner or no.

To this I answer, that this you must know, that Answ.
the only means to receive the Spirit into the heart, the right conveyance of
the Spirit into the heart, is by the Word purely preached, when it comes in the
evidence of the Spirit purely, without the mixture of any thing of man's with
it: and further you shall know, whether you have received the Spirit by the
preaching of the Word, by these two things; by the antecedent, and by the
consequent.

First, you shall know it by that which went before: 1.
if the Spirit has been wrought by the Word, then there will be a deep
humiliation wrought in the soul for sin, and then Christ and the Spirit
comes into the heart, and begins to cheer up the dejected soul, and
strengthens the inward man, and then thereupon there will be a through change
wrought in the whole man, and it must needs be so; because the nature of the
Spirit is, first to pull down what man's corruption has built; and then to lay
down the foundation of the spiritual building, humility; and then after to
rear the building of grace in the soul; as for example, if you would know
whether the plants receive virtue from the Olive or no: then you must know,
that first they must be cut off, and then they must be ingrafted in, and then
see, whether they have the fatness of the Olive, and then, whether they bear
the Olive leaves; so a man that has not received the Spirit by the word, he
shall see it by the ripeness of sins, the corrupt branches, the bitter
fruit that comes and is brought forth by him; but on the contrary, if the Word
by the Spirit has cut you down and humbled you thoroughly in the sight of
sin, and then ingrafted you into Christ, by working in you a saving
justifying faith: and if it has then made you fat and well liking in grace,
that you have brought forth better fruit then you could before, then certainly
the Spirit came into the heart the right way, and works in the right manner:
but as I said, it will first humble you by the Word, as in John 16. 8. the
Spirit shall reproove the world of John 16. 8.
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. First, he will reproove them of
sin, to humble them. Secondly, 1.
of righteousness, because they have not 2.
believed the all sufficiency of Christ. Thirdly, of judgment, that they might
change their opinions, 3.
that they might do these things, and bring forth such fruit as is agreeable
unto God Will.

Secondly, consider the consequence, that is, look to the thing that follows
the Spirit where 2.
it comes: for where the Spirit comes, it works a through change in the soul;
I call it not a bare change, but a through change; for as there may be a
glistering show of something that is like gold, and yet no gold: so there may
be a cessation from sin, and a change from sin, but not truly or thoroughly,
and so not at all; for what will it avail Herod, to forsake some sin, and
like John Mark. 6. 20.
well in some things, if he will not forsake all, and like John in the reproof
of all: in like manner, what if you change your opinions of some sins, what
if you esteem some sins to be sins indeed; if you have not the like
opinion of all, whatsoever you think of your selves, as yet you never had the
Spirit: therefore if you would know whether you have the sanctifying Spirit or
no in you, then examine, whether there be a through change wrought in you, that
is, whether you do not only esteem every sin to be sin, but also what
spiritual life you find in you, I say, you shall know whether the holy Spirit
be in you by this, if you find your own spirit dead in you, and Christ's Spirit
quick and lively in you; and this you shall know also by your affections; if
you have other affections both to God and Christ, to holiness and to the
Saints than you had before, it is certain you have the Spirit; for this is
that which follows the Spirit, for when the sanctifying Spirit comes into the
heart of a Christian, it works another kind of love in a man, then a man
naturally has; and again, it makes a man to live another kind of life then he
did before, thus it was with Paul, in Galath. 2. 20. Thus I live, yet not I but
Christ in me, that is, there Gal. 2. 20.
is a proportion and likeness, between the life of a Christian and Christ,
that is, when the Spirit enters into the heart, then it begins to put off the
old man, and to put on the new man; it will put off its own spirit and
strength to good, and put on Christ's wholly: yet mistake me not, I say not,
that the substance of the soul is changed, for the soul in substance is the
same as it was before: but here is the difference, when the Spirit comes, it
puts new qualities and habits into it, alters and changes the disposition of
it, gives it that sense which before it felt not, and that sight which before
it saw not. Hence it is thoroughly changed, in regard of the quality and
disposition, to what it was, and yet in substance remains the same: as for
example, put Iron into the fire, the Iron is the same it was in substance
before it came into the fire: but now it has another quality, it was cold,
and stiff, and hard, and unplyable: but now it is hot, and soft, and
pliable, and this change is throughout in every part of it, and yet it is Iron
still. So it is with the Spirit when it comes into the heart of a Christian, he
mingleth and infuseth spiritual life into all the parts of the soul, and
therefore it is said; if Christ be in you, the body is Romans 8. 10.
dead as touching sin: but the Spirit is alive. The body is dead, that is, as
touching reigning sin: he is like a tree that wants both sap and root, or as
a man that is dead that wants a soul; he is now dead, whatsoever he was
before: but the spirit is alive to God. Therefore examine, if this through great
change be in you, see then what death there is in you to sin, and what life
unto holiness, I call it a through and great change: because a little one will
never bring you in such a frame as to be fit for heaven. And again, the
Apostle calls it a great change in Romans 12. 2. be you metamorphosed, that is,
thoroughly changed, new molded: again, Romans 12. 2.
in 2 Corin. 3. 18. You are, says the Apostle, changed 2 Cor. 3. 18.
from glory, to glory: and therefore consider, that every change will not serve
the turn, but it must be a great change, as the changing of Christ's Spirit
for your own spirit, which if you have, then you shall come out of every
affliction, and every difficulty like gold out of the furnace, like cloth out
of the die; of Lions you shall be Lambs, of Serpents you shall be Doves:
therefore see whether this change be in you or no, if this change be in you,
then when your old guests, that is, your old lusts shall come and find that
his old companion is cast out of doors, and that the soul is swept and
cleansed, he will not stay, but seek abiding elsewhere: but on the contrary,
if your opinions of sin be the same, if you have the same lusts reigning in
you, if you use the same evil company, and have the same haunts that ever you
had, you have not the Spirit, and so long as you remain thus, do you think
that Christ will come and sup, and dine with you, and yet you will not erect a
building for Him in your hearts: therefore if you would have Christ and the
Spirit, then labor to get holiness.

The fourth sign, whereby you may know whether 4. Sign.
you have the spirit or no, is this: if it be but a common spirit you shall
find that it will do by you as the Angels do by assumed bodies, they take
them up for a time, and do many things with them to serve their own turns,
but they do not put life in them: such is the common spirit, but the
sanctirying spirit puts life into the soul. Wherefore examine your selves
whether the spirit makes you living men, or no, for when the sanctifying Spirit
shall join with the soul of a man, it will make him to do suitable things,
and bring forth suitable actions: for as the body is dead without the soul, so
the soul has of it self no spiritual life to good without the spirit:
wherefore as Paul speaks of unchaste widows, that they are dead while they
live: 1 Timothy 5. verse. 6. so I may say of every man that has not the spirit,
they are dead men, dead to God, to good, to grace, to holiness: I say, there
is no life without the Spirit, men are not living men, because they walk, and
talk, and the like: but they are living men that live in the spirit, and by
the spirit: and on the contrary, there is no true life, neither are men to be
esteemed living men that want the spirit.

Now for the examination of our selves by this rule, consider: First, we have
but an assumed 1.
body of grace and holiness, when in the practice of life we assume unto our
selves, only the outward form of godliness, but regard not the power:
cleaving in our affections to that which is evil: and leaving the things that
are truly good. I do not say, when you hate good, but when you prefer evil
before it in your choice, and set it at the higher end of the Table, and serve
it first, and attend upon it most, when that crosses holiness, but you will
not again cross it for the Love of Christ; when it is thus with you,
whatsoever you think of your selves, you have not the sanctifying Spirit, but
a common spirit without life.

Secondly, you have but an assumed body of grace, if you have it not in a
feeling manner: the 2.
sanctifying spirit works a spiritual sense, and taste in the soul, that is,
if you have the sanctifying spirit, then holy things will have a good taste,
they will be sweet unto you, it will purge out that which is contrary to the
growth of the inward man: on the contrary, the common spirit will never make
you to taste grace, as it is grace, or because it is grace, that is, grace will
not be a dainty thing, it will be without a good savor. Therefore examine
what taste of good you have, whether you can relish grace, or no; if not, you
have not the sanctifying spirit, but an assumed habit of grace, that is, a
common spirit without the life of grace.

Thirdly, as assumed bodies are unconstant, that is, walk only for a time,
but they walk not always; 3.
even so if you have but a common spirit, you will not be constant in good, but
off and on the rule. A man that is living in Christ, you shall still find him
living and moving, and doing the actions of the new man, a man that has but a
common spirit, may do somethings that are good, he may keep and press down
some sin awhile, but not always; neither then, because it is sin, but
because it crosses his profit or pleasure or some other thing. Again, he may
have some taste and relish of spiritual things, but he is not purged and
cleansed by them; First, he may walk as a living man walks, that is, perform
holy duties, but they are not constant in holy duties, neither do they
perform them in obedience, but out of self love, that is, they are still
ebbing, and seldom flowing, they omit ofter then they perform. Therefore let
me exhort you that are alive, and have been dead, be you careful to prize
your life, and you that have been alive, but now are dead, that is, you that
have fallen from your holiness, and zeal, and have lost your first love, and
strength, labor now to recover it again. And you that are alive, and yet are
falling, let me exhort you to strengthen the things that are ready to dye: if
there be any here such, let them now humble themselves, and seek the spirit
with earnestness, that ye may be renewed, that ye may be strengthened, and
quickened to good, and received to favor again, but if you will not, but
continue in this condition still, you have but a name that you are alive, but
indeed you are dead. Romans 6. 8. it is said, that they that dye in Christ shall
live in him, Romans 6. 8.
if you once live the life of grace, and have received the sanctifying spirit,
you shall never dye but live for ever in Christ: this was the promise that
Christ made unto his Disciples, and in them unto every Christian that he would
send the spirit, and he should abide with them forever, Therefore examine, if
the spirit do not remain in you, and make you constant in good, it is not the
sanctifying spirit.

The fifth sign, whereby you shall know whether you have the sanctifying
spirit, or no, is this, 5. Sign.
examine whether it be the spirit of adoption: if it make you to call God,
Father, then it is the sanctifying spirit, Gal. 4. 6. We have received the
spirit Gal. 4. 5. 6.
of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, this is the property of the holy man;
no wicked man can call God Father, because they have not amity with God, they
neither love God, neither does God love them. The Apostle says, I do this to
prove or know the naturalnesse of your love, they 2 Cor. 8. 8.
that have the spirit, they have as it were a natural inclination wrought in
them, to love God again, and delight in God, and in the Communion of Saints;
and therefore our Savior says, John 4. 34. It is my meat and drink, to do
the will of my Father: John 4. 34.
he that has God for his father, will serve him willingly without constraint,
as willingly as a man will cate meat. A man will eat and drink without
wages, he needs not have wages to do that, so he that has the spirit, he will
delight in doing Gods will; he would serve God, though he should give him
nothing, and this that God is our Father, it will raise some like affections in
us to love God again: so likewise in prayer, to have God to be our father, it
raises some like affections in us, whereby we do not only believe that the
things we pray for, we shall have: but we have boldness, also to come unto
him, as unto a Father, which no man can do till he have this Spirit of
adoption; Therefore examine, with what confidence and boldness you pray, with
what reverence you hear, with what affections you love; examine whether you
have the Spirit, that does make you to call God Father.

The sixth sign, whereby you shall know whether 6. Sign.
you have the Spirit, or no, is this; you shall know it by the manner of
working; if it change you, and lie combating in you, as Gal. 5. 17. The Gal. 5.
17.
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: if you
have the spirit you will have a continual fighting, and striving in the soul,
and this will not only be against one, or some more particular lusts, but it
will be against all that it knows to be sins: I say not, that there is only
a striving or a suppressing, but a lusting, or a striving and suppressing by
way of lusting; because a natural man that has not the sanctifying Spirit,
may keep down a lust for some by-respects, but it is not by lusting, it is
not because his heart hates it, or suppresses it by another power then a
natural power; for they retain the love of sin still: but the opposition
and resisting of sin in the godly, is by way of lusting; because they hate
the sin and they fight against it with courage. Therefore examine, what
lusting there is in you, what hating of sin, and then see with what courage
and power you go about the subduing of it. It is said, that John Baptist came
in the Spirit of Eliah, that is, he came with that Spirit, that is full of
power: you will fight but faintly against sin, except you have the Spirit.
Acts 4. they spoke with great boldness, that is, they had greater power to
Acts 4. 14.
speak then before, therefore the Lord exhorts all men, in Esa. 31. 3. trust
not in them, they are men and not Gods: as if the very name of men were Isa.
31. 3.
weakness, they are men they have no power, it is God that has power, and
therefore trust not in them, but in every thing labor to see the power of God
in it, and seek for all spiritual power to good from God, and examine your
selves, what power you have when you pray, what power have you to go through
it to the end, when you hear, what power have you to edification; when you see
evil, what power have you to avoid it, when you are offered the profits and
pleasures of the world, what power have you to forsake them if they may prove
hurtful unto the inward man; if you have strong lusts in you, what power have
you to suppress and lust against them; therefore you shall know by this,
whether you have the sanctifying Spirit or no, by the manner of working of it.

The seventh sign, whereby you shall know, whether you have the sanctifying
Spirit or no, is 7. Sign.
this, you shall know it by your carriage in your words and actions, and by
your Christian-like walking and holy conversation, and this is the same that
the Apostle speaks of, when he would assure them of their resurrection unto
life, in Romans 6. 8. Romans 6. 8.
If you dye with Christ, you shall also rise with Christ again, if your
actions be the actions of the Spirit, proceeding from the inward man, and have
some resemblance with Christ, showing that you are dead with him, then you
shall rise again to life with him, and then in Romans 8. 14. he comes unto the
works of the Spirit, so many, says he, as are Romans 8. 14.
lead by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God, that is, they are lead
unto all holy actions; and then he comes, in Gal. 5. 22. unto the first fruits
Gal. 5. 22.
of the Spirit: the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, peace, etc. well then,
examine, whether you have the Spirit by the actions of the Spirit, and by the
working of the Spirit, and by the teaching of the Spirit: for it is the Spirit,
that is the Doctor of the soul, that teaches it all spiritual and saving
knowledge, and therefore the Lord says, you shall not need to be taught of one
another, for you shall be all taught of God; that is, men's teaching will never
be effectual to work grace and holiness in you except God teach you by his
Spirit.

Now you must know that there is a twofold teaching: First, there is a teaching
of beasts by man, that they may be serviceable unto men, which may serve to
put men in mind of this spiritual teaching; for as God has put such a nature
into some beasts, that they cannot choose but obey being taught; there is a
kind of necessity laid upon them by God in the very instinct of nature: so when
the Spirit comes into the heart of a Christian, it opens another light in the
mind, which makes them to do Gods will as he teaches them. And therefore the
Apostle says, That I need not to teach you to love, for you are taught 1 These.
4. 9.
of God to love one another: that is, there is a kind of necessity laid upon
you: therefore you must needs love: I grant that sometimes a thief may be in
the high way, but it is for a booty; and a holy man may be out of the way, he
may have slipped aside the way; but here is the difference, the one A maine
difference between a holy man, and a wicked man:
sets himself of purpose to do evil, but the other is forced unto evil
unwillingly, and you shall know the difference between these two in these
things, if a holy man have gone besides the way, as soon as the passion or
temptation is once past, he will return again unto the right way, he will
not go forward nor stand still, but he will return; but the other though in
some sense he knows it, and is told that he is off the rule, yet he cares not
he will go on forward: therefore examine, what fruits of the spirit do you
bring forth, and what way do you delight in, are you in the way of holiness?
Do you delight to pray, to hear, to receive, do you love God and Christ, and
the Communion of Saints? then it is a sign that you have the spirit, but on
the contrary if you follow drunkenness, and uncleanenesse, and profaning of
the Sabbath and idleness, and go on herein, as in your way you had never the
spirit. Again, consider what are your walks, that is, do you follow your old
evil haunts, now as fast as ever you did, it is a sign that you have not the
spirit. Again, think not it will excuse you to say, whatsoever your actions
be, yet you have good hearts, you must know that your hearts are much worse
then your actions, as I said before; for if you had the spirit, it would not be
idle in you, but as it makes the heart holy, so likewise it sends forth holy
speeches, and actions unto the life. The working power of the Spirit is
excellently set forth betwixt Eliah and Elizeus. In that story it is said, that
Eliah cast his mantle about Elizeus, then presently Elizeus cries out, let me
go first, and 1 King. 19. 19, 20, 21.
take leave of my father, and then I will go with thee. Eliah might have well
reasoned thus with him, what have I done unto thee or what have I spoken unto
thee, that you should thus reply unto me, as if I tied thee to the contrary;
said I any such a word unto thee, that thou must not go: but there was a kind
of necessity laid upon Elizeus by the Spirit to go with him, and therefore
he brake out into these words, that is, the Spirit now entered into his heart,
that he was not now his own man, he must go whither the Spirit will have
him, and do what the Spirit bids him, and so we see in Acts 4. 20. when the
Jews came to Peter, and commanded that he should not Preach Christ unto them,
he answers, that he cannot choose but he must preach Christ: and in the
beginning of the Chapter you shall see the reason of it, They had received the
holy Ghost and they spoke boldly: therefore you see that the Spirit is not
idle, but he is marvelous working and operative, therefore examine what power
you have, what actions you have, and what fruit you bring forth.

But you may say, that sometimes the spirit seems to be dead in the heart:
therefore it is not Object.
always working.

To this I answer that the property of the spirit is always to work, and it
does always work, Answ.
but he may sometimes withdraw his actions of growing, as when a temptation
comes: and you are taken in it: there the spirit seems to absent himself by
with drawing his power, but notwithstanding he works still, for at the
instant, there is lusting, and laboring in you against it, and afterward he
gives you power to return again. Again, it is not always thus with you, but
sometimes: thus much for this use.

The next use stands thus, if the holy Ghost strengthens us in the inward man,
then let me exhort Use 2.
you above all things to seek the Spirit, because it will do so: what would a
man desire either for the outward or inward man; if he have the spirit, he
shall obtain it, would a man be enabled to pray, would a man be enabled to
bear losses and crosses: would a man master particular lusts, is a man in
bondage, and would be set at liberty from sin, is a man spiritually dead,
and numbe, is a man spiritually affrighted with sin? would a

(...) there they took away his strength; and it weakens us, because it draws
the affections away from God, but when the spirit comes, then it casts us into
another frame; as appears, if we do but compare these two places together,
James 4. 5. with Act. 20. 22. Saint James says, that the spirit James 4. 5.
Acts 20. 22.
lusts after envy: it labors to carry us head long unto the committing of
sin, and to the doing of that which is evil; but then comes the sanctifying
spirit, and it stays us and makes us to lust after good, that is, it binds up
our hearts, and suffers us not to do that which otherwise we would do:
therefore examine whether you are bound with another spirit that you do not
the evil that you would: then it is certain that you have the holy spirit;
Therefore Paul in the place before named said, that he was bound in the spirit
for Jerusalem: as if he should say, the Spirit of God bound up my Spirit to
go, that I cannot otherwise choose, therefore what do you mean to break my
heart, do you mean to hinder me, I tell you there is a kind of necessity
laid upon me by the spirit, and I must go whatsoever does befall me: for it is
the office of the spirit to bind up our spirits, and therefore in Revel. 1. 10.
It is said, that John was in the spirit: that is, he was compassed Revel. 1. 10.
about with the spirit: he was in the spirit as a man is in Armor, it keeps I
say our hearts in a spiritual disposition, that it shall not do the evil
that it would.

The second benefit that a Christian has by the 2. Benefit.
spirit, is this, it enables a Christian both to see and believe the things
that otherwise he would not believe. I gather it from that place of the
Prophet, Isai. 6. 9. where it is said, seeing they should see, and not
perceive, and hearing they should hear, and Isaiah 6. 9.
not under stand: they saw but they wanted another sight, which is the sight of
the spirit, and therefore they cannot see: a man may have great sight in humane
things by learning, and Philosophy, and the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, by
these he may see both into natural and spiritual things in some measure: but
I say he cannot see as he should, except he have added unto this another
sight, which is the sight that the spirit brings; and therefore it is called
the opening of the eyes, and the boring of the ears, and it is the same that
St. John speaks of, in John 1. 5. That the light shone in Ioh. 1. 5.
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not: before a man have this
sight of the spirit, whatsoever he sees, yet it is with a great deal of
darkness, but when the spirit comes, it drives away this darkness, by
giving us another eye to see through it. And the darkness comprehended it not,
so that till a man have the spirit, he does neither truly see, nor believe.
You cannot believe till you have the spirit, but when you have got the spirit,
then you will believe in Christ. We preach Christ unto all and exhort you to
believe, but what is the reason that some believe, and others believe not, but
because they do not see; they want the spirit to show them sin, to humble
them, and Christ to comfort them: and therefore Peter calls them purblind. As
men that are purblind cannot see things a far off, except they be near, so
men without the spirit are but purblind, men that cannot see Christ, and Grace,
and Salvation a far off, as near: but if they had the Spirit, then they
would see them near hand, that is, you would see a mavelous beauty in
Christ, and holiness: it is that which the Apostle speaks of, in 1 Cor. 2. 9.
The eye has not seen, etc. that is, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
he saw them before, but he saw them not in that manner he sees them now, they
are represented unto him in another fashion. Again, he sees them in another
hue, he sees another beauty in them, thus you see the sanctifying spirit
opens the eye of the understanding, to see more. A blind man might see if he
had but the faculty of seeing, so a spiritual blind man will see when he has
the spirit.

The third benefit, that a Christian has by the 3. Benefit.
Spirit, is this, it breeds heavenly and spiritual effects in the soul, as
joy, and comfort, and the like: and therefore in John 14. he is called the
Comforter. First, I say, the Spirit will beget joy in the soul, Ioh. 14. 26. 1.
and therefore says Christ, he will (speaking of the Spirit) lead you unto
all peace, and joy in believing: now I make a difference between joy and
comfort thus; joy is unto the soul, as a wall is unto a City, the wall does
compass the City, and so is a defense for it, that is, it keeps petty
dangers out; so does joy, it walls and fences the soul, and keeps out many
enemies, that otherwise would destroy it. (2.) effect is comfort, and this I
call a Bulwark: because a Bulwark is of 2.
greater strength to beat back, and keep out any that shall besiege it, and
makes the Citizens more secure; so comfort is the Bulwark of the soul,
against the greatest temptations and trials, it makes the soul secure,
resting upon Christ. (3.) effect, that the Spirit begets, is boldness, that
is, 3.
there is no true boldness without the Spirit: Let Adam witness it, ask him
what boldness he had when he hid himself from God, and what was the reason
of it; but because he wanted the Spirit, and on the contrary, when the
Disciples had received the Spirit, they spoke with boldness. (4.) effect, that
the Spirit begets, is, holy and heavenly desires in the soul, therefore the
Church in 4.
the Canticles, when she had got the Spirit, she had bred in her loving
desires after Christ, as in Canticles 1. 7. she is mavelous inquisitive
where Cant. 1. 7.
to find Christ; for what is the reason that there is in men such a want of
holy desires: but because they have not this Spirit. (5.) effect, that the
Spirit 5.
begets is holy indignation, that is holy anger, it is an effect of the Spirit,
and therefore the Apostle says, in 2. Cor. 7. 11. what indignation or wrath, 2
Cor. 7. 11.
this he speaks in the commendation of the Corinthians, men will not be angry
with sin as evil, till they get the Spirit. (6.) effect of the Spirit, 6.
is holy affections; it will make you to have heavenly affections to God, to
grace, to the Saints; therefore the Lord says, Ezech. 36. 26. I will give you
a new heart: carnal men, they may do something Ezekiel. 36. 26.
to make their children reverence them, or to love them, in regard of some
domination, they may proffer an object; but they cannot beget holy affections,
this is the only work of the Spirit thus to change the heart. (7.) effect of
the Spirit, is this, it will purge the soul, it will cast out all 7.
rubbish out of the soul; therefore the Lord says, that he will purge the
sons of Levi: as silver, Mal. 3. 3.
that is, that they may be fit for the Priesthood, he will purge out of them by
the Spirit, that which otherwise would make them unfit. And David often in
Psalm. 51. verse. 2. 7. prays that the Lord Psalm. 51. 27.
would purge him, wash him, and cleanse him from his sin, and then after he
prays, for the Verse 10. Verse 12.
restoring of the Spirit, making the absence of the Spirit, the cause of his
uncleanness (8.) effect of the Spirit, is this, it kindles holy affections to
good 8.
in us. I said before, that the holy Spirit works holy affections in us, but
now I add that he kindles those affections in us to good, and this is that
which gives us great advantage against sin, I say, we have no small
advantage of the devil, but great advantage, when the heart is full of
heavenly affections, and that for these Reasons.

The first Reason is, because the more holy affections the better man, God
accounts more of 1. Reason.
him: a man is esteemed of God as he has, or has not holy affections; a man
is that which he is in his affections: a man is not a good man, because he
knowea much, but he is a holy man, because he has holy affections, that is, he
is full of love to God, to Christ, and to the Saints.

The second Reason is, because holy affections, 2. Reason.
they are a means, or a second cause of good, they are the cause of good
actions, as for example: for a man to suffer for Christ, and yet not to do it
with holy affections, out of love unto Christ, it is nothing worth; therefore
when the affections are right, they are drawn upward by the Spirit, both to
do, and to suffer.

The third Reason is, because holy affections, 3. Reason.
they widen the soul, they make the soul large, for when holy affections are
dead in you, the soul will begin to shrink in; even as cloth that is not
thoroughly made, when water falls upon, it will run in, but if you stretch
it, it will come to the same length again; so when the Spirit comes and works
holy affections, they widen the soul and make it large and firm: therefore
that you may have large hearts in prayer, in meditation, labor to get the
Spirit, that you may have holy affections kindled in you.

The fourth benefit, that a Christian has by 4. Benefit.
the Spirit is this, it will make the heart good, because it is the proper
work of the holy Ghost, to sanctifle the heart, to cleanse and change, and so
make it good; it is the work of the Spirit to work repentance in us, a through
change in us: I call repentance a through change, because men for the most part
mistake repentance, taking that for repentance which is no repentance, men
think that if they be turned this way and that way, from this sin and that
sin, though it be not from every sin and evil way, that they have true
repentance, but they are deceived; for repentance is a thorough change of the
whole man, consisting both of soul and body, whereby the parts and faculties
of both are turned a quite contrary way; the heart is turned out of the way of
sin, into the way of holiness: now that a partial turning is not
repentance, I will make clear by this comparison: take any natural thing,
that is of an earthly substance, whose nature is to go downward, yet you may
force it upwards by means that you may use; as for example, water you know is
of an earthly substance, and the nature of it is to descend, yet you see by the
force and strength of the Sun, it is drawn upward; first, into vapors, and
then congealed into ice and snow, and rain, and then it will not rest till it
descend again: but there is another ascent of the fire, and that is upward and
not forced, but naturally does ascend up: even so a carnal man may do the
same things that a spiritual man does, he may keep down some lust, and he
may forsake some evil, he may forsake his drunkenness and uncleanness, and
his old evil haunts, yea he may do some good, but yet he does not forsake the
evil, neither does he do the good, by the power of the sanctifying Spirit,
but by a natural strength; if he does a good action, it is by constraint, he
is forced by something

(...) Spirit is a free agent, it works freely of himself, therefore to whom
it goes, it goes as a free gift. Now that the Spirit is a free agent, it
appears by this, that reason makes man to be a free agent, but it is the
Spirit that gives reason, therefore the Spirit must needs be most free.

Thirdly, the Spirit must be a free gift, by his 3.
carriage to them he will save; he might have chosen the elder and not the
younger, he might have chosen Esau and not Jacob; or if he would have chosen
the younger, then he might have brought him first out of the womb, but he
will not, because he is most free in his choice, he will save Jacob and cast
off Esau; and so he might have chosen honorable and noble men, to have both
preached the Gospel, and to be all saved by the Gospel; he might have chosen
them only, for salvation, but he will not, but the poor they shall receive the
Gospel, he will make choice of them for salvation; he might have chosen Simon
Magus, as well as Simon Peter, but he will not, therefore you see he is free.

Fourthly, the Spirit is free, which appears by the paucitie of them he
chooses, he is at liberty, 4.
he might have saved more, but this shows his freedom, he is not tied to one
more then unto another, the wind blows where it lists, John 3. 8. he
calls when and whom he will: Let them Ioh. 3. 8.
come in that my house may be full: none shall come, no more, no less then I
have chosen.

Fifthly, the Spirit is a free gift, which appears 5.
by the prosecution of his decree, both of Election and Reprobation; nothing
more free then the Spirit is; he might, as I said, have chosen Esau and not
Jacob; for there cannot a reason be given, wherefore he should choose the one,
and not the other, he will choose the wife and not the husband, he will choose
the husband and not the wife, he will choose the child and not the father,
and he will choose the father and not the child: again, he will choose this
man and that woman, and not another man, or another woman; and what is the
reason of it, surely there can be no reason given of it, but because the Spirit
is free to choose and choose not: thus briefly I have showed you that the
Spirit is a free gift.

Is the spirit a free gift, and does it work freely, then let them consider
this and tremble, that are Use.
not sanctified by the Spirit; and in whom the spirit has not yet wrought his
good work, least they may seem to be deprived. Again, if the wind blows
where it lists, then it stands you upon, to do as Millars are wont to do,
to watch the opportunity, and grind: if the Spirit does blow upon you, if at
any time the Spirit does kindle any spark of grace in you, take heed of
neglecting the opportunity: do not say in this case unto the spirit, as Festus
said unto Paul: that you will hear him another time; but be sure, if the
spirit commands do you run, or if he calls be sure to answer him, least he
call you no more. I have often told you, that there is a time when he will call
you no more: therefore think with your selves what a time of darkness, and
sorrow it will be to you then, when with the five foolish Virgins, you shall
be shut out of heaven and happiness: I say, there is a time when he will
swear that you shall not enter into his rest; and do not only labor and
watch for the opportunity, to take the Spirit when it is offered, but labor to
get the opportunity. Use the means whereby you may get him, and for your help
herein I will lay down some means whereby you may get the spirit.

The first means to get the Spirit, is this, you must labor to know the
Spirit: for what is the 1. Means.
reason that men do not receive the spirit, but because they know him not:
they do not know him in his purity, in his free working, in his
incomprehensible greatness, in his increate holiness; and therefore they put
off the working of the Spirit. Men think that now their sin in this kind is
not so great as Simon Magus was; it is true say they, Simon Magus sin was a
great sin, and worthy of punishment, because he thought to have bought the
Spirit with money; but if we well consider men's dealings now with the Spirit,
we shall find that the same sin is committed now: I say, men think they
do not commit this sin of Simon Magus, when indeed you do; you know how
great the sin was in him, and what a judgment was inflicted by pronunciation
against him, and your sins are as great and the same, but you know them not:
and therefore let us compare them together, and you shall see that they are the
same, and all one, and that in these three particulers.

First, Simon Magus thought that the Spirit 1.
might have been had at any time, for he neglected the means, and despised
that, presuposing, that at any time with a small reward he might get it of the
Apostles; what shall I give thee, etc. Even so when you put off the spirit, is
not your sin, the same thinking that you may have him when you will, that you
can have him at your pleasure to mortify a strong lust, a sin that you would
be rid of: and for a sin that is pleasing unto your nature, you can when you
will subdue it, you can when you will forbear it, and is not this one part of
Simon Magus his sin.

Secondly, Simon Magus thought it was in the power of men to give the Spirit;
What shall I give 2.
thee, Peter, for the spirit: and is not your sin the same; do not many men
think, that it is in the power of men, to give the spirit when all the time of
their life they will neglect the calling of the Spirit; but in some great
affliction, when they lie upon their death beds, then they will send for the
Minister, but not till then, as if it were in his power to give the Spirit? O
Sir, what shall I do to be saved, can you tell me of any hope of salvation,
and the like.

Thirdly, Simon Magus, he desired the spirit to a wrong end, namely, for his
own advantage, 3.
That upon whomsoever I shall lay my hands, they may receive the holy Ghost;
and do not men do the like they desire to have the spirit, and they could wish
with all their hearts, that they had him; but yet not for a right end, for Gods
glory, but for some carnal end of their own, that they may be reputed thus
and thus, but not to any other end. For know that a man may desire grace, but
if the aim of his desire be for his own end, the desire is sin, the same
that Simon Magus was: therefore I beseech you defer not, put not off the
opportunity; and remember what the Lord says, Hebr. 3. 15. to day if ye will
hear his voice harden not your hearts: this Heb. 3. 15.
is the day; now you have the opportunity, the candle is in your hands, and
you may light your soul by it, the Word is near you; Well, light your candles
by it, you may now light them whilst the fire is here, but if you will not
now, how will you when the candle is out, when you shall be either taken from
the means, or else the means from you, therefore labor to know the spirit,
and judge aright of him, if you would get him.

The second means to get the spirit is to believe, 2. Means.
and the best means to get faith is to be conscionable and constant in hearing
the Word preached; the preaching of the Word, is a means to get the spirit,
and therefore the Apostle says, received you the Spirit by the works of the
Law, or else by faith preached? Gal. 3. You may know whether Gal. 3. 2.
you have the spirit or no by this, examine whether you have gotten faith by
the preaching of the Word, our Savior says, that the tree is known by Matthew.
12. 33.
his fruit: the branch cannot bear fruit, except it receive virtue and
strength from the root; so if we get not faith in Christ, and be joined with
him, we shall never get the spirit: therefore if you would get the spirit, you
must get faith: for faith is the knitting and drawing grace, it will draw the
spirit into the soul, and it will knit him fast unto the soul, that he can
never depart away from it: faith will recover the Spirit if it seem to want
his power of working in the soul, it will return him if he seem to depart
away, it will enlarge the heart if the spirit be scanted in it, it will widen
the narrow bottle of your hearts; and you know what Christ said unto the woman
in the Gospel, So be it unto thee according unto thy faith; therefore if you
would get the spirit, you must get faith in your hearts, if you would get a
large measure of the spirit, then get a large measure of faith: for what is the
reason that men thrive not in the spirit, but because they thrive not in faith.

The third means to get the spirit, is an earnest desire, joined with prayer:
to desire and pray earnestly 3. Means.
for the spirit, is a means to get the spirit: an instance of this we have in
Elisha, servant to Eliah; he earnestly desires and prays that the Spirit of
Eliah his master might be doubled upon him: not that he meant that he might
have as much more again, but that he might have a greater measure of the
Spirit, then other of the Prophets; and he did obtain his desire, for he was
endued with a greater measure of the Spirit, then other of the Prophets were:
even so if you would but desire and pray earnestly for the Spirit, you might
get him. Solomon desired wisdom, 1 Kin. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12.
and prayed for it, and he had it, and that in a larger measure, then those
that went before him; so if you would pray for the spirit, you have his
promise, Luke 11. 13. That he will give the Holy Ghost Luke 11. 13.
unto them that ask him: and this he does speak by way of opposition, if you
that are evil can give good things unto your children, then much more will God
give you his Spirit; that is, if a man will be importunate for grace, and the
spirit, as a child will be unto his father for bread, then he cannot deny you.

But you will say, if he were my father, and I his child, then it is true he
would give me his spirit, Object.
but alas he is not, for any thing I know, neither my father, nor I his child.

To this I answer, suppose thou be not his child, in thy own apprehension, yet
look back unto Answ.
the 8. verse. and see what Importunity does, though he would not open the
door, and give him that which he would have, yet in regard of the importunity
of him that asks, he will open and give him what he would have: thus do you
though you may have a denial sometimes, no answer at all, or an angry answer,
yet take no denial, and your importunity will at last prevail with him: and
to encourage you against former runnings out from God, the Apostle says, that
he gives and upbraideth no man, James 1. 5. As no James 1. 5.
man meriteth at Gods hand, so no man shall be upbraided with any failing to
shame him; he gives unto all men that comes unto him, without exceptions of
person, without any gift freely, and reproaches no man, that is, he will not
lay before him, either that which might hinder him from coming unto him, or
him from receiving of him, he might do both, but he will do neither, and you
know the promise; the Disciples, they must go unto Jerusalem, and he will
after a certain Acts. 1. 4.
time send the spirit, but they must wait for him, and this they did by
constant prayer, and they had the promise made good unto them, for the holy
Ghost came upon every one of them, in Acts 2. 4. so if you be constant in
prayer, what Acts 2. 4.
though for the present you get him not; yet, at last you shall have him; thus
much for this means, if you would have the Spirit, you must pray and desire
him earnestly.

The fourth means to get the Spirit, is to obey 4. Means.
him; and this you do, when you make him good entertainment, when you feed him
with heavenly thoughts, and do what he would have you to do, but if you
slight him, set light by him, and will not obey and be ruled by him, you will
never get him, and this you do when you resist, greive, and quench the spirit;
you resist the spirit, when you resist that light which the spirit has wrought
in you, when you fight against it, against its reason and arguments, this is a
great sin; you grieve the spirit, when you mingle two contraries

(...) PAVLS CONVERSION. OR, THE RIGHT WAY TO BE SAVED. As it is excellently
well set out in diverse Doctrines raised from ACTS 9. 6. And he trembling, and
astonished, etc.

By the late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON, Dr. in
Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuell College in
Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes-Inne.

Printed at London for Andrew Crook. 1634.

The Contents of PAVLS Conversion.
NOthing can deject a sinner so much as the fearful power of God. page 108

Three things cause an astonishment:

Suddenness of evil. p. 181 Greatness Inevitableness

DOCTRINE I. He that will receive Christ or the Gospel, must first be
humbled. p. 182 Humiliation, how it is called in Scripture. 1. Pricking of the
heart. ibid. 2. Poverty in Spirit. p. 183 3. A melting heart. ibid. 4. A
trembling at the Word. p. 184
Humiliation of necessity to salvation, because without it men keep back from
Christ. Two hindrances that keepemen from Christ. 1. Unbelief. p. 187 2.
Neglect of Christ, which is twofold; 1. Total, refusing all offers of grace.
p. 188 2. Partial, having a mixture of the love of the world, and Christ. p.
189
Men compared to the three grounds in the Gospel. p. 190 Whether Humiliation
be absolutely necessary or no? p. 191 A two fold sorrow, Preparative. p. 193
Godly. p. 194 Godly and worldly sorrow differ in the Objects. p. 195 Causes.
ibid. Effects. p. 196
They are distinguished by the Ingredients. p. 197 Continuance. p. 198 Event.
ibid. The degrees of godly sorrow. p. 199 The least measure of Humiliation is
that which makes a man believe in Christ. p. 200 USE I. To examine our selves
whether we have received Christ or no; for it must be by a deep Humiliation.
p. 201 Without Humiliation no receiving the Gospel; showed in five
particulars. 1. A man will not find any need of Christ. p. 202 2. He will not
hold out to entertain Christ. p. 203 3. He will not for sake all things for
Christ. p. 204 4. He will not wholly depend on him. p. 205 5. He will not
undergo any thing for Christ's sake. 206
Means to attain humiliation of Spirit, are, I. A rectified Judgment. p. 207
From a rectified Judgment proceeds sorrow for sin, in respest, 1. Sin is
evil of its own Nature. p. 208 2. It is the greatest evil, because it
deprives us 1. Of the best outward good, which is God. ibid. 2. Of the chiefest
good within us: For, 1. It deformes the beauty and strength of the inward man.
2. It weakens grace within us. p. 209 3. It produces evil effects, ibid. 4. It
needs the greatest medicine to beale it, even Christ himself. ibid.
II. Humility of heart. p. 210 The way to get our hearts humbled, is, 1. To
labor for some sense of holiness. p. 211 2. To consider the punishment of
sin. ibid.
III. Application. p. 213 IV. Bringing things to a propinquity. p. 216 V. The
removal of all excuses. p. 818 Excuses, or deceits, are, 1 We do as well as
the best. p. 219 2 We have as good meanings as the best. p. 221 3 It is our
Nature to be thus and thus. p. 222 4 Our condition privilegeth us. p. 223 The
better the condition, the more reason to serve God. 1 Because a greater account
is to be rendered. p. 224 2 Because their knowledge is the more. p. 225 3
Because a greater Judgment will be inflicted. p. 226

VI. The obtaining of the Spirit. ibid. VII. A joining the Word with the
Spirit. p. 228 The Word will effectually humble us, 1 If we get saving
knowledge of the Word. ibid. 2 If we receive it as the Word of God. p. 229 3 If
we bring it home to the Conscience. p. 231 Three Rules that the Word by
Application may be effectual to humble us. 1 Not to defer or put off the work
of the Spirit. p. 232 2 Not to make too much haste out of humiliation. p. 233 3
To proportion humiliation to the sins. p. 235

USE. II. To exhort us to get our selves thoroughly humbled. p. 236 Motives
hereunto, are, 1. All we do, till we be humbled, is but lost labor. p. 237
Reasons hereof are, because 1 A broken heart is the Altar on which we must
offer. ib. 2 An humble soul is a fit habitation for Gods Spirit. 238 3 Without
humiliation no keeping close unto Christ. ib.

2. Whatsoever profession we make, it is worth nothing without humiliation.
Reasons hereof are, because without humiliation 1 A man withers, will not hold
out in his profession. 239 2 He will not grow strong in Christ. ibid. 3 Good
duties will be chok'd, as the seed amongst thorns p. 240
3. There can be no sound comfort without humiliation. 241 Two Questions
answered: 1 What kind of sorrow meant here. p. 242 2 Whether it be of absolute
necessity to salvation. 243
Signs to know whether we be truly humbled or no, are, I. To love much. p. 247
Motives to love Christ, grace and holiness, are, 1 To consider the goodness
and exoellency of the thing you are persuaded to. ibid. 2 To consider the good
you see in Christ, is yours, if you be his. p. 248

II. To tremble at the Word Preached. p. 249 III. To be affected with the Word
when it comes in the edence of the Spirit. p. 251 In the Word two things: 1
Meat. ibid. 2 Medicine. p. 253
IV. To be little in ones own eyes. p. 254 V. To yield a general obedience
unto Christ. p. 255 Humiliation fits the soul for obedience, because 1 It
makes a man see God in his holiness and power* 256 2 It makes him desire the
favor of God. ibid. 3 It makes him choose God to be his master. p. 257 4 It
tames the stubbornness of our Nature. ibid. 5 It makes him willing to suffer
any thing for Christ. p. 258
VI. To prize Christ above the things of the world. p. 259
DOCT. II. Sin in it self is full of grief and bitterness, and men shall
find it so, sooner or later. p. 260 Proved to be bitter. p. 261 Men shall find
it so, for these reasons; because 1 Otherwise God should lose his glory. p. 262
2 Every sin is the breach of a just Law. p. 263 3 It is Gods Justice to
punish sinners. p. 264
God suspends the execution of Judgment, 1 Because the time of punishment is
not yet come. p. 265 2 For the Churches increase. p. 266 3 For the good of some
that are yet to be called. ibid. 4 For try all of the heart. p. 267 5 Because
their afflistions are greater than other men's, though they seem not so: and
that in these respects: 1 Because God denies them grace. p. 268 2 The
prosperity of the wicked is a punishment. ibid. 3 They wither and dry in their
sins. ibid. 4 They have many afflictions we know not of. p. 269

USE. I. To teach us not to delude our selves in the matter of afflictions. p.
269 Motives to forsake sin, are, 1. Sin will make you ashamed. p. 271 2. If
you sin, God will beat you. p. 272 God corrects his children when they
sin, sor two reasons. 1 Because sin is sin with God, in whomsoever it is.
ibid. 2 Because Gods children are the Temptes of the holy Ghost, wherein God
delights to dwell. p. 273 Six objections concerning Gods punishing sin,
answered. p. 274 3. Sin will take away your excellency. p. 277 4. The least
sin violateth the peace of conscience. p. 278 5. Sin will bring upon you all
manner of miseries. ibid. 6. Sin can yield no true comfort or content. p. 280
7. Sin is restless. p. 281 8. Sin has no familiarity with God, p. 282 9. If
you live in sin, God will show no mercy. ibid. 10. Sin breaks the Covenant
betwixt God and you. p. 283 11. Sin is a Thief. p. 284 12. Sin is the greatest
enemy God has. p. 285 13 Sin will make you come weeping home. p. 286 14 No
content so long as you live in sin. p. 287 15 Sin will make you confess your
selves to be fools. ib. 16 Sin will take you away from God, and God from you.
p. 288
Motives to hate sin in regard of God: 1. God does take notice of all you
do. p. 289 2. When God strikes for sin, his wrath exceeding bitter. ibid. 3.
The longer God stays from striking sins, the greater and terribler his
stroke when it comes. p. 290
DOCTR. III. Christ is exceeding merciful and ready to show mercy to those
that are truly humbled. p. 291 REAS. I. Because mercy pleases him. p. 293
REAS. II. Mercy is natural unto God. ibid. REAS. III. God is rich in mercy.
ibid. REAS. IV. God is our Father. ibid. USE. I. To draw us close to God,
because he is merciful. ibid. OBJECT. My sins so many, so great, I fear
Christ will not receive me. p. 294 ANSW. Gods mercy is infinite, and so are not
thy sins. p. 294 USE. II. To exhort men not to neglest those means whereby
grace is got. p. 294 Helps, not to put off Repentance, but to get grace, are 1
To take the time and opportunity when Grace is ofred. ibid. 2 Repentance is not
in thine own power. p. 295





PAVLS CONVERSION.
ACTS 9. 6. And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, What will thou have me
to do? And the Lord said unto him, arise, and go into the City, and it shall
be told thee what thou must do.
IN this verse we have the first act of Paul's conversion from being a
persecutor to be an Apostle. In the words, there are two parts. The first is
the manner of it: he trembled, and was astonished: Secondly, the plyablenesse
of his will, and he said, Lord what will thou have me to do: but before we
come to any observations, we will open the words unto you.

[Trembling.] Trembling is an effect of fear, which fear is seated in the
affecttive part of the soul: for when the understanding apprehends any thing,
whether good or evil, then the affections come and apply it, either unto joy
or sorrow.

Now the affections may be considered either in regard of good or evil: in
regard of good, and that either present which breeds joy; or future, and to
come, whence flows desire: for desire is of some good, not present, but to
come. Secondly, I say, the affections may be considered in regard of evil,
and that likewise either as present, which breeds sorrow, or to come whence
flows abomination, or an affection, by which we fly and shun this evil.
Again, if a man apprehends the good which is to come, as possible, though hard
to be obtained, this breeds hope. And so if the evil be apprehended as
future, and hard to be shunned, it works fear. And this was Paul's fear, he
apprehended affliction, as coming, and hard to be avoided; the Judge as
terrible, and that there was no way to escape, and therefore he trembled. He
was in a great perplexity and fear, after that the Lord had shown unto him a
glimpse of his dreadful power. Whence we may see, That nothing will so much
deject a sinner, as when he sees the fearful power of God. When Observation.
there is a crevis opened unto him, whereby he who is a sinner sees into the
holiness and the purity of God, and the vileness of his own nature, hence
he fears; and therefore it was that Adam feared, when he heard but the voice
of God in Genesis 3. 10.
the Garden: and the Israelites could not endure the presence of God, because
that it was terrible unto them. For they conceived as the Scripture speaks,
That no man could see God and live: that is, see him according to the excellent
greatness of his power, and majesty, but it would utterly overwhelme them, so
that there should no longer life remain in them; whence was their fear.

[And astonished.] This is another effect of fear, or a further degree of it:
he apprehends such a sight of the power of God, and of his own estate, that
is, this light did so shine into his soul, that he was at a nonplus, not
knowing what to do, or how to escape. Now there are three things that make an
astonishment: First, if the danger Three things cause Astonishment.
be sudden, for else it will not astonish, for that which is known before,
will not cause astonishment. 1.
Secondly, if it be great, for a small evil will not astonish a man, but when
a man apprehends 2.
a great evil present, then he is astonished at it. Thirdly, if it be
inevitable: when a man is compassed about with it, that he cannot get out;
there 3.
is no door to escape, but he must needs abide it, hence proceeds an
astonishment: thus it was with Paul. It was sudden, a light shoone; it was
great for he persecuted Christ, for which he was stricken Acts 9. 4.
down; and it was inevitable, he saw no way to escape: it is hard for thee to
kick against the pricks, that is, it is in vain for thee Paul to set thy
Verse 5.
self against me and prevail, there will be no resisting without great
danger: thus when he saw no way, by no shift to escape, then he was
astonished. I might note many doctrines from the words, but least I should be
prevented in the maine, I will therefore omit them, and come unto the proper
point intended by the holy Ghost, which is this.

That whosoever will receive Christ, and be ingrafted Doctrine.
into him, and receive the Gospel as he ought to do he must be first humbled:
I say, it is necessary for the right receiving of Christ, that a Christian be
humbled. It is a necessary condition, because no man will receive Christ till
then: till he be cast down, Christ will not be prized, grace will not be
esteemed; and then he will see a necessity of Christ and holiness. Now that
humiliation is of such necessity, we will prove by Scripture, even by those
phrases, by which this humiliation is set forth.

First, it is called a pricking of the heart, Acts 2. 37. And when they heard
it, they were pricked in Acts 2. 37.
their hearts; they had then broken hearts, they were thoroughly humbled, and
when it was thus with them, then they can inquire after Christ, what shall we
do to be saved; and on the contrary, that which keeps men from Christ, is the
want of sound humiliation, in Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will take away Ezech. 36. 26.
the stony heart out of you, and I will give you a heart of flesh (that is)
till I have made you sensible of sin you will not prize me, that is, you
will not do it till you be humbled. Again, consider that Christ came to this
end, to revive the humble sinner, Esa. 61. 1. the spirit of the Lord is come
upon me, to preach glad tidings to the meek, to Isai. 61. 1.
bind up the broken hearted, he that is not broken hearted and wounded with
sin, will not seek to the Physician to be healed, Christ is no precious
balm unto him. He feels himself not a prisoner to sin, and therefore cares
not for the liberty that is in grace, because he is not broken hearted, but if
he were thoroughly humbled, it would be far otherwise with him.

Secondly, it is called poor in spirit, in Matthew. 2. Matthew. 5. 3.
5. 3. those who are broken hearted and mourn for sin, will seek to be
enriched by Christ, and therefore Christ promises to comfort these, in Esa. 61.
2. to comfort those that mourn: those that Isai. 61. 2.
are are thus spiritually poor, and mourn for the want of grace, shall have
comfort, because I am come to this end; the contrary to this you shall see, in
Revel. 3. 17. the Laodiceans, they thought Revel. 3. 17.
themselves to be rich wanting nothing, and therefore they sought not after
Christ, but thou art poor, and blind, and naked: the way to make thee to come
unto me, is to humble thee in the sight of thy spiritual poverty.

Thirdly, it is called a melting heart, that is, such a heart, as will take any
impression of grace, this 3.
we see in the 2. Chron. 34. 27. Because thy heart melted 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.
within thee, and thou humbledst thy self before me, that is, because thou
wast thoroughly humbled, and thy heart sensible of sin, and of the Judgments
that I would bring upon thy people, therefore I have heard thy prayer: if thou
had not been humbled, thou could not have sought to have made thy peace
with me: so in Ier. 31. 19. after Ierem. 31. 19.
that I turned, I repented and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh, I was ashamed. So that till a man be humbled, he will not turn unto
Christ, but when he is humbled, then he will seek unto Christ and be ashamed
of himself: the contrary to this we see, in Hosea 4. 16. Israel is like an
untamed heiffer: viz. because she was not humbled. Hosea 4. 16.


Fourthly, it is called a trembling at the Word, 4.
Isai. 66. 2. and Job 42. 5. 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear, therefore I abhor my self, Isaiah 66. 2. Job 42. 5. 6.
etc. that is, when I heard thee in thy Word, it much humbled me, and caused
me basely to esteem of my self, and highly to esteem of thy favor. Prove.
28. 14. Blessed is the man that fears always: the contrary to this is
hardness of heart, Prove. 28. 14.
when the Word wants this effect to humble men, they fear not at all.

Now that this humiliation is a necessary condition, will appear more
apparently and fully, if we do but consider Gods dealing with men in all ages:
I say, it is the course that God himself takes; first, to humble sinners. Thus
he dealt with Adam, Genesis 3. 8. When he heard the voice of God, he trembled and
feared: and thus he dealt with the Genesis 3. 8.
children of Israel, he shows unto them but a glimpse of his power at the
delivering of the law, Exodus 20. 18.
and they were much cast down. Again, this was the course that the Prophets
used: when they came unto any people, you shall see they first pronounce the
judgments of God against them: Thus and thus says the Lord, etc. thoroughly to
humble them; and then after they preach of mercy, and the loving kindness of
God, of the readiness of God, to receive those unto mercy, that are thoroughly
humbled. Again, this was the course that John Baptist took, he came in the
Spirit of Eliah: with sharp words pronouncing heavy judgments against those
that remained impenitent: and therefore Matthew. 3. 7. he calls them, O
generation Matthew. 3. 7.
of Vipers, who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come, etc. And
all this to humble them, because he knew they would never receive Christ, nor
prize grace till they were humbled. Again, this was the course that our
Savior took, in Ioh. 4. 31. with the woman of Samaria; first he humbles her,
and then he comforts her, John 4. 31.
that is, first he makes her confess that she was a sinner, and then she
believed; and therefore he says; I am not come to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance, to wit, to make them see their sins, and be humbled
for them, that so they may fly unto God for mercy. Again, this was the course
that the Apostle Peter took, Acts 2. 37. first he humbles them, and then after
comforts them; so Paul Acts 24. 26. when he preached of Judgment Felix
trembled; and so likewise in the three first Chapters to the Romans, Paul
preaches matter of humiliation: in the first Chapter, he taxes them with
their Idolatry, bringing unto their remembrances particular Judgments, which
the Lord inflicted upon them for it: in the second Chapter, he brings them to
the Law, in which they so much boasted of, and makes a comparison betwixt the
Gentiles and them; that howsoever they thought hardly of the Gentiles, yet they
were as bad as they were: and then he prooves in the third Chapter, that we
are justified by faith without the works of the Law, and this he does to
humble them; and then in the rest of the Chapters he preaches of Justification
and Reconciliation by Christ; because men will not receive Christ, till they be
humbled. And thus, I say, humiliation is the first step to happiness, and the
first beginning of grace and bringing to Christ; and therefore it is, that we
generally labor to humble men in preaching of the Law, and then after persuade
them by the promises to come unto Christ, because men care not for Christ, they
esteem not of him; they find no need of him, till they be humble: therefore
if you would receive the Gospel and Christ offered in the Gospel; if you
would be ingrafted into Christ, then you must labor to be humble. But for the
more full explaining of this thing, some questions are to be answered, which
will make plain what this humiliation is, and what a necessary condition it is
unto salvation.

The first question is this, upon what ground, or for what reason is
humiliation so necessary unto salvation. Quest. 1.


This will be the sooner answered, if we do but consider; what is that which
makes men keep back Answ. 1.
from Christ, there are two hindrances that keep men from Christ; the first
is unbeleefe, and the second is a neglect of Christ: unbeleefe that was the
sin that kept men from Christ in the first age of the Church, in the Apostles
times they believed not that they might be saved, that is, they would not
believe that the Messiah was come in the flesh: but now in the second estate of
the Church, such unbeleefe is not the cause that keeps men from Christ,
neither which we labor most to convince men of, for they do generally
believe the Gospel, but our labor now, is, to draw men from the neglect of
Christ: we preach Christ generally unto all, that whosoever will, may receive
Christ; but men will not receive him, till they be humbled, they think they
stand in no need of Christ, they care not whether they have him or no: they
prize him not, they look upon him a far off, they will not have him for the
fetching: now Christ will never be received, till he be prized above all
things, and this men will not do, till they be humble: humiliation if it be
sound, will give a man such a sweet taste of Christ and holiness, and such a
bitter taste of sin, that nothing will satisfy him but Christ: this will
make his heart pant after grace, and when the heart is in this case, then
Christ will be prized and not before: but this men will not I say do, till
they be humbled. It is true, God can come in the still and soft wind, that is,
he can give Christ and the Spirit without this condition, and he may likewise
make men fit to receive the Gospel without it, but he will not, therefore he
will come in the rough winds, that rends the rocks: he will first humble men,
and make men fit to receive the Gospel, and Christ by the Gospel, before they
shall have him, and therefore it is said, that the poor receive the Gospel,
that is, those that are broken hearted receive Christ tendered in the Gospel,
because they are thoroughly humbled: for this cause also we Preach the Law to
bring men to the sight of their sins that they may be humbled; and therefore
it is called, a Schoolmasters to bring us unto Christ; Gal. 3. 24.
the Law shows unto men the sinfulness of their nature and their
indisposition: I had not known sin (faith Paul) but by the Law, that is, I
had not Romans 7. 7.
known sinneas sin, to humble me, if I had not looked into this Glass; if I
had not been taught by this Master, and this is that which makes men fly unto
the City of refuge, that is, they will not run unto Christ till they be
humbled: this we see in the Prodigal, Luke 15. 16, 17. he would never go
unto his father, till he could see no Luke 15. 16, 17.
means to escape; and then he takes a resolution to go; so a sinner will
never receive Christ nor the Gospel till he be humbled.

Now there is a twofold neglect, the first is a total, the second is a
particular neglect.

First, I say, men neglect Christ totally, when they refuse all the offers of
grace, when they will 1.
not have Christ upon any condition: they will not speak when the spirit calls,
they will not believe that they may be saved; these are the same with them in
the Gospel, That were invited unto the marriage: they excuse themselves, they
have other employments, that they must look unto; let Christ and grace go
where they will, both farms and Oxen and wives must first be looked after,
that is, they mind earthly things more then Christ: and if Christ will not be
had without they loose the love of these, they will not come, they know the
feast was ready, but they mind it not: and this is the condition of many men in
the world, they will not come in within the lists of the Gospel, least they
should be caught with the hook: though they generally believe, yet they will
not outwardly profess Christ: this is a fearful condition if they continue
in it, he has sworn that they shall never enter into his rest.

The second is a partial neglect, and this is when they make a mixture both of
the love of the 2.
world, and of the love of Christ; they mind Christ, and grace, and holiness,
but they mind them not altogether, that is, they would be contented to do
something for Christ, but they will not do all things, it may be they will
forsake a little profit, or pleasure, or vain glory, or coveteousnesse, for
Christ, but they will not forsake all. These are like the three grounds spoken
of in the Gospel, the first ground received Christ, but they would not
profess him: so many men will be contented to hear the Gospel, but they will
not profess Christ, because they are not thoroughly humbled, or if they do
chance to profess, yet they will not continue: the reason why the seed (...)
in the first ground, did not continue, was because the plow had not gone deep
enough, that is, they were not humbled.

The second ground went yet further; it not only received the seed, but it
sprung up with much hope of a fruitful harvest; yet it continues not, it will
not suffer for Christ: so many men will receive the Gospel, and joy in the
profession of it, but they will not suffer for Christ: because they are not
humble, that is, the plough went not deep enough to humble them.

The third ground went yet further, it did not only what the other did, but it
did that which the other would not do, that is, it would be contented to
suffer for Christ, but yet it would not do all things; he would retain some
pleasure, and some profit: when any earthly thing, which his affections were
glewed to, stood in competition with Christ, he had rather loose Christ, then
he would loose all his pleasure in these earthly things, because he is not
thoroughly humbled: humiliation comes and takes all impedimouts away, plowes up
the hardness of the heart, sets the affections on another object to delight
in, checkes the will, opens the mind, awakeneth the conscience, that Christ is
all to him in all things: and therefore it is compared unto the good ground,
that received the Word with an honest and good heart, the heart will not be
fit to receive that good, that will make it good till it be plowed deep and
humbled, then the Word will grow, the heart must be humbled before grace will
grow: and therefore, this is the effect, that humiliation works when the heart
is humbled: he will not part with Christ for any thing in the world. Therefore
you see upon what ground humiliation is necessary, because men will not receive
Christ till they be humbled.

The second question, is, whether humiliation is Answ. 2.
simply, and absolutely necessary.

To this I answer, that it is not simply, and absolutely Quest. 2.
necessary, for it is not a simple grace, and therefore not necessary on Gods
part. But it is a condition required on our parts, because we will not receive
Christ till we be humble. I say, it is not a simple grace, or simply necessary.
For that which a man may exceed in, is not simply necessary: but a man or
woman may have too much of it, that is, he may exceed in the measure, he may be
over humble: and therefore Paul writes unto the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 2. 7. That
they should comfort the incestious person, least he should be swallowed up of
2 Cor. 2. 7.
grief: now that which is a simple grace, a man cannot have too much of: he
cannot exceed in it; as for example, a man cannot have too much faith, or
repentance, or love, sanctification, etc. but the more he has of these, the
better: now, howsoever it is not simply necessary on Gods part, because he can
save men without it, yet it is a necessary condition, on our parts: and in
regard of us, because we will not receive Christ till we be humbled. And
therefore it is, that we Preach the Gospel generally sometimes, sometimes with
the condition, as in Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you: Matthew. 11. 28.
till men do feel sin as a heavy burden, they will not come unto Christ to
be cased of it. Again, in Revel, 22. 17. whosoever is athirst, let him come
and take of the water of Life freely: except Revel. 22. 17.
they first be athirst, and find they stand in need of Christ, they will not
come unto him to be refreshed. Again, sometimes it is put without any
condition, except faith: Revel. 22. and whosoever will, let him take of the
water of Life freely, that is, whosoever has a desire to come unto Christ, let
him come and he shall have him without any exception of persons or condition,
He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned: bring true, saving, purging, working Justifying faith, and thou shall
have Christ and salvation: where there is no mention of humiliation. For there
may we know, be seedings, without plowing, and there may be plowing and yet no
sowing, and sowing and no reaping, so I say, there may be saving and
sanctifying grace wrought in the heart without humiliation; and again, there
may be humiliation and no true grace at all, or general graces, but not
special and saving graces: but the way to make us fit to receive grace is to
be humble. A man may be said to receive Christ by a common light of knowledge,
and hereupon do many things for Christ; but yet he will not take Christ for
his King as well as a Savior, except he be humbled, he will not take Christ
so, as to be ruled by his Laws, and to live under his Commands, he will not
take him with losses and crosses, disgrace and reproach; till he be humbled, he
will not endure reproach; he would be content to have Christ, but if Christ
must cost him all that, then Christ and he must part, but when a man is
thoroughly humbled, then he will part with all things for Christ, nothing shall
be so dear and precious unto him, as Christ will be, if any thing come in
Competition with Christ, he will refuse it for Christ; thus you see that
humiliation is a necessary condition on our parts, though not a simple grace.

The third Question, is this, whether there be 3. Quest.
any kinds of humiliation more then one.

To this I answer, that there is a twofold sorrow: Answ.
the first is a preparative sorrow; the second is a godly sorrow. The
preparative sorrow, is nothing else but a sorrowing for sin, as it causes
punishment, or a sorrowing for some Judgment likely to ensue, and pronounced
against him, but this is not the true sorrow: a reprobate may have this sorrow,
which shall never be saved, this was the sorrow of Judas, and Cain, and Ahab:
they sorrowed, but it was a false sorrow, only a work of the flesh: it has
his original from nature, its object punishment, and its end despair: but the
second is a godly sorrow, such as the Apostle speaks of, in 1 Corinthians. 7. 7.
that works repentance 1 Cor. 7. 7.
not to be repented of, that is, it turns the heart to God, it takes away
that flintie disposition of nature, by the conveyance of grace; it makes the
heart better, it brings it into a frame of obedience, it works a willingness
in it to good, so that the difference of them lies, in this; the one is
outward, but the other is inward; the one is from grace, the other is from
temporal things; the one is a work of the flesh, the other is a work of the
sanctifying Spirit: the one will make a man fly unto Christ, because of our
wants, (as in the example of the Publican: especially in the prodigal son,
he never seeks unto his father, till he be thoroughly humbled: then he
concludes, I will go unto my father:) the other will set and push a man
further from God, this we see in Cain and Judas, their sorrow made them run
away from God: but this godly sorrow or humiliation never rests till it bring a
sinner into the presence of Christ; and when the soul is in Gods presence,
then it will never rest, till Christ have made its peace with God: but as I
said, the nature of the worldly sorrow, is to drive a man further from Christ.
Adam had this sorrow: he runs and hides himself. A carnal man will sorrow,
either for some present Judgment upon his person, or else upon his substance,
but yet it will not turn the heart, that will not work a pliable disposition
in the heart, to yield obedience out of love, in hatred to sin; but on the
contrary, that hardneth the heart the more, even as water hardneth Iron when it
is hot, but this godly sorrow works other effects: therefore the Apostle says,
I was glad that you were sorrowful, because it wrought repentance in you, that
is, it changed your hearts: so much for this question.

The fourth question is this, whether there be any difference between the
godly sorrow, and 4. Quest.
that which is false.

To this I answer, that they differ in three things especially. 1. In the
Object. 2. In the Causes. Answ.
3. In the Effects.

The first difference is in the object: the object of worldly sorrow, is the
punishment of sin, 1.
the wrath of God, he looks upon these without any relation to Christ: but the
object of godly sorrow is sin, as it stands in opposition with the love of
God toward him in Christ, and howsoever a regenerate man looks upon the
punishment, yet in a different degree, not so much because he fears punishment
as that he should give his father such cause, to take such displeasure against
him: but it is sin that he principally looks upon. viz. that he has
displeased so good, so gracious a Father as God has been unto him, and this
is that which works humiliation in him: but the other sees the wrath of God,
and hell, death, and that final separation between him, and happiness, and
hereupon for fear of punishment he is humbled: Thus you see the difference in
the objects.

The second difference is in the causes; the cause of the worldly sorrow, is
either some judgment 2.
present, either upon his person, or in his substance or in his family, or else
it is some judgment that he fears God will inflict upon him hereafter either
in his riches, or in his credit and reputation amongst men: and therefore, for
fear of these he is humbled.

But the cause of godly sorrow is the apprehension of sin, as it is contrary
unto the nature, purity and perfection of God, as also of Gods love toward a
man; he has an eye given him whereby he sees into the riches of Gods love unto
him, and then reflects upon himself, and sees his carriage toward God for
such mercy, and finding no proportion between them, hence grows his sorrow
that he should thus requite God with sin for mercy.

The third difference is in the effects, for as they 3.
do proceed not from one and the same ground: so they bring not forth the
same, but contrary effects, and they are three fold: First, worldly sorrow, it
draws the affections of the heart from God, because they see him as a judge,
they cannot love him as a Father: he takes God to be his enemy, and therefore
does what he can to fly from him, because he expects no good from him, this we
see as before in Adam, Cain and Judas: but the godly sorrow, it makes a man
cleave faster unto Christ, to stick faster unto grace, it whets the
affections, to love Christ, to prize Christ more, it works a willing
readiness in the soul to obey, it puts by that which would make him fly from
Christ; Secondly, worldly sorrow, it hurts the body, it breeds diseases, it
wastes and consumes the Intrailes, breeds and brings consumption of the body, it
duls, and makes dead the soul, it takes away the relish of spiritual things,
it makes a man careless to good, it daules and makes a man unwilling unto any
good. But the godly sorrow, it is the life of the soul, it is the health of
the body, it quickneth the soul of man unto good, it puts a new life into it:
it works a readiness in the will, and love in the affections to Christ,
grace, and holiness. Thirdly, worldly sorrow, it makes a man of a hot, and a
fiery spirit, it stirs him up after evil, to reproach and disgrace his
neighbor, it fills him full of hatred, revenge, and envy: but godly sorrow, it
breeds another kind of Spirit in him, it makes him of a meek, and a quiet
spirit: wordly sorrow will not put up reproach disgrace and wrong, but this
will put up all injuries and wrongs, and whatsoever else he meets withal for
Christ: thus you see the difference between these.

The fifth question, is this, how shall I know 5. Quest.
whether my sorrow be a godly sorrow or no.

To this I answer, you shall know it, by these three things. 1. By the
Ingredients. Answ.
2. By the Continuance. 3. By the Event.

First, I say, you shall know it by the Ingredients: for first they have not
only the sense of 1.
punishment, which is common unto the worldly sorrow: for I say, howsoever it
is the property of worldly sorrow to apprehend punishment, yet it is likewise
required of godly sorrow, to be sensible of punishment; but there is another
light put into him, whereby he sees into the uncleanenesse of sin: he sees
sin in its own dye, not only sin, to be sin, but sin to be vile;
and hereupon he will not content himself with mercy, unless he may have
grace? but the other cares not if he may be free from punishment, whether he
has strength against corruption or no.

Secondly, you shall know it by the continuance 2.
of it: godly sorrow is constant, but worldly sorrow is but a passion of the
mind; it changes, it lasts not, though for the present it may be violent and
strong, and work much outwardly, yet it comes but by fits, and continues not;
like a land flood, which violently for the present over-flowes the banckes, but
it will away again, it is not always thus: but the godly sorrow is like a
spring that still keeps his running, it is not dried up, but runs still, it
is not so violent as the other, but it is more sure: you shall have it still
running both Winter and Summer, wet and dry, in hot and cold, early and late;
so this godly sorrow is the same in a regenerate man still, take him when you
will, he is still sorrowing for sin, this godly sorrow it stands like the
center of the earth, which removes not, but still remains.

Thirdly, you shall know it by the success, and 3.
event of it, it will turn the heart unto Christ, it will make the heart stand
more firm in grace, it will turn the whole frame of the soul unto God like
the Loadstone, that will not rest till it has touched the Iron; or as the
needle touched, will not stand till it touch the North Pole: So it is with this
godly sorrow, when a man has received but a touch of the spirit, he will never
rest till he has touched Christ: till he be at peace with him, nothing will
satisfy him till Christ come into the Soul, till Christ be his: nothing will
make him to remove that confidence, and trust, that he has in Christ, all
things shall go for Christ. But the worldly sorrow has another success:
namely, to fly faster away from God; as I have showed in Judas and Caine. And
thus much for this question.

The sixth question is this, seeing the object of godly sorrow is sin; whether
there be any degrees 6. Quest.
of this godly sorrow.

To this I answer, that howsoever sin is the chiefest cause of godly sorrow,
yet notwithstanding Answ.
it admits of degrees, there are diverse degrees according unto the apprehension
of the thing conceived: some sorrow more, and some less according to the
proportion of grace received, every one in one degree or other, but the cause
in every one, is properly sin, but these degrees of sorrow proceed from a
threefold cause. First, because God will give more grace unto one, then unto
another; where he does intend to make a great building of grace, there he will
lay a deep foundation of godly sorrow: and on the contrary, where he does
intend to bestow less grace, there a lesser foundation will serve: as in a
temporal building; no wise man will lay a great foundation to a little house,
but will proportion it according to his building. Secondly, because he seems
to love some above others, he expresses himself more unto some then unto
others: now where God will express a large measure of love, there he will
work a great measure of godly sorrow; as a father loves that child best that
he beats most. Thirdly, because some have a greater measure of knowledge then
others, some have received a greater measure of illumination then others: now
there is nothing more forceable to make a man humble, then to be spiritually
enlightened; so long as a man or woman does not come unto the true knowledge of
sin, and the excellencies that are in Christ and grace, he will never be
humbled.

The seventh question, is this, what is the least measure of humiliation. 7.
Quest.


To this I answer, the least measure of humiliation necessary, is that which
makes a man believe Answ.
in Christ: viz. makes him to fly unto him, and to prize Christ above all
things: as the Prodigal, he did not at the first go unto his father, but he
considered of it, and when he sees no way to escape, then he says, I will go
unto my father; so a Christian that has the least measure of humiliation and
godly sorrow, it will make him to fly unto Christ; the least measure will give
him such a sight of sin, and such a glimpse of glory, that he will prize it
above all things, it will show him that there is no way to escape hell, but by
going unto Christ; that nothing will satisfy for sin, but the blood of Christ,
nothing so excellent as grace and holiness is: it will tell him, that he that
will be Christ's Disciple, must do these two things. First, he must deny
himself, he must renounce all trust and confidence in any thing for salvation
without Christ: and he must deny all ability to work that which is good
without the Spirit. Secondly, he must take up the cross, that is, he must
suffer what God will have him, either in his name, or body, or goods; this is
the last measure requisite, without which thou will not receive Christ; and
thus much for this last question.

Is it so, that humiliation is so necessary, to the Use.
right receiving of Christ and the Gospel, this should teach us to consider
our condition and estate, whether we have this condition in us or no: let every
man by this try his condition, whether he has received Christ or no, and this
must not be outwardly but inwardly, not a sorrow in show, but in substance; and
think not that a little sobbing and sighing will serve the turn, a little
ringing of the hands, a few tears, and a little hanging down of the head; but
it must be a deep humiliation, such a humiliation that proceeds from the
spirit: in Romans 8. 15. you have not received the spirit again to fear, but
the spirit of Adoption: you Romans 8. 15.
once had a slavish fear, a fear contrary unto this true fear, which was the
spirit of bondage; but you shall not have it again: but that humiliation shall
proceed from another ground; namely, from the spirit of Adoption, whereby you
shall fear him, not as a Judge, but as a Father: therefore let every man enter
into his own heart: and see whether this condition be in him, or no, and
think not to come unto Christ, or to be ingrafted into Christ without it: for
as I said, howsoever it is not simply necessary, on Gods part; yet it is
necessary on our parts, because we will not receive Christ, and the Gospel,
till we be thoroughly humbled. And that you may see the necessity of this duty of
humiliation: I will show you in five particulars, that a man cannot receive the
Gospel except he be humbled.

First, a man or woman must be humble, or else he will not receive Jesus
Christ. To receive Jesus 1.
Christ, is the first act of the Gospel: and therefore we preach the Gospel
generally unto all, that whosoever will, may have Christ: but you must first
receive him, and this you will not do till you be humbled; till ye think you
stand in need of Christ, till then, you will think the work too great, and
wages too small; as for example, A woman must first receive her husband, and
be united unto him, before she can be made partaker, either of his riches,
or honor: so before a Christian can be made partaker of the benefits of
Christ, he must deny himself, and cleave wholly unto Christ: and receive him
so, as to be ruled by him, and to suffer for him.

But some men will say, this is too much, what Object.
must I so receive Christ, that I must forsake all things for him?

To this I answer, it is no marvel though thou think so, because thou art
not as yet humbled, Answ.
but if thou were humbled, thou would never stick at any thing; when a man
is humbled, he is then in the condition, that he should be, both to deny
himself take up the cross, and to follow Christ: when a man is humbled, then
he cares not to be trampled under foot for Christ: to suffer disgrace,
reproach and shame for Christ, but till then, a man will not; somethings a man
will do, but not this: therefore it is necessary to the receiving of the
Gospel, that a man be humble.

Secondly, to receive the Gospel is to entertain Christ into the soul; he
that entertaines 2.
Christ so, must retain him, and continue with him; he must not take Christ
for a day, or a year, but he must take Christ, as a woman does her husband,
for term of life: nay, after life, and that in such a manner with such a holy
demeanor of himself, that he may not give the least occasion of evil that may
be to Christ. You must take heed of grieving the spirit, and you must resist
the works of the devil; if you contract with Christ, you must takeheed of
despising him, take heed of giving the Spirit a nonplus. And you must continue
in all estates, and keep as the Apostle says, your profession without
wavering? I say, howsoever a man may practice, and promise, and do much for
Christ, yet except he be humbled, he will not hold out: and therefore we see
in many, that there are bubbles of grace; as if they would retain Christ, and
continue with him, they do something, but they do not persevere to the end,
like those in Hebr. 6. 5. that have tasted, that is, professed, but fall away:
and this was the fault of the three grounds, they received the Gospel, but
they continued not; Christ entered not into them deep enough. Now the
difference of the four grounds, was humiliation; every ground was plowed, but
none plowed to purpose, but the fourth ground: when there is but an outward
show of holiness in a man, it will not keep his color always, it may
glister and carry a show of the right stamp, but when it comes to trial it is
but counterfeit, but when the sanctifying Spirit comes, and touches the heart
of a Christian, and he is thoroughly humbled, he will never loose his beauty;
he is Gold, try him how you will.

Thirdly, to receive the Gospel, is to take Christ, and to part with all
things for Christ, making 3.
him his chiefest joy, prizing him so, that he will loose any thing for him,
like that wise Merchant in the Gospel; which when he had found the Jewel,
went and sold all that he had, and bought it: there must be a prizing of
Christ above a man's self, he must part with all things in the world, with
husband and wife, with father and mother, with brother and sister, with
friends, with honor, and riches, pleasure, and all things else, and account
Christ more then all things: now this a man will not do, till he be humbled.

But you will say, What must I forsake father and mother, and wife for Christ,
or else I cannot Object.
have him? this is a hard thing, the work is too great, there is not sure such
need of Christ or grace, or at the least, Christ will not impose such a burden
upon me.

I answer, yea; you must forsake all these things: if you will not, you shall
never have him; this was Answ.
the fault of the second ground, there was both a receiving, and a rejoicing in
Christ, and this was a good property, but yet there was not joy enough;
because there was not humiliation enough, the plow had not gone deep enough,
and therefore it was that they continued not, some things he would do, but not
all things for Christ, but when the heart is humbled, that is, when the plow
has gone deep enough in humbling a man; then he will and not till then, make
Christ his chiefest joy.

Fourthly, to receive the Gospel, is to trust in Christ wholly, to depend upon
him both for 4.
grace and salvation, and every thing else that is good: he will labor to know
the length, and the height, the depth, and the breadth of the riches of Christ,
he will look still unto the preciousnesse of Christ, because he will not have
his mind exercised about vain and foolish things, and this no man will do,
till he be humbled; no man will see his need till he be humbled, he fears
nothing, he thinks he stands in need of nothing, but when a man is brought to
see hell, he will cry for Christ and grace, then he will prize things
according to their worth, then he will see such excellencies in Christ, that he
never saw in any thing else; such an infiniteness of purity and holiness,
such abundance of sanctification and redemption, such joy, such glory, and
such pleasure, such love, such content, as is not in any thing else; now he
will deny the world, profit, or pleasure, or any thing else, and seek, depend,
and trust wholly in Christ.

Fifthly, to receive the Gospel, is, to do and suffer what is commanded him,
as Paul in this 5.
place, Lord, what will thou have me to do? as if he should say; I am ready
both to do and suffer whatsoever thou will have me, and Paul was as good as
his word, as appeared by those reproaches and sufferings that he bare for
Christ, always making ready to lay down his life for Christ, now such a
disposition no man will have, such a thing no man will do till he be first
humbled. Yet as I said, a man may do some things as the dead hand of the
Dyall, it may perhaps point right at one stroke without the help of the
master-wheeles, but to go round and miss none it cannot; so a carnal man may
hit upon some good duty, that God commands and refrain some sin, that God
forbids, but to go through he cannot, to take up reproach and disgrace, to lose
his credit, to forsake his friends, to lose honor, and riches, and pleasure,
this he will not do, till he be humbled; therefore labor to see the
necessity of this duty of humiliation, or else you will not do all things
for Christ, and labor to get the degrees of it, and withal get the degrees of
grace, and that will increase spiritual sorrow, and degrees of sorrow, makes
degrees of joy: a man or woman that never sorrows, or never had the degrees of
sorrow, never truly rejoiced in Christ, for as the spirit works grace, and
grace works true humiliation, so true humiliation works joy; therefore you see
it is necessary: again there will be no suffering for Christ, till there be
rejoicing in Christ; a man will not either do any thing, or suffer any thing
for that thing, that he cannot delight in, therefore labor to be humbled.

Now to help you in this work, I will lay down some means, by which you may
come unto 1. Means.
this humiliation of spirit.

The first means to get this humiliation, is to get the Judgment rectified,
because men cannot see sin, nor know it till then; and men will not be
humble, so long as they remain ignorant, but when the judgment is rectified,
then he knows sin to be the greatest evil; Again, a man will not sorrow,
till he have a fit object for sorrow, as a blind man cannot see any object, so
a natural man is a blind man, and he must have new eye sight, before he can
see sin to sorrow for it, as sin; and this is the rectifying of the
judgment; but when the judgment is rectified, then it will sorrow for sin,
and that in these respects.

First, because sin is of its own nature evil, because it is contrary unto
the nature of good; and 1.
of its own nature, is an enemy unto God. The Philosopher says, if God be
the chiefest good, then sin is the chiefest evil; from whence we may thus
argue, that which is most contrary to God, is the greatest evil, but sin is
most contrary unto God; therefore it is the greatest evil: and the reason is
because sin is that which makes the creature most odious unto God. No
creature, or thing, so contrary unto the nature of men, as sin is unto God,
nothing makes God to loath the creature but sin, all the imperfections, and
blemishes, and diseases, and infirmities of the creature, makes not God to
loath it, if there be not a mixture of sin with it, because they are not
contrary unto God: they fight not against God, but sin fights against the
purity and holiness of God; and therefore Gods hatred of the creature, is
only a hatred for sin.

Secondly, to us it is the greatest evil: the argument stands thus, that which
deprives us of the 2.
greatest good, is the greatest evil: but this sin does, Ergo. for it does
deprive us of all things that are good, but especially of two things, wherein
stands our chiefest good. As first it deprives us of the best outward good,
which is God: as the Prophet says, Your sins separate between you, and your
God: and they keep good things from you; of Isal. 59. 2.
all other good, especially they hinder the coming of grace into your hearts.
Now what greater evil can there be, then this, to keep both God and his Grace
from us. Secondly, it deprives us of the chiefest good within us; as for
example: First, it deformes the beauty and strength of the inward man:
Secondly, it weakens that grace that is within, that is, it makes us unable to
resist evil; this is the nature of sin.

Thirdly, if you cannot see it in these, then come unto the effects that it
works, and it will appear 3.
to be the greatest evil. First, it turns all the faculties and parts of the
soul and body to evil, and is the breeder of all distemperature, as fear and
horror in the soul. Secondly, it brings all the evil that does befall a man
in this life, they all come by sin; all shame, reproach, poverty, disgrace,
punishment, comes by sin; now if you will but consider sin in these, you
will see it to be evil; but especially, you shall see the evil of sin in a
distressed conscience: what fear, what amazement, what astonishment, and
despair, what sorrow, what anguish of heart is there? as upon Judas; no
restitution will serve, no comfort will work, no persuasion will prevail:
thus if you look upon sin it will appear the greatest evil.

Fourthly, sin is the greatest evil, if you consider 4.
the medicine that must come to heal it, Christ must lay down his glory for a
time, he must abase himself, he must come from heaven to earth, he must take
our nature upon him, and humble himself unto a cursed death, before sin can
be healed, now put them altogether: sin is evil by nature: Again it is
evil, because it deprives us of the greatest good, both within us, and without
us, it is the cause of all diseases, shame, and reproach; such an evil that
nothing will heal, but the blood of Christ: look upon sin thus clothed,
and it will appear the greatest evil: Make conscience therefore of little
sins, for they bring great evils; though the sands of the Seas be but little,
yet a many heaped together, make a great burden; so sin though but in an
idle word, thought, or behavior, seem to be but a little sin, yet lay many
of them together, and they will break the soul, and make it barren, and unfit
to good; if a man owe but little debts, yet if they be many, if he look and
cast them up in the total, he will find himself presently to be but a
bankerupt; so it is with sin, what though the sin be but a little sin,
yet give this a little vent, put it to action, and this sin will prove a
great sin; give once consent, and in time it will be a reigning sin: and
when it is thus, then it turns the soul into evil, sets it on a rage,
imprisons it, makes it to obey, and to be a slave to Satan, now what greater
evil can there be then sin: thus much for the first means to get the
Judgment rectified, which will see sin, so as to humble it.

The second means to be humbled is this, you 2. Means.
must labor to make your hearts fit to be humble, and that you may do this,
you must do these things.

First, you must labor to get some sense of holiness, that is, you must get
the heart in a frame of grace, for except a man get the spirit, he will not be
humbled, but when there is holiness bred in the heart, then he will see sin
to be humble, he will see sin out of his place. Take any heavy thing,
especially water, and in its place, it is not heavy, but let it be remooved out
of its place and it will be a heavy burden; even so will sin be unto you,
when you have once gotten the spirit, you will then see sin out of his place,
and to be a heavy burden, that you will not willingly bear it, but you will
stoop under it, and therefore the more holiness that any man gets, the more
will be his sight of sin; and where there is most sight of sin, there will
be most grief for sin, and this grief is always accompanied with this
humiliation that I speak of; and where there is the greatest humiliation for
sin, there is the greatest door of mercy opened; where there is most sense
of sin, there the heart is best fitted for grace, and in this case, the more
tender of conscience, the better Christian.

Secondly, if you would be fit to be humble, 2.
consider another thing, which is the punishment of sin, if you continue in
sin, you shall be damned, deprived of glory: you were once good, consider
now, wherein your happiness consists, consider that you have an immortal
soul, and that you must be called to an account; the serious considerations of
these things, will make you to be humble: Nebuchadnezzar when he is brought to
be like a beast, then he confesses that the Lord is God, and humbles himself,
even so should we. Again, do but consider that all things are in the hands
of God, and that every one of you in particular are; and that he is able
presently to dispose of you, as he will. Again, consider that God is always
every where, that he sees all things, and that he will judge all men, and that
a day of judgment, a day of departure to judgment is appointed unto all:
consider also the severity of the Judge, the sentence that he will pronounce
the punishment that he will inflict; the eternity of the time; I say, if men
would but consider these things wishly, they would not go on in sin, as they
do: but the want of consideration of these things keeps men from Christ. For
if the adulterer would but consider what the Scripture says: that no adulterer
shall be saved, or if the covetous man, or drunkard, etc. that wholly devotes
themselves unto evil would but consider that in 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 6. 9.
6. 9. that none of these should inherit the Kingdom of God, they would not
go on in sin as they do. Again, if they did but consider that all sin
ends in pain, that every act sin wounds the soul, it would surely make them
humble, this is that which the Lord complains of in Deuteronomy. 32. to 29. verse: O
that my people were wise, that they Deuteronomy. 32. to 29. verse.
would but consider with themselves, viz. their sins, their afflictions, my
love in their deliverances; that is, O that they would but look back unto the
former account and see what they have done; for my love, it would cause them to
be humble: Dolor is the reluctance of the will, now the Will will not strive
till there be a change wrought, neither will a man be humbled truly, till
there be a through change in the soul; therefore labor after holiness, and
get both a sense of holiness, and a sense of sin, and this will humble you.

The third means to get humiliation is application, you must apply both what
you have received, 3. Means.
and what you have paid together, and then cast up the account: first consider
what you have received from God, and what you do presently enjoy; and then
consider what have I paid, what have I done, how have I demeaned my self, what
obedience have I yielded, what thanks have I returned? Again consider the
excellency that is in grace, and then consider sin, that it is evil by
nature, that it is evil to me, that it brings forth evil effects, except you
thus wisely apply it, it will not humble you, you will not feel sin, or
esteem it as a burden, because you will not see it out of its place. It will
be as a heavy burden at the foot, which though never so heavy, yet it is not
felt, it will not hurt a man so long, as it lies there; even so sin will not
be a burden unto the soul, till it be applied unto the soul by the spirit,
but when it is applied, then it will be like a burden upon the back, which a
man will quickly be weary of, sin will then clogge a regenerate soul, and
humble him, and this wisdom we may learn of the devil himself, when he
will bring a man unto despair, he will still hold out before a man his
sins, and that with aggravation of them, that so he may come unto the sight
of them: and then he will hold out the Justice, and purity of God, that he will
not let sin go unpunished, that he shall not be saved, that so a Christian
may be out of measure dejected: and thus a Christian should do if he will be
humbled, let him still set sin before him, and that not only in the general,
but also to apply it in particular unto the conscience; and especially, in
cases of relapse, for as figures added to Ciphers do make the total the more,
so relapse in sin is a great sin, and a particular notice of them, will
cause great humiliation.

Again, let man set before him sins against knowledge, or great sins; and
this will be a means to humble you, for what is the sin against the holy
Ghost, but sinning against knowledge upon an obstinate will in despite of God
and the Spirit: and that the sin of knowledge is a great sin appears in
Acts 17. 30. At the time of their ignorance Acts 17. 30.
God wincked; that is, so long as you wanted the means of knowledge, both of
knowing me and my Spirit, I little regarded it, I wincked at it, that is, I
esteemed it not so great, but past it over; but now the cause is altered, since
I came in my own person, and preached unto you: now I will not wincke at your
sin as before, I will not pass it over as I did before; but I will behold
you in another manner. After the knowledge of sin to fall into it, and then
not to be humbled, is to slight a sin, and to slight a sin after the
committing of it, ismore dangerous then the sin it self, wounds the soul
more, provokes Gods wrath against a man the more; as a servant after a fault
committed, when his Master tells him of it, if he shall then slight it, as not
regarding it, the slighting of it, incenses his Master more against him, then
the fault it self; therefore if you would be humbled, apply sin unto the
soul, and come from the general, unto particular sins, especially fasten
your hearts upon great sins: that rule in Logic holds true, that generals
work not, but particulars are prevalent: As I said before, when sin lies
like a burden at the foot, it hurts not, but when it is laid upon the
shoulders, then it hurts: saving knowledge breaks the heart, and humbles the
soul: on the contrary ignorance hardens more and more: this we see in Ioh. 4.
in the woman of Canaan, the reason wherefore she received not Christ, was,
because she wanted John 4.
knowledge, to know her own estate; general conference, and exhortations to
receive Christ will not serve till Christ comes in particular unto her, and
tells her in plain words, that she is an harlot; until then, she little
regarded him, then she can bestirre her self, then she can confess, and be
humbled: and thus he dealt with Paul in this place, Paul why persecutest thou
me, and thus he Acts 9. 4.
dealt with Adam, what have thou done, have thou Genesis 3. 11.
eaten, etc? thus he dealt with Peter, John 21. 15. etc. Love thou me, feed,
feed, feed, etc: the remembrance of particular sins wrought a general John
21. 15.
change in them, and mightily humbled them: therefore, if you would be humbled,
apply particular failings, and exclude none, and God will not exclude thee: you
know that which will take a great stain out of a garment, will surely take out
a lesser: even so fear not, but if God has given thee a heart to see some
great sin, and the assurance of the pardon of that sin, he will forgive
thee all sins: thus much for the third means.

The fourth means, to get humiliation, is this, 4. Means.
we must labor to bring things unto a propinquity, that is, let us look upon
sin past, as present, and so near at hand: for this is our folly, we look
upon sin, great way off, and that is the reason, that sin is so little
regarded of us, because we cannot, as we might, see how odious it is: the
Philosopher says, that things a great way off, are as if they were not, they
do not hurt us, and this is the cause why men are not humbled: experience
proves this, you know death is the terriblest thing in the world, but yet
because we look upon it a far off: therefore it is, that it does not
affright us now: to help you to bring things to a propinquity, that you may be
humbled, you must observe these two rules.

First, I say, you must look upon things that 1.
are past as present: consider that the sin that is past is as great a sin
as ever it was, though it seem afar off, that is, committed long ago: it is
man's weakness to think otherwise of sin; a malefactor that has committed
a foul fact a long while ago, if his pardon be not sued out, he may be
condemned for that fact, though there has been a long time between the fact
and the execution: so, what if thou have not committed a sin a great while,
yet if thou sue not out thy pardon, God will judge thee for that sin, as
presently committed: look then upon sin as present, and it will humble thee;
this Job did, I possessed the sins of my youth; that is, though they were a
long time ago committed, yet he looked upon them as present; and this wrought
humiliation in him: and thus it was with David Psalm. 51. My sins are ever
before me: that is, they are all seen of me as fresh, Psalm. 51.
though never so old, as if I had now presently committed them.

Secondly, you must look upon things to come as present, bring things within
the compass of a 2.
spiritual understanding, or else you will not be humbled; look upon the
wrath of God as present, look upon death as present, look upon the
britlenesse of thy nature, that thou art in the hand of the potter: consider
how soon the buble may be blown out, look upon salvation and damnation with
an equal eye, consider your selves now as if you were to appear and make up
your accounts before God. Consider what you would do if you should now go
into eternity, consider the presence of God amongst you, which one day you
shall see in another manner. Do as Saylors do, when they see a storm a far
off, they prepare and esteem ofit as present: Thus should every Christian do,
look upon every thing as present; for what is the reason that sin is not
avoided of many, that they sin and remain as stones without sense, but because
they do not apprehend sin and the punishment thereof as present; they look
not upon the wrath of God as present, nor on death and hell as present:
Belshazzar, so long as he looked upon sin a far off, it never moved him, but
when he saw the present hand writing, that humbled him: Things apprehended as
present make a deep impression in the heart, either of joy if good, or of
fear if evil, and therefore if men would but look upon sin, and the wrath
of God, and death, and eternal life, as present, they would be humbled.

The fifth means to get humiliation is this, you must labor to remove these
excuses, by which 5. Means.
men labor to keep off this blow of the Gospel, they are loath to be hit, and
therefore they labor to shelter and hide themselves, because they would not see
themselves in such a case as they are in, lest they should be humbled, which,
on the contrary, if they would but let the Gospel have his full force at their
consciences, it would work this effect to humble them: But, I say, it is a hard
matter to persuade men to see sins as present, and a hard matter to persuade
men to be humble, and consequently, a difficult thing it is, to make them to
bear this blow of the Gospel, and to persuade them, that humiliation is a
necessary condition to salvation, and the right receiving of Christ: therefore
you must labor to remoove the excuses that men make for themselves, before
they will be humbled; which excuses, or rather deceits, are these following.

1. The first pretense is this, We do good as well 1. Deceit. Object.
as the best, we balance our sins, we hear, we receive, we give alms, we
pray; in a word, we do all things that Christians ought to do: therefore we
are truly humbled, what need we more to humble our selves.

To this I answer, Well, what if you do pray, Answ.
what if you do give alms, and hear the word, and receive the Sacrament:
though these actions simply in themselves are good, yet they may be nothing
worth unto thee, unless thy heart be right: yea unless thine heart be right,
these actions, as they are thine, and proceed from thee, will be found sins
before God, and so in stead of a blessing may bring a curse upon thee: viz.
because thou usest holy things in an unholy manner to a wrong end. For if thy
heart be bad, that is, estranged from God, through infidelity and unbeleefe,
whatsoever thy heart meets withal, it makes it unrighteous, and so puts the
tincture of poison upon it, because it is not Gods end, that thou aymest at, in
the doing of these, but thy own end: Now it is not only the action, but the
end of the action that makes it acceptable and discharges a Christian in the
performance of it. We know Silver will not go current, though it be never so
good, except the Kings stamp be upon it: now the end of the action puts the
stamp on the action, and makes it go current with God for a holy action:
therefore you that brag of your actions look unto the end of your actions; for
unless the end be good, the actions are but as counterfeit coin, that every
man will refuse, that knows it: and you your selves will be esteemed of God,
but as cooseners are of men, worthy to be put to death: though the same actions
in another are acceptable to God, because the sin is taken away that poisons
them. So that as a poisonsome stock turns the sweet drops of dew that falls
upon it unto poison, which yet causes other trees to be fruitful; such are
unregenerate men, continuing in their old sin without repentance. Those
things that are good in themselves being performed by them, are turned into
poison unto them, though being performed by a holy man, they are as a sweet
odor that makes him more acceptable unto God: besides, if you do but examine,
you shall find that it is not so much you that do them but some noble quality
in you: it is either some natural parts of learning or policy, or else some
natural disposition to be kind and loving and meek, etc. nature without
sanctifying, or renewing grace will bring forth such fruit: many things you
know for a time will hold sent, that rather hurt then do good: so these
actions that are performed without the spirit, though they may carry a sent,
and smell well, yet they hurt the soul, because they make you to rest only in
the outward action: but if you would do good, and have your actions acceptable
unto God, then labor to get regenerate hearts, because otherwise you will not
please God. Iehu, performed a good action, but yet he is branded for it; if the
end be not good, the action is not good to you: and therefore let no man rest
in the outward action, but remember what the Lord accounts of the actions of
wicked men. He that kills Isaiah 66. 3.
an Ox is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off
a dogs head, he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood, he
that burns Incence, as if he blessed an Idol, etc. There was nothing so
contrary and odious unto God in his worship under the law, as these were by
which he sets forth the actions of wicked men; therefore let not this excuse
hinder you from being humble, because you do good.

Secondly, the second deceit or pretense is this, 2. Deceit. Object.
they say they have as good meanings as the best whatsoever they may speak;
and they have as good hearts as the best, whatsoever they do: and therefore
they are humble enough, that is, they need no more humiliation.

To this I answer briefly, you lie; for if your Answ.
actions be naught, your heart is worse, and if your speeches be rotten, your
meaning is far worse then either thy action or thy speech: if your speeches
be rotten and smell of hell, and yet say that you mean better, or that your
meaning is better then you outwardly express, it is false: for we say, that if
we see sparks of fire come out of the chimney, we conclude that the fire
within is far greater; so if thy speeches and actions be bad, thy meaning is
worse, there is a greater fire within: actions are but the fruits of the heart,
or branches that proceed from it. Now in a natural plant we say, that if the
fruit be bitter, the root is much more bitter, because the cause is always
greater then the effect: even so, if thou have naughty speeches and actions, if
there be bitterness in them, thy meaning has much more bitterness in it,
because it is the root from which these spring; therefore let not your good
meaning keep you from being humble.

Thirdly, the third pretense is this, they say, it is 3. Deceit. Object.
their nature to be thus and thus; they have a natural inclination unto some
particular sin, and therefore they think that God will be merciful unto
them in that thing, and they need not to be humbled.

To this I answer, that this pretense of yours aggravates Answ.
your sin the more, for the more inclination that there is in your nature
unto any particular sin, the greater is the sin; for inclination with
consent, is more odious unto God then a violent lust not consented unto, which
may sometimes break out in a regenerate man without full consent: the more
inclination, the more cause of humiliation; this did David, he adds unto his
sins his inclination to sin, to aggrauate them the more, and to humble him
the more, as if the inclination gave a greater strok upon his conscience, then
the action it self, as in Psalm. 51. I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did
my mother conceive me, that Psalm. 51. 5.
is, that which makes my sin the more heinous and offensive unto God, is this,
because it proceeds from a natural inclination of my corrupt nature, it was
borne with him, and it grew up with him, and this was that that troubled him,
and thus it is with every regenerate man.

Secondly, to this I answer, that when a man has Answ.
any inclination unto any sin, there is not such an inclination, but it is or
may be restrained by the mind; but if the mind give consent, then like woade
it adds unto the color, and makes the sin the more inexcusable, because there
is no reluctancie in the will against it, but yields it strength unto the
inclination: therefore if you do thus, you add transgression unto the sin;
take heed of plucking away your strength, in resisting your natural
inclinations; for know, that it is one thing to be beset with sin, and
another thing to consent unto it: therefore let your inclination of nature be,
as it is, a cause to humble you, and not to keep you from humiliation.

The fourth deceit or pretense is from their conditions, which keep them from
being humble, 4. Deceit. Object.
especially in the younger sort, who think themselves in such condition that
they have a kind of privilege and need not to be humble, therefore the wise
man Eccl. 11. well knowing the folly of youth, and what a vain thing it will
be to reclaim Eccles. 11. 9.
them from their sins, says; Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, as if he
should say; for you young men it will be a vain thing for me to speak unto
you, you will not forgo your pleasures and your lusts and be humbled;
therefore for your parts rejoice, that is, take your fill, go on in that
course that you will not be reclaymed from, But yet remember that for all
these things you must come to judgment: that is, you shall be called to an
account for all your vain and sinful pleasures and humbled for them, if not
humble.

To this I answer, for any man to think that he may have excuse for sins
because he is in Answ.
such or such a condition except they be sins of infirmity, he is a fool,
he never knew for what end he came into the world; (for example) Is thy
condition greater then others? art thou richer or more honorable, or wise, or
more beautiful or strong then others are? thou have the greater cause to serve
God, and be humble, and that for these reasons.

First, because you have more accounts to make up then others have; and again,
you have more 1. Reason.
wages then others have, and therefore you are more inexcusable, if you be
negligent and careless: where much is given, there much shall be required: you
are bound with greater bonds, and therefore your forfeits are much greater if
you break with God: if a Master give great wages unto his servant, it will be
but a vain excuse, a false reasoning, if he should thence conclude, that
therefore he may be more careless then others; nay rather he should conclude
the contrary, that because my Master does thus and thus for me, therefore I
ought to be more careful and diligent then others: and if it be thus before
men, how can you imagine that this will excuse you before God.

Secondly, you had more need to be humble, because your knowledge is, or
should be the more: 2. Reason.
and therefore in Ier. 5. 5. says God, I will go into Ier. 5. 5.
the house of the great men, for they know my name; that is, they have more
time to get knowledge then others have that are in meaner conditions; they have
not such means, such time, such opportunity to get knowledge as you have;
they have many outward hindrances which you have not; but these have broken
the yoke, wherefore a Lion shall slay them, and that is, because they be
ignorant I will not excuse them, I will take a strict account of them, because
they ought to know me better then others that have not the like means; that
are not freed from the distracting cares of the world as they were: therefore
let all in high places labor to excel in grace, and abound above others in
spiritual knowledge, and take an example from the Nobles of Berea; as they
were more honorable then others in regard of place, so they were above others
in regard of grace; they searched the Scripture, they abounded in spiritual
knowledge.

Thidly, consider that as your wages are more, and your talents are more, and
your accounts are 3. Reason.
more, so likewise your judgments shall be more, if you be an example either
of evil to others, or evil to your self: I say the greater you are in place,
the greater should be your care, because the greater is your sin: Inferiors
depend upon superiors; consider I pray, if you be eminent in place, what a
good example from you will do unto others that are under you; and on the
contrary, what evil will follow from being carlesse and profane: they will
mark you for an example to evil: therefore you see that the greater
conditions that you are in, the more cause you have to be humble.

The sixth means to get humiliation is this, you must be earnest with God to
get the spirit; for this 6. Means.
makes the law effectual: the flesh profits nothing, Ioh. 6. 3.
it is the spirit that quickneth; the law and the letter of the law will not
work grace in you no more then the flesh will, except the spirit go with it:
It is the spirit that always enlighteneth the mind and works a change in the
whole man, and puts new habits on the faculties, and objects sit for those
habits: and here now appears the difference between the Law and the Gospel;
nothing will make a man truly humble without the spirit. If the Lord should
speak unto you this day as he spoke here to Paul, yet if the spirit did not
shine into your hearts, it would not be effectual to humble you: it is not
the word, but the spirit in the word that is able to change you, and make you
new creatures, I say, if Eliah should preach unto you, or one in the spirit of
Eliah, he would never humble you; except the spirit accompany it, it will be
but like the shaking of the earth unto the Iayler, Acts 16. but it must be the
spirit that changes your hearts: but when the spirit comes and gives but a
glimps of that light in the soul, then he can cry to Paul, Sirs, what shall
we do to be saved? Felix at the preaching of Judgment can tremble, but it
is the spirit that opened Lydias heart to believe; I say, if you had Paul, and
Eliah, and John Baptist that came in the spirit of Eliah, yet it were nothing
worth if you get not the spirit: therefore be ye earnest with God to get the
spirit, and never rest till you find him in your soul: and remember that
there was a time when the Angel stirred the water at the Poole of Bethesda,
that they that first stepped in were healed of what disease soever they had: So
there is a time when the Lord turns, and when the spirit mooues the heart to
good: let us make use of this opportunity, and strike while the Iron is hott,
and grind while the the winds blow, and watch every opportunity because the
spirit will come and move the heart, as the Angel did the water, that so we
may first step in and be healed: therefore if you would get humiliation, be
earnest for the spirit; and you may have him for asking, it is Christ's promise
to give him, if you want him, it is because you do not ask him; ask
therefore Luke. 11. 13.
that you may have him, and be humbled.

The 7th means is this, that as we must get the spirit, so we must add the
word: it is true that the spirit is the only means to make us humble, it is 7.
Means.
the efficient means, without which nothing will humble us, it is as true also
of the word: because the spirit makes the word, as the isntrumental means to
humble us, and therefore if you would be humble, you must join with the Spirit
the Word, and that you may have the word effectually to humble you, you must
do these things.

First, you must labor to get the saving knowledge of the word, because it is
the means to humble you, that is, the Word with the Spirit inlightens 1.
the soul: for as a man that is in the dark, cannot see any thing till he
have a candle, so he that is ignorant of the Word, he is in darkness and
cannot see his sins in such a manner, as to humble him: or as a man cannot
see the motes that are in the house, till the Sun shine into the house,
though they were in the house before; so he that has not the saving knowledge
of the Word in his heart, cannot see the several windings and twinings, and
corners, and corruptions of his heart, till by the Spirit he come unto the
saving knowledge of the Word. Ahab saw not the chariots and Horsemen of Israel
which Micha saw, because he was Ignorant of the Word; and therefore the Lord
says, Ierem. 31. 34. they shall know me from Ier. 31. 34.
the greatest unto the least, they think they do know me, but indeed they do
not, but then they shall know me; that is, when I have given them my spirit,
and by the spirit they have attained unto the true knowledge of the word, then
they shall know me; they knew me before, and they knew sin before, but now
they shall know sin by the word in another manner then they did: so Paul,
Romans 7. Romans 7. 7.
says, I knew sin by the law, that is, I knew sin before, but now I know
sin by the word in another manner then I did; I saw it, but not with that hew
as I did, before the law had made me to see things in another color then
before: Labor, as to get the spirit so to get the saving knowledge of the word:
The Apostle says 1 Cor. 2. 10. that the spirit 1. Cor. 2. 10.
searches the deep things of God; now these things are shown unto us by the
word, they are plainly discovered unto the soul in another manner then
before: Knowledge works a deep impression unto the soul of a Christian, and
searches into the corruptions of the heart, into the diverse lusts of the
flesh, finds them poysonable and hence is humbled, for where there is the
greatest knowledge, there is the greatest light, and where there is the
greatest light, there is most filth seen; and where there is most corruption
seen, there is greatest cause of humiliation; therefore that the word may
humble you, labor to abound in knowledge.

Secondly, as you must know the word, so you must receive the word as the word
of God; if you will have the word to humble you, you must receive it as Gods
Word and from God; for if it do come unto you, and be not received of you as
the Word of God, but as the word of man, it will neither enlighten you nor
humble you: this is the difference between the word that is received, as from
God; and the Word, that is received as from men: if you receive it as from God,
it will work effectually in you, it will make you to renounce the world, it
will work fear and humiliation in you; but if it come as the word of man, it
will be slighted by you, it will take no solid root in you, it will wither
and bring forth no fruit in you: and therefore the Apostle rejoices in the
Thessalonians 2. Thessalonians 2. verse. 18. that they received the Word of God
from him, not as the word of 2 These. 2. 18.
man, but as it was indeed the Word of God; and therefore it was, that it
wrought those gracious effects in them as it did, so that no Church was so
commended of Paul, no Church so eminent in grace, as this Church of the
Thessalonians was. And so Adam in the garden when he heard the voice of God,
then he feared; because when the Word comes as from God, then it comes with a
force upon the conscience, then it humbles and casts down a sinner, in Micha
5. verse. 4. the Spirit says, And he shall stand and feed in the strength of
the Lord, Micah. 5. 4.
and in the Majesty of the name of God, that is, he shall speak so as if God
spoke himself, and with such a Majesty, that he shall convince the
conscience, this was spoken of Christ, and Christ did fulfill the prophecy;
and therefore the Jews confess, that no man spoke as this man spoke; and in
another place, it is said that He spoke as one having Authority, Matthew 7.
verse. 28. 29. Now no man speaks with Matthew. 28. 30.
authority, whether he be an Ambassador or Constable or any other officer,
but only when he speaks in the name of the King, and uses his name, then he
comes with authority, his words take effect: so does the Word, when it comes
and is received by us as from God, then it works upon us. Let us now examine
our selves how we have received the Word, whether it has come unto us with
authority or no; if it has, then we shall be humbled by it, but if
otherwise, it will not humble us.

Thirdly, if you would have the Word effectual, 3.
to humble you, you must apply it, bring it home unto the conscience; otherwise
it will not humble you, as the preciousest medecin will not heal till it be
applied unto the sore, so the Word will not heal the brachs and bruises of the
soul, till it be applied unto the conscience, for howsoever we account of it,
or though it be in its own nature, a two edged sword, yet except you strike,
it will not hurt, except you apply it, it will not heal the soul, by cutting
of sin and corruption from the heart: therefore this is your work to apply
it, when we have done our parts in preaching the Word, if you will receive
benefit by the Word in making it your own, so as it may be unto you the power
of God unto your salvation, then apply it, and so doing it will make you
humble, and receive Christ: now that you may attain unto this, and that the
Word by application may be effectual to humble you, observe thesethree Rules
which I will lay down for your help herein.

The first Rule is this, As you must get knowledge 1. Rule.
before you will be humble, so now in the first place, you must not defer or
put it off; when God does give you a sight of sin, it will be your wisdom
to apply the medicine presently whilst the wound is green, the Word will have
a greater power of working then, then it will have afterward: if it in this
case be deferred, it will gather corruption, it will put you to more pain and
charge; it is good therefore not to defer humiliation, or put off the working
of the Spirit in this case; but if the Spirit give thee a sight of sin,
presently apply it unto the Soul, and that so much the rather, because the
labor will be less, the pain less, and the danger less. When a bone is
out of joint, it is good setting it whilst it is hot, no man will defer it;
in such a case the defering of it will be with much more grief: so when the
heart is put out of love with sin, if you then presently apply the Word unto
it, it will humble and change you, but if you defer, it will be a hard and
difficult thing to bring the heart unto repentance: to bring it unto a good
frame and soft disposition: Again therefore consider this, and make good use
of the opportunity: the Apostle gives the reason why it is so hard to bring the
heart unto a fit temper again, Heb. 3. 13. Take heed, says he, that you be
not hardened through the deceitfulnes of Heb. 3. 13.
sin: there is a deceit in every sin, which if you look not unto it, will
beguile you; if you do not put out the spark, it will be a harder thing for
you to put out the flame, to stop the passage of sin; but you will be like
unto those, Romans 2. 5. that have hearts that cannot repent, hearts past Romans 2.
5.
grace; therefore take heed of quenching the spirit, and this we do when we
put off repentance, and humiliation, when we are by the spirit brought unto a
sight of our sins.

The second rule is this, as in the first place, we must not put off the work
of the spirit, so in the 2. Rule.
second place, we must not make too much haste out of it: you must not think
that a little humiliation will serve the turn, a little sorrow, a few tears,
or a few sighs; but you must continue in it, and it must remain in you: the
contrary unto this, is that sorrow which the Lord reproves in the people of
Israel, Isaiah, 8. 6. Is this the fast that I have chosen that men should hang
down their heads like a bulrush Isaiah 58. 6.
for a day: they were affected with sin, and it wrought some effect in them,
but it did not continue, it was but a for a time, it lasted not, and therefore
it was that the Lord hated it: you must let sorrow breed in our hearts, you
must let it still continue with you, or else it will not humble you: the nature
of the bulrush is, for a time to hang down the head, when it is over-prest
with water, but when it is dry, then it lifts up it self again; so there are
many, that for a time will hang down their heads, and seem to have this true
sorrow, but it is but when some judgment is upon them, then they can humble
themselves, and cry and weep: but when it is removed, that is, when they are
freed from the judgment, they are lifted up, their humiliation is gone, now
that you may have this humiliation, to continue with you, you must do as the
Apostle exhorts you, James 4. 8. you must purge your hearts: that is, you must
purge hypocrisy away that deceives you in the matter of humiliation, and if
you ask how you shall keep your hearts humble, he tells you how, Let, says
he, your joy be turned into mourning: that is, keep a taste of sin, and the
displeasure of God in your hearts, and this will humble you; therefore you must
continue in sorrow: this was that which was commanded the people of Israel,
Levit. 16. 29. You shall humble your selves, and do no work at all: Levit.
16. 29.
they must separate themselves from all such works on that day, which may be
a means to keep them from humiliation: for the object, being holden long on
the faculty, it will at last humble us; for our nature is like the fire if
matter be not upplyed unto it, it will go out, so if we keep not a sense of
sin, humiliation, and sorrow in our heart, it will dye. Therefore you must
take pains with your hearts, and set sin still before you, David's sin was
ever before him, and Paul was ever humble in remembering his sins: therefore
let this humiliation and godly sorrow be in you, not like a land flood, but
like a spring; this sorrow must still be running and springing and flowing or
else you will not remain humble: I confess, it is true that they that have
received the spirit, have not the spirit of bondage to fear, that is, to
sorrow hopeless, but yet they have received such a spirit that keeps them
still in awe, that keeps them still in this sorrow, that keeps them still in
fear; but yet the evil that is in the sorrow and fear is taken away, because
of a mixture of spiritual joy, hope, and confidence, that they have wrought in
them by the spirit.

The third is this, you must proportion your 3. Rule.
humiliation according unto your sins; if your sins have been great
sins, then your humiliation must be a deep humiliation: this we see in
Manasses, as his sin was exceeding great, so his humiliation was exceeding
great: it wrought in him a great measure of humiliation, and so Peter's sin
was great, and his humiliation was great, for as the sin is greater or
lesser, so the humiliation should be greater or lesser, because the greater the
sins are, the greater shall be the judgment for them: and therefore when
you can pass over your sins, as little sins, it is a sign that you are
not humbled, for if you were, you would then otherwise conceive of sin: now
where there is great sins forgiven, there will be great love, as the woman in
the Gospel, she loved much: that is, she had many sins forgiven her,
therefore she expressed much humiliation and love unto Christ. Again, let every
man labor to feel their sins the more, that they may love Christ the more;
for that which the affections are most affected with, that the understanding
apprehends most, and then the bent of the will follows, and a man may, if he
will, come unto this to see sin in himself, in such a manner as to humble
him, and make him to love God the more. As a man that has a desire to see the
Prince in a multitude, he will ever fasten his eye unto him: so if a man would
but fasten his understanding and mind upon sin, he would at last see it to
humble him, and this did David in the sin of Vriah he brought his sin unto
this, that it was ever before him, no sin humbled him as this did: And thus
much for the means of getting humiliation.

Is it so that humiliation is so necessary a condition on our parts, though as
I said before, it is not simply Use.
necessary on Gods part, neither a simple grace because there is no promise
that follows it, but the promise is made without exception of persons, or
conditions generally unto all, Whosoever will, let him come and take of the
water of life freely, that is, without any antecedent condition (faith
excepted): yet as I said, except we be humble, we will not come in and receive
Christ, and without Christ, there is no means to be saved, and this we will
not do till we be humble, therefore it behooves you to examine your selves,
whether you have this condition in you or no: and now, that I may make you
willing to examine your selves (for except you be willing you will not)
consider these three things to moove you hereunto.

The first motive is this, consider that all that 1. Motive.
you do till you be humble is lost labor; you hear in vain, you read in
vain, you receive in vain, you pray in vain, you give alms in vain, till
you be truly humbled. Psalm. 51. 17. the sacrifices Psalm. 51. 17.
of God are a broken and contrite heart, all the prayers that a man makes, all
the alms that he gives, all the holy duties that he does perform, if they
do not proceed from a truly humbled soul, they are unsavory things, and that
for these reasons.

I. Reason. The first reason is this, because a broken heart, is the altar on
which we must offer; 2. Reason.
whatsoever we offer up to God, they are not such as God accepts of, if they be
not offered up upon this altar, for the sacrifices of God are a broken heart, a
truly humbled soul: for as in the time of the Law, the Priest was to offer up
sacrifices for the people in all humility, so Christ in the Gospel on the
Cross with a broken and a contrite spirit, offered a sacrifice for all his
children, and makes them acceptable unto God, yet except the heart be humble,
he will not accept of a sinner.

II. Reason. The second reason is added in Isaiah 66. 2. he will dwell in a
broken and a contrite spirit, I. Reason. Isaiah 66. 2.
a humble soul is a fit habitation for the spirit, now the spirit dwells in the
heart as the sun in a house, by communicating his grace unto the soul; where
he will come into, and where the spirit will dwell, there he does certainly
love, and no sooner does he dwell in the heart, but he will fill the heart full
of holiness; and on the contrary, he will not come near a proud heart:
therefore if ever you would have the spirit to dwell in you, you must get
humble hearts.

III. Reason. The third reason is, because except a man have a broken heart, he
will not be constant 3. Reason.
with Christ, he will serve him but by halves and fits, and not constantly, now
and then, as passion rules him; but when a man is truly humbled, he will keep
close unto Christ: now a man that is unstable, God does not esteem of as a
friend, he does not esteem him as a friend that is unstable, because he knows
not how to depend upon him, he stands now with him, but whether he will when
he shall need, whether he will hold close to him or no he knows not, and
therefore the Apostle says, that the unstable heart shall receive nothing of
God, James 1. 7, 8. God will not accept James 1. 7. 8.
of any thing that he does, thus you see all is lost labor, till you be
humbled, men are unwilling to loose their labor in any thing, but much more in
this, if they had hearts to believe it.

The second motive is this, because whatsoever profession a man makes in
religion, it is nothing 2. Motive.
worth, till a man be humble, for what is the reason, that men do not hold out
in their profession but fall away and loose their first love, but because they
were not thoroughly humbled: for pride of heart smothereth that form of seeming
grace at last, that the corruption and hollow heartedness that was in them is
made apparent unto all: now that your profession is nothing worth, without
humiliation, till you be humble is clear by these reasons.

The first reason is this, except you be truly humbled, you will wither: you
will not hold out 1. Reason.
in your profession, this was the quality of the first ground, the plow had not
gone deep enough: they were not thoroughly humbled, there was seed sown, an
open profession of Christ, but it lasted not, the house was builded, but the
foundation was not deep enough, that which should have kept the house from
falling, was wanting, and that made it to fall; so it is with men, because they
want this humiliation: therefore their profession and they do not continue,
but part willingly, one from another: they will do somethings, but not all
things, and they will forgo somethings, but not all things: and therefore our
Savior says, Luke 14. He that will not for sake all for my sake, is not
worthy of me: he is not worth the saving that prizes not me above all things
whatsoever, and a man will not prize Christ, nor forsake all things for Christ,
till he be humbled.

The second reason is this, because till a man be 2. Reason.
cut off, that is, till he be humbled, he will not grow strong in Christ, but
he will grow upon some ledgiments of his own, he will rest upon some thing
of his own: but when he is truly humbled, and so cut off and ingrafted into
Christ, he will grow peremptory in the profession of Christ, depend wholly upon
Christ for grace and salvation and every thing else; he will apply strong
resolutions unto himself to do good; he will not for sake Christ and loose
the sweetness that he has in Christ, for all the profits, pleasures, and
delights in the world: and hence he will draw such virtue from Christ that
will make him withstand all losses, and crosses, reproaches, and disgrace that
he shall meet withal, that will seek to disjoynt him from Christ; but this
virtue none can draw from Christ till he be humbled; you will not grow strong
til you be humbled: for felt weakness to good, is the way to strengthen grace.

The third Reason is this, till a man be humbled, he sowes his seed amongst
thorns, he sowes amongst 3. Reason.
his lusts, that chokes and destroys whatever good duty he does perform; you
know men will not sow their seed among thorns, because as the place is
unfruitful, so it is unseasonable; men would be accounted unwise men in doing
so: so it is with men that are not humbled, they sow many holy actions amongst
their lusts, and therefore it is that they remain poor in grace; till a man
be truly humbled, sin is not mortified, and every unmortified lust is a
thorn to every seed of grace in the heart, hinders the growth of it,
burdeneth the heart and weakneth grace, and therefore the Prophet says, in
Ier. 4. 3. that they sowed their Iere. 4. 3.
seed amongst thorns, and therefore it was, that it prospered not, it took
away all the goodness of their actions, because they were mingled with their
lusts; mingle lusts and grace together, and you will never grow fruitful in
good.

The third Motive is this, because except a man 3. Motive.
be humbled, he cannot have any sound comfort; for howsoever, as I said, it is
not a simple grace, yet it is so necessary a condition, that except we be
humbled, we will not receive Christ, nor come unto him; now all joy and comfort
lies in the receiving of Christ, and Christ's accepting of you: Consider what
comfort Cain and Judas, and others had, that did not receive Christ; and
again, consider the comfort that Peter and Paul, and Mary Magdalen had in
receiving of Christ, and then consider whether they had not this condition, and
were not thoroughly humbled or no; it is true, the other were humbled, but it
was not the humiliation of the spirit, which is a work of the spirit, but it
was a work of the flesh: now if our comfort stands in receiving of Christ, and
if we will not receive Christ, till we be humbled, then it stands us upon to
examine our selves, whether this condition be in us or no, or whether we have
received Christ with this condition or no, if you have not, you may suspect
your selves, that you are neither Christ's, nor Christ yours, for this is the
first step unto Christ, he that is truly humbled is in the right way to
salvation: now if a man were to go a journey, and were directed to go by such
a hedge, or such a Windmill, it stands him upon to mark diligently, whether
he has gone by such a place or not, that so he may know whether he be in the
right way to his journeys end; so it should be with you. I have told you that
if you be saved, you must be humble; that is, if you would go unto heaven, you
must go this way, you must turn at humiliation; if you miss this crook, the
further you go on in this way of yours, the further you go from the right way
to salvation and happiness.

But here a question may arise, that is, you may demand what sorrow or
humiliation this is, 1. Quest.
that is so necessary to the right receiving of Christ.

To this I answer, consider that there is a turbubulent kind of sorrow, which
is not this sorrow Answ.
which is required for the receiving of Christ: I call that a turbulent sorrow
which ends in despair, that the children of wrath are possessed withal, such as
Judas, and Cain, and Achitophel; but this is not the sorrow, that I would have
to be in you, but there is another kind of sorrow, which is a sad and deep
apprehension of sin, when a man sees sin in such a hue, with such a wadde, so
contrary unto God, so contrary unto his good, that hereupon he so sorroweth for
sin, that he seeks unto Christ, both as a father to help, and a Physician
to heal: yet we say not, that this alone is proper unto the godly, for many
times they have both; sometimes the best of Gods children have horrors of
conscience, and are affrighted with hell, so that for the present, they
apprehend not Christ, but think themselves to be vessels of wrath: again
many have them not, and yet are truly humbled, and therefore we may say of
these, as the father said unto his two sons in the Gospel: those that have
this first kind of sorrow, say in their passion, they will do thus and thus,
and yet will not; again, others that have it not, though for the present, they
will not do thus and thus, that is, though they be not humble as others are,
yet they will go and continue with Christ, and do what he commands them.

And here another question arises, whether this turbulent kind of sorrow be
of absolute necessity, 2. Quest.
that is, whether to the right receiving of Christ, it is necessary that
Christians have this kind of sorrow.

To this I answer; first, that it is not the greatest turbulent sorrow that
breaks the heart Answ.
and mollifies and softens it, but there is another sorrow, which I call a
tempered sorrow, and that sorrow has in it both a sight of hell, and a sight
of heaven, a sight of sin, and a sight of grace in Christ which far
exceedes this sorrow; for as it is with joy, the greatest joy is not expressed
by laughter, for that is the greatest joy that is the joy of the inward man, so
it is not the greatest grief that is expressed by tears, and as it is not the
greatest fire that makes the most crackling and noise, nor that the deepest
water that makes the most roaring, so is it not the greatest grief or sorrow
that expresses it self by this turbulent passion of the mind; but the
greatest grief is nothing when a sinner apprehends sin within, and sees it
in its own color, then it humbles him.

Secondly, to this I answer, that there are degrees of this sorrow, and this
arises from the nature 2. Answ.
of men, some men are of a more hardier nature then others; and again some are
of a more softer and tenderer disposition: for example, some men's flesh will
heal sooner then others, though the wound be the same; so some have more
softer and gentle natures, and therefore sooner wrought upon: again some God
intendes to build a greater work upon, and therefore he humbles them the
more: again, some he will season above others, and therefore will humble them
the more, that so they may be fit for it.

Thirdly, to this I answer, that although all 3. Answ.
have not the like measure of sorrow, neither the same apprehension of sin that
others have, (and therefore are not so much cast down in such a manner as
others are) yet it is not because they are not humble at all; but because the
condition follows it so close, that it has not power to work that effect in
them, which it does in others, that see the same condition a far off, or not
at all; they apprehend Christ by faith, and see reconciliation through him; and
therefore are not so dejected as others that see him not thus: and therefore
be not discouraged, though thou find that thy humiliation be not so great as
others, the things may be the same; and the apprehension the same, but Christ,
the condition of thy peace is apprehended near thee by faith; and this
qualifies the tempest of the soul, but Christ is not seen of the other as a
Savior: and this makes the difference; as for example, there are two men set
upon by robbers, the one sees no help, or no way to escape; and hereupon he
is marvelously afflicted and astonished because he finds himfelfe unable to
resist or make his party good with them: but the other man beset with robbers,
sees another near hand that will stand close to him; and thereupon he trusts,
hopes, and depends upon the man to help him, this man sees the danger as well
as the other and fears, but his fear is not a distracted fear, neither is it
so great as the other, because it is mixed with joy and confidence, in that he
sees a way to escape, yet he fears the same that the other fears, and is
truly humbled, and thankful unto him that saves him from the danger: thus it
is with many Christians, they that have a turbulent kind of sorrow, see death,
and hell, and sin, and damnation; but he sees Christ so far off, that he
cannot depend upon Christ as a Savior, and hence for the present is
marvellously cast down, but he that has the mixed sorrow spoken of, sees the
same in the same manner, but withal he apprehends Christ as a helper, as a
Savior; and here upon is not so much dejected and cast do wne, as the other
and yet notwithstanding is as truly humbled and thankful as the other:
therefore labor to get a heart sensible of sin, that is, labor to know
sin, and the evil of it, and withal labor to see Christ, or else you will
be over-frighted with them: as a man that is in prison for treason, or a great
fact, he knows before what sentence the Judge and Jury will pass upon him,
but he cares not, if before he have got the Kings pardon: so if you know sin,
and know the punishment of sin, but know not Christ, you will have no comfort
in your knowledge: labor therefore to get the holy Ghost, for it is the work
of the holy Ghost to convince the world of sin. John 16. 9. John 16. 9.
a man is no sooner convicted, but there will be a change wrought in him: for a
man is then convict, when he is overcome every way, and thus the holy Ghost
will convince you of sin: seek what way you will to keep off the stroke of
the Spirit, yet you shall not be able, and this stroke shall humble you, if you
belong unto God, as it did Paul in this place.

But you will say, how shall I know whether I am truly humbled or no? For your
better help, I will lay down some signs by which you may examine your
selves, and then accordingly you may judge of your estates.

The first sign whereby you shall know whether you be thoroughly humbled or no,
is this, if you 1. Sign.
love much, it is a sign that you are thoroughly humbled: this we see in the
woman in the Gospel, and it is Christ's commendation of her, that she loved
much, that is, she was sensible of that which Christ had done for her;
therefore her love to Christ was exceeding great, no labor too great, nothing
too precious for Christ, and this we see in Paul also, Christ did much for
Paul, and Paul thought nothing too good for Christ: therefore peremptorily he
concludes that he is ready, not only to suffer, but to dye for Christ: seeing
Christ saved my soul from hell, and that by such a price of so much worth, as
his own blood was, how can I then think that my life is too much for Christ?
therefore examine your selves, examine your humiliation by your love, if you
love him not above all things, if you prize him not above all things, you were
not as yet truly humbled: and that I may persuade you to love Christ, and
grace, and holiness above all things consider these two motives.

The first motive is this, consider the goodness of the thing that I persuade
you unto: the goodness 1. Motive.
and excellency, that is in the things of the world, makes men to love them:
men will not love any thing, except they see some excellency in it, or at least
wise esteem it so, but if it be excellent, then it winnes their love: so it
will be with you in this, if you see into the excellency that is in Christ, and
grace, it will win your love, you will prize him above all things: no man
will prize a Jewel till he know the worth of it, so no man will prize Christ
as excellent till he know him: therefore labor to bring your hearts unto such
a frame, that you may see that excellency that is in Christ, which you cannot
see in any thing else, and then you will love him above all things.

The second motive to persuade you, is this, that this good you see in Christ
is yours, if you 2. Motive.
be his: now that which makes a man to love any thing that he has property and
right in, is this, because it is his own, and if you ask him wherefore he
loves his wife, or his child, or his goods, he will answer, because they are
mine own: so till a man make Christ his own, he will not love him above all
things, but when he is once come to this, that Christ is his own, then he
will prize Christ above all things, and love him above all things; (mine own)
has a great force, that is a part of my self; so when Christ is your own,
when you have made Christ a part of your selves, then you will love him, and
prize, and esteem of him, as you do of your selves: and you will as
unwillingly part with him, as with the noblest member of your body; therefore
examine your humiliation by your love: I say, not so much by the greatness of
your humiliation, as by your love, the effect of it: examine your love by your
prizing of Christ, and grace, and go through all the works of love, 1 Cor.
13. it is patient, it suffers 1. Cor. 13:
much, it envieth not, it seeks not his own: thus examine, whether you can
patiently endure reproach, and shame, and disgrace for Christ; examine whether
you can rather loose your right, then by getting of it, dishonor the Gospel:
examine whether you do not murmr or repine at the prosperity of others, when
your selves are in a meaner condition; examine whether you be gentle, meek,
and easy to be entreated of your inferiors, or equals; if you can do these
things, and that from this ground, because the love of God in Christ
constraines you, it is a sign that you are truly humbled.

The second sign whereby you shall know whether 2. Sign.
you be truly humbled or no, is this: examine whether you tremble at the
Word, when it is preached: it is the sign that God himself gives, Isaiah 66.
2. I will be with him that trembles at my Isaiah 66. 2.
Word: he whom the Word has humbled, in whom it has wrought this effect,
even to make conscience of all his ways, that labors to see every turning of
his heart, and fears his corruptions, that they will master the work of grace
in him; this man is truly humbled. Eccles 9. 1. I Eccles. 6. 1.
considered in my heart, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works are
in the hands of God, etc. That is, his heart is taken up with a solid care of
offending God: he will not trust himself, or his heart with any thing, he sees
and fears God, both in his power and holiness: he fears the threatening of
the Word, and he is affected with the promises of the Gospel. Only by the
way take this caveat with you: it may be you fear the Word, but take heed
that it be a right fear, for in this fear there are two things. First, there
is the fire of the coal; and then secondly, there is the filth of the coal.
Now it is a great fault of many men, they are more affrighted with the fire of
the coal, then with the filth of the coal; sin troubles them more, because
of the wrath of God, and hell, and damnation, which by the Word they apprehend,
then because of the defilement that comes by sin, that defiles the beauty of
the soul: therefore by this you shall certainly know whether you be thoroughly
humbled or no; examine, what is your carriage toward the Word, when it
convinces you of sin, are you then stricken with an astonishment, and
amazement, and does this sorrow continue upon your hearts, or else when your
are reproved of sin, and you find your selves guilty, do you only sigh and
sob, and grieve a little, but anon your hearts begins to slight them: is it
thus with you, then it is a sure sign, that you were never thoroughly humbled;
for as it is with a disease, we say a man is not healed, till he be healed at
the root: so a man is not truly humbled till the Word work this effect in
him; namely, to make sin a burden unto him; howsoever there may be a a
salve made that will cure the wound, skin it over, yet it will not continue,
but break out again; so though men oftentimes may seem to be humbled by the
Word, yet the truth is, they deceive themselves; the disease of their souls
was never thoroughly healed, it may be some mercy skinned it over, and he
thought he had been healed, but it breaks out again; he respects not the
threatenings of the Word, but he goes unto evil company again, he will
profane the Sabbath, and swear, and be drunk again; if it be thus with
you, you were never truly humbled, for if you were, you would tremble at the
Word: what shall we say, do you tremble at the Word, when you are no more
moved at it, then the seats you sit on? we may preach the Law, and damnation,
and spend our selves, and yet it will not work upon you this effect, as to
humble you: but till then, never say that you are humbled, and by this
therefore examine your selves.

The third Sign, whereby a man may know, 3. Sign.
whether he be truly humbled or no, is this, examine how you stand affected to
the Word, when it comes in the evidence of the Spirit, for as you are affected
to the Word, so you are more or less humbled, if you feel a sweetness in the
Word, a saving power in it, it is a sign, that you are truly humbled; and on
the contrary, if the word be an unsavory thing unto you, if you cannot love it
alone for it self, it is a sign that you are not humbled: now in the word,
there are two things; Meat, and Medicine.

First, I say, there is meat, a man that is not 1.
humble, never loves and affects Christ nor the Word; because he is full, and
we know that a man that has a full stomach will set light by the daintiest
dish, when as he that is hungry will feed upon courser fare. So it is with a
man that is humble, he hungers and thirsts after Christ, prizeth the Word at a
high rate, because it reveals Christ unto him, he esteems the Word not with
eloquence, but alone, the best; when it comes in the demonstration and evidence
of the Spirit, when it is purely Preached, when it comes as pure milk without
mixture, then it is sweet unto him: but a man that is not humble, he will not
prize Christ, neither relish the Word when it comes in the evidence of the
Spirit, when it is purely preached, but he must have something joined with it:
as a man that is full, who cares not for eating Grapes, and therefore stands
looking and gazing on them; or as a man that is not a thirst, he will gaze
more on the graving of the cup, then he will desire to drink that which is in
the cup; when as the hungry, or thirsty man, he will not so much gaze on the
Grape, or respect the outside of the cup, as to eat and to drink: so a truly
humbled man, he will not regard eloquence and wit in the Word, this is unto him
but as a graven cup, that will not satisfy him, but the pure word alone, is
that which will satisfy him, and nourish him up in grace: A man that is not
humble, is like a sieve that loses through it all that is good, but keeps
nothing but motes and dirt: when he comes unto the word, if there be any thing
that may fit his humor, that he will hold; which is nothing but vanity and
nourishes not: but for that which is able to feed the soul, and make him wise
in all spiritual wisdom, which is the application, both of the threatenings,
and the promises unto the soul, this he lets go as not worth the keeping: and
this is the reason, why men remain so barren and fruitless, because they do
not retain that, or love that which would make them fruitful in holiness:
these men are like children that cry for books, not because they have a desire
to learn, but because they may turn over some gaudy or gilded letters; so
these men, they come to Church, and they hear, and they receive the
Sacraments, and they read the Word, but not to learn to be edified by them,
but to play with some golden letters, to hear the folly and foolishness of
him that preaches himself and not Christ, or for fashion sake, or for some
other by-respect, but not to this end, that they may be builded up in grace.

The second part of the Word, is the Medicine part, the healing part; for as
there is power in the 2.
Word to fill the soul full of grace, so there is another power in the Word to
heal the breaches and wounds in the soul: now he that will find this saving
power in the Word, he must be humble, he must find and feel himself sick of
sin unto death, then the Word has this power to save and to heal, but if a
man do not find himself spiritually sick, the Word will never heal him;
but it will be a quite contrary medicine, rather a destroying medicine then a
healing medicine, it will be unto him, like as the Sun is to him that has sore
eyes, the more the Sun shines, the more offensive it is unto him, and the
greater pain it puts him unto. So it is with a man that is not humble and
sick of sin, the more the Word lights upon his sin, the more he storms
and strives against it: it is with him, as it is with a man that is sick; when
men are sick, then every thing troubles them, then they will be humble; so
when men are spiritually sick, then sin troubles them: it is with them, as
it was with Absolon and David, there was a rumor of war, before there was
true war: so it is with men in this case, they have a kind of war in
themselves, they seele sin, and are affrighted with it, but the war is not
true, it is but a counterfeit war, a feigned war, because it is between
the conscience and hell, and not between the flesh and the spirit, therefore
examine your selves by this, whether you be truly humbled or no.

The fourth sign whereby you shall know whether 4. Sign.
you be thoroughly humbled or no, is this; when a man is little in his own
eyes, when he thinks himself worthy to be destroyed, this we see to be the
true property of a humbled soul, in Ezekiel. 36. 37.
Eze. 36. Then shall you remember your own evil ways, and your doings that
were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities, they shall so remember them, that they shall think them selves
worthy to be destroyed; for then, and not till then, is a man truly humbled.
Lam. 3. 22. says the Church, It is thy mercy that we are Lam. 3. 22.
not consumed; as if she should say, I am worthy to be destroyed, and
therefore it is a great mercy in thee to save me: now if a man be humbled, he
will be patient, mild, and gentle, and loving, he will patiently undergo
reproach and shame for Christ, and love them that show no true love unto him;
on the contrary, you may see if a man be not humbled, then he is proud and
impatient, collericke and angry: Danid was humble in the matter of Vriah, and
Eli was humbled when he heard the judgment that was threatened against his
house, It is the Lord, says he, 1. Sam. 3. Let him do what is good in his
own eyes; that is, I am 1 Samuel 3. 18.
worthy of it, let come what will come: but if your hearts rise with pride and
impatience, your hearts are not truly humbled and broken, for he that is the
humblest man is least in his own eyes: sin will break the heart of a holy
man, and humble him; but if you be not humbled, your hearts will remain stiff
and stubborn, that is, they will not yield: therefore the more humility that a
man gets, the more is his heart broken with sin, the less he esteems of
himself: therefore examine your selves whether you be little or great in your
own eyes, and accordingly judge of your selves.

The fifth Sign, whereby you may know, whether you be thoroughly humbled or no,
is this, examine 5. Sign.
your obedience unto Christ, if the soul be humbled, it will yield general
obedience unto God. True humiliation will breed obedience in you: now if you
find that you yield no obedience unto God, but you will notwithstanding
profane the Sabbath, and be drunk, and game, it is because you were never
truly humbled, for if you were, you would yield obedience: humiliation fits the
soul for obedience, makes it of a pliable disposition, and that for these
reasons.

The first reason is, because humiliation makes 1. Reason.
a man to see God, in his holiness and power: he that before respected not
God, when he comes to this to see the power of God will submit himself: an
example of this we have in Belchazer, that feared the Lord after he was
thoroughly humbled: but when a holy man with the power of God, sees the purity
and perfection that is in God, this humbles him more, and that also in regard
of his own basnesse, and vileness, and hence properly the obedience of a holy
man proceeds. Obedience depends upon humiliation. As with men when a man or
woman sees the power of a superior, and that he is under his power, then he
becomes humble and obedient.

The second reason is, because humiliation makes a man to desire the favor of
God: now 2. Reason.
you know, a man that desires the favor of any man, he will do any thing that
may please him, he will yield obedience unto all things, to all his demands, to
all his requests, no labor and pain is too great for to take for him, because
he seeks his favor, so it is with a Christian, he will do any thing, or
suffer any thing for Christ, that may please him, because he seeks his favor,
to have familiarity, and inward acquaintance with God.

The third reason is, because humiliation makes 3. Reason.
a man to choose God to be his Master, to be ruled by his laws, to live under
his commands, and to obey him in all things: and this is true obedience when a
Christian chooses God, and grace, above all things in the world, otherwise it
will not be free obedience; as a servant that serves a wicked master, he
obeyes him, but it is forced obedience, because he cannot otherwise choose,
for if he could have his will, he would not serve him: but when a Christian
chooses God to be his Master, he will think nothing too much for him, he will
do his will freely in all things.

The fourth reason is, because humiliation 4. Reason.
breaks, and tames the stubbornenesse of our nature, and makes it gentle and
pliable (I speak all this while of the humiliation of the spirit) unto good:
as a young horse, or a young heifer, when they are broken become tame, and
gentle; so a man that is truly humbled, that has the stubbornenesse and
perverseness of nature broken in him, he will then yield obedience unto God.
For example, take a man that is troubled in conscience; who more humble, who
more willing to be reconciled, who more willing to obey then he? or take a man
that is broken in estate, though he was proud and high minded before, yet now
he will be humble, and labor by all obedience, and submission to raise his
estate; for humiliation will break the heart of all, but withal it sostens
the heart of a holy Man: this we see in Paul. Acts 21. 13. When the Jews would
have persuaded him Act. 21. 13.
from going to Jerusalem: he answers them, What do you mean to break my
heart? Wherefore do you weaken my desire? Paul's heart was set in him to suffer
many things for Christ; and therefore whatsoever he meets withal that sought
to persuade him to the contrary, it pierced him unto the heart: if you then be
truly humbled, the stubbornenesse of your nature is tamed.

The fifth Reason is, because where there is true humiliation, there is
willingness of mind, and you 5. Reason.
know a willing mind will suffer any thing for Christ, and till then no man
will: when a man is willing to do a thing, that which hinders him pinches him;
but a man that is humble is willing to do any thing, or suffer any thing for
Christ; he will obey Christ in every thing, because he sees and feels the
burden of sin; and again, he knows the virtue and excellency of Christ,
and prizeth him above all things, sets him at a high rate, and lightly esteems
and sets by, either profit or pleasure: What is the reason that men will not
obey? but because they value their lusts at a higher rate then they do Christ;
and this is because they are not humbled, they are not able to fadome the
length and the breadth, the height and the depth of the excellencies that are
in Christ; but it is otherwise with a regenerate man; nothing so dear and
precious unto him as Christ is, he will loose all things, and part with all
things, before he will part with Christ, he will yield free obedience unto
Christ, because he is thoroughly humbled.

The sixth sign whereby you shall know whether 6. Sign.
you be truly humbled or no, is this, examine how you stand affected with
worldly pleasures, worldly profits, and worldly joys: are these delightsome to
you, do you make these your only delight and joy; then it is a sign that you
were never as yet thoroughly humbled, because sin as yet is not a burden unto
you; for if a man apprehend sin deeply, if he sees sin as it is sin,
contrary unto the nature, purity, and holiness of, God he will not mind
earthly things so highly or principally as to rejoice in them only; therefore
examine your hearts how you stand affected with the things of the world: and
therefore the Apostle says, Let him that is great in the world be low in his
own eyes: James 1.
he that is truly humble, he will prize Christ, and grace, and holiness, as
the greatest and most precious and excellent things in the world: as for
example, a man that is sick, when he is sick then he will take no pleasure in
any earthly thing, because he is humble; but if you tell him that Christ is
merciful, that he will receive humble sinners unto favor, he delights in
nothing so much, nothing is so excellent unto him as this; but when he is well
again, then he delights in the world again, and the reason is because he was
never truly humbled, but prizes the world, and takes more pleasure in the
things of the world, then he does in grace: but it is otherwise with an humbled
soul, that is truly humbled; and it will delight more in Christ, and grace,
and holiness, then in all the pleasures and profits in the world: therefore
examine your selves whether you are more affected with the world or with grace,
and accordingly you may judge of your estates, whether you be truly humbled
or no: and thus much for this means, and for this point, we now proceed unto
that which follows.

And he said Lord, what will thou have me to do?

The point is this, That sin is in it self full of grief and bitterness, and
men shall find it so, sooner or latter. Doctrine.
I gather it thus, Paul was affrighted with his sin and trembled at it, it
appeared unto him in an ugly shape; hence he cries out, Lord what will thou
have me to do? that is, I am in a straight, I cannot tell how to be freed from
sin, and I will do any thing, or suffer any thing for thee so I may be freed
from sin: now I see sin with grief to be a bitter thing: And so Adam saw
the bitterness of sin when he hid himself from God in the Garden; and so
David saw the bitterness of sin when he made the 51. Psalm. How earnestly
prays he to be freed from it, to have the sting of it taken away, to feel
the favor of God again, which then he felt not? Now that sin is thus, we
will prove it unto you.

First, I say, that sin is full of grief and bitterness, the Prophet calls
it bitter, in Ierem. 2. 19. Know, says he, that which thou have done is bitter
and Ierem. 2. 19.
evil, that is, you shall find it bitter: nay it is bitter now, if you taste
it; and it is always so, though you do not always feel it so; as the
Serpent always has a sting, though he do not always use it, so though
sin does not always appear bitter unto you, yet it is, and it appears not
bitter oftentimes to some, because it does not use its sting always; but sin
is bitter, because it is the cause of all afflictions: I say, sin is the
sting and edge of every affliction, take sin from the affliction, and
affliction will be but a bulk without a burden, or as a Serpent without a
sting, or a sword without an edge: and on the contrary, nothing is bitter, nor
hurts, if sin be remooved: Paul had a good conscience, because sin was not
joined with it, and therefore the afflictions, imprisonments, and reproaches,
that he met withal did not hurt him, they had no sting in them, in 1. Cor. 15.
56. says the Apostle, The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the Law. That 1 Cor. 15. 56.
which gives a sting unto death is sin, and that which gives a sting unto
sin is the Law; for if it were not for the Law, there would be no sin, and
if it were not for sin, there would not be any sting or bitterness in death.
Therefore sin cannot choose, but in its own nature be exceeding bitter and
evil: and therefore esteem how you will of sin, now; but if once you come
to know God in his power and greatness, then you shall know sin to be bitter
and evil: and the reason is, because sin makes us to see God, as a Judge
ready to cast us into hell, out of his presence, and utterly to destroy us:
What was the reason, that Paul was so affrighted and astonished in this place?
but because he saw God in his power, and holiness; and sin contrary unto
the pure nature of God: And what was the reason that the Iaylor was so
affrighted? was it because the prison doors were opened? no, but because he
apprehended a wonderful power in God; there was a glimpse of the power of God,
that shone into his heart, and this was that which so affrighted him: so you
see that the more that any man sees into the power and Majesty of God, the
more bitter will sin be unto the soul: as we see in Judas, he saw the wrath
of God, and then sin became bitter unto him: now there is a time when God
bears the burden of his children, and keeps it off from them; else with
Judas they would sink under them: again, sometimes he does not lay it upon
them, but they lay it upon themselves; but if God lay it on, they shall see
sin to be a bitter thing.

Secondly, as sin is bitter, so it shall appear to be so, unto all men
sooner or later, and that for 2.
these reasons.

The first Reason, is, because otherwise God should loose his glory; I do not
say, that this glory 1. Reason.
shall be taken away: for nothing neither sin nor Satan shall take away Gods
glory; because all things work for his glory: neither can any thing add unto
his glory, but I say, if God should not make sin bitter unto men, sooner or
later, his glory should be suspended for a time; and therefore it is usual
with the Lord to prefixe unto many threatenings his own name: the Prophets use
it frequently after that they have pronounced Judgment against rebellious
sinners, then they add Thus says the Lord, and you shall know that I am the
Lord, that is, because you will rebel against me, therefore you shall know
that sin is a bitter and terrible thing, because I will not have my glory
suspended, therefore you shall be punished, that you may know sin to be a
bitter thing.

The second reason is, because every sin is the breach of a just law: now God
will have the obedience 2. Reason.
of every creature framed according to his law, and all their actions must be
squared by this rule. And the law is this, Do this and live; if thou do it
not, thou shall dye: So that the Law is an Injunctive Law, that injoynes either
a man to do or to suffer the penalty: that is, jnjoynes punishment to follow
the breach of it: so that if a man break the Law, then he shall be sure to
be punished. For God is zealous of his Law, and he will not pass a sinner in
the breach of it without satisfaction, because every injunctive Law, as it
binds to obedience, so it binds the disobedient unto punishment.

The third reason is, because of the Justice of 3. Reason.
God: if he should not punish sinners when they sin, if he should not make
them to feel that sin is bitter, sooner or latter, he should not be God:
therefore says Abraham, shall not the God of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.
that is, spare the good but punish the wicked: it is equity that he should do
so. And indeed if men punish offenders that break the just Laws of their
Prince, (and it is equity for men to do so, otherwise there would be no order
in the world, nor no rectitude amongst men:) how much more shall God? For all
the rectitude that is in the creature, comes from God: and therefore this being
equity with men to punish offenders, surely it is justice in God to punish
sinners: it is his nature, for Justice in God is God himself.

But you will say, it does not appear so, that Object.
God does punish offenders, for we see wicked men prosper in their wickedness,
and they have no bonds in their death, as Job says; they feel sin not so
bitter as you say it is, when on the contrary the godly suffer much.

To this I answer, that men's Judgment is contrary to the wisdom of God in
this thing; God Answ.
knows better how, and when, and where to take offenders then men can:
therefore though God does suspend execution awhile; yet it is not because they
shall escape unpunished, but for these reasons.

The first reason is this, he suspends the execution 1. Reason.
of punishment for a time, because the time of punishment is not as yet come.
You know the Crown is not won till the race be run out to the end, so in
this the full time is not come; sin is not ripe enough, but when it is full
ripe, then he will lance them, and this was the cause that the Lord did not
punish the Amorites, because their sins was not full: it was not come unto
the full Genesis 15.
pitch, sin is growing all the time of a man's life: it is like fruit, it is
sooner ripe in some then in others, and that is the reason that some go a long
time in sin, and yet are not punished; when others are taken in the very
fact: there is a bound and stint set unto every man's sin, thither he shall
go, and no further: and therefore the Apostle says, Romans 2. 5. that some are
kept till the revelation Romans 2. 5.
of Gods just Judgment, till he reveal himself in his just Judgment; this
time is not yet come, and therefore it is, that they are not cut off. Again
the Apostle says in another place: What if God will suffer with great
patience, the vessels of wrath Romans 9. 22.
fitted for destruction? that is, what if God will bear with some a great
while, and punish some presently? What does it advantage them, have they cause
to boast themselves, or rather were it not far better for them to be cut off
presently, then to be spared a while, and then to have the judgment the
greater? therefore when God will make his power known to men, he will suffer
them with great patience, that he may give the greater stroke: it is true, men
cannot conceive how God can bear, and be so patient toward wicked men: but
you must know that He is full of patience: it is his nature, he is patience it
self, though patience be a quality in us, yet it is not so in God, it is his
essence.

The second reason is this, he bears long with wicked men, for the
propagation, and increase of 2. Reason.
mankind: for if he should punish men as fast as they offend, and deserve
death, how should the Church increase, how should the Church stand, this were
to overthrow and weaken his own power; but God is wise and knows better how
to turn the evil intentions and deeds of men, for the good of his Church: as
for example, if a Captain upon some general fault committed by his soldiers,
if he should execute all offenders, this were the way to destroy his Army, and
so expose himself unto the hands of his enemies, therefore he takes but a few,
here one, and there one, to make the rest to take heed they fall not again:
thus does God, he does not inflict punishment, that is, present death upon all
sinners; but takes here and there one, to make them palpable examples unto the
rest; as we see daily, how the Lord meets with the sins of men, then when they
least think of sin or God.

The third reason, why God does patiently bear with offenders, is this, He
does it for the good of some 3. Reason.
that are yet to be called, and therefore you know what the Lord said unto the
husbandman in the Gospel, when he would have plucked up the tares, let them
alone, says he, until the harvest: yet howsoever this comparison does not
always hold true, for he did not forbear the plucking of them up, expecting
any change, but only least in plucking up them, he should hurt the good seed;
for tares will never be wheat, so they that are reprobated, will never
convert: yet it holds good in this, he lets tares grow, that is, he bears
patiently with wicked men, even with those that as yet seem to be so, because
as yet they have not expressed the fruits of their conversion; and therefore for
this reason does God forbear long to punish the wicked, lest he should
destroy the seed of the righteous.

The fourth Reason, Why God suffers long, is this, that he may try the heart,
how it will carry it 4. Reason.
self toward him; not that he knows not the heart before, but that the
heart may now know, that the Lord is patient, when he shall consider how
patiently God has dealt with him, and how long he has borne with him; for
this makes men more inexcusable before God, and more ashamed of themselves,
when they shall call to mind, what time, what opportunity, what occasion they
have had to good, how they might have stored themselves with grace, and made
their peace with him, and then how many sins they have committed time after
time, and then what checks of conscience after, to reclaim them; I say, if men
did but consider this, they could not but say, that God is patient.

The fifth Reason, is this, although they be not 5. Reason.
afflicted as other men are, yet it is not, because they are therefore not
afflicted at all, for indeed they are afflicted with the greatest afflictions
that can be; other men's afflictions may seem to be greater, but yet not so,
but are lesser, whatsoever they may seem to be, and that in these respects.

1. Respect, Because wicked men, they loose the spirit, God denies them grace,
and that is the 1. Respect.
greatest affliction that God can lay upon any sinner, namely, to deny grace;
this was the affliction that God laid upon Saul, it had been better for Saul
that a thousand judgments had befalne him, then to have lost the spirit, the
favor of God. Now wicked men they loose the favor of God, they loose the
obtaining of saving grace, therefore whatsoever they seem to be, yet the truth
is, they are more afflicted then other men.

2. Respect, The prosperity of wicked men, is a punishment; for that which
slayes men, is a punishment; 2. Respect.
but this the prosperity of wicked men does, fit them for destruction, and
therefore the Wise man says, Proverb. 1. 32. that prosperity and ease Prove.
1. 32.
slaies the wicked, that is, the more they prosper and thrive, and rejoice in
their lusts, the greater stabb does sin give them at the heart, and the more
irrecoverably are they smitten; therefore they have no cause to brag of their
prosperity.

3. Respect, Is this because they may wither and 3. Respect.
die in their sins, and that is a great punishment; for because they are not
afflicted as other men are, therefore it is, that their superfluous branches of
lust, and covetousness, and pride, are not lopt off, for afflictions lop these
off, which hinder the growth of saving grace, as you know the superfluous
branches of any tree, hinder the growth of the other branches, if they be not
cut off they will make them to wither and die; thus it is with wicked men,
because they are not afflicted, they begin to wither and grow cold unto good.
The body does not so much wither with age, as the inward man does by these
lusts, theybreed a consumption in the soul, that will not be recovered.

4. Respect, Again, though we see them not afflicted, 4. Respect.
yet they have many afflictions which we know not: even as the godly have many
inward joys and comforts in their hearts, which wicked men never felt, so
wicked men have many strong fears in their hearts, and many sudden flashes of
the fire of hell in their souls, much hollownesse in their hearts, much sorrow
mingled with their carnal joys, and often affrighted with the jaws of death,
and arrested with horrors of conscience, though outwardly they seem to the
world, to be the joyfullest and happiest men in the world, yet the truth is,
they are the most miserable and sorrowful men in the world, for as the inward
joy is far greater then the outward joy, so the inward sorrow is far
greater then the outward sorrow alone: thus you see the point prooved.

The use of this should teach us not to delude Use.
our selves in the matter of afflictions; in afflictions we are ready to
conclude, because our afflictions are greater then others, that therefore we
are greater sinners; but here you see the contrary, the greatest sinners are
not always outwardly the greatest afflicted, for God uses a great deal of
difference in afflictions, some he afflicts young, he takes them when they are
green; others he lets them go a long on the score, till they be old, yet he
will meet with all at last, either sooner, or latter; therefore think not
that thou art a greater sinner, or that thy sins are greater then other men's
are, or that God loves thee less, because of thy outward afflictions: remember
what the Lord said unto the Jews. Luke 13. 2. 3. Think not, says he, that
the Galileans on whom the Tower of Luke 13. 2. 3.
Shiloim fell, were greater sinners then you, or others sinners: think not
because judgment was in that manner infflicted upon them, that they were
greater sinners: or that their sins were greater, and did exceed others: but
except you repent, ye shall all likewise perish; I will meet with you, and
you shall know that your sins are as great as theirs was; and so look upon
every sin that God has punished, presently, and the sin is as great still,
as ever it was: as for example the sin of lying. Acts 5. Ananias and Saphira
they lied, and you see what a judgment was inflicted upon them, because Acts 5.
they had lied to the holy Ghost: even against that light which the holy Ghost
had revealed unto them, and yet you must know that a lie is not the sin of
the holy Ghost; for any regenerate man, that is in the covenant, may through
infirmity speak an untruth, and yet not sin the sin against the holy
Ghost; but I say, the sin of lying is now as great as ever it was, and he
that infflicted that judgment upon them, may infflict the like upon thee: yet
you must know that this sin is not greater then other sins; but because men
might take heed of this sin for the time to come, he made them examples.
Again in Levit. Levit. 10. 1, 2, 3.
10. 1, 2, 3. they that offered strange fire in the time of the law they were
stricken with death, not that this was a greater sin then any now, but to
teach men reverently to draw near unto God; when we have to do with any of
the ordinances of God to use them reverently, and to come with reverent hearts
unto them. Again, let us consider what judgments have befalne liars, and
thieves, and prophaneners of the Sabbath, and drunkards, and luxurious persons,
and cozeners, and gamesters; that if we be the like, the same judgments may
befall us, as has befalne them; let us set these as examples, to take heed of
the like sins; as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 11. These things fell upon
them for our example, etc. That we 1 Cor. 10. 11.
should not lust as some of them lusted, etc. Now if sin be as dangerous
unto the soul as ever it was, it should teach us to take heed of committing
the least evil: And that I may the better prevail with you to forsake sin,
consider these motives.

The first motive to move you to forsake sin, is this, because sin will
make you ashamed; Romans 1. Motive.
6. 21. What fruit had you then in those things whereof Romans 5. 21. Sin
makes ashamed.
you are now ashamed: what will it avail you to do that thing, that
afterward will shame you? for though the root of every sin seem to be
sweet, yet the fruit of it is bitter, that is, both shame, and sorrow, and
death: and again, on the other side, though the root of every act of
godliness be a little hard, and bitter to the flesh, yet the fruit of it, is,
honor and glory: And therefore the Prophet says, Iere. 2. 19. that to sin
against God, is an evil thing and bitter, how sweet soever Iere. 2. 19.
it may seem unto you: let this therefore move you to hate sin, because it
will make you ashamed.

The second motive, to move you to forsake sin, is this, because if you
sin, God will beat 2. Motive.
you: though election be sure, yet you shall not escape correction, which shall
be more bitter unto you, then the sweetest sin, Heb. 12. 6. He scourges
every son whom he receives: if thou be Heb. 12. 6.
Gods son, thou must make account to feel Gods rod. The Lord corrects his
children, when they sin, for these two reasons.

The first reason is, because sin is sin with God, in whom soever it is,
and he will be sure to 1. Reason.
scourge him in whom it is; if thou run out he will fetch thee in, with his
crook; and the sweeter the sin was, the bitterer will the scourging be.
Rev. 3. 19. Whom I love I rebuke and chasten; that is, I will do it without
exception of persons. Revel. 3. 19.
a Pet. 1. 4. Judgment must begin at the house of God. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Prove. 11. 31. Behold the righteous shall be recompensed, or rewarded in this
life, how much more the Prove. 11. 31.
sinner; if a holy man sin he shall be afflicted, then much more a wicked
man. And again, he that sows iniquity, shall reap affliction: he that
sins, must expect the rod, and it must needs be so, because Gods children
draw the nearest unto him, and he has said, that he will be sanctified of
those that draw near unto him, Levit. 10. 3. Levit. 10. 3.
therefore for the keeping of them clean, they must be scowred, when they grow
foul and rusty; they must be cast into the furnace, when they gather dross.

The second reason is, because his children are 2. Reason.
the Temples of the holy Ghost, wherein God delights to dwell; and therefore he
will not suffer any uncleanenesse to abide in them long, but will quickly
sweep it out, with the beesome of affliction, as in Revel. 2. 5. Remember
therefore from Revel. 1. 5.
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or else I will
come unto thee quickly.

Ey, but I feel nothing for the present. 1. Object.


I answer; yet after, though not now, thou shall surely feel it, and in that
thing that thou love Answ.
most, which of all other, thou would not be crossed in, as David in his
Absolon, and Moses in his going into Canaan: for that is Gods manner; if Israel
loath Manna, God will make it to come out at their nostrils. And so thou shall
surely feel thy sin, what ever it be, in the end: for as in the misdemeanor
of youth, we sow the seeds of afterdiseases, though not presently felt. So
godly men in their runnings out, sow the seeds of after-afflictions, though for
a while that harvest appears not above ground: see it in David, in Solomon,
in Asa, in Vzziah, whether all they smarted not for it in the end; and the
longer it is deferred, the more will come together: as those that are sick
seldom, are sick to purpose when it comes, because many humors lie heaped
together, and lie insensible awhile, and then break forth at once; so when
thou have heaped a great many of sins together, the judgments of God will
break out to purpose against thee, so that thou shall feel the weight of them
all.

Ey, but I am healthful, and rich, and strong; and me thinks, afflictions
are not near me. 2. Object.


This is answered in 2. Corinthians. 10. 12. faith the Apostle, We are not of the
number of them, that Answ.
compare themselves with themselves, and commend 2 Cor. 10. 12.
themselves; for they that do thus are unwise: for as the hiding of the Sun,
brings darkness in a moment, so in an instant, God can turn all upside
down, and will do it on a sudden, when you think your selves safest.

I will commit it but once, if I might but commit it but once, I could desire
to commit it no 3. Object.
more.

Remember, David numbered the people but once, and committed adultery but once,
Sichem Answ.
and Dinah committed fornication but once, Ammon committed adultery but once,
Reuben went up to his fathers bed but once, Saul offered sacrifice against the
Commandment of God but once, Moses feared but once at the waters of strife.
Josiah disobeyed God, in going to war without a warrant but once; Nadab and
Abihu offered strange fire but once: those two thousand three hundred Number. 25.
3.
which were slain for committing fornication, the same day they were
destroyed; (it is likely therefore they did it but once) yet upon them and upon
all these, the Judgments of God were very heavy, for once falling; therefore
sin not once.

Ey, but I am a regenerate man, and in the state 4. Object.
of grace; and therefore God will deal tenderly with me.

So, first, were most of these named before, yet Answ.
God spared them not: secondly, again thou shall the rather be sharplier dealt
withal, because one that draws near unto him in profession, must be more
clean then others: thirdly, Job was in the state of grace, yet quickly moved,
for hec knew he could not escape, as it is in Job 31. 2. to the 23. verse, in
which he concludes, that the wrath of God was a terror to him, and by reason
of his Highness, he could not endure: so also in 1. Pet. 1. 17. though he be
a Father, yet without respects he judges all men, therefore think not 1 Pet.
1. 17.
to escape, if thou sin, because thou art a son, but rather expect to be
beaten the more.

But I may recover by repentance. 5. Object.


I answer, It is more then thou know, and that for this reason, because
repentance is Gods gift, every Answ.
very time when it is renewed; if it be then his gift, and in his power, then
it is not thine, nor in thy power to repent: in Ioh. 3. 8. the wind blows
where it lists; and it is certain, when we have once past limits
modestiae, we are in praecipitio: we cannot stay our selves till we come
unto the bottom of the hill, except God stays us: David and Solomon, thought
they could have gone so far, that they might have reclaymed themselves, but
they were deceived; if thou cannot keep thy soul pure before thou have
committed sin, how will thou do to cast it out, when it is once in? every
sin hardens the heart, and weakeneth the strength of the inward man.

But many have escaped punishment; and so 6. Object.
shall I.

I answer, never any escaped, but they had it either Answ.
inward or outward, sooner or later, though they have been Gods dearest
children: Heb. 12. 29. even our God is a consuming fire, that is, he is Heb.
12. 29.
zealous of his glory, to burn up and purge out by afflictions, the
corruptions of his children: and in 1. Pet. 1. 17. every one to whom he is a
Father, 1 Pet. 1. 17.
shall be judged, that is, afflicted without respect of persons, according unto
their works: so Job 34. 11. he rewards men according to their works: Job 34.
11.
only this must be added, the more we judge our selves, and the deeper we go
in humiliation, the lesser God will afflict us. David humbled himself so far
that God sent him word, that all his sins were pardoned. Yet what measure of
affliction David did need, that his heart might be more broken, that he shall
have; and every one else that belongs unto God: so Ahabs fained humiliation did
defer, and lessen his punishment; I say, lessen it only, for notwithstanding
he was slain. Ezechiah tasted of some afflictions, yet because he humbled
himself, a great shower of Gods vengeance fell not upon him; humiliation is a
means to break the shower, and still the wind, and calm the waves of the
wrath of God.

The third motive to move you to hate sin, is 3. Motive.
this, because sin will take away your excellency; even as a star that
falls to the earth loses his brightness, so when one that has been
forward in religion, falls to earthly and carnal delights, then all his
beauty, dignity, and excellency vanishes: Genesis 49. 4. it is Jacobs last speech
unto Ruben, Thou have lost thy excellency, thou art become Genesis 49. 4.
as weak as water, because he had defiled his fathers bed: nothing will take
away a man's excellency but sin; afflictions, disgrace, imprisonment, or the
like do not hurt a man; nay he may shine the more for these: as the torch
appears the brighter, the darker the night is: so if a Christian keeps his
uprightness he will shine still bright, let men doc or say what they can; but
it is sin that blemisheth, and takes away our dignity, and excellency; when
a man keeps his uprightness, he walks in his strength, but when he descends
unto any vanity, or folly; it is his impotency and weakness: therefore if you
would not loose your excellency, you must loose your sins.

The fourth Motive to moove you to hate sin, is this, because the least sin
violateth the peace 4. Motive.
of conscience, which is as tender as the apple of the eye; and you know the
least mote that is, troubles it: sin will fret and grieve the conscience, it
will inrage and disquiet it: if a good conscience be a continual feast, what a
loss is it to want it in time of health; but in time of sickness and
afflictions how bitter will it be to want it? If a man admits but of the least
evil thing, though but an occasion of evil, reluctante Conscientia, that is,
against his conscience, it does not only take away a man's peace, but it
galleth and vexes him exceedingly: for sins in a man's conscience are like
thorns in a man's feet, though all were plucked out but one, yet that one is
enough to trouble and grieve him: on the contrary, see what comfort Paul had
from a good conscience when he was in prison: and what sorrow Adam had in
Paradise from an evil conscience: let this moove you to hate sin.

The fifth Motive to moove you to hate sin, 5. Motive.
is, because sin will bring upon you all manner of miseries: all the miseries
and afflictions that we taste of here, are measured out to us for sins
committed; and on the contrary, all the comforts, peace of conscience,
prosperity, and inward joy, are all continued to us according unto the
pureness of our hearts and ways: as in Psalm. 18. 23. Psalm. 18. 23. 24.
24. I was also upright, says David, before him, and I kept my self from mine
iniquity, therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my
uprightness: according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyes sight: and
then in the 25, and 26. verses, both parts are clearly expressed, that he will
walk more frowardly with you, as you walk more frowardly with him: and
again, as you walk more purely with him, so he will show himself more
gracious and loving unto you: as for example, go through all the Judges of
Israel, and you shall see this true; look to Gedeon, one sin was the
destruction of him and his house: look to Sampson, that sin of fornication,
brought upon him shame, imprisonment, and death.

Again, go through all the Kings of Judah, and you shall see that they
prospered so long, as they prospered in grace, and when they fell into sin,
then presently they fell into misery, look to David, to Solomon, to Rehoboam,
Ahab, to Asa, Manasses, etc. Again, look amongst the Corinthians, some were
sick, and weak, amongst them for not receiving the Sacrament worthily, so all
sicknesses in body, breaches in estate, ill hansels in businesses, troubles
from enemies, griefs from wives, children, and friends, they all even now in
our days proceed from the sins, which you have committed. Again, as I said,
all the prosperity, whether it be outward in riches, or honor, or wife, or
children, or friends; or inward, the saving graces of the spirit, they all
proceed from your uprightness of heart. And needs it must be so, because if
God be the Governor of all the world; then it must needs be best with them
that serve him best, and worst with them that offend him worst: this rule must
be understood of the Saints to comfort them, and not of wicked men; for they
want afflictions, and enjoy prosperity in Judgment: but with the godly it is
not so, therefore they are like to taste of both in this life, according to
their thriving in sin, and going backward in holiness; let this moove you to
hate sin, that you may escape these miseries.

The sixth Motive, to moove you to hate sin, is, because sin is a vain
thing, it can yield us 6. Motive.
no true comfort or content; and this we may see in the vanity and
changeableness of earthly things, when we make them our only joy, how soon
are we deprived of them? for indeed, what is our portion, or what can yield us
any sound and solid joy and comfort, but God and Christ? and so Job reasons
in Job 31. 2. what portion shall Job 31. 2.
I have with God Almighty? it is no small portion, but a great portion to have
Communion with Him, to be sure of Him for a refuge in all troubles, a
Counselor in all duties, a helper in all wants to stand by us, when all else
forsake us: he that knows the sweet consolations of the spirit, will account
sin and the world but a vain thing; I say, no man that knows the sweetness
there is in the Communion with God, will loose it for all the pleasures of
sin. Job 14. he shows the vanity of earthly things; some conceive the
comforts of the Spirit but a vain thing, but this is, because they never
tasted of the sweetness of the spirit: there is no man but he has something
that he rests his heart upon, as the Psalmist says, Some trust in Princes,
some in riches, others in their friends, but it is God that is the strength and
prop of every sanctified man's heart, on which every holy man and woman rests;
now take from any man that which is his prop and stay, and his heart sinketh
and dies in him like a stone: so will the heart of a child of God, when the
assurance of the favor of God is taken away by sin: therefore as the favor
of God is sweeter then life it self unto him, so the very interruption and
suspending of it, is as bitter as death: and therefore in this regard, sin is
to be hated.

The seventh Motive, to moove you to hate 7. Motive.
sin, is, because sin is restles, if you do but Sin restles.
truly consider the restlesnesse of the heart, till it be sanctified, it will
make you to hate sin: the heart is restless, till it be set in a good frame
of grace. Sin is unto the soul, as a disease in unto the body; a man that is
bodily sick will never be at rest, till he be well: so a regenerate man is
never at rest till sin be healed in him; wickedness is of a restless
nature, according unto that measure it is found in any, as the Prophet says,
in Isaiah 57. 20, 21. where he compares the heart of wicked men unto the raging
Sea, that still is in Isai. 57. 20. 21.
motion, purging and cleansing it self; so a holy man is not at rest, whilst
his heart is not cleansed from his sins: let this therefore moove you to hate
sin, because it is restless.

The eighth Motive, to moove you to hate sin, is, because sin is not
acquainted with God, it 8. Motive.
has no familiarity with him, it is not accustomed to stand, or be in his
presence; it stands in such terms with him, that the sinner dares not look
upon God, or draw near him without shame and fear: no wicked man dares do
thus, so long as any uncleanness cleaves unto him in any degree. But grace
breeds an holy acquaintance with God, and does beget in the heart a kind of
noble friendship and familiarity with God, which will make a holy man to
abhor sin as a base thing, which beseems not that pureness of that
friendship which he has with Christ: hence is that speech of Ezra, in Ezra 9.
Ezra 9. 6.
O my God, I blush and am ashamed to lift up my face to thee, my God; for my
iniquities are gone, etc. that is, because of my sin, I am ashamed to have
any familiarity with thee.

The ninth motive, to move you to hate sin, 9. Motive.
is, because if you live in sin God will show you no mercy: you shall find
him not as a father, but as a Judge. The mercy and kindness of God is a great
and effectual motive which God often uses in Scripture, to move us from sin;
thus the Lord dealt with David, in 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. I gave 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8.
thee thy Masters daughter, and I made thee King in his steed, and if this had
been too little, I could have done much more, wherefore then have thou done
thus and thus, etc. Again, in Micah 6. 4. 5, Micah 6. 4, 5, 6, 7.
6, 7. O my people, what have I done unto you, remember what I did for you,
when I brought you out of the land of Egypt; remember what Balack King of Moab
consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him, from Sittim unto
Gilgall, etc. Again, in Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish
people and unwise: is not he thy father that has Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
made thee, and fashioned thee; that has bought and established thee, etc.
Gods dealing with us, being soundly considered, how often he has spared us,
and borne with us, how much he has loved us, and done for us, is enough to
break the heart of a regenerate man, and make him to hate sin.

The tenth motive, to move you to hate sin, is, because sin makes you to
break your covenants 10. Motive.
with God: and therefore the remembrance of our covenants with God, is enough
to confound us, and give an edge unto our sorrows for sins past, and
confirm us in our resolutions exceedingly for the time to come: what shall we
mock God, says the holy Man? will he hold him guiltless that takes his
name in vain? and will he not surely require our vows at our hands? Yes,
certainly he will, and that speedily: if we use to break our covenants
often, and begin to forget them, and the Genealogy of them: therefore let this
move you to hate sin; that you may keep your covenants with God, and so
escape those judgments, which otherwise will light upon you.

The eleventh motive, to move you to hate sin, is, because sin is a thief:
it will rob you of your 11. Motive.
pretiousest Jewel, and best thing you have in the Sin is a theife.
world, which is your assurance of election: for what is the reason that many
have such heartqualmes, and pinches, and doubts, and fears, whether they be
God's or no, but because they let some lust or other enter into their hearts,
which stirs up the musty corners of the heart, and so makes a foul smell in
the soul, which if they had been careful before, they might have prevented.
Now how great a comfort it is to be assured, that he is one of Gods elect,
he that has felt it knows what it is, though he cannot express it; but if
you have not felt it, you will not believe it, though you should be told it:
to be assured of the love of God, and that all the privileges in Christ, and
that all the promises in Scripture belong unto a man; it is such a joy as will
raise the heart, basely to esteem of all earthly things, and to walk in
Paradise as it were, and to rejoice continually in the meditation, and
assurance of those things, which are appointed unto the elect in the Book of
God; besides, not to fear death, not to be moved with any Tyranny, or evil
tidings, but to be like a square stone that stands eeven upon his own
bottom, in whatsoever estate he is cast. But all his assurance, joy, and
comfort is lost, if the heart be but impure, and unholy toward God. Wherefore
let this moove you to hate sin.

The twelfth motive, to move you to hate sin, 12. Motive.
is, because sin is the greatest tyrant that God has. The consideration what
a tyrant lust is, would make you afraid of sin, if you did but know what
vexation it would put you unto: from which tyranny you shall never be freed,
till you come to give peremptory denialls unto it in every thing: for when
strong lusts possess your hearts, they lead you about, distract you, and weary
you. Now what greater enemy can any man have then he, that draws away the
heart of his spouse after him, from her own husband? What greater enemy can
any chaste woman have, then he that entises her to folly, and to make her his
whore: beloved, sin draws away your hearts and affections from God: you
are, or you ought to be Christ's Spouse, then think with your selves, whether
sin be not an enemy both unto Christ, and unto your selves: It is true, it
may be it will promise you to make satisfaction, but perform nothing; for
while they are yet living and quick in us, we are in this straight; either
we resist them, or not resist them: if we resist them, they pain us, and
weary us out with importunity: but if we resist them not, then we put fuel
unto the fire, and so make it the greater: and when the lust has gotten more
strength, then it must have more satisfaction, and when that is done, yet more
will be desired; as the fire the bigger it grows, the more fuel it requires
to feed it, and so there will be no end: but it will grow, in infinitum,
infinitely, till it has drawn you into perdition: therefore there is no way,
but to put it clean out, and to quench every spark; to give no fuel to it
at all, nor so much as to gaze upon unmeete objects, else shall you never be
free from the vexation and tyranny of it: but rather sink deeper and deeper,
like a man in a quick-sand. Let this moove you to hate sin.

The thirteenth motive, to move you to hate sin, is, because sin will make
you to come 13. Motive.
weeping home, if ever you come; but if you do not come home, then, as the
Apostle says, your damnation sleeps not; the longer you go, the nearer you
are to hell, and further from God. And therefore it is better for you to come
weeping at last, then not at all; and who went ever out from God, that
sometimes had enjoyed fellowship with him, but they have come home by the
weeping cross: for in this case God commonly drives them home with storms, if
they be such as belong unto him. Hence the ways of the Saints are said to be
hedged in with thorns; if they keep the right way, it is smooth and plain,
but if they step aside, they will meet with thorns that will prick and gall
them: the Scripture is full of examples: in David, in Solomon, in Manasses, in
Paul, in Peter. Let this moove you to hate sin.

The fourteenth Motive, to moove you to hate sin, is, because you can never
have any true content, 14. Motive.
so long as you love sin and live in it: as for example; Let a man but look
back unto former times before he was called, and see whether he ever found so
much contentment in any thing, as he does now, if his heart be perfect toward
God, when he walks more exactly with him. Again, whether it has not been
wearisome and restless, to have his heart drawn forth to vanity, and led up
and down with diverse lusts: This was David's practice, I remembered my
sorrowings in the night, and in the times of old, what joy I was wont to find
in thee: every man would live a contented life, and it is wearisome unto nature
to live in discontent; now that you may have true content, hate sin.

The fifteenth motive, to move you to hate sin, is, because sin will at the
last, whether 15. Motive.
you will or no, make you to confess, and say, that you have done very
foolishly; I say, never any man committed sin, but it brought him in the end
to say, as David said, in 2 Samuel 24. 10. I 2 Samuel 24. 10.
have done very foolishly: and, to express this, that speech of Solomon is
most excellent, Eccles. 7. 15. I set my self to know the wickedness of folly,
and Eccles. 7. 25.
the foolishness of madness; as if he could not sufficiently, or easily
express it, that sin will make a man to see, that there is nothing but folly
in sin at last: and in 1 Timothy 6. 9. sin is called, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
foolishness: hence then, it is extreme folly to commit the least sin; it
is good to oppose this conclusion against all the reasons of Satan, That we
will not sin, because it will be our folly: and if we cannot answer in
particulers, let us answer him in the general, that we will not yield to any.
It may be, he will tell you, that you shall gain some profit, or pleasure,
or sweetness, or commodity by sinning: but if you can bring your hearts, not
to believe this, you will never do it; and say, the Scripture tells us, that it
is extreme folly to do so, and we shall find it to be so, therefore we will
not: Let this move you to hare sin.

The sixteenth motive, to move you to hate sin, is, because sin will take
you away from 16. Motive.
God, and God from you; and therefore that must needs be an evil thing, and
worthy to be hated of you, that will deprive you of God; it is the terriblest
thing in the world, to have God taken away from a man: that which makes a man
to loose any thing that he loves, is hated of him; as for example, a man that
loves and respects his credit, he had rather loose any thing then that; it is a
great grief unto him, to be disgraced: to a rich man that loves his riches, it
is a grief to part with them, and therefore he does hate a theife: so it is
the slaying of the soul to part with God; a holy man had rather part with wife
and children, riches, pleasures, and friends, and life it self, then part with
God; and therefore it is, that in every regenerate man, there is bred by the
spirit a loathing of all sin: if you would not then part with God, hate
sin; God and Mammon cannot abide together no more then light and darkness.

Now if these will not move you to hate sin, then consider some motives to
move you to hate it in regard of God.

First, consider that God does take notice of 1. Motive.
all that you do, he sees into the secret corners of your hearts, and makes a
diligent search: I know thy thoughts a far off, (says God) and he knows
the intent of your hearts. Revel. 3. 8. I know your works, and patience, and
so forth, I Revel. 3. 8.
take notice of them, I knew them before you did act them; therefore in every
action that thou go about, say, now God sees me what I am doing, and he
knows what I intend to do: it stands me upon to carry my self uprightly in
this action, least he meet with me: for he is a God of pure eyes, and cannot
bear with evil in his own. You know what he said unto Nathaniel, John 1.
48. I knew thee, before I saw thee: that is, thou 1 Ioh. 48.
marvailest how I came to know thee, but marvel not, for I did not only know
thee, but I also know thy heart; therefore consider this, that God sees you,
and takes notice of your actions and thoughts. Again, consider that so much
sin, so much seed, and the more seed, the greater harvest; the more sin,
the more punishment: therefore labor to hate sin.

Secondly, consider that when God does strike 2. Motive.
for sin, his wrath is exceeding bitter and terrible: for if it were not for
the wrath of God that follows sin, afflictions would not be so bitter: and
therefore the Lord says unto the Church. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those
things which thou shall suffer: that is, fear them not, for that Revel. 2. 10.
which makes them terrible, shall not be mingled with them, which is my wrath:
for it is not afflictions that are bitter, but sin in the afflictions that
makes them bitter, therefore let this make you to hate sin, that you may
escape the wrath, and vengeance of God.

Thirdly, consider that the longer God stays from afflicting of sinners; the
greater and terribler 3. Motive.
shall the stroke be when it comes, and therefore it were better for thee, that
have no interest in Christ, that he would strike presently, then defer it
longer, that so thy punishment may be the lesser: in Amos 5. says God, I will
strike at once, and I will not strike the second time, that is, when I do
strike, I will strike so that I shall not need to strike the second time, and
thus the Lord said unto Eli: in 1. Sam. 3. verse. 12. When I begin I will make
an end, and this is the greatest punishment that the Lord can inflict against
any sinner; it is as if he should have said, I will not begin to afflict them
and then cease, and give them space of repentance, but I will make an end, that
is, I will do it in a moment, on a sudden; I will but make one work of it, I
will begin, and I will finish it in an instant, and this we see the Lord did
upon Hephni and Phineas: therefore let this moove you to hate sin. Thus much
for this point.

And he said, Arise, and go into the City, and it shall be told thee, what
thou shall do. Doctrine.
The point is this, that Christ is exceeding merciful, and exceeding ready to
speak mercy unto those that are truly humbled.

I gather it thus, Paul was here stricken down with an apprehension of sin,
and being thus exceedingly humbled in the sight of his sins, Christ meets him
upon the plyablenesse of his will, with a word of comfort, (Arise): this word
is full of comfort, for it is as if he should have said, Paul be not too much
dejected and cast down at the apprehension of thy sins, as if there were not
abundant mercy in me to pardon it, but arise, that is, go, and I will show
thee what thou shall do, to save thine own soul; and it shall be told thee,
what thou shall do for me, but fear not, be of good comfort: now that
Christ is full of mercy, we will prove it by Scripture, Matthew. 11. 28. Come
unto me all that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you: in these
words, there are three things. First, the conditions of the persons that must
come, and those are such as are weary and heavy laden. The second thing is the
qualification of the persons that are truly weary, and heavy laden: first, they
must be meek: secondly, they must be lowly: the third thing is, the pattern
or teacher of them, and that is Christ; the best, the holiest, and wisest
Teacher in the world: learn of Me, I am ready to teach all, and to upbraid no
man: and then in the last place, the thing that they must do; they must take
Christ's yoke, and so they shall be rid of their burden; the sum of it is
this, if you be weary and heavy laden with your sins, and have a desire to
be eased, it is no more, but come unto Christ, and he will ease you: that is,
if you be heavy laden with sin, Christ is ready to take off your burden,
and to put upon them the easy yoke of obedience and holiness. Again, in Esa.
57. I dwell in the high and mighty place, with him also, that is of a contrite
and broken spirit, that is, there is but two places that God delights to dwell
in, the one is in heaven, and the other place is, in a humbled heart: now
surely, he will not dwell there where he loves not; for to dwell notes a
special presence with them, that is, he will not only dwell in the heart,
but he will make his presence to comfort the heart; and again, in Esa. 66. I
will be near unto them that are humble, and that tremble at my words; that
is, I will take a special care of them that are humble: this readiness of
Christ to receive sinners, is excellently set forth in the parable of the
Prodigal: How readily did the father receive a rebellious child; even so
ready, and much more ready is Christ to receive sinners that are humbled: an
example we have in David, how ready was God to pardon David's great sin, when
he had humbled himself; and the same we see in Peter, and so here in Paul. The
reasons of this point are these.

The first reason is, because mercy pleases him, 1. Reason.
as it is in Micha: I will pardon your transgressions, because mercy pleases
me, that is, he delights to show mercy to sinners, and what man will not
willingly do any thing that pleases him.

The second reason is, because mercy is natural 2. Reason.
unto God, that is, it is his nature, for although mercy be a quality in us,
yet it is a nature in God, and what man will not willingly do any thing that
is agreeable unto his nature.

The third reason is, because God is rich in mercy; a man that is rich, he will
not respect the giving of 3. Reason.
a small gift; but he will give liberally and bountifully, and it is for his
credit to do thus: now if it be thus with men, then how much more with God,
because he is the Storehouse, and has the fountain in himself; and therefore
it stands with his honor to give liberally, to be rich in mercy to his children.

The fourth reason is, because God is our Father, and you know a father has a
tender affection over 4. Reason.
his children, and if it be thus with men, then it is much more with God
toward his children; thou needst not to fear the missing of his mercy, if
thou be one of Gods children.

The consideration of this, that God is exceeding merciful, should draw us
close unto God, 1. Use.
that is, is God merciful, then let us run unto him; this hoping of mercy,
should win us to come unto him; for what is that which makes a Traitor, or a
Malefactor after Hue and cry, to come in and lay down the arms of Rebellion,
but the Proclamation of mercy? and in hope of this he comes in; Therefore when
you hear that Christ is exceeding merciful, then come in: only lay down the
arms of rebellion, and you shall find mercy.

Object. Oh but says some, I would willingly come unto Christ, but alas, my
sins are so many, Object.
and so great, that I fear Christ will not receive me.

Answ. To this I answer; what if thy sins be exceeding great and many, yet
they are not Infinite, Answ.
that is, they do not exceed the price paid for them. But God is Infinite in
mercy, and therefore exceeds all thy sins. Again, consider the ability and
power of God, he is able to make thee clean, and purge thee from all
iniquity; and therefore fear not the greatness of thy sins: only labor to
find the condition, faith, in thee: and then come and take of Christ freely.

Secondly, if God be exceeding merciful, then let men take heed, that they
wrong not themselves 2. Use.
in regard of salvation by the neglect of those means, whereby grace is got:
that is, let men be humble, and then let them know, that Christ is merciful:
And that you may not put off repentance, and the getting of grace, consider
these particulars.

The first thing is this, take the time and opportunity when grace is offered,
that is, it will be 1. Help.
good for you to strike while the Iron is hot, and grind while the wind
blows, and sail when there is a fair gale; so it is good to follow the
spirit in its motion: for as there is a time when the spirit is offered, so
there is a time when the spirit may not be got, and therefore it is, that this
time is so insisted upon so often in Hebr. 3. To day if ye will hear his
voice, etc. that is, there is a time when God will not be found of us, though
we would give a world to have but one motion of the spirit again, one moment
of repentance, one offer of grace, but you shall not: well then, now you have
the time and opportunity, that is, the day of salvation; I offer you Christ and
salvation, and you may have him if you will but receive him, that is, if you
will but suffer him to rule in your hearts, if you will but acknowledge him to
be your Lord and King; you shall have him whatsoever thou art, or have been
for the time past; only if you will be a new man for the time to come: but if
you will not receive Christ now, but refuse him, there shall a time come, when
thou would receive him, but then thou shall not. Remember the five foolish
Virgins, Matthew. 25. They were shut out of the marriage chamber, and so may
thou, if thou now refuse him.

Secondly, consider that repentance is not in 2. Help.
thine own power, that is, it is a turning of the heart and casting of a man
into a new mould, the setting of the heart the right way, and withal know,
that there is a false repentance: Cain and Esau, and Judas repented, as well as
Paul and Peter and David, but the one proceeded from the Spirit, and the other
from the flesh: it must be sound repentance, if it be acceptable: now this no
man can do of his own power and strength, except there be a supernatural
work of grace in the soul. There are two causes why God does afflict his
children; First, God afflicts his children, because of some scandal, I speak
now of Gods children, and thus David was afflicted, because he gave a just
occasion of scandal in the matter of Vriah; therefore God afflicts him:
Secondly, to weane them from the world, because God knows till they be humble,
and basely esteem of themselves, and the world, they will not prize Christ, or
grace; but when they are thoroughly humbled then they will come in and take
Christ; and therefore it is, that we preach Christ generally unto all, that
whosoever will come and take him, may have him: and therefore this is the
question that we move and propound unto all men, whether they will receive
Christ, that is, whether they will take him above all things for better or
worse, to be their Lord, Master, and King; if they will thus receive him, they
shall have him: it is no matter, as I said, what a man is, or what a man was,
only if he will be another man for the time to come; and therefore it is false
preaching, to say, they must come thus, and thus, as if Christ were purchased
with our own gift; but we preach Christ freely, without any condition, without
any exceptions of persons, Whosoever will let him come and take of the Water of
life freely, as in Revel. 21. And that Christ is thus ready to receive humbled
sinners, you may see in his readiness to receive all manner of people, whilst
he was on the earth, with several diseases: he put none away that came unto
him. Again, consider that if Christ should not be merciful, then the end of
his Redemption should be lost: for wherefore came he but to show mercy unto
sinners? Again, consider how ready he is to receive sinners, from the mouth of
his Ministers. 2 Corinthians. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ; as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God: that is, we use all the persuasions, and motives that we
can; we exhort, rebuke, instruct you, and all to this end to make you willing
to receive Christ; nay we do not only beseech you, but with those in the
Gospel, we compel you to come in, that is, we persuade you often against your
wills, to receive Christ. Now the things that keeps men from Christ is this;
they say, that they are not fit to come to Christ, and therefore they will not
come: but men are deceived, for there is no other fitting condition required of
us by God; only believe, and you shall be saved, that is, if you have but a
desire to come to Christ, you may have him: as for example, if there should be
a general proclamation made by the King, for all offenders let their crimes
be what they will; that whosoever will come in, and lay down his arms of
rebellion and acknowledge him to be Supreme, shall have pardon; it may be
there is some offenders that have greater crimes then others, and others less,
whatsoever difference there be, it matters not if they will but come in, they
shall have pardon: so I say unto you, if you will come in, it matters not what
your sins were, or are; Christ here has made a general proclamation, that
whosoever will come in, shall have mercy; therefore fear not what your sins
be, only get a willing heart to part with sin, and cleave fast unto Christ,
and Christ will not forsake you. In the time of the law every seventh year,
there was a Iubilee, wherein every servant was made free from his Master; but
if any refused then, then he was to be bored through the ears, and to serve his
Master for ever: beloved, now is the year of Iubilee, you may now be free men
in Christ, if you will but receive Christ; but if you will not then you shall
be marked for the devil, and serve him for ever: therefore, as Pyrrhus said
unto his servants, he that will freely go with me unto the battle, let him
come; so I say unto you, if you will freely come in unto Christ, come, and
Christ will receive you; but if you will not, Christ will not have you to go
with him, that is, you shall not: but this you will not do till you be
humbled; and therefore labor to get humiliation, and then whatsoever your
sins are, you shall be saved, if you will but receive Christ. Therefore
examine your selves in what a frame your hearts stand in; if so be you find
that your hearts are hardened (as the Apostle says) that is, such as cannot
repent, it will be a difficult thing for you to receive Christ; that is, if you
have put the spirit by his proper work, and have hardened your hearts from his
fear, it will be a hard matter for you to get the spirit of repentance; the
Apostle calls men in this estate, like Trees twice plucked up by the roots, Jude
verse 12. that is, it will be a hard matter to make them to grow again, and
be fruitful: but if you be thoroughly humbled, Christ is exceeding merciful and
ready to receive you unto favor.

Imprimatur.

Rob. Austine. July 30. 1633.

FINIS.

