A DEFENSE FOR MARRIAGE OF Priests, by Scripture and aunciente Writers.

Made by John^ Ponet, Doctoure of Diuinitee.

Heb. 13. Wedlock is to be had in honor among all men, and the bed
undefiled: As for whoorekepers, and aduouterers, God shall judge them.

Imprinted at London, by Reynold Wolff.

Cum Sereniss. Regis priuilegio.

To the Reader.
To please or displease men's minds, I mind not,
But mind (as God knows) Gods mind to fulfill.
As he will I will, and more I will not:
So God be pleased, say men what men will.
That the marriage of Bishops, priests, and other ministers of the church, is
not only lawful by the word of God, but was also used in the primitive Church
and so forth before the Bishop of Rome by his wicked Decrees ordained the
Contrary.
IF MEN had been so ready to redress the filthy and unclean life of prestes
(for the which they have been noted most worthily of the whole world) as they
have been to stay them from the hollye state of matrymony (whereby the
amendment of the same should have ensued) neither should wyuelesse life have
had so many procters as it had, neither unchaste living should so much have
raygned as it does: But they would have been as willing to set the pen to the
book to make the unchaste and vycious lyuers to repent and receive the remedy
of the holly state of matrimony, as some busy bodies have been ready to procure
statutes and laws, whereby the unchaste sole life has been with fear of the
pains of death continued, and the chaste married life in some state condemned.
The cloud which has so long blinded the eyes of the lay sort in this point,
was the opinion of hollines that they conceived in priests, for that they
married not as other men did: and the cloud that blinded the eyes of the
priests, was the gain that they got by their unworthy estimacion. So the
one being deceued by simplenes and ignorance, and the other by covetousness
and vain glory, have by a mutual consent continued this deuelyshe state of
unchaste sole life, to the great hinderance of virtue, and auauncement of
vice, and so to the subuerlion of the kingdom of Christ and setting up of the
kingdom of antichriste. To the intent therefore that this cloud of ignorance
might be the sooner taken away from the eyes of the ignoraunte, and that they
might know, that it is not the unmarried life, which makes the priest better
in the sight of the lord, but the wourse, if he live burning in desires,
contrary to the order in scripture commanded, I have set forth this little
treatise, trusting hereby to please God, and to edifye his congregation: the
increase of whose kingdom and heavenly glory I only seek, and to quiet the
consciences of many, which be not yet fully instructed and resolved, in this
point. And first I will begin with this general preposition of Paul to the
Corinthia^s. For the avoiding of fornication (says Paul) let every man have
his wife, 1. Co. 7
and every woman her husband. These two words, every man, and every woman,
betokens that this saiynge of S. Paul does dispe^ce with no man nor woman, that
cannot otherwise avoid fornication, but that he wills all sorts, both of men
and women, which be endaungered by the reason of their flesh to fall into
fornication, to avoid the same by the heavenly mean of marriage, which is a
remedy appointed of God for that end and purpose. This phrase of speaking to
call matrimonye a remedy, is not only used in ye Scriptures* but in the
doctors also, who afferme with one consent that matrimonye ought to be used
in the Church of God, not only for procreation and increase of the world, but
also for a remedy of incontinencye. 1. Tim 4
And therefore Paul names the doctrine, which would take away this remedy, a
doctrine of the deuell: by the which words it should appear that Paul
foresawe no small myschefe, which should ensue to the Church of God, by
restraining the liberty of marriage, or else would he never have termid it so
heinously, calling it a doctrine of devils. If this doctrine had been persuaded
only to prestes, and not by law commanded, it had been more tolerable, but
seeing it has a commandment, it is evident, that it is the same doctrine
which Paul calls a doctrine of deuels that for byddeth marriage. But what
can all the commandments of man, that ever were made, prevail against the
ordinance of God, planted in man's nature, in hs first creation? Bow a tree by
art with all the wisdom you can devise, streinyng it, yt it may not grow
right, and yet will it enjoy the power of growing (allthoughe it be crooked) as
long as it continues in life, obeyinge the ordinance and commandment of
God, who at the beginning bade it grow and multiplye: Even so the man, who
has not the gift to live without a wife, but is framed in his first creacion
to be one of the^, by whom the world shall be increased, keep him down with
laws and statutes as streitely as ye can, yet will he at one time or other,
kycke against the law, and seek means to maintain and exercise that nature,
which God for the continuance of procreation, has planted in his flesh. The
law and wit of the law makers, can not so restrain man's will, that it
will be unwilling to that thing, where unto it is most willing, it will strive
against the law, make it never so strong, other in mind or in deed, as it
appears by the unchaste life of those, which have been bound by laws, not
having the gift, with whose life, wourse then lecherouse, I am ashamed to
occupye my pen. How many thousands have their been, which have stryuen
ernestly for a time to obaye the law of sole life, contrary to their nature?
And yet have they in conclusion perceived their own weakness so great, that
they were feign to give over, and yield to their nature, not withstanding their
former purpose, and the straight law of death by man made to the contrary:
Neither fasting neither watchynge, neither any thing such like, is more able
to stay their desire (their life and health being preserved) then minyshyng
of moisture and earth about the root of a tree, (so ye kylle it not) is able
to stay the same tree from bringing forth of leaves and blossoms in the
spring time of the year: whereby it may appear how sore the law makers of
sole life, have thus long time stryuen against the stream, purposynge to
bind the mind, which being endued with the spirit of God, is at liberty,
when their bands have no further force, but upon the body only and the
outward actions. That marriage and priesthod may stand together.
If any man would obiecte unto me, that marriage can not stand with the order
of presthod: I will ask him again, whether marriage may stand as well with the
order of priesthod now, as it might in the Apostles time or not? If it be
answered that it may not, then must you show a reason why: which reason can
not be showed, except ye allege the order of priestynge devised by the bishop
of Rome, which varyeth in deed almost as far from the priests that were of
Christ's ordryng, as a dum picture from the thing or person whom it does
represente. And therefore ought they to be corrected and redressed to their
former exaumple: so that it must needs be confessed, that marriage may as well
stand with the order of preestehod now, as it might have done in the Apostels
time: which thing being granted, if I can show by the scripture and doctoures
that the same Apostels were married, then may I say, yt the objection is false,
for as much as marriage stood with presthod in the Apostels. To prove then that the
Apostels were married, being by shoppes and prestes: Mat. 8.
Peter's wives mother (as the Gospel witnesses) was healed by Christ of a
fever, by ye which words it is plain yt Peter had a wife which thing Clemens
Alexa^drinus writing against the^ yt reproved marriage, does plainly approve,
saiynge: Li. 3. ca. 30. Ecle. Hist.
An and Apostolos improbauit? Petrus etenim ac Philippus, and vxores habuerunt,
et filias nuptum dederunt: Do they reprove the Apostels? Peter and Phillyppe
had wives, and also children, which they gave to be married. And of the
marriage of the same Peter, and also of other Apostles, thus writes Ingnatius,
Saint John's disciple: Non detraho autem caeteris beatis, qui nuptijs copulati
fueruut, quorum nunc memini, opto enim Deo dignus ad vestigia eorum in regno
ipsius inueniri sicut Abraham et Isaac, et Jacob sicut Joseph et Esaias et
ceteri Prophetae, sicut Petrus and Paulus, and reliqui Apostoli, qui nuptijs
fuerunt sociati. Qui non libidinis causa, sed posteritatis sub rogande gratia
coniuges habuerunt. That is to say: I discommend not other hollye men, which
were married, of whom I have now spoken, My desire is, that I may be found
acceptable to God in his Kyngedome at their foot steps, as Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, and Esaye be, and all the rest of the Prophets: As Peter, and
Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, who were coupled in marriage, and yet not
married for the fulfyllynge of their ^odely lusts, but for the mayntenaunce of
their posterytee and ofsprynge. Whom should we allow for a witness of the
marriage of the Apostles, if ye will refuse Ingnatius (who testified Christ by
his martyrdom and death, and was in the same world a dissiple of Saint
John the Euangelyste.) If the proverb be true which is used of Plautus the
Comic. Plus valet oculatus testis vnus, quam auriti december: One eye witness is
more worthy to be esteemed, then ten ear witnesses. We ought to give more
creadyte to Ingnacius, then to any other, whose knowlage is only grounded
upon a contrary report. Saint Ambrose does also confirm the same
sentence, saying: In Ca. ^2. prim. epist. ad Cor.
Omnes Apopostoli, excepto Iohane, vxores habuerunt, Al ye apostles, except
John, had wives. So yt I trust, I need not to labor any more in proving this
point (it being proved by so old and autentike writers) that to be a priest
and to have a wife, be not repugnaunte, but stand so well together, that the
Apostels were Bishops and priests, and yet they had wives not withstandyng.
But what needs me to wander so far in the doctoures for the proof here of?
when this thing may otherwise be easly showed by the scriptures it self,
first and foremost says Paul both to Timothy and to Tite: 1. Tim 3. Tit. 1.
A bishop or priest, must be the husband of one wife. Paul does not say: It is
enough for him if he has had a wife, but he says in ye p^sent time: Si
quisest sine crimine, vnius uxoris uir. and oportet episcopu^ irreprehensibilem
esse. He must esse, be, the husband of one wife. Neither find I great fault
with the doctors which change, be, into has been. But such Bishops and
Priests as neither be neither have been married, neither will marrye to this
day, must find some other exposition, for this text of S. Paul, or else can
not I se how they can excuse them selves, but yt they shall be found gilty by
this description and rule of a blameless Bishop. I remenbre that
Theophilacte upon this text fyndeth a fault with such, Theoph upon. 1. Tim.
3.
as would have a wife, in this place, to sygnyfy one Church or one benefice:
but they which so wrieth ye scripture, ought rather merrily to be laughed at,
then to be with study confuted, for experience does declare, that they would
rather (vxor) a wife, in this place should signify twenty other men's wives,
the^ one of their own. They handle the scriptures, as S. Hierome did against
Iouinian: That is to say, make it sound as it is writhed, and not as it was
written. The words of them selves be so plain, that it can not be denied, but
that Paul meant that it was not only a thing of sufferaunce, but very
convenient, or rather requisite for a bishop or a priest to have a wife. This
have I proved by the word of God, by the doctors, and by the example of the
Apostles, that presthode in his most holiness and perfection, may well be
joined with the holy state of matrimony. If any man would pretend, Marriage is
no hynderance to a godly life. Chriso. ho. 21. in gene.
that marriage should hinder him from ye seruyng of God, let him read
Chrysostom in Genesim. And in an other place also, in a sermon that he made
against the Jews, the Gentyles, and the heretykes, upon the marriage made in
Cana, where he has these words: Nec excuses te propter nuptias, Dominus tuus
nuptijs interfuit, and nuptias honestauit, and dicis, nuptias obstaculum esse
ad pietatem? Nullum enim ad pietatem est obstaculum. Vis cognoscere quia nihil
nocet habere vxorem and liberos? Moses, nonne vxorem habuit and liberos?
Helias, nonne virgo erat? Nonne Moses Manna de celo deduxit? Nonne Elias ignem
de coelo deduxit? An nocuit huic virginitas? an impedimento fuerunt huic vxor
and liberi? Vidisti Heliam aurigam in ae^re: Vidisti Mosen in mare viatorem:
vide et Petrum ecclesiae columnam, quia and ipse vxorem habuit. etc. Excuse not
thy self, because of marriage (says Chrisostom) thy Lord was at a marriage, and
commended it with his presence: And say thou, that marriage is a hynderaunce
to a godly life? It is no hynderance to a godly life. Will thou know that it
hurts nothing to have a wife and children? Had not Moses a wife and
children? Was not Helias a virgin? Did not Moses bring Manna from heaven? Did
not Helias bring fire from heaven? Did virginitee hinder the one? Or did
marriage hinder the other? Thou see Helias ridyng in a carte in the air: Thou
see Moses passing thorough the mids of the sea: Behold Peter also, a
Pillar of the Church, had a wife. etc. In case that ye think that the examples
of Moses, Helias and Peter, be not enough, I will be so bold (to bring example
of Chrysostom) to add unto them three: hollye Abraham, and all the rest of
Patriarchs and Prophets of the old testament: All the Apostles of Christ in
the new testament, Actu. 21.
Philip the evangelist, who had many daughters: Cheremon, a bishop in Egypt, of
a city called Nilopolis: These shall ye have ^in Eccl^si. histo of Eusebius.
Philias also, which was both bishop and Marter, and Policrates, a Bishop of
the Ephesians, which said: Seven of my fore fathers by order, were Bishops of
this See, and I am the eight: Spiridion, and a great number of holly men mo,
which all were married and highly in the favor of God. Marriage was no more
hinderance to Abraham and the rest of the Patriarchs, touching the true
service of God, and being in the favor of god, then it was to Moses. Marriage
was no hinderance to all the rest of the Apostles, neither is it this day to
any other godly man: so that by the means thereof, they be not cast out of
the favor of God, more then was sayncte Peter. And saint Ihon Chrysostom
upon the epistle to Tite, says: Adeo preciosa res est matrimonium, ut poss^t
quis cum eo ad sanctum Episcopatus solium sub^ehi, So precious a thing is
Matrimonye (says he) that a man may ascend with it to the holly seat of a
bishop. Let then this vain quarrel, that marriage should hinder enny man from
the service of God, be no more alleged, as though there were a great matter in
it, when it is sufficientely showed, that there is none in deed.

But this gear, they think, will soon be answered, granting that the
Apostles and other holly bishops and priests had wives as I say: Mary, than
will they say again, that neither the apostles neither the rest of the
forenamed Ecclesiastical persons had any matrimonial use of their wyfes,
after the time of their election to their ministry, but did put them away, and
utterly forsook the company of them, after that time. Well, yet than grant
they, that the apostles and other holy bishops and priests had wives, even
in the time of their apostleshyp and ministerye, which thing I take at their
hands as won good ground. For by that, have al they granted (which flee to
this objection* that a married man may be a priest, his wife being alive.
After this victory then let us thus proceed: The apostles (they say) put away
their wives, after the time they were called to the preaching of the Gospel.
If I should ask ye, how you prove that, should not the best reason or
auctoritee that ye could bring for your purpose be blind reason or
conjecture? Well, answer what ye shall thynk good, wha^ I have made answer to
your former objection. When ye speak of puttyng away of wives, it is
convenient, that ye call to remembrance the laufull causes why a man may put
away his wife, by goddis word: And in serchyng, ye shall find there, that a
man can not put away his wife for any other cause, Mat 5. and. 19.
but for adulterye only. Than is the preaching of the Gospel no cause, why a
man should put away his wife. Much less for the Apostles of Christ, whose
life was a rule to all the rest of the Christen congregation. I trust you be
not so shameless, that ye will challenge the Apostles wynes to be evil women,
for the mayntenance of your fond reason. And yet if you would so do, it may
be gathered by the Scripture that they were godly and obedient women to their
husbands to your confusion. It is to be thought, that such as Christ
appointed to rule the whole Congregation, were hable to rule their wives, their
children and family, or else should not Christ have observed the same rule in
chusyng of his apostles, as Paul prescribed to Timothye, in chusynge a
Bishop. 1. Tim. 3.
If they were obedient wives to their husbands (as by that scripture it may
be gathered that they were) you must needs grant, that the Apopostles did not
put away their wives, for if they had, they should have offended against
Gods word, who charge man, not to put away his wife for any cause, but
for adultery only.

Thus then I conclude: Gods word says, that no man may put away his
wife except for adultery, ergo, they did not put them away. Yea, and further
it may be thus proved by scripture, that they had Matrimonial company with
their wives in this wise. The word of God was the only rule of the Apostles
life: So that what soever Gods word commanded them, so they did: But Gods
word commanded them, saiynge: Vir uxori debitum reddat, 1. Cor. 17
similiter et uxor uiro. Let the man render the duty of a husband to his
wife, and the woman to her husband.

Ergo, the Apostles being ruled by the said scripture, and obeiyng gods word
in this point, had matrimonial company with their wives, and did acordyngly as
scripture wills them. For a proof whereof, the scripture does testify that the
apostles and the brothers of the Lord and Cephas, carried their wives about with
the^, to what purpose I pray you? if it were not for the auoidynge of that
inconvenience, against the which, matrimony is provided by god for remedy.
If a wife be a trouble to them that be prieestes (as some do allege it) why
left they not their wives at one place remainyng, and discharged them selves
of so cloggyng a carriage? as by the scripture it should seem that Paul did.
I doubt not, but that they would have so done, if the infirmitee of the flesh
had not dissuaded them to the contrary. Return not to your former fantasy,
saying as ye be wont, that ye can not be answered, for if ye can defend
without blushyng, that scripture rightly alleged, is not sufficient to confound
your conjecture which is directly against it, than is your face so
blyndelesse, that it can not blusshe. A priest may not put awei his wife under
p^tence of holiness.


And because no man should pretend a religious holiness, by the means
whereof he might shyfte away his wife, the apostles decreed, as it appears
in their Canons, Apostoloru^ Can. 5.
that Episcopus aut presbyter vxorem propriam, nequaqua^ sub obtentu religionis
abijciat, A bishop or a priest in no wise may put away his wife, under the
pretense of holiness, and color of religion: by the which Canon it may
appear, that the apostles did not put away their wives. And yet came there a
sort of heritikes, named Eustachiani, shortly after the apostles time, who
said, that priests that were married should not be set by, and dissuaded the
people from receauyng the Sacraments at such priests hands: For the
condemnation of which heretics in the old council of Gangris, The counsel
of Ga^gris
which was about the same time, that Nicene counsel was, This decree was made:
Si quis discernit presbyterum coniugatu^, tanqua^ occasion nuptiarum, quod
offerre non debeat, and ab eius obla^ione ideo abstinet, amathema sit: If any
judge a married priest, as though he should not minister, because he is
married, and so for that cause withdraws him self from such a priests
ministration, let him be accursed. This godly counsel of such antiquitee,
compelled not the priests of these days to put away their wives, neither
condemned them from their company, but allowed and commanded them under the
pain of accursynge, to keep still their wives, and condemned the Eustachians
for heritikes, who under the pretense of holiness were offended with the
marriage of priests, and held the contrary opinion to the counsel. And there
is a place cited out of S. Gregory in the Decrees, which does plainly
declare, that it is a law of man, and directly against the law of God, that
any man should put away his wife under such a pretense: Did. 27. q. 2. Sunt
qui dicu^t
These be the words: Sunt qui dicunt, religionis gratia coniugia debere
dissolui, veru^ sci endum est, quod si hoc lex humana concessit, lex tamen
diuina prohibuit, per se enim veritas dicit: Math. 19.
Quos deus coniunxit* homo ne separet. Qui etiam ait: Non licet dimittere
vxorem, Ibidem.
excepta causa fornicationis. Quis ergo huius latori legis contradicat? scimus
quia scriptum est: Erunt duo in carne vna. Genesis 2.
That is to say: Sum there be, which hold opinion, that marriage ought to
be broken for relygions sake, but it must be known, that all though the
law of man has so granted it, yet the law of God has forbidden it. For the
truth it self said: Math 19
Let not manne separate them, whom God has coupled. And it also says: It
is not laufull for a man to put away his wife, except for fornication. Who
than may gain say this lawmaker? For we know that it is written: Genesis 2.
They shall be two in one flesh. Mark these words I pray you, and ye
shall perceive that they need no interpretation nor wresting, for the proof
of this purpose. What would you have more said, the thing being proved by the
scripture, by ye Canons of ye Apostels, and by the old ancient cou^sayles and
doctors? me thinks ye should change your judgments, and say another while,
as it is largely proved, that the Apostels did not put away their wives, but
co^panyed with them, after the time that they were called to the preaching of
the Gospel, without pretending holiness of religion.

But then will ye fall on meruailing, how it came first to pass, Priests to
put away their wives was the inue^tion of the Byshope of Rome.
that priests did put away their wives, they having no warrant so to do by
gods word, neither yet exaumple of the Apostels of Christ, and other holy
fathers in the Primitive Church: From this meruaylynge I trust easelye to
deliver you, if ye will take pains to read on a littell. How should
Antichrist have been known, if the prophecyes of him should not have been
fulfilled? And one of the chief marks, whereby Daniel appointed out
Antichriste is, that he should forbid marriage: whose prophecy must be
fulfilled. 1. Tim. 4.
And Paul likewise prophesied, that such doctoures should come in the latter
days, which should confirm that devilish doctrine of Antichriste, forbiddyng
men to marye. This doctrine was first found out by the devil, for the
maintenance of whooredome and all filthye kind of living: And it was brought
to pass by the deuelles high priest, Antichrist, the bishop of Rome, whose
power by usurpation extends thoroughout the most part of Christendom,
published and stablysshed this dyuelyshe doctrine against the marriage of
priests, contrary both to the doctrine of Christ (for the which cause, it
may well be called the doctrine of Antichrist) and contrary to the example of
thapostles, as ye have heard. And for a proof, that Antichrist bishop of Rome
was the first setter abroad of this diuelyshe doctrine, I will cite unto you a
plain place ex sexto synodo. 6 Synod. distin. 3^. cap. Quu^ in Roma.
Quum in Romani ordine canonis cognouimus esse traditum, eos qui ordinati sunt
diaconi vel presbyteri, confiteri quod non iam suis copulentur vxoribus,
antiquum sequentes canonem apostolicae diligentiae, and constitutionis sacrorum
virorum, legales nuptias amodo valere volumus, nullo modo cum vxoribus suis
eorum concubia dissoluentes aut priuantes eos familiaritate ad inuicem in
tempore oportuno: Quicunque ergo diligens inuentus fuerit in subdiaconali
ordinatione aut diaconali aut sacerdotali, hij nullo modo prohibeantur ad talem
ascendere gradum pro vxoris suae cohabitatione, Nec etiam tempore ordinationis
suae profiteri castitante^ cogantur, quod abstinere debeat a legalis vxoris
familiaritate. Si quis igitur praesumpserit, contra apostolicos canones,
aliquos presbyterorum and diaconorum priuare a contactu and communione legalis
vxoris suae, deponatur. Similiter and presbyter aut diaconus, qui religionis
causa vxore^ suam expellit, exco^municetur: si vero in hoc permanserit,
deponatur. etc. The english whereof is this) For as much as we know, that it
is in the Canons of Rome, that such as be appointed to take the order of
Deacon or priest, confess that they have not matrymonyall company of their
wives: We, followynge the old Canone and rule of the apostelles dylygence,
and the Constitutions of holly men, will, that from hensefoorthe, lawful
marriage be effectual^e, minding in no wise to lowse the mutualle copulacyon
of them with their wives, or else staiyng them from their familiaritee together
in time convenient. Who soever therefore be found worthy in the order of
subdeacon, deacon, or preeste, let him in no wise be kept back or forbidden
to ascend unto such a degree for that he has his wife dwelling with him,
neither let him be compelled to profess chastitye, when they take orders,
whereby he should forsake his lawful wives company. Therefore if any man presume
contrary to the Canons of the Apostles, to take away the mutual embrasinges and
companiyng with their laufull wives from any priest, or deacon, let him be
disgraged: Likewise that priest which puts away his wife for religions
sake, let him be excommunicate, and if he so continue, disgrade him. Thus far
have ye herd the words of the synod, by the which it is plain, that the
Canons of the Romyshe sort, and the Canons of the Apostles be contrari. The
Apostles taught one thing: The bishop of Rome brought in another. Now judge
you whether is best for us which profess Christ, to follow the Apostles of
Christ, or the Romyshe Antichrist? The law of God, which wylleth byshopes and
priests to mary: or the doctrine of the devil, as Paul calls it, which
forbyddeth them marriage. It is an extreme wickedness abhorred of God, to
stablyshe and defend a doctrine of devils, contrary to the word of God,
contrary to the example of the apostles, contrary to the order of the
Primitive Church, to the subuersio^ of chastity, to the maintenance of
hoordom, and other fleshly beastlines: but whosoever forbyddeth marriage to
them that has not the gift of sole life, stablisheth a doctrine of devils,
with all the inconveniences before rehearsed. Ergo, they that forbid marriage to
them which has not the gift of sole life, co^mau^d an extreme wickedness
abhorred of God. For a further proof of this my purpose, I have thought good
here to recite certain practices of the bishop of Rome, which he used to
bring this matter to pass. It were to tedious, to rehearse all the names of
those Antichristian byshopes, that were the patchers and proppers up of this
Decree. Yet one or two of them can I not well pass over, but especially
Gregorye the.vii. otherwise named Hildebrande, whose life, who soever has
read, may perceive that he was one of the chief authors of the wyuelesse life
of the clergy. Read thoroughout the Cronicles, and I think you shall find
few or none more vicious, more ambicious more cruel, more lecherous: Ye shall be
forced to say, that Hildebra^d was even a meet serpent to spit out such a
poison at the co^mau^dment of Antichrist, among the people of God.
Thistoriographers does abu^da^tly testify, what tumultes and rufflynges he
caused at Magu^ce and Co^stance, and many other places in France and Germanye,
for thestablishment of this most abominable law against the marriage of
priests.

And that ye may be the better acquainted with his practices, both in these and
all other christian Realms, ye shall understand, that amongst other letters
sent to other parties, he addressed also his letters to Otto bishop of
Constance, co^mau^dyng, ye he should forbid ye marriage through out his diocese,
of such priests as were not yet married, and that he should break and loose the
matrimonial knot between them, that were already married: But Otto perceauing
right well thu^godly purpose of Hildeb. neither would divorce those priests
which were married, another deny ye liberti of marriage to such priests as were yet
unmarried. The byshope of Rome therefore cursed him, and discharged his subjects
of their duties and obedience toward him, and appointed Otto a day, to
appear before him at Rome in a counsel appointed. In that counsel Hildebra^d
with the other bishops of Itali amongst other things, established stoutly a law,
that from thenceforth, priests should not mary. And that such as had married,
should other forth with put away their wives, or else be clearly expelled from all
ecclesiastical function. And none to be admitted into the order of preesthode,
unless he first were sworn, never to mary. This Decree of the sole life of
priests (when the counsel was dissolved) was publyshed through out Italy.
And the bishops every where there, were commanded both to obey and execute it.
And likewise were the bishops of France forced to obey the determinacion of
the same Decree, made by that same counsel of Rome: But the clergy of France
withstode boldly Hildebrandes decree, and cried with one assent, affirmyng,
that counsel to be directly against Gods holy word. And that the bishop
of Rome took that thing away from priests, which both God and nature had
given unto them: and that the said bishop of Rome was an heretic, and
thauctor of a wicked doctrine, by the suggestion not of the holy ghost, but of
the devil himself: and moreover that his decree was contrary to this saying
of Christ: Math. 19.
All receive not this word: and contrary also to this wholesome doctrine of
Saint Paul: As touching virginity I have no commandment of the Lord: 1.
Cor 7.
And he that can not absteyn, let him mary: And contrary also both to the
Canons of the Apostles, and of Nicene counsel. They found fault with this
Hildebra^de for yt he would have them contrary to the order of nature, live
like Angels without the company of women, and that he had also by this Decree
opened a window to whooredome and al uncleanness. Insomuche that they answered
with one voice, that they had rather lose their benefices, then forsake
(against the word of the Lord) their wives. And (said they) if married
priests be an evil sight to the bishop of Romes eyes, then let him call
Angels down from heaven to be ministers in the Church. But the bishop of
Rome was nothing stirred with all these godly reasons and authorities of
scripture, neither yet with the Decree of the holly Nicene counsel, but moved
continuallye the minds of the bishops, with swarms of imbassadours, and
sendyng of letters thycke and threfolde, accusynge them for their slackenesse
and negligence, and also thretnyng them with the plage of his curse, unless
they compelled their priests to obey his Decree. So that a great number of
bishops being forced by this tirannye of the bishop of Rome, applied them
selves to take away the lawful law of matrimony from their priests. But
tharchebishop of Magu^ce perceauing that it would be a weghty and no easy
thing to compass, to take Marriage clean away from the priests of his
Diocese: first he admonyshed them frendlye of this Romysh Decree, geuyng
them half a years respite, for to consult upon the thing, and aduertisyng
them earnestely to obey the bishop of Rome and him. And that they would of
them selves willynglye do that thing, which they should in conclusyon, will
they nyll they, be constrained to do: otherwise he should be forced to
attempt some thing more grievous against them.

The half year being expyred, Tharchebyshop called a convocation at
Erifort, where he commanded them, according to the bishop of Romes decree,
either utterly to forsake and forswere marriage, or else to leave of their
ecclesiastical ministry: but the clergy defended them selves against
Hildebrandes Decree, with scriptures, with reasons, with sayings of counsels,
with thexa^ples of their forefathers, and with a number of unanswerable
arguments, whereby they proved, that the said Decree was nothing to be esteemed,
but to be worthyly of all men rejected. And when tharche bishop replied,
saying, that he was compelled of the bishop of Rome, and that he could do no
less but accomplish and keep his laws. The clergy perceauyng that there
could be no means made to compass their bishop, neither by disputation,
neither yet by entreaty, they withdrew them selves a litell from the counsel,
as purposyng to consulte upon the matter: some thought not good to return into
the counsel, and some other thought it was good to return, and pluck
tharchebishop out of his chair by the ears, handling him as he had deserved,
that there might a notable testimony remayn to their posterite of his worthy
death on that sort, so that all his successors might take ensample by him to
beware how they took away such privileges and libertees from the clergi.
Tharchebishops spies, made report unto him of their intent, that went out.
Then sent the archebyshope sum of his friends to them that were without, for
to counsel them to conceive a good opinion of their bishop, and to will them
quietly to return again into the counsel. They were contented and returned.
Than the archebyshop made promise, that he would do the best he could to
change the bishop of Romes mind, wyllyng them in the mean season to return
to their cures. The next year following, the bishop of Magunce at the
commandment of the bishop named Curiensis (who^ the bishop of Rome had sent in
embassage unto him, both with his letters and commandment) called a counsel
at Magunce. In this counsel he commanded the clergy under the pain of
cursyng, that they would immediately in that present Synod, either utterly
forsake their wives, or else their ministry for ever. The Clergy pleadid their
own cause boldly: and when they perceived that their answer could not be
herd, but that they should be compelled by the tyranny of the bishop of Rome,
to obey, there was a sodayn tumulte, wherein the ruffelynge was so violente,
and with such a force, that both the bishop of Romes ambassador and the
archebyshope were put in ieopardie of their lives. The counsayl brake up. The
archebyshop perceiving and fearing the danger of the matter, would meddle no
more with the reasonyng therein, but committed all together to the bishop of
Rome, therein to do what he should think good. But he would here neither
Scripture, neither reason, neither any ancient writer sense the apostles time.
His ears were stopped against all reasons, which were contrary to his
opinyon: he heaped up his thunderboltes of cursings and excommunications upon
all them that would not obey this saying of his: we will, charge, and
straytely command you. He went forth on like him self, without all fear
of God, without all reverence to the holly Scriptures, as a horn wood
beast, for the mayntenaunce of his dyuelyshe Decree, pretending always a
zeal to chastitee, that he might the safelyer live without suspicion in his
accustomed lecherous life, whereof the histories does plentuously entreat, and
thus by violence and tyranny, he compassed his purpose.

The like practyse to this that was used in Italye France and Germanye, has
been used also in England by the bishops at sundry times, but namely in
king Edgars days, thorough the suggestion of the bysshoppes, Dunston,
Ethelwald, and Oswalde, three monks, by whose procurement to John the.xiii. of
that name, bishop of Rome. The pristes, who were named secular canons, were
banyshed out of their colleges of Wynchester and Worcetter, and sundry other
places of the realm, because they had wives, and monks were placed in their
roumes. The chief cause that was laid to their charge wherefore to put them
out of their lyuynges was, that they were married. But why I pray you were the
monks now of late days again displaced? If Matrimony might be called a
fault (as God forbydde that any christen tongue should abuse it self in so
speaking) yet had it been but one fault. Now for that one fault (as they
call it) what a number of fautes I pray you, were there found in the abbaies
at the kings majesty's visitation? Did nor the confessions of them selves, in
man^r without examination, wytnes those abbays to be the store houses of al
vicious life and abomination? Was not there couched together in one dunghyll,
superstition, ydolatrie, pride, malice, ydelnesse, ignorance, abhorryng of
marriage, and yet a satisfyeng of their stynkynge lusts of their bodies other
ways? and under the pretense of obedyence to their Abbotte or pryoure,
dysobedyence to God, and their prince, etc. These were the holly ones, whom
Dunstone placed in steed of the Priests, which lived in Godly marryage.
These were the chaste and virtuous lyuers, against whose life it was not
lawfulle to speak. But ye may see by their overthrow, how well God was
pleased with their works. Ye may see how woorthily God has cast down their
begun builded Babylon, and has scattred those blyndlynges to their utter
confusion, and his most heavenly glory. They entered their houses as though God
had given them possession, but thanks be given to God, who has sent
Christ with his whyppe, challengynge them for papystes and liars, and
declarynge to all the whole world that they have made his house a Sodomyticall
den of beastelye blind wretches and steal swat thieves. The self same
thing was also practysed by Anselme archebyshoppe of Caunterburye, in Henrye
the first his days, the second year of his Reygne, in a Counsaylie holden
at London, where he forbadde the priests of England to have wives. It was at
that time a strange mattier unto them: Libro. 7.
For as Huntingdon^nlis does write, they were never forbidden until that
day. And for a confyrmacion of Anselmes fact, there was sent into England,
from the Byshope of Rome one Ioannes Cremenses, a Cardynalle, who held a
Counsaylle at London, where he alleged many reasones for the restraynte and
prohybytyon of Priests marriages, and amongst other allegacions, he said,
that it was an exceadynge great abhominacion, for a priest to arise from a
whores side (for so he called priests lawful wives) and immediately to go
make gods body. Yet it came to pass that although he had the same day said
mass (which he called the making of Gods body) he was taken with a whore the
same night. From whence came this fellow I pray you? came he not from Rome? was
he not a Cardinal? was he not sent from the captain general of Antichrists
kingdom the bishop of Rome him self? What need we then to doubt from
whence this law of wyuelesse life came first, and who were the stablishers
thereof?

Some cry, the Church the Church: was not this Cardinal trow you a meet
membre of the Church, to make a law for the rulynge of the Church? Thus
has the devil under the name of preeste, bishop, Cardinal, Pope, and
Church, deceived all the world. Surely I am persuaded that it was done by
the high providence of God, that this Cardinal should be so taken in such a
trappe, at that time especially, because he would have it notified to all the
whole world, that the wyuelesse life of priests, which Antichrist studied to
bring to pass, was altogether the devils doctrine, and contrary to the mind
of the holy ghost. Ye may se, that this Church of Rome is the well spring of
all the poison that has infected thuniuersal church of Christendom.

All the Greek Church has been, from the Apostles time to this day, clear
from this heresy, in that they never allowed ye doctrine of sole life, but have
continued contrary, in the doctrine of the Apostles, as the bishop of Rome
confesses in his own Decrees. Aliter se orientalium habet traditio
ecclesiarum, did. 31. ca. Aliter.
aliter huius S. To. ecclesiae: na^ ea sacerdotes, Diaconi, aut subdia coni,
matrimonio copu la^tur: Istius aute^ eccl^ae, uel occide^taliu^, nullus
sacerdotu^, a subdiacono usque ad epm^, lice^tia^ habet co^iugiu^ sortie^di.
The churches of the East, (says the bshop of Rome) have one tradicion and
order, and this holly church of Rome another: for the prestes, deaco^s, and
subdeaco^s of the Greek church, does mary but no priest of the church of Rome,
or of ye west churches, from subdeaco^ to ye degree of a bishop has lice^se to
mary. By this text may ye see, not only who they be which has begun and
continued the doctrine of the Apost. in this point, but also who they be,
which have brought in, the contrary doctrine. Now then is my purpose proved,
and your merueilyng (how it came first to pass that priests did put away
their wives) answered, in ye it is showed, that it is by doctrine of the devil,
and first published by the Romish by shop, otherwise called Antichrist,
acordi^g to the prophecies of Paul and Daniel. A priest may marye after that he
has received thordre of presthode.
Some sophister would yet peradventure frame further cauellatio^, gra^ting yt
prests may mary before they be prestes, but it must not (will they say) be
granted, that they may mary after they be once e^tred in to ye holly order of
presthod. But my former reason well waid, will make a ready way for an answer to
this objection. For if it be granted, yt thapostles and other holy me^ lai with
their wives after they were called and chose^ to their ministeri (as I have
before proved yt they did) compare marriage of a wife and lie^g with a wife
together, and when it shall apere unto you, ye marriage of a wife, is as small an
offense as liyng with a wife, ye will be as ready to grant the one, as ye were to
grant the other. All the world must grant, yt matrimony is not denied to
prestes for ye own sake, because of it self it is an holy thing ordained of
God: but because as the p^tend of the mutual company between ye man and the
woman, which follows matrimony, and is judged of the unlearned, an ungodly
thing. Now then the mutual company of the priest and his wife, being found
laufull amongst such as be all redye entered into the order of preesthode, ye
must needs grant, that to marry is as laufull, which is of it self no evil
thing but good, not ungodly but lauful and honorable in all states. How say ye
to ye very words of God him self in the.xxi. chap. of Leuit. where he said:
Leuit. 21.
Sacerdos uiduam, prophanam, repudiatam, and meretricem no^ ducet in uxorem,
sed uirginem. The priest shall mary no wydow, no heathen woman, no deuorsed
woman, nor no common women, but a virgin of his own nation. Priests be not so
straightly tied with laws, now in the time of the light of the gospel, as the
were in the shadow of Moses: And yet ye see, that even in the mids of the
Mosaicall commandments, a preeste might marrye after he was a priest: and if
his wife died, he might by the same law marry the widow of an other priest,
which thing Innocencius the.i. had in remembrance in his Decree, saiynge: In
Decretis Innocentis ca. 4. ed ^icturiu^ Rothomag^n
Mulierem uiduam clericus non ducat uxorem: quia scriptum est: Sa cerdos uxorem
uirginem accipiat, non uiduam, non reiectam. etc. Ye may see that in the time
of Innocencius the first, a priest might marry after he was priest. And Leo the
first, entreatyng of the same matter, said: Si in ueteri testamento hec
sacerdotalium coniugiu^ forma, seruata est, Epist. 85.
quanto magis sub reuelata iam gratia constituti, apostolicis debemus inseruire
praeceptis? If this manner of prestes marriages was observed in the old
testament, how much more ought we to obey the Apostolical commandments,
being now in the time of grace? Another place there is in the decrees which
proves this point, whereof these be the words: Diaconus quicumque cum
ordinantur, si in ipsa ordinatione protestati sint, Distin. 28 Diaconi. ex
sinodo Ancyria tana. ca. 308.
dicentes seuelle habere uxores, nec possese continere, si postea ad nuptias
peruenerit, maneant in ministerio: propterea quod his Ep^s licentiam dederit.
That is to say: What soever Deacons they be, that make protestacion in taking
of their Ordres, that they will have wives, and that they can not refrain: In
case they marry afterward, yet shall they remain in their ministry, because
the Bishop has so licenced them.

In these words may ye learn, that some married, or at the least, that it
was not against the laws of God, but that they might marry after the
receiuyng of their ordres, and a prouiso also, that they should not be
disgraded for so doing. If ye allege, that Ordo impedit matrimoniu^ contractum,
and dirimit contrahendum, Orders let the contracting of matrimony, and break
matrimony already contracted, I will set the Bishope of Rome to answer you
with his Decrees, who says: Copula sacerdotalis, Distin. 26 que. 42. Sors.
nec legali nec eua^gelica, nec apostolica authoritate prohibetur,
ecclesiastica tantum lege interdicitur. The marriage of priests is not
forbidden, neither by the law of God, neither by the law of the gospel, nether
yet by the Apostles, but by the Ecclesiastical law it is utterly forbidden:
Unto the which saying, all the learned men both in the law, and in the scole
learning, as Panormitane, Thomas, Albert, Duns, Bonauenture and other, does
agree: Insomuch that Panormitanus yt great learned lawyer says: Melius fore,
and pro bono ac salute anima salubrius, si and uniuscuiusque uolu^tati
reli^queretur, ita ut non ualentes aut no^ uolentes continere, possint
contrahere. Quia experientia docente, comperimus contrariu^ effectu^ sequi ex
illa lege, cu^ hodie plerique no^ uiua^t spu^alit, nec sint mu^di, sed macu
le^tur illicito coitu, cu^ ipso grauissimo to, vbi cum propria vxore esset
castitas, That is: It were better and wholsomer for the salvation of souls,
that this thing were left to every man's will, so that such as either could
not or would not abstein, might marry: for we perceive now by experience, that
there follows a contrary effect of the law of sole life: forasmuch as many
now a days live not spiritually, neither be clean, but defiled with vsyng
unlawful commixtions, to the heinous offense of God, where as if it were with
their own wives, it were chastitee. In these words ye may see the great
clerk Panormitan lament this law of wiuelesse life, and find great fault
therewith. Which thing he would never have don, if that law had com from God. But
from whens this law came first, I have declared largely before, that it was
devised by the dyuel, and publyshed and also stablyshed in all christen realms
where it was received, by the vicars of Antichrist. Then may I grant you,
that Orders let the contractyng of matrimony, and break the matrimony all ready
contracted, not by the law of God, but by the law of the bishop of Rome,
whose law here has the name of the ecclesiastical law, and so my former
reasons stand in their full strength and force. In epist. i. ad Tim. 3.
Faber Stapulensis does express to the eye this diuelysh law with a very
proper similitude, whereby the devils craft is lively discifurid and opened to
all men's sight. Thus he says: Apostolicum nuptiarum ritum retinueru^t Greci,
neque mutare voluerunt. Agamiam acceptauerunt aliae ecclesiae, vnde plurimi per
deteriorem incontinentiam lapsi, in pedicas inciderunt diaboli: Araneos vides
veneno turgentes, tam subtilia retia texere, quae oculos fallere possit:
quicquid incidit, mortifero morsu necant: and primum quod aggrediuntur caput
est, sen sus auferentes. Hae daemonis and laqueorum eius mira art and
subtilitate nobis praetensorum, and venenatorum mor suum, quaedam sunt
adumbrationes, qui etiam retia plaerunque nectit, in his quae clariora and
sanctiora videntur. The Grecians (says he) kept still the use of the apostles
in marriage, and would not change it. Other churches received to live without
marriage, by the means whereof many of them falling into further and greater
incontinencie, were trapped in the snares of the dyuelle. Ye see the spyders,
wyche be swellynge full with poysone, make so fine nets, that they can
scarsely be seen, in those nets what so ever falls, they kill it with
their deadely bytte. The first thing that they assault, is the head,
destroyenge there the senses. These nets be certain fygures of the dyuell,
and of his venomed bytynges and fine snares wouen and set for us by him with a
meruaylous art and subtiltee. Who commonly knitetth his nets in those
things, which appear more euidente, and more holly. Thus far Faber has
declared by this similitude, that as the spyder spynneth her web with much
art, so has the dyuell with much art made his snare of wyuelesse life: And
as the spyder makes her threede so fine, that it can not well be seen when it
hangs in the light, so has the dyuell made this snare so fine and pleasant
in the outward show with a face of holiness, yt many can not well see it,
although they be in the light of the gospel. And as the spider by the help of
her fine nets, catches an infinite nu^bre mo than she should do otherwise, so
ye devil by ye help of this cloak holy snare, catches an i^finit nu^bre of
souls, more the^ he should do otherwise. So yt this compellid chastitee (most
unworthy the name of chastitee) may right well be called one of the diuelles
chief huntyng nets. If a man call to remembrance the church of the old
time, wherein it was laufull for prestes and other ecclesiastical minysters to
marye, and compares it to the church that is now adays, he shall find in
that church, citees, towns, countries, deserts, every where replenyshed
with a willing chastnesse and continency of solitarye lyuers, of clerks and
of lay men, or that gave them selves to no other imbrasynges but them only
which be in chaste matrimony. But he shall find the church now adays,
which is bond under the law of wiuelesse life and of fained chastitee, most
filthily steyned with the spots of fornication, adultery, incest, and
Sodomitical abomination.

Thus have I declared first, that marriage and priesthode may stand together.

And than that marriage is no hinderance to a godly life.

Thyrdely, that the apostles did not put away their wives after the time they
were called to the preaching of the gospel.

Fourthly, that no priest may put away his wife, under the pretense of
religion. And that that use was first brought in by the byshope of Rome.

And last of all, that a priest may marry, after thar he has received the
order of priesthode.

Now remains only to be answered the objection of the vow, which is both
fondly and wrongfully laid to all such prestes charge as were never professed to
any other kind of rule, than to the only order of priesthode. For if it could
be proved by the holy scriptures, or else by any other strong and godly reason,
that secular priests (as they be termed) when they be admitted to their
ministration, make a vow never to marry, but always to live a sole and a
wiueles life, then would I either have yielded or answered with like reason and
like authoritee in their behalf, as the word of god should have ruled me. But
seeing it can not be proved, that there is any such vow made by any such
priest at the receuing of his charge at the byshopes hand, I can not but
marvel greatly, why the adversaries of prestes marriages will not of a like
sort yield in their argument, their ground being nothing, and their reasons
unreasonable. Let the very self same book be judge in this cause, wherewith the
byshope uses to give orders, and it shall appear to the whole world, that
neither the bishop makes any request of an unmarried life to the priest in
gyuyng him orders, neither yet promyseth the priest an unmarried life in
receauynge them. This sentence, Accipe iugum castitatis, Take the yoke of
chastitee, Is not in all the whole book: which has not withstanding been
always both conmonly and wrongfully alleged as a matter of weight, but it
has this sentence: Accipe iugum domini, Take the yoke of the Lord: which
makes nothing for the proof that prestes should live sole, but that they should
live godly. Yet for this sayi^g wrong alleged, priests have been challenged for
votaries, as though they had made a solemn profession never to enter into the
holy state of matrimony. So yt this reason has been so common, and so commonly
published by ye adversaries of marriage and the proctors of vows, yt almost the
rudest in a cou^trei can redily object it, taki^g it to be a very strong and an
insoluble argument. wherefore I thought good to admonish such as heretofore have
be^ by this reason seduced that they shall no more credyte their wrong
allegacio^s with, whom they be wont to enchau^t the ears of the unlearned. Yet
because this appears but a siender solucion for the defense of them, which
have in religion without question vowed openly, to live sole all the days of
their life. I have wyshed that some learned man would take the pains to resolve
the unlearned sort touching that point, who might open to them somewhat of the
matter, that they should not esteem it so heinous a thing as they do, that a
man which has vowed to live all his life sole, should in conclusion marry
notwithstanding his vow. But seeing my wishyng takes no such effect, as my
will was it should, I thought good to leave of wyshyng and fall to writing in
that point, when I see few or none else will. True it is, that it can not be
proved by scripture, that any Christen man priest or other can make any such
vow of sole life, which he can not revoke again when it shall please God to
call him to a contrary state, and yet is the contrary opinion defended as
though there were nothing more true. The place of scripture which is now most
alleged to prove the strength of the vow by, is in the first to Timothe the
first epistle where Paul says: 1. Timo. 5.
The wydowes be subject to the slander of the world, because they have
broken their former promise. If it be granted that Paul in this place speaks
of vows, which thing is in question, and then afterward the same place be
well wayed, it will appear that he gives a determinate sentence, that all
vows of sole life be of none effect which be made under the age of threscore
years. For the text has these words. Non minor annix sexaginta, Not under
thage of threscore years. By the order then that scripture opens in this
place, all vows of sole life that be made before that age, be void and of
none effect, because they be not agreeable to the word of God. It is evident
that Paul in this place wylled Timothy not to credyte the younger sort in
their vowynge, but aduysed him to obiecte unto them their youth and their
wanton courage increasing in them that were under that age, and so to put them
of, and to confute them, as it is plain by the vsyng of the Greek word,
(...), which signifies, confute. So that he allows not the vow of the
younger huswiues, but wills them to marrye and bring forth children,
continewynge in the hollye state of matrimony, that the adversaries of the
Gospel should have no just occasion to be offended with their trade of
living, who would otherwise be ready to ieste and rail upon them, in case
they should repent them, and marrye contrary to their former determinacion.

This note of inconstancy, Paul foresawe that it should be a blotte to the
wydowes which were chosen to be fed of the Congregation, not easy to be
wyped away, but that ever they should be subject for it, to the obloqui and
accusacion of the people. And for that cause Paul said, that they were (...),
habentes iudicium, 1. Tim. 5.
meaning thereby not the condemnacion before GOD, but the reproach and
judgment of the world.

To aduoyde this inconvenience Paul admonyshed Timothye to refuse such as
would show to be found of the Congregation before the forenamed age, saying:
Iuniores reijce, Admit none of the yo^ger sort, for fear God should be
dishonored by such as had professed his name. Forasmuch, then as the vow (if
ye will so call it) or the promise of such as make promise of sole life,
before the age of threscore years, 1. Tim. 5.
is against thordre that Paul (endued with the spirit of god) did prescribe,
it must neades be granted, that all such vows be void and of none effect.
But it may peradventure be objected of some, such as will not be answered, that
we ought not to call again our vow, if we make it before the age of
threscore, because the scripture says: Psalm. 75.
Vouete and reddite Domino, Uowe and render it to the Lord. This objection is
thus answered, that we be bound to render the thing that we vow, according to
the order appointed in scripture, if we perceive the thing to stand with the
pleasure and glory of God and the order of his word. But it is alleged that
Paul would not have any vow of sole life allowed for good, before the age of
three score years. Then he that breaks the vow of sole life made before that
time, breaks no vow, that is to say, no Christian vow, but a wicked and a
diuelysh vow, because it was made contrary to the order appointed in the word
of God.

It must neades be granted, that all our doings must have a respect to the
glory of God, and the rule prescribed in hollye scriptures. If we vow or
promise any thing otherwise, then this rule rules us, we be bownde to vndooe
the thing again that we have done. Even as the wife was bownd^ to vnuowe
again that thing, Number. 30.
whereunto her husband would not consent. And as the servant to vnvow again
that thing, whereunto the master would not consent. And as the child, to
vnvowe again that thing whereunto his father would not consent: So be we
bownde to vnvowe again that thing, whereunto we perceive in our self by
lackyng of the gift that our heavenly father does not consent. In this mind
it is plain that S. Ciprian was when he willed the virgins, who had promised to
live a sole life, to marry, if they perceived not the gift given unto them so
to contynew, as it appears in the.xi. Epistle of his first book in these
words: Quod si se ex fide Christo dicauerunt, Cyprian
pudice and cast sine vlla fabula perseuerent. Si autem perseuerare nolunt,
vel non possunt, melius est ut nubant quam in ignem delitijs suis cadant. Certe
multum fratribus aut sororibus scandalum faciant. That is to say: If it so be
that they have faithfully dedicated them selves to Christ, let them so
without ta^^^^^^g, chastely and reverently cont^^^^d. But if so be, that either
they will not or can not so continue, it is better for them to marrye, then
that they should fall to burning with their pleasures. Truly they ought not
to be the occasion of any offense to their brothers or systers. By these
words it is plain that Saint Cyprian had not his eye set so much upon the
vow that the maidens had made, as upon the glory of God, that he should not
be dishonored, nor the congregation offended with their followyng unlawful
lusts and desires: for that cause he wylled the virgins which had vowed, and
other would nor, or could not continue, to vnsai their vow again and marrye.
Further it should seem by the scriptures, that none such as marry after their
vow for voidynge of fornication, break their vow, but keep it: and that may be
proved thus. S. James in the.iiii. chap. of his Epi. gives an exception to all
christen men, Iaco. 4.
which exception must be either expressed or else understood in all their
vows, bargaynes, and promyses: in so much that it can not be a christian vow,
nor a godly bergayne, unless this exception be either expressed or included in
it. This exception is, Si deus voluerit, if God will. This exception was in
Paul's promise, when he promised to go into Spayn. Romans 15.
This exception was also in Peter's promise, wha^ he said to our savior, Non
lauabis mihi pedes in aeternum, Thou shall never wash my fete: else should
Paul have broken his promise, in that he went not into Spain: and Peter should
have broken his promise like wise, in that he suffered Christ to wash his
feet. Yet this exception (if God will) being included, neither of them both
brake their promyses, because God called them otherwise for the larger
setting forth of his glory, and so they both were excused. Of a like sort
that godly man what so ever he be, that makes a vow to live a sole life
without marriage, and perceaueth in process of time that God calls him to a
contrary vocation, he is bound to say as Christ said, Not as I will, but as
thou wylt, Math. 26.
O heavenly father. Then if this man marry, he breketh not his vow, because it
included this exception, Si Deus uoluerit, If god will. The same thing has a
gloss in the Decrees, that these general conditions, Si Deus voluerit: si
vixero: si potero, If God will, if I live, if I can, be included in all vows
and oaths, so that all such as can justly challenge the exception, may not be
impeached as breakers of their vow or bargain. This exception Paul forgot not
in the.vii. chapi. the first epistle to the Corinthia^s, 1. Cor. 7.
spekyng in the commendation of the unmarried life, for as soon as he
perceaueth him self to have spoken any thing ernestly for the stablishment of
a sole life, by and by he calls again the Corinthians to this exception,
willing them to set their eyes upon the will of God, and to examine them
selves whether they be so called or not, and so to try whether God be pleased
with their life or not, if not, Propter stupra vita^da, ^. Cor. 7.
suam quisque vxorem habeat, and suum quaeque virum, For the aduoidyng of
fornication, let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband. And
afterward when he had wyshed all men to be as he is, in co^tinent he refers
them al again to this exception, that is to say, to the will and pleasure of
god, and puts them in mind of their vocation, wherein it is the will (says
he) and pleasure of God, that they should walk, chargyng such as have not the
gift of sole life to marry, with these words, Si non continent, contrahant
matrimonium, Ibidem.
If they can not refrain, let them marry. As who should say, if they feel
them selves hable to continue, without marriage, so to continue, if not, to
marrye in the Lord. Ibid.
Vnusquisque vt illum vocauit Dominus, ita ambulet, Let every man walk
acordingly as the Lord has called him, referring them always to the calling,
will and pleasure of the Lord. Sundry like exceptio^s he has in the same
chapter, which I leave out, desirous to be short. Now than when this
sentence, Vouete and reddite domino, Uow, Psalm. 75.
and render it to ye Lord, is alleged against the^, who has vowed a sole life,
to restrain the^ from marriage, must be joined with this exception, Si deus
voluerit, If god will: and the spirit of god must give testimony to the
conscience of man that has so vowed, whether he perceive by the stirrynge of
his flesh, yt god has so called him or not. And wha^ we have knowledge by the
testimony of our conscience, that god has not endued us with a power to live in
single life without danger of burning in desires, we may be well assured, ye god
is not content we should remain in yt state, but yt he would have us change our
state, and walk after his will. It is none excuse wherewith to answer the
lord when he calls us to marriage, to say, forsoothe O Lord, I have made a
vow never to marry, and therefore I can not follow thy calling, as by this
similitude it may apere. Wha^ the kings majesty calls his subject forth to
take harneis and weapon, to go immediately to the sea coast for the defense of
his country, is it sufficient excuse for the subject to sai, Forsooth sir, I
can not nor will not come because of a promise yt I have made to abide within
the walls of my house and never to go out all the days of my life? Think ye
not, but that if a prince had a nu^bre of such subjects he were well manned?
Such subjects apere rather to take upon them the parts of their princes,
the^ of obedient subjects, in that they will follow their own determination,
and not the mind of their prince. Eue^ so the man which refuses to marry when
the spirit of god ascertaineth his conscience, yt he can not live otherwise,
does disobey god, in that he follows him not what time he calls him. God
must not be indented withal: we must wait upon his calling, and not he upon
our vowyng. We must serve him with a free spirit in libertee, indifferent to
what state of life it shall please him from time to time to appoint, and not
in the state of life, which we fashion to our selves. You will say
peradventure, we may have this gift for the askyng, and than will ye bring in,
Math. 7. Luc. 11.
Petite and accipietis, quaerite, and inuenietis, pulsate and aperietur vobis,
Ask, and ye shall have, seek, and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you. True it is, that ye shall have the gift of sole life for the asking,
if it be the will of God to give it you. But many times he wylleth not that
thing that you would, he only knows what thing is good for us, and what is
not. We many times ask that thing, that is not mete for us, in the judgment
of God, which to our blind judgment seems most convenient. As when we desire
worldely riches at goddis hand, or victory in battle, or delyuerance out of
captiuitee, or plenty of vitayls in the time of dearth, and such like. Many
times it cha^ceth yt god grau^teth not these our petitions, because he knowith
yt it shall be more for his glory and our profit not to grant them. Even so,
if the gift of syngle life be desired at his hand, he gives it not to all
men: Math. 19.
Non omnes capiunt verbu^ hoc, All men receive not this word: and therefore the
Lord has taught us to say in our prayers, Math. 6.
Fiat volu^tas tua, Thy will be fulfilled. Not as we will, but as he will. And
yet is it true, that if we ask, we shall have: but what shall we have? forsooth
what so ever it shall please him to give, and not what so ever it shall please
us to ask. And therefore John says in his first epistle, Haec est fiducia qua^
habemus apud deum, 1. Joan. 5.
quod si quid petierimus secundu^ volu^tatem eius, audit nos, This is the
trust that we have in God, that if we ask him any thing according to his
will, he hereth us. The mother of the children of Zebede, had no grant of her
peticion, Math. 20.
because it stood not with the will and pleasure of God: So that although it be
true, ask and ye shall obteyn, she asked and obtained not, because her request
had not a relation to the will and pleasure of God, who gives sundry gifts as
it shall please him, and as he thinks mete and convenient for them that call
upon him. As touchi^g things yt he has ^o^ma^ded, he denies them to no man,
but things indifferent sometimes he gives, sometime he denies at his
pleasure. To some he gives riches yt they should help the poor: to some he
gives poverty, to exercise the^ in hope: to some he giuith health, to labor for
them that be in affliction, to some he gives syckenes to exercise them with
patience, and so forth: to some he gives the gift to live without a wife, and
to some he denies the same gift, and them Paul wills by commandment to
marry.

In case there be one that live in continency, yet sins he not although he
do marrye, as the hand fasting of the blessed virgin Mary to Joseph bears
witness, although she had the gift. In that point Paul would not take upon
him to command, but to counsel only. And S. Augustine says, that such
offend not in maryeng, but in forsakyng their former purpose. In case there be
any that has not the gift of sole life, they sin if they mary not. Si non
continent nubant, If they can not forbear, let them marrye. God byddeth not
man fast, if he can in no wise without danger of sickness abstayn. God
byddeth not man vow continencye, if he can in no wise without danger of
burning in desire, live without the company of a woman. God byddeth not man
take purgacio^s and poticarye ware for medecyns against the burning, he gives
no other medecyne but this one only, Si non continent, contrahant matrimonium.
Et, Propter stupra uitanda, sua^ quisque uxorem habeat, and suu^ quaeque uirum
habeat. That is, If they can not refrain, let them marry. And, For the
aduoidyng of whoredom, let every man have his wife, and every woman have her
husband. True it is, that the gift of continencye is a gift of God, more
excellent then is the gift of matrimony, but to whom I pray you? to him that
can not live with out the company of a woman? no. A charger full of gold is
better then a charger full of meat, but to who^ I pray you? to him which is so
hungrye, that he can not tarry one moment of an hour without danger of death
for lack of meat, and can make no other shyfte but the same only? no. Then
must we not covet the thing which is without our reche, but be content with our
calling, as Moses, Exodus 33.
who spoke with God face to face, and all the Patriarchs, and all the Apostles
were, and a great no^bre of holy men mo, which were married: namely as Abraham
was, of who^ thus writes S. Augustine: De bono viduitat.
Propterea tenuit coniugij castitatem, quia non potuit ampliorem. That is to
say: Therefore he held him to the chastity of marriage, because he had not the
greater gift. And shortly after in the same treatise: Ibidem.
Res ergo ipsas si comparemus, nullo modo du bitandu^ est, meliore^ esse
castitate^ continentiae, quam castitatem nuptiale^, cu^ tamen utrumque sit
bonum. Homines uero cu^ comparamus, ille est melior, qui bonum amplius quam
alius habet. That is to say: If we compare the things them selves together,
there is no question but that the chastity of continency is better then
matrimonial chastity, and yet nevertheless they both be good: but when we
compare the men together, he is the better, which has more goodness then
the other has. And although he which has the gift of chaste continencye,
is noted of Saint Austustine to be better then he, who has the gift of
chaste marriage: Yet may he which has the baser gift, be as good (even by
the authority of Sayncte Augustine) as the other holy men that enjoyed the
greater gift, and lived sole without marriage.

It follows not. Ihon the Euangeliste had the gift to live a continent
life, ergo, every man that will, may so do: no more then it follows,
Sampson was hable to take up upon his back the gaates of a City, poastes and
all, and carry them away unto a hill: ergo, every man that will, may so
do. Every man is not streyghte way made a Ihon or a Sampson, that is to
say, continent or mighty, with willing. Such vows therefore be temerous and
unadvised vows, although they be never so advisedly made, when the vower
has not respect to the power, which he has received at Gods hand, for
the perfourmaunce of that his vow. Who would not account that man unwise,
and his vow also folysh, that would vow, never to eat fyshe all the days
of his life, when God has so framed his appetite, that he can eat nothing
else? or never to drink water, when he can drink nothing else? of the
which properties there be some in England: or never to marrye, when he can
not live continent, but burns continually in fleshely desires? Be not these
and such like bound to vnvowe with aduisement, that thing which they vowed to
their own vndooynge unadvisedly? And be not these and such like vows against
Gods holy word, who wylleth every man to walk accord^ngly as the Lord
has called him? God calls that man who has not the gift of co^tinency, to
marriage, The vow calls the same man from it. Is not the vow then an adversary
to God? God says yea: The vow says nay: Whom ought we to follow? The vow
says: although ye can not absteyne, yet ought ye not to marry. God says:
Si no^ continent, contrahant matrimonium, If they can not live chaste, let the^
mary. It must neades then be confessed, that that man, which after this sort
resoneth with him self, and in conclusion for saketh his vow (a thing of his
own making) and follows Christ, loves Christ better then him self, and
acknowlegeth Christ to be his master. And contrariwyse, that man which
forsakes the calling of Christ, and follows his vow, loves him self
better than Christ, and acknowledges his vow to be his master, acordyng to
the saying of Paul: Eius serui estis, cui obeditis. Ye be his servants, Romans
6.
whom ye obey. If the vow then stay any man from marriage, it is a token that
his vow was wyckedly made, without the exception before mentioned, or else
would he never stay for any respect to his vow. And scripture is a
witness, that such men be fallen from grace, because they will be under a
law, when Christ has set them at liberty. That vowynge is* a doctrine not
taught by Christ, but instytuted by the only ordinance of the Church, as in
the Sexte it does appear, where it is said: Extra li. 3. De voto and voti
redempt. Quod votum.
Voti solemnitas ex sola constitutione Ecclesiae est inuenta, matrimonij vero
vinculum, ab ipso ecclesiae capite rerum omnium conditorem ipsum in paradiso
and in statu innocentiae instituente vnionem and indissolubilitatem acceperit:
That is to say, The solempnes of the vow was devised by the only Constitution
of the Church, but the bond of matrimony took his inseperable vnytynge and
knotte of Christ him self, which is the head of the Church, and maker of
all things. So that the vow is but an ordynance of man, and marryage the
ordynance of God.

Wherefore, if we will refuse Marriage being the ordinance of GOD, because of
our vow, which is the Ordinance of Man, may not Christ say unto us: Ye
worship me in vain, Math. 15. Marc. 7.
teaching the doctrines and commandments of man? Yes truly. And styckynge
to this our vow, we break our promise made in baptism, where we utterly
renounce and forsake all other things, in hell, earth, and heaven, and give
our selves wholly and only to God, committing the wholle tuition and
governance of us to him, promysing him faith and truth, that he shall do
with us, not what pleases us, but what pleases him. Now when we, by a vow,
promise this or that kind of life, which is not commanded in Gods word,
without exceptyng, goddis will and pleasure, we take upon us to govern our
self after a fashion, not of gods, but of our own deuisynge, reuokynge and
calling again our former promyses, which we made to him in baptysme, and so
we take upon us to serve God after our own fashion: But how wicked and ungodly
a thing it is so to do, all godly men can easily give sentence. The ignorant
sort which have not yet tasted of the spirit of God, would sooner judge,
that marriage should rather be broken for the vows sake, than the vow for
the marriage sake. And yet is there a decree wherein these words be
contained, Tanta est vis in sacramento coniugij, quod nec ex violatione uori,
Decret. did. 27. diaconus.
potest dissolui ipsum coniugium, that is to say, Such a strength is in the
sacrament of matrimonye, that it may not be dissolved for ye breakyng of the
vow. And saynct Augustine in his book De bono viduitatis, speaking of them,
which have forsaken their former purpose, and married afterward, says,
Proinde qui talium nuptias dicunt non esse nuptias, sed potius adulteria,
Augustine.
non mihi videntur satis accurate and diligenter co^siderare quid dicant, that
is, Therefore they yt say, that the marriages of such men be no marriages, but
rather adultery, appear not to me dilygentely to way the thing that they
say. And Gratian cites an other place out of saynct Augustine, which has
the very same sentence in effect, Disti. 27. ca. Quida^
Quidam nubentes post votu^, asserunt adulteros esse, ego aute^ dico vo bis
quod grauiter peccant qui tales diuidu^t, that is to sai, Some say, that such as
mari after their vow, be adulterers: but I say, yt they syn heinously which
divide such as have married after their vow. These and such like sentences
being found in the doctors, declare their opinion, that the strenghte of
matrimony is of more force, than is the strength of the vow. How be it, all this will not serve the ungodly, who cesse not to maynteyn manfully the strength
of their vow, and would have holly matrimony to be called whooredom, for
maistresse vows pleasure. Yet well worth Paphnutius, who was not afraid to
confess openly in Nicene counsel, that marriage was honorable in all states,
and that the companieng of the husband with his own wife, was chastitee. So
that it should appear he was of the opinion, that matrimony, kept as it ought
to be, was one ki^d of chastitee, even as virginite is an other, both the which
kinds of chastity, be the gifts of God, and no more in our power to perform
the gift of them to god, (unless he give them to us first) then it is in our
power to perform the gift of all the french kings jewels to the king our
master, onles he first give us them. In deed I might perform my promise so
made to the king our master, if mi promise did include this exception (if the
french king will give the^ me: or if I can get them) and eue^ so may I perform
my vow made to god of sole life, if it include the christian exception, that is
to say, if ye giver of that gift will give it me, or if god be so pleased,
without which exception, all vows be wicked, all promyses be vayn, and al
bargains ungodly.

AND to make an end instead of a recital of those things which I have
spoken, I will knyt up the matter with this brief reason. No vow which has
this exception (if God will) other expressed or included, byndeth any man that
has not the gift of sole life, to absteyne from the holly state of matrimony.
But al christian vows have this exception (if god will) other expressed or
included, Ergo, no christian vow binds any man to abstein from the holly state
of matrimony. The parts of this syllogism be proved in my former process to
him that will wyllyngly way it. Wherefore it should be but a folly to make more
matter when enough will serve, as no doubt it will, to them that will be
satisfied. If there be any whom nothing will serve, I beseech the living lord
to soften their hearts, when it shall be his pleasure, to his most heavenly
glory. Amen.

Imprinted at London in the house of Reynolde Wolf.

ANNO DOMINI M.D.XLIX.

Sap. 8. When I perceived that I could not keep my self chaste, except GOD
gave it me (and that it was a point of wisdom also, to know whose gift it
was) I stepped unto the Lord, and besought him etc.


