AN ELEGANT AND LIVELY DESCRIPTION OF Spiritual Life and Death.

DELIVERED In diverse Sermons in Lincolnes-Inne, November the 9.th, M.DC XXIII.
upon John, 5.25.

BY John Preston then Bachellor of Divinity, and Chaplain in Ordinary to the
Prince his Highness.

Ignatius Epistola 15. ad Romanos. Mors est vita sine Christo.

LONDON. Printed by Tho: Cotes, for MICHAELL SPARK, at the blue Bible in
Greene-Arbor. 1632.

AN Elegant and lively description, of Spiritual DEATH and LIFE.
JOHN 5.25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that the hour is coming and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live.


THE Occasion of these words was this: when as Christ had affirmed to the
Jews, That God was his Father, and the Jews went about to kill him for it:
He proves what he had said by this argument: He that is able to give life to
the dead is God, or the Son of God; But I am able to give life to the dead;
(The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and those that hear it shall live;) Therefore I am the Son of
God. In brief, these words show Christ's Divinity by the effects of it, that
he can quicken the dead.

In these words we may consider these parts.

The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and shall live. Secondly,
the instrument by which he does it, and that is, by his word; which is not
meant only the bare preaching and hearing of the word barely; but such an
inward, commanding, powerful, operative word, that makes men do that which is
commanded them: Such a word was spoken to Lazarus being dead, Lazarus come
forth; and he did it. This word commands men, and makes them to obey it.

the hour is coming and now is, that is, the time shall come when as it shall
be abundantly revealed, the fruit of the Gospel shall appear more plentifully
and fully hereafter, but yet it is now beginning to appear; there Verily,
Verily, I say unto you: And these are the parts of this Text.

Out of these words I purpose to show you these three things.

what the estate of all men is out of Christ.

what we gain by Christ.

what we must do for Christ.

out of Christ, for this will make you to prize him more. And the point for
this is,

That every man out of Christ is in a state of death or a dead man; that is,
Doct. 1.
All men however they are borne living, yet they are still dead men: without
the living Spirit the root is dead. Hence are these places of Scripture, Genesis
2.17. The day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death. Math. 8.22.
Let the dead bury their dead. Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were dead
in trespasses and sins. Ephe. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, stand up from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. The meaning is, that all men are
spiritually dead. This will be of some moment, to show you that you are dead
without Christ. Ye account it a ghastly sight to see many dead men lie
together, it affects you much: but to see a multitude of dead men walk and
stand before us, that affects us not. The natural death is but a picture or
shadow of death, but this spiritual death, is death indeed: As it is said
spiritually of Christ's flesh, John 6.55. That it i^ meat indeed. Now that you
may know what this death is, I will show you,

First, of all, what death is.

Secondly, how many kinds of death there

Thirdly, the symptoms and signs of this

Fourthly, the degrees of this death.

For the first; what this death is; it consists in two things. First, in death
there is a privation of life: then a man is dead, when as the Soul is
separated from the Body: so a man is spiritually dead, when as the soul is
separated from the quickening Spirit of Grace, and righteousness: This is all
our cases, In us there dwells no good, there is no Spirit of life within us: the
Soul is so out of order, that the spirit is weary of it and forsakes it. When
the Body grows distempered and unfit for the Soul to use it, then the Soul
leaves it. Even as when the instrument is quite out of tune, a man lays it
aside; whiles it is in tune he plays on it: So a man dwells in a house as long
as it is habitable and fit to dwell in, but when it becomes unhabitable he
departs: so, as long as the body is a fit organ for the soul, it keeps it;
when it becomes unfit, it leaves it. Even so the holy Ghost lives in the Soul
of man, as long as it is in good temper, but being distempered by sin, the
holy Ghost removes. You may see it in Adam: as soon as he eat of the
forbidden fruit, the holy Ghost left him, and he lost his Original
righteousness.

Secondly, in this death as there is a privation, so there is also a positive
evil quality in the soul, whereby it is not only void of goodness, but made
ill. In the natural death when as a man dies, there is another form left in
the body; so in this spiritual death, there is an evil habit, left in the
souls of men: This you may see Heb. 9.14. where the works you do before
regeneration, are called, Dead works: there would be a contradiction in
calling them dead Works, if there were not another positive evil form in
man, beside the absence of the quickening Spirit, which form is called Flesh in
the Scriptures.

But it may be objected, Ob.
that sin is a mere privation of good, that it is a Non-ens; therefore flesh
cannot be said to be an operative quality and form of sin.

To this I answer, Answ.
that though all sin be a mere privation, yet it is in an operative
subject, and thence it comes to pass that sin is fruitful in evil works:
as for example: take an horse and put out his eyes, as long as he stands still
there is no error: but if he begins to run once, he runs amiss, and the
longer he runs, the further he is out of the way wherein he should go, and
all this because he wants his eyes, which should direct him: So it is with
sin, though it in its self be but a mere privation, yet it is seated in
the soul, which is always active: Anima nunquam otiosa; The goodness that
should inlighten us is taken away, and there is a positive evil quality put
into it, that leads us on to evil.

Consider farther whence this death proceeds; the original of it, is the
understanding and mind of man, which is primu^ vive^s, et ultimu^ moriens. That
which lives first and dies first. The cause of life is the understanding
enlightened to see the truth; when the affections are right, and the
understanding is straight, then we live; when it is darkened all goes out of
order. John 1.4. speaking of Christ, it is said, that in him was life, and the
life was the light of men: he was life because he was light, he did inliven
men, because he did inlighten them: therefore Ephe. 5.4. Awake thou that
sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: because
light is the beginning of spiritual life, James 1.18. Therefore it is said, Of
his own will begot he them, by the word of truth: that is, the word rectifies
the understanding and opinion, which is the first thing in this spiritual
birth. Ephe. 4.22.24. Put off the old man which is corrupt, according to the
deceitful lusts thereof; and put on the new man, which after God is created in
holiness, and perfect righteousness. The old man is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts: that which is here called deceitful lusts, etc. in the
original, signifies, lusts proceeding from error, and holiness proceeding
from truth; lust proceeds from error, in mistaking things; for lust is nothing
else but affection misplaced, proceeding from error. That holiness in which
God delights, in which his Image consists, comes from truth. When Adam was
alive, he judged aright, then the wheel and affections of his soul were
right: Being dead by reason of his fall, he lost his sight, he saw no beauty in
the ways of God; and this is the case of all unregenerate men: but when the
Spirit rectifies the judgment, convinces them of sin and righteousness,
then they begin to revive. To be dead is to have the understanding darkened, the
judgment erroneous: to be alive is to have the understanding enlightened, and
the judgment rectified; And thus much for the first, what this death is.

We come now to the kinds of death, The kinds of Spiritual death.
which are three.

First, there is a death of guiltiness: one that

Secondly, there is a death in sin that is Ephe. 2.1. you has he quickened,
who were dead in trespasses and sins: and there is a death for sin that is
contrary to the life of Glory.

Thirdly, there is a death that is opposite to himself in a common manner, and
thence it is, they have common joy, common comfort, common civility; to the
godly he joins himself in an extraordinary manner, by which they have
extraordinary joy: now when God is separated from the soul, then comes a
perfect death; see it in the separation of God from Christ's humanity. God
withdrawing himself from him but for a time, he cries out, My God my God, why
have thou forsaken me; As God withdrawes himself more or less, so is our
joye, our sorrow more or less. Thus much for the kinds of this death.

We come now to the Symptoms or signs of this death, The Symptoms of true
death.
and they are four.

because they are spiritual, and he carnal.

Ob.
But it may be objected: men do understand things belonging to faith and
repentance, carnal men not yet sanctified have some understanding of these.

Answ.
I answer, that they may understand the materials belonging to Godliness as
well as others, but yet they relish them not, they see them not with a
spiritual eye. Tit. 1.16. They are to every good work reprobate; they cannot
judge aright of any good works, as to like, approve and love them, to see a
beauty in them as they are good: Romans 8.7. the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
with God, for it is not subject to the law of God, the Greek word is (...),
the meaning is not that they understand it nor, but they like it not, they
relish it not, they taste it not; they think of Gods ways, that they are but
folly, 1 Cor. 2.14. They are at enmity with them, they count them dross.

The second symptom of death is, want of opus operatum, but they cannot do it
in a holy manner; their prayers, their hearing, receiving of the Sacrament, and
the like, are dead works, without faith the principal of life; however they
may be fair in other men's eyes.

The third sign of a natural death is sencelesnesse; have hard hearts which
cannot repent, Romans 2.5. when they have hearts as hard as a stone, Ezekiel. 36.26.
yet they may be affected with them, as natural men apprehend evil, not from a
quickening Spirit, but from a self love.

Lastly, in a natural death, there is a loss of that vigor and beauty in the
face and countenance which is in living men: So in men that are spiritually
dead, there is no beauty, no vigor, they have death in their faces: they may
have painted beauty, which may be like the living, (as he said: pictum putavi
esse verum, et verum putavi esse pictum:) they may be much alike, yet they
have not that liveliness and beauty as living men have; Gods beauty (the
beauty of holiness) is not found in them.

Ob.
But it may be objected, they have many excellencies in them, they know much,
they excel in moral virtues.

Answ.
I answer, they may have excellencies, as a dead man may have Jewels and Chains
about him, yet they are dead: they have them, but yet they are as Jewels of
Gold in a Swines snoute; they are as Swine, their good things make them not
men, they are beautiful yet they are but dead men; as the evil works of good
men make them not bad men: so the good works of evil men, make them not good.
Thus much for the signs of this Death.

We come now to the degrees of this death, The degrees of Spiritual death.
in all these deaths there are degrees: First in The Gentiles they shall only
be condemned for breaking the Law of nature, because they knew no other Law;
The Jews they shall be condemned for sinning against the Law of nature, and
the Law of Moses, they had a double Law, and shall be condemned for the breach
of it; Christians having a treble Law, the Gospel, the Law of nature, the
morrall Law, shall be condemned for all three; and among all Christians, such
as have had more means, and better education, the greater shall their
punishment be.

Secondly, in the death opposite to the life enmity to the ways of God, being
fighters against God; enemies to the Saints; this is the lowest step. The
second degree is, when as men are not so active that way, but yet are dead in
pleasures, Ambition, covetousness, and the like. There is a generation of men
which trouble not themselves to oppose God and the Saints, but give themselves
to pleasures, and like those Widows, 1 Timothy 5.6. are dead in pleasures, while
they are alive. The last step in this death, is the death of Civility. Civil
men come nearer the Saints of God than others, they come within a step or two
of heaven, and yet are shut out; they are not far from the kingdom of
Heaven, as Christ said to the young man; yet they miss of it as well as others.

Thirdly, for the death that is opposite to the life of joy, the degrees of it
are more sensible: Some have legal terrors, the beginnings of eternal death;
others have peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost, the beginning of
eternal life. And thus much for the degrees of these deaths.

Object.
Now hearing that all are dead in trespasses and sins, ye may object; If we
are dead, why do you preach unto us? If we be dead, we understand not, we
moove not, we are not capable of what you say.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer, First, there is a great difference between this spiritual
death, and natural death.







Answ. 2.
Secondly I answer, that though ye are dead, yet hearing may breed life, the
word can do it. There was an end why Christ spoke to Lazarus that was dead,
Lazarus come forth, because his word wrought life; therefore though ye are
dead, yet because the word can work life in you, our preaching is not in vain.

Lastly, this death is a voluntary death. Men Ezekiel. 18.31. Why will ye dye, O
ye house of Israel? implying that this spiritual death in sin, is a
voluntary death.

But ye will object, Ob.
Men are not quite dead, there are some relics of Gods Image still left in
them; how are they then dead?

To this I answer, Ans.
that there is a double Image of God; first a natural, standing in the natural
frame of the soul, as to be immortal; immateriall; So there is understanding,
will and reason, and some sparks of life left in us, as the remainder of a
stately building that is ruinated: but yet there are no sparks of the living
Image left in us, the spiritual Image of God consisting in holiness and true
righteousness, remains not; The Papists indeed deny it, but how will they
answer the rule of the Fathers: that Supernaturalia dona sunt penitus ablata,
naturalia quassata; that supernatural gifts are utterly taken away, no sparks
of them remain.

Ob.
But it will be objected, that though men by nature have nothing left, yet there
is now an universal ability and grace, an universal sufficiency given unto
them.

Ans.
To this I answer, that that which they call universal grace, is the same thing
that nature is, but they put another term upon it; it is found in nature, and
is common wherever it is, therefore it cannot be grace. For in grace there is
always someting that is peculiar.





Paul made it such matter of difficulty to answer that question of election,
Romans 9. If Aristotle and other heathen, if every one have such a general
sufficiency, Paul would not have made such a scrupulous answer, and have cried
out of the depth.

Thirdly, there is not that universal ability, that which is borne of the
flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the Spirit is Spirit; we are borne
of the flesh and cannot therefore have this spiritual sufficiency.

But yet there are some spiritual gifts in men. Ob.


I answer, Answ.
that we cannot have these spiritual gifts if we are not borne of the Spirit;
that which is borne of the flesh is flesh. Not Bellarmine himself, nor no man
else will say that all are borne of the Spirit, John 15.2. Every branch in me
not bearing fruit, he takes away, and it is cast out, and withered; that is,
as the branch not being in the root, brings forth no fruit, so men as long
as they are not ingrafted into Christ, bring forth no buds, no fruit; they may
hear the word, but they cannot make use of it, they cannot do it without the
Spirit, and that is free: it breaths where it lists; compare John 3.8. the
Spirit breaths where it lists, with John 6.44. No man can come unto me
unless the Father draw him; draw him, that is, not as a sheep is lead with a
bough; for Christ does not say, no man will come, but, no man can come except
the Father draw him; compel him as it were by force, not persuade him by
entreaties: that is, unless he changes, and takes away his wolvish will.

Ob.
But it will be objected, that God draws every man.

Ans.
I answer, that the context concludes against this. For Christ does bring this
in, to show the reason, why many did not receive his Doctrine; and he concludes
with this, that men therefore do not receive it, because God does not draw
them: None can come unto me except my Father draw them.

Ob.
I will answer one objection more and so conclude: If we are dead, to what end
is the law given, why are we commanded to do thus and thus, if we be dead?

An.
To this I answer, that the Law is given to this end, to show us our weakness,
and to lead us unto Christ: it is not given us to keep exactly, for that is
impossible: it was impossible to keep it through the weakness of the flesh,
Romans 8.3. the Law was therefore given that we might know our weakness, not
that we should keep it, but that Christ's righteousness might be fulfilled in
us by faith, Gal. 3.24. the Law is our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that
we might be Justified through faith; That is, the end of the Law.

Ob.
But it will be objected: that in as much as we are commanded to do things
impossible, man's nature is destroyed, for man is a free creature. Secondly, the
command implies an absurdity, and impossibility, to bid a man do that which he
cannot do; to bid a man that is in a deep Well, bound hand and foot, to come
out himself is foolish; ye may blame him for falling in, it is absurd to bid
him come out.

To this I answer, Answ.
that there is a difference between the external binding, and the bonds
wherewith a man is fettered by sin; There is an external impediment, which a
man cannot remove when he is fettered in the Well; but there is no external
impediment, when as men are bound in the chains of sin. When we command you
to do thus and thus, all the business is with the will, we rather say men
will not, then they cannot come; There is liberty when as a man has eligibile
or non eligibile; when he has a thing in his own choice, when there is no
impediment, when he may argue both ways: If a man out of the perverseness of
his nature does it not, it is not compulsory, but free; a beasts action is free
because he cannot reason on both sides, but man when he considers arguments on
both sides, when he can say, do not do such a thing, but do such a thing;
when he can conceive arguments, on both sides, he is free, there is no such
external impediment in him, as to bid one in darkness, to do a thing of the
light, or one bound hand and foot in a pit, to come out; since the chief
impediment here, is in the depraved wills of men, which God does rectify and
change by his grace and Spirit, through the use of means.

Use 1.
If then every man out of Christ be in an estate of death, let every man
examine himself, and consider whether he be a dead man or no; this is the
great quere or question in this mutability and incertainety of things. Let us
make the life to come sure; our life is uncertain here; but have we this
spiritual life, are we living men? then we are happy: but are we dead? then
he that is not partaker of the first resurrection, shall not be partaker of the
second. It is too late to begin to live, when we are dying; certainly natural
death is a time of spending, not of getting or inquiring after life: If ye
defer this search while ye are in health, when ye lie on your deaths bed,
when you shall see heaven and hell immediately presented unto you, this
question will hold you solicitous, and then you shall see that this spiritual
life, is the life indeed. The time of this natural life, is not long; the
Candle burns not long if it burn out; yet it is oftener blown out, than burnt
out; men oftener fall down than come down from the tree of life: this
Tabernacle is often thrown down before it falls down, therefore in this short
life make your selves sure of eternal life.

Now there are two things which hinder this search and inquiry after spiritual
life.

The first is a false opinion; men think themselves in the ways of life,
being in the ways of death; they think there is a greater latitude in the
Gospel than there is.

The second is* men are not at leisure; there are millions of businesses in
their heads, so that they cannot hearken to the whisperings of conscience; they
have no spare time to be wise unto salvation; It will be our wisdom therefore
to consider our end, Deuteronomy. 32.29. To help you therefore in this Quere, whether
you are dead or alive? Consider first, if ever you have

First I say, consider whether ye have bin Romans 7.9, 10. I was alive without
the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed; that
is, the Commandment awakens my sins, and they being alive I dyed; sin when
it affrights not a man's conscience, then he is dead; when it wounds the
conscience, then he is alive.

The Law being brought to the soul by the Spirit, ye see the rectitude of the
Commandment, and your own obliquity and crookedness; sin is alive and ye
dye. Peter preaching to the Jews, Act. 2. recites to them their sins in
crucifying the Lord of glory, which sin was made alive, and pricked them at
their hearts. Sin was dead in David, till Nathan and the Law came unto him,
afterward he lived and was humbled; Luke 5. Peter seeing Christ's divinity by
the draught of Fishes, cries out, Depart from me Lord, for I am a sinful man;
he had sins in him before, but they were dead; then they were made alive.
Paul, he had sins that were dead in him, but when the outward light which was
but a tipe of his light within, did shine about him, then he dies, and his
sins were made alive: So Joseph's brethren had sins, but they were not made
alive till they were put in prison, then their sin in selling their brother
Joseph lived, and they dyed. Has sin ever bin alive in you by the
commandment to slay you? that is, has it bred such an apprehension in you, as
of death; (not a sigh or two for a day (that is no slaying of you, but ye must
apprehend sin as death, as one that is to be executed, forthwith apprehends
death, so must you apprehend sin) then it is a sign, that there is life
within you.

whoever is in Christ is, a new creature, it works a general change from
death to life; it makes all our actions to be rigorous, like the actions of
living men, Old things pass away, all things become new, it makes men lead a
new life: If old aquaintance and lusts would draw us away, we answer that we
are dead, that we live no more to these, that now we have not our own wills:
Christ ^ives in us and works in us, Gal. 2.20. It is not that live, but Christ
lives in me. The same mind ^ill be in us that was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5.
^ow if ye desire to know whether Christ live ^n you or no, or whether you are
in an estate ^f death; you must see whether you have these ^wo things which are
in every one in whom christ lives: first see whether you live to him: ^e died
that we should not live to our selves, but him alone. In moral things the end
and prin^^ple are all one. Before Christ lived in you, (...) you did was from
your selves, ye were your ^wne principle and end: but Christ living in ^^u,
there is another end; ye eye Christ, ye ^^oke to him, all that ye do is done
in sinceri^^, it is done for him and from him.

But how can Christ be the end of our cal^^^gs, eating drinking, and
recreations? Quest.


I answer, Answ.
that of every action Christ must be ^^e end, ye must do as a man in a
journey; ^^ough every (...) trea^es he thinks not of (...) journeys end* yet
the general aim of (...) must be for that and, and that causes

John. 6.68. when Christ demands of the twel^^ whether they would likewise go
away; Pet^^ makes this answer, Lord, whither shall we g^^ thou have the words
of eternal life.

If ye keep (...) Commandments, ye shall live in them, sai^^ Christ: you
shall live in them as in your pr^per element, as the Fish in the water; eve^^
motion out of it, is to death: There are tw^ sorts of men to whom this trial
does b^long.

who have a name they l^^^ and yet are dead, like the Church of Sardis. R^^^
3.1.

dead indeed.

living men, though they appear to be. Now the signs that Characterise these
dead men from those that are truly living, are five, taken from the signs of
the fained life, in the Spirits that have true bodies but only in appearing,
whereby they are distinguished from bodies that truly live.

First, Angels that take Assumed bodies, The characters of those that are
spiritually dead.
eat and drink, and are not nourished: as the Angels that came to Lot, and
Abraham, and had created bodies: So these dead men do all the Boulimia, they
eat and drink not, because there is an Atrophy in their bodies. We preach to
men, yet they are the same this year they were the last: they have a name to
live and yet they live not, they turn not the means to flesh and nourishment;
it is a sign of a living man that he grows. That which is said of a good
will, that it makes use of every thing, may be said of grace; It turns all the
passages of Gods providence into nourishment; storms as well as fair gales,
help a living man to the haven; Affliction, prosperity, all put him on and
help him forwards. Take one not having this life, do what ye will, he
thrives not; as an unthrift, put him to what trade ye will, he thrives not,
he is still on the losing hand; so these men, prosperity, adversity, help
them not: put any thing to a dead man to do, he does it not; so these men, the
Word and Sacrament helps them not, because they are dead.

form of religion, but yet the power is wanting; all they do is but a mere
formality; their Prayers, their Sabath keeping are but in show, those actions
and duties that have most power and life in them, they do least of all relish,
they taste them not because they have no life in them. In general, all the
actions that men wanting life do, they are but dead works, they may be
deceived with them for a time, but when death comes, they shall find them to
be but dead. Remigius a judge of Laurence tells this story, that the Devil in
those parts did use to give money to Witches, which did appear to be good
coin, seemed to be current money at first; but being laid up a while, it then
appeared to be nothing but dried leaves: so the Devil deceives men now, he
makes them to do outward actions, which have a fair show, but when they need
them, they the^ appear as they are, to be nothing but dead leaves, because the
Principle of life is wanting.

A third property of Assumed bodies is this, They are as inconstant as Clouds
without rain, that are quickly scattered; like wandering Stars, or like the
morning dew, that is soon dried up. The Saints have an inequality in their
lives, yet they never dye again; they may be sickly, but these men are twice
dead, Trees plucked up by the roots, that never grow again: The Saints may
be as sheep soyled with a fall, but they can never become Wolves again, but
these men they turn Wolves again, so did Pharaoh and Saul. The Saints have
their Turbida intervalla, their ebbing and flowing, their full and their waine;
but yet all these cloudings do but obscure their graces, not extinguish them:
the darkness of the night extinguisheth not the light of the Stars, but
covers it; so do these cloudings but only cover the graces of the Saints. All
the goodness of other men that seem to live, are but Lucida intervalla, they
are good but by fits, when as those that live are bad but by fits, Nullum
fictum est diuturnu^, their goodness is but counterfeit, therefore it lasts not,
it holds not out.

Sardis, Reve. 3.1. that had a name she lived, and yet wa^ dead: Their works
are not perfect throughout, they were but linsey-wolsey, they were not through
paced in the ways of God, but shuffel; they graspe at both, and comprehend
neither; they do many things, but not all. As the young man that came to
Christ, Christ looked on him, and loved him; what distinguished him? One thing
was wanting, his works were not perfect, his heart was set upon his wealth, he
would do any thing else, his heart was not weaned or divorced from it. Saul
had a name to live, but yet his works were not perfect, when Samuel came not,
then he was discovered, that was but his trial, he would not rest in God.
Herod did many things, yet he was not perfect, he would not leave his incest;
so all that have but a form of religion they are Wolves though they have a
sheepish outside, they are not perfect, ye shall know them by their works.

But what works are those that we cannot see them do? Quest.


I answer, Ans.
they may be exact in the first, yet fail in the second Table, and those that
practice the duties of the 2 Table, fail in the duties of the first. If men be
exact in the duties of both Tables, their religion is pure and undefiled, Iam.
1.27. If they fail in the duties of one table, to make their religion pure, is
to mend in the other. These civil men wrong no man, yet they content
themselves with a bare formality; this is not pure religion: we say this is a
pure religion, if ye be fervent in prayer, and content not your selves with
formality of Religion without the power.



all, is put in all Paul's Epistles; these love not all the Saints.



those that excel in virtue. If your hearts be not right, ye dislike all
those that go beyond you in holiness, and practice.

them, yet they do not show the effects of their loves to them. And thus much
for the helps and discovery of the first sort of men, that have a name they
live, and yet are dead.

The second sort of men to whom this use The marks and signs of those who are
spiritually dead.
ye shall know them by these marks or Symptoms.

First, ye shall find coldness in them; in

But the Saints want heat as well as others, Object.
they also are cold.

I answer, Answ.
though sometimes they want it, yet they are quickly made hot again, because
there is life in them; as Charcole is quickly kindled, because it has been in
the fire; so the Saints are soon kindled, because they had fire in them
before. Others are as green wood, or rather as matter that is not Combustible,
as the Adamant, that will not be made hot with fire; living men, admonitions
and the fire of good company will heat again, so will it not the others.

Secondly, ye shall know them by their stiffness do you delight in your own
ways, and yet continue the same men, keep the same company? Do ye abide
still in the same place, or go on in the same tract? then ye are dead: In many
things you may be tractable, but the maine is, whether ye are flexible in
those things that are connaturall unto you: these deal with us as Iohanan did
with Jeremiah, Ier. 42. he said he would go down into Egypt, he would do any
thing, that God should bid him, whether it were good or bad; but when Jeremy
had told them that they must not go down into Egypt, then they say that he
spoke false, God did not send him: If Gods will had suited with his, he would
have done what he would have had him to do: your trial is when you must
offer up your Isaac, when you must part with those things that are most
sweetest unto you.

they have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, mouths and speak not, feet
and walk not, they have senses to discern, but there is yet an inward eye,
they want; they see no beauty in the ways of God; therefore they think there
is no such matter, because they have eyes and see it not, they have mouths and
taste it not, they relish it not, they smell no sweet savor, from the graces of
the Saints, when as the graces of the Saints have a sweet savor, like an
ointment powered out, Cant. 1.2. So for feeling, they feel not, they are not
sencible of the judgments or threatenings; the Law nor the Gospel move them
not, they have hard and insensible hearts; the more insensible they are, it is a
sign, they are ever dead: the more sensible we are of the threatenings or
promises, the more life is in us.

Lastly, dead men are speechless; there is Out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks. The dry and empty channel drives not the Mill, but a full
stream sets it on work. If the heart be full of life, the tongue is full of
good speeches. Prove. 10. The words of the righteous are as fined silver,
because there is a treasure within them; but the words of the wicked are
nothing worth, because their hearts are evil. As it is said of evil men, that
their tongues are set on fire of hell; so the tongues of the righteous are set
on fire by heaven. Esaias. 19.18. they speak the language of Canaan. In
hypocrites there is loquacity as blasing meteors, and in Saints there is
sometimes an indisposition by reason of some sins, which make them like to
springs which are dammed up with stones and mudde. Yet judge not of them by
such fits, but take them as they are in their ordinary course; the mouth
speaks out of the abundance of the heart. Every man is delighted in some
genious operations, in things that are suitable to him; if there be abundance
of life, abundance of grace within a man, he delights to speak of it: as all
men are severally disposed, such are their speeches. Now all these are
privative signs of death; I will add one more that is positive.

Fifthly, look what life a man lives, he draws to him the things that nourish
it, and expels that which hinders it. If a man be alive to sin, he draws
that which is sinful, but holiness and the means of grace, he expels as
contrary to him: What does satisfy his lusts, that he does; he may do good for
a time, but he is quickly sick of it.

Objest.
But I do much good, I abstain from much evil, may some say.

To this I answer, Answ.
that if one member lives, it is a sign that the whole body lives; so if one
mortal sin live in you, it is a sign you are dead. Truth of grace cannot
stand with one mortal sin unrepented, unsubdued: one disease kills a man as
well as an hundred; so one living lust kills you: Does any lust live and reign
in them, it kills them.

But what is it to live and to reign?

Object.
I answer, Ans.
when a man cease to maintain war with his lust, and resists it not; when
a man lays down the weapons, when he sees his lust is natural to him, and
therefore yields unto it, then sin reigns in him. There is no man that lives
the life of grace, but he has this property, that he strives against all
sin to the utmost, not in show, but in sincerity; he strives against the
occasions of sin though they foil him; he still maintains war against
them, and so they live, and reign not in him.

2 If every man out of Christ be in an estate of death, let us not defer
repentance, Use 2.
but do it whilst we may. Repentance makes a dead man to be a living man:
What is it that makes you defer repentance? ye think ye can change your
courses, and sorrow when you list, therefore ye defer it. If men be dead, and
repentance puts as it were a new soul into the^, makes them to pass from
death to life, then is it not so easy a thing. Suppose ye had Ezekiahs
warning, is it in your power to make your selves live? no, it is beyond your
power; God only can do it. Every man lies before God, as that clod of earth,
out of which Adam was made. God must breathe life into him, else he continues
dead. God does not breathe life into all, He quickens whom he will. It is your
wisdom therefore to wait on him in his Ordinances: if you have good motions
begun in you, press them forwards, they are ofsprings of life. Think
seriously, am I dead, or alive? If dead, why then say, its not in my power to
quicken me, its only in God to do it, and he does this, but in few, those
whom he quickneth are but as Grapes after the Vintage, or as the Olives after
the beating; how then shall I be in the number? Give your selves no rest; know
that it is God that breaths, and then depend on him. Make that use of the
doctrine of election, with care and more solicitude to look to your selves.
Phil. 2. God works both the will and the deed of his good pleasure, work out
therefore your salvation with fear and Trembling. If repentance be a passage
from death to life, if it be such a change, then labor for to get it. The
Spirit does not always strive with men; ye are not always the same, ye will
stick in the sand, grow worse and worse, if ye grow not better and better. No
more power have you to change your selves, than the Blackamore has to change
his skin, or the Leopard his spots; the time will come, when you shall say as
Spira did: O how do I desire faith, would God I had but one drop of it; and
for ought we know he had it not.

Use 3.
Thirdly, learn hence to judge of natural men; for all the excellency they
have, yet they are but dead men; If a man be dead, we do not regard his
beauty, all excellencies in natural men, are but dead. It is a hinderance in
the ways of God, to over-valew outward excellencies, and to despise others
that want these trappings: let us say for all these excellencies, yet he is but
a dead man, we know none after the flesh any more, 2. Cor. 5.16. Again for
your delight in them, know that this death does differ from natural death; for
these dead men are active, and ready to corrupt others, they have an influence,
that does dead those, who are conversant with them, sin communicates as well
as grace. Nothing so great a quench-cole, as the company of bad men: there is
an operative virtue in them to quench men's zeal, as the dropping of water will
quench the fire, though they cannot wholly extinguish it being once kindled.

Fourthly, if all out of Christ are dead, Use 4.
learn to judge of the Ordinances of God, and the means of salvation, let us
not undervalue nor overvalue them; the Ordinances cannot bring life, not the
Word, nor Sacraments; If ye are sick and send for the Minister, he cannot
quicken you; the Ordinance is but a creature, and cannot give life. If we
speak to the ear, and Christ speak not to the heart, it is nothing: Let your
eyes be fixed on Christ, beseech him to put life into you, pray to God for a
blessing: the Ordinances are but dead Trunkes, as Pens without Ink, Conduit
pipes without water. Learn then that God does convay life by the Ordinances,
that they themselves cannot give life, therefore do not overvalew them. Yet
know withal, that God does work but by his Ordinances; the Spirit breathes
not in Taverns nor Playhouses, but in the Church assemblies. Act. 10. whiles
Peter was preaching to Cornelius, and his family, the Spirit fell upon them: so
the Spirit fell on others by laying the Apostles hands on them, the Ordinances
are the Vehiculum of the Spirit; give what is just to them, and no more; give
them neither too little nor too much. Neglect not the Sacrament, ye know not
what ye do when ye neglect it; ye think that ye eat and drink your own
damnation, if ye receive it unreverently; Absence from it is a sin as well
as the remiss and negligent receiving of it. Sickness and death ye fear,
why then do you neglect the Sacrament, why do you receive it unworthily?
Whence are those Epidemicall diseases amongst us? the cause of them is from
hence, that ye neglect the Sacrament, that ye receive it unworthily. 1. Cor.
11.30. For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep:
Consider the danger of neglecting the Sacrament, he that came not to the
Passover, must be cut off from the children of Israel; the same Equity
remains still in the Sacrament; the cause of that was, because he was to come
up with the rest, to remember the death of the first borne of Egypt, and the
redemption from their bondage, he being passed over thereby: It is now the
same sin to neglect the Sacrament, the Equity still remains. Are ye to
strong in faith as ye need it not? To be absent from the word, ye think it
a sin: so is it to be absent from the Sacrament; nothing can excuse you. If
a master bid his servant do a thing, and he goes and is drunken, so that he
cannot do it, will it excuse him? If you have made your selves unfit to
receive the Sacrament by committing any gross sins; the unfitness will not
excuse you. If a man has occasion to ride a journey, if he miss one day, he
will take the next: so ye if ye miss the Sacrament once, be sure to take it
the next time: It is The Sacrament is administered twice every Term, and
sometimes thrice.
divided here, that so if ye miss once, ye may receive it the next time; take
heed therefore how ye neglect it. The end of the Sacrament is to worship God,
to set forth Christ's death, it is the chiefest part of Gods worship; therefore
give it the chiefest respect. Now from hence see the necessity of this life of
grace: how can ye come to the Sacrament, if ye are dead men? Labor therefore
for this life of grace. And thus much for the first point, that all men out of
Christ are in a state of death.

We come now to the second, and that is this,

That all in Christ, are in a state of life. Doct. 2.
Our scope is, to show you what you are out of Christ, and what benefits ye
receive by being in Christ; we cannot go throughout all particulars, but we
will take the greatest, life and death; the one the greatest good, the other
the greatest evil. All in Christ are living men; this is the great benefit,
because death is the greatest evil: therefore by the rule of contraries, life
must be the greatest good. Farther, men prize nothing so much as life; this
experience shows, and Satan himself could tell, that skin for skin, and
all that a man has, he will give for his life, Job. 1. Beyond experience, God
himself threatens death to Adam, as the greatest evil; The day that thou
eatest of it, thou shall dye the death, Genesis 3. Now all that live this life are
living men, and have all things pertaining to life, 2. Pet. 1.2. they have all
that pertaines to life and godliness, that is, all things necessary for the
nourishment and cherishing of them, life were else unhappy; take beasts and
plants, they having all belonging to their life, are happy, and they are said
to live: take any natural life, when as a man has food, and raiment, and
recreation, he is said to live. A man lives when he has life, and all that
appertains unto it. I will divide this Doctrine into two parts, and I will
show you two things.





a Carpenters son: so he hides the glorious mysteries of the Sacrament, under
the base elements of Bread and Wine; he hides the wisdom of God, under the
foolishness of preaching, he hides those whom the world is not worthy of,
under sheep Skins, and Goats Skins, Heb. 11. Col. 3.3. Our lives are hid
with Christ in God.

But from whom is this hidden? Quest.


I answer, Ans.
that it is hidden from natural men as Colors from a blind man; they are
there, and he sees them not.

But with what is this hidden? Quest.


I answer, Answ.
that it is hidden: First, with this natural life, we see it not because we
have this life; it is hid, as the Sap in the root, or water in the spring.

Secondly, it is hidden with a base outside, Cor. 6. The Saints are as poor,
as despised, as having nothing; Christ had a base outside (there was no form
or beauty in him that we should desire him: Esaias 53.
) and so have the Saints being conformable to him; they are like other men for
their outsides.

Thirdly, it is hidden with mis-reports; thus a wine-bibber, a friend of
Publicans and sinners; one casting out devils by Beelzebub: and therefore he
became a stumbling block unto many. The Saints are likewise misrepresented,
they are evil spoken of, they are presented to men's understanding otherwise
than they are. There are a generation of men, that pervert the strait ways of
God, Act. 13.10. that is, they make them seem crooked: though they are
straight, notwithstanding, they pervert them, as a crooked, as a false glass,
does pervert a face that is beautiful, representing it in another shape; or as
a stick that is half in the water, and half out, seems to be crooked, yet
it is straight in it self.

Quest.
But in what is it hidden?

Answ.
I answer, that it is hidden in Christ, as in the fountain, as in the heart and
soul, as in the subject wherein it dwells. Men what ever they profess, believe
not this, because it is a hidden life; what course then shall we take to make
you believe it? The Scriptures you will not deny, yet you will be as hard to
believe them, as you will be to believe there is such a life; We will therefore
say something, without the Scriptures, to persuade you that there is such a
life as this.



live; it is otherwise in beasts, their souls and bodies live together.
Besides it is certain, that the soul shall live, when as the body is laid
aside; then it lives another life from the body: therefore it lives another
life in the body. The higher faculties of the soul, the Understanding and
Will, are not placed and seated in the body, as other faculties are: the visive
faculty must have an eye to see, the hearing faculty must have an ear to
hear, and so the rest of the faculties must have their organs; but the
Understanding has no such organ, it only uses those things that are
presented to it by the phansy. Our sight, feeling, and hearing, perish, when
their organs perish; but the superior faculties of the soul, wear not away,
but the elder the body is, the younger they are. The soul lives now in the
object, now in the subject: it lives in the things it is occupied about; as the
Angels are said to be, where they work, because they have no bodies as we
have, to make them be locally there: so the soul it also lives, where it is
occupied; as if it be occupied about heavenly things, then we are said, to
have our conversation in heaven. Take the understanding and faculties of
reason, they sway not men, but the Ideaes, truths and opinions that dwell in
this understanding, sway men: There are three lives in man, there is the life
of plants, of Beasts or sense, and the life of reason; I may add a fourth, and
that is this spiritual life, which is an higher life of the soul; Where there
is an evil life, there is death, but where there is a good life, there is this
spiritual life: See it in the effects, for these are but speculations.



live not to themselves, but to the Lord, 1. Thessalo. 3.8.

Torments, imprisonments and death; they are content to do that which is the
ruin of their lives, which they would not do, had they not a more special
life within them. 2 Cor. 4.11. We which live are always given up to death for
Jesus sake, that the life also of Jesus, might be made manifest in our mortal
flesh: That is, for this cause God suffered his Children, to be in danger, that
men might know, that they live an other life, and have other comforts: this
appears by their readiness to be exposed to death; all which shows, that
there are some that lead an other life.

But it will be objected, Object.
that the superstitious, and those of another religion, will suffer death as
well as the Saints: and morrall philosophers are retired as well as the Saints:
and those who have but common graces, live this life as well as the Saints:
therefore these experiences prove not the point sufficiently.

I answer, Ans.
that it is true, that superstition does work much like religion, morrall
virtue does many things, like true holiness; and Common grace, does much like
true grace; yet it is no good Argument to say, that because a dreaming man
dreams that he sees, therefore a living man that does see, does but as he. A
picture is like a living man, yet it follows not that a living man is dead,
because the picture is dead; it is no Argument to say, that because morrall
virtue, does many things like true holiness, therefore true holiness does
them not: They may be like in many things, yet not in all things; the cause of
all deceit is, because we cannot discern of things alike, therefore I will
show you how these differ.

First, superstition makes men suffer much, as well as true religion, yet they
do it out of a false opinion, the other from faith: the one do it being
helped by the holy Ghost, the other have a supernatural help from Satan that
extends nature beyond his spear; the one does it from grace, the other from
delusion: the outward acts are alike, but the inward principles differ.



all things are new.



Epicures thought one way the best, the Stoics another; but the Saints seek a
happiness, in denying themselves, which helps to perfect them.

Lastly, common and true grace, have many

Now we have done all this, there is not yet sufficient said, to make it
sufficiently appear, that there is such a life of grace; these and an hundred
other Arguments and reasons, will not make natural men believe, that many men
live other lives than they. But when they see the life of holiness blase in
their eyes, they say it is but gilded over, it is but hypocrisy. These reasons
may prepare and confirm, but they cannot persuade; we must therefore believe
that there is such a life. John 3. Christ treats of this, that there is such a
life; he tells Nicodemus, that he must live it, and be borne again; He wonders
at it, how it can be; Christ therefore concludes in the 12. verse: If I have
told you earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell
you of heavenly things? that is, it must be believed, that there is such a
life: sense believes it not, yet it is easier to believe it, because it is
wrought on earth; other things are harder than this to believe, because they
are wrought in heaven; though this be wrought on earth, yet it is hard to
believe, and must be believed. And thus much for the first part of the
doctrine; that there is such a life.



First, in this common life of nature there

Secondly, as the natural life has a temper of body, has diverse mixtures, so
it abhorrs things that are hurtful to it, and desires things

Thirdly, as in the natural life, so in this, there is a taste, and palate,
that helps this appetite. Romans 12.2. Be ye changed by the renewing; that is,
that ye may be able to discern of it, as the touchstone discernes of Gold, or
the taste and palate of meats.

Fourthly, as in the other life there is hunger and thirst, so is there in
this; men are sensible of pains, and refreshings, they are sensible

Fifthly, as the other life is fed with food, so is this: the food which a man
eats is not presently turned into flesh and blood that nourishes; Ephe 4.16.
They being knit to Christ, according to the effectual power, working in every
part increase, and edifye themselves in love.

Lastly, as this common life has beside other things that maintain it, some
other indowments to help it out, as company, recreation, riches, and the like:
so has this spiritual life, it has riches, and friends, it has its
heritage, company, habitation, ( God is our habitation from everlasting) with
the same reality, though not with the same visibility, and so exposed to sense
as the other. The cause of this life is the holy Ghost who is to the soul, as
the soul is to the body; he is the cause of it: the end of all of it, is the
Lord; all is done to God; No other life is so, this life is of God, through
God, and for God: when you find such a reality in your actions tending to God,
when he is your aim, then ye live this life. Use.


If this be the condition of all that are in Christ, to live and be quickened,
see what is expected from you to whom this talent is committed, every
excellency is a talent, it must not lie dead, but be improved for our masters
use: the sin is great if ye do it not: the neglect being of a greater
thing, the sin is greater. God sets a proportionable account on his benefits,
and expects a severe account from us, if we use them not. Be exhorted then to
live this life: some live much in a short time; Some never live this life; one
man may live more in one day, than another man in a hundred: for to live is
nothing, but to be stirring and doing. 1 Timothy 5.6. those who live in pleasures
are dead whilst they live; so he that is occupied about riches or honors, is
dead: all that time that men are occupied about riches, and their estates,
about credit, honors, and the like, making them their end; that is, a time of
death: ye have lived no longer than ye have acted duties of new obedience. If
you sommon up your lives according to this computation, to how short a
reckoning will they come? A wise man speaks more in a few words, than a fool
does in a multitude: one piece of Gold has more worth than a hundred pieces of
Brass; as we say of an empty oration, that there is a flood of words, but a
drop of water; so if you consider your lives, and see how long ye have lived
in death bungling out the time, you will see that ye have lived but little in
a long time, therefore now be doing something; redeem the time; be busy in
doing or receiving good, be still devising to do something for God, and to put
it in execution: spend your fat and sweetness for God and man; wear out, not
rust out; flame out, not smother out; burn out, be not blown out. So did
Christ, so did Moses, so did Paul, making the Gospel to abound from Jerusalem
to Illyricum: so did David, the text says, that he served his time; he did not
idle it out, that is, he lived not as his own master, but he did do it all
to God, as to a master: All the worthyes of the Church have lived thus: and not
only they, but poor Christians they are still doing, they serve God and men,
they are useful, these are the men that live. Those who spend their time in
sports, in gaming, in business, in serving wealth and honor, those who spend
their time in morrall discourses, in histories, in hearing and telling of
news, as the Athenians did: these are dead they do not live: as we say of
Trees, that if they bring not forth fruit, they are dead; whatever men do if
they bring not forth fruit they are dead, if they glorify not God, they are
dead. See what a price is in your hands, see what ye have done, and mend
whiles ye may; bestow not your price amiss. There are many Talents, yet none
like this of life: take therefore the exhortation, Gal. 6. while ye have time
do good: life is but an acting, ye then live when ye are doing good: see how
many men fall from the Tree of life, as leaves in Autumn; the candle of the
life is quickly blown out: have therefore a better life in store, be not
always beginning, always building, never inhabiting, always beginning, never
finishing; Stultitia semper incipit vivere: folly always beginns to live, men
are always beginning, and never go on. 1 Pet. 4.3. Think it sufficient that
you have walked formerly, as ye have done; the time which remains, let us
reckon it precious, and bestow it to better purpose.

If every one in Christ, Use 2.
be in an happy estate of life; then let men from hence know their state and
condition, often reflect on their privileges, behaving themselves as men
prising them, bestowing their time as well as may be; let as few riuulets run
out of this stream as you can. We pray, that we may do Gods will on earth,
as perfect as the Angels do it in heaven; we should therefore practice this as
we pray for: their life is without interruption, they are in communion with
God; let us then b^ doing, having our thoughts above, let us still be doing,
let not cares and business call us off; but let us comfort our selves in God,
acting that which is for his glory: prize this life, esteem it much, know what
ye have by Christ, and consider the excellency of this life. That ye may know
the excellency of this life, consider it comparatively with this other life,
that we live: It has three properties wherein it differs from, and excells
this common life which we all live.

First, it is an eternal life, Ioh 6. Your fathers: that is, this is the
advantage that ye have, by the life that I shall give you: those that did eat
Manna, the food of Angels, died, and John 4. those that drink of this water
shall thirst again; that is, those that live another life than this, shall dye
and thirst; but those that live this life, never dye. To live this life is when
the soul lives in the object; there is a living in the subject, yet this
spiritual life is when the soul lives in the object, when as it is set on
God. Take men that live other lives, ye shall see that their lives are short;
A man living in honor, that being the thing he minds and intends, it is in
potestate honorantis, there is no constancy in it, it is brickle. If a man
lives in wealth, sets his mind on it: Why riches take their wings and fly away,
Pro. 23. and then their life is ended. So if a man lives in pleasures and
music, they pass away, and then he is dead; those who live in these things
suffer many sicknesses and many deaths, as his heart is more intent upon them.
Quest.
But may we may not mind them? Answer.
Yes, as if we minded them not, as a man may hear a tale, and have his mind
elsewhere, or as a man that baits at an Inn, his mind is somewhere else; If
ye mind them, ye dye in them; he that minds the best things, there is no
change in them. God is always the same; so his favor and love is constant;
see therefore that ye prize them. As a long time that is infinitely long,
exceeds one that is a span long in quantity, so does this life exceed the
natural life, in perpetuity, and excelles all other lives in excellency.

Secondly, this life is a life indeed; as that feeds it is meat indeed; the
other is not so: see all the comforts of this life, they are not so indeed;
take wealth, pleasures, honors and the like; wealth is but a false treasure:
Luke 16.11. it is called the unrighteous mammon, the false treasure: (Falsus
Hector non est Hector:) in comparison of the true treasure it is nothing.
Therefore Solomon, Pro. 23.5. speaking of riches says; Will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not? these riches are nothing: So for honors, all
praise among men is nothing, it is but vain glory, and vain because it is
empty and has nothing in it: so the pleasures of this life are but sad
pleasures, the heart is sad at the bottom: the comforts of this life, and
only these are comforts indeed: the actions of this life, are actions indeed.
In eating and drinking there is sweetness, but when we feed on the promises by
faith, then we taste sweetness indeed in them. One that is weary, being
refreshed with sleep finds sweetness and ease; but it is another refreshing,
that these find who have bin weary and heavy laden with sin, and are now
refreshed, this brings comfort to the soul. So to think of houses, wife,
children, and lands; to consider all the actions that we have done under the
Sun, and all that we have passed through, is pleasant: but to think of the
privileges we have in Christ, that we are heirs of Heaven, Sons of God,
this is comfort indeed: especially to think of the good works we have done;
what good prayers we have made, what good duties we have performed, these are
actions indeed, and bring comfort indeed. All the actions of this life are
actions indeed, this life is a life indeed; in death you shall find it so,
that Christ's body and blood are meat and drink indeed; that remission of
sins, peace of conscience, are comforts indeed, peace indeed; they are such
though now ye think not so; ye shall then know, that this life is a life
indeed.

Cor. 4.4. the Apostle desired death: not to be uncloathed, but to be clothed
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life; that is, desiring death, I
do not desire to be deprived of the comforts of this life; then I were unwise:
I would not put off my clothes, but to be clothed with a better suite; I
desire a life to swallow up this life; not as a Gulf swallows that which is
cast into it, or as fire swallows up the wood, by consuming it, but a life
that swallows it up, as perfection swallows up imperfection, as the
perfecting of a picture swallows up the rude draught, as perfect skill
swallows up bungling, or as a manhood swallows up childhood, not
extinguishing it, but drowning it that it is not seen. The life of grace being
perfect, swallows up imperfection; he that lives this life of grace, has the
imperfections of this life swallowed up: For example; before we live this
life, we magnify riches honors, and Gugaes; but the life of grace coming,
we have other kinds of comforts then: as a man that is to be made a Prince,
contemnes the things he before admired. The weaknesses we are subject to, are
swallowed up in this life: all sickness and trouble are swallowed up in this:
so are weaknesses, and imperfections. This should teach us to set a high prize
upon this life of grace; that we dye no more if we live it; that it is a life
indeed, that it swallows up this other life, compare it with other lives, it
far excels them.

Secondly, this life of grace must needs be than the thing it self. Secondly,
that there be a good union. Nothing puts so high a degree of excellency into us
as this, that we are united unto God; this unity to God is the cheifest good.
Secondly, this union betwixt God and us is a perfect union. There are many
unions; as first there is a relative union, such as is between man and wife.
Secondly there are artificial and natural unions, as when two pieces of bords
are put together, so that one touch the other: so when grain, and grain of
another sort are mixed together; there is a nearer union than this, when as
water and water are mixed together: nearer than this, is the union that is
between the soul and the body. Such a union as this, is there between us and
Christ: we are in him, as the branches in the vine, we are knit to him, this
puts us into an higher degree of excellency: silver mixed with gold is better;
yet if we could take the spirits out of gold, and make silver take the nature
and quality of it; it would be much better. We put on the spirit and quality
of Christ, when as we live this life. Lusts which are most contrary to this
life, puts us below men, makes us worse than Beasts; this life puts us beyond
men, and makes us equal with Angels. All men desire some excellency which is
done by adding something to them; some desire wealth, some learning, some
honor. Consider then if ye live this life ye go beyond all others: nothing
beyond Gods Image; nothing better to be united to than God: let this set the
life of grace at a high rate in your affections; men do it not, and therefore
they despise religion in its self, and in those in whom it appears.

Thirdly, ye have this advantage in this Cor. 3.17. where the Spirit of God
is, there is liberty, to do things which before we could not do; as one
having an Art can do things that he could not do before: This, though you
prise it not, while your mountain is strong, yet the time will come when ye
will need liberty to pray, repent, and trust in God; and then ye will find
the pretiousnesse of it: this then sets a price upon this life of Grace, and
should make you to desire it.

Thirdly, if it be a happy condition, and that be the privilege of those who
are in Christ, Use 3.
that there is such a life for them; let this teach men to seek it, to live
this life of grace, to get it if they have it not: to confirm it if they have
it; to abstain from lust, the sickness of the soul, and the means to quench
this life: take heed of estranging your selves from God, who is the principle
of this life: take heed of dejections of mind, the cloudings that damp this
life. This life is to be active, to act much in the ways of God; when a man is
cheerful and vigorous he lives a life of nature; so in this life of grace,
he that has a quick and nimble sense, and is forward and busy in good works,
lives most; has most life: he that rejoices most in God, has most comforts,
has most life; Take heed of the contraries. Idleness, sencelesnesse, and
barrenness are contrary to life, take heed of them: take heed of sadness that
rusts the wheels of the soul, whereas joy does oil them. Do all to further
this life: avoid all that hinders it. Labor now to be translated from death to
life: that which hinders us, is, that we think we are in a state of life, when
we are not. Now ye may know whether ye are alive or no, by seeing whether ye
are dead or no: But because ye may be certain whether ye are alive or not; I
will give you some positive signs of life to know it.

First, ye are translated from death to life, ye are living men if ye love
the Brethren, Ioh. 3.14. If a man be a living man, Signs of spiritual life.
he lives in another element then he did before; Every living man converseth
with those of the same kind, as every creature does; Sheep with Sheep, Lions
with Lions, Doves with Doves; so living men will converse with living men. Not
loving the brethren, we are in a state of death: every creature must have an
element to live in; a new life must have a new element: evil men out of their
companies, are as Fish out of the water: every life has a taste and appetite, a
new life has a new taste and judgment, Pro. 29.27. an unjust man is an
abomination. to the just: and he that is upright in the way, is an abomination
to the wicked: that is, one hates the things that the other loves: he that is
alive, the things which before he loved, he now hates: he abhors the things,
that evil men delight in. That which is a dogs meat, is a sheep poison, as
the proverb it: so that which wicked men delight in, is as odious as poison to
the just. To judge this life by; see what your company and delights are,
nothing can be less dissembled than company. In his company man does speak
out of the abundance of the heart, he then bewrayes himself what he is: there
is no dead man, nor living man but he is inward with the like: no sign so
much poynted at in the Scripture, as this, ye are translated from death to
life, if ye love the brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.14. and Ioh. 13.35. By this shall all
men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another: this rule will not
deceive you.

John 3.9. He that is borne of God cannot sin: to be borne of God, is to
lead a new life; he that lives a new life, admits not the things which tend to
the destruction of it: Compare this with the 1. Pet. 2.11. abstain from
fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul: he that is borne of God sins
not; that is, he yields not to sin with his good will, but struggles against
it; as one in health strives against sickness; resistes the disease, and
maintains a war against it.

Object.
But yet the best are foiled.

It Is true, yet they strive, they never yield; Answ.
they maintain a war: and this they do not only by discourse, but there is
a natural instinct that puts them forwards: they may be cast back, yet they
return again: they may have a sickness, that takes away sense* they may
swound and be astonished for a time, yet after they contend for life: every
evil man contends for his life: he leads his life in some lust, from which if
he be drawn he returns again: as a thing that is lifted from the earth,
will fall down to it again: he reckons the ways of God hard, and opposite
to him: the wisdom of the Spirit is enmity to the flesh: neither can it be
subject to the Law of God, Romans 8. it cannot but resists it. Every creature
labors to maintain its being: so evil men continuing in sin, strive
naturally against all that would bring them out of this life of sin: so the
Saints they live a life of grace, and labor to maintain it. John 6.68. Christ
asking his Disciples whether they also would go away? Peter made this answer,
Lord whither shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life; that is,
whiles we conceive thee to be the principle and fountain of this life, we
cannot depart from thee. The Saints will let go friends and life, and all for
this life. Count therefore of others and judge of your selves, by contesting
for this life: strive to maintain it, let all go rather than it.

Thirdly, ye may know whether ye have this life in you or not, by the fruits
of it, as the tree is known by its fruits. If the word turn the stock into
its own nature, ye know it by the fruits. Gal. 5.25. If ye live in the
Spirit ye will also walk in the Spirit; that is, if ye profess your selves
holy men, show it by walking in the Spirit: holy men will be doing that which
is good. This is the surest trial, our works will not deceive us: other
things which consist in imagination may. 1 Ioh. 3.10. In this the children of
God are manifest and the children of the Divill: who does not righteousness is
not of God, he that is of God does not unrighteousness. Consider then what
your walk and your actions are, and by them ye shall know this life.

Object.
But how shall we know whether we walk in the Spirit or no?

Answ.
I answer first, that there are many by-walkes, and if ye walk but in one of
them, ye walk in the flesh, and not in the Spirit. Iam. 1.26. If any man
seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own
heart, this man's religion is vain: that is, he that makes this sin his
trade, and walks ordinarily in it, his religion is vain. Secondly, ye may
know it by the guides ye follow. Evil men they follow three guides. Ephe.
2.3. they follow first the world, secondly, the Divill, thirdly, the flesh.
Holy men have three contrary guides, first, the renewed part within; secondly,
the holy Ghost; thirdly, the course of the Saints. Go ye the broad way?
oportet Sanctos vadere per diverticula, the Saints do not so: follow ye the
stream? fulfill ye the will of the flesh, or of the Spirit, what are your
actions? Ephe. 4.17. I charge you that you hence forth walk not as the
Gentiles do in the vanity of their minds: that is, holy men may have vanity in
their minds, yet they walk not in it as others do: evil men may have holy
thoughts; yet they walk in the vanity of their minds; and albeit that evil
men walk not in all the ways of sin, yet they are dead: there is but one way
to hit the mark, but there are a thousand by-ways: a holy man may stumble in
the ways of God, and have some foyles, but he leads not his life in sin, he
strives against it: he that leads his life in any known sin, not resisting
it, and will do it, and not cross himself in it, is dead; his religion is
vain.

But what actions are there, Object.
that holy men do, but that wicked men and others do them?

I answer, Answ.
that there is no good actions we do but they may be dead works: as men may
pray, keep the Sabbaths, and yet they may be but dead works: they may do
them for a show, yet they are dead. A shadow has all the liniaments of a
body, yet it wants life; so the works of hypocrites, they want life, consider
therefore, whether your works are living works; you may know it by these
three signs.

Gal. 5.6. In Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love, with Gal. 6.15. In Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision availes any thing, neither uncircumcision, but a new
creature: all not proceeding from a new heart, and from faith which works by
love, is nothing: this is the root of all, when all our actions come from
faith, which works by love: else, though they are never so precious, they are
but dead works. It is no matter whether ye pray or not, whether ye recive the
Sacrament, keep the Sabbaths or not, they help not a jot unless they come
from the principle of life, a new creature.



then they are gracious works, and proceed from grace; they are living
actions, and not dead: they issue from a right principle aiming at God, and not
at your selves. Hosea. 10.1. Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit
to himself. If you bring forth ^ruits to your selves and not to God, ye are
but empty Vines, God accepts you not.

Fourthly, this life is discovered by your In times of ignorance, God regards
not men so much, but now in time of the Gospel, see if it be powerful, and
whether you set your selves about holy duties. Matthew. 3.10. Now is the Axe laid
to the root of the tree: that is, since John's coming there is a
distinguishment twixt living and dead trees: A tree is not discovered to be
dead, till it wither; no man will cut down a tree in winter, because he knows
not then whether it be dead or no; the Spring distinguishes the dead and
living trees, in the winter they are all alike. The Spring is the powerful
preaching of the word; if men spring not then, if they come not in, they are
dead. Those whose education has been good; those who live under a powerful
Ministry, now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree with them; it is a sign
they are dead, if they profit not by it.

Pet. 2.25. As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word that ye
may grow thereby, if so be that you have tasted that the Lord is gracious:
that is, if ye are alive as you profess your selves to be, you shall know it
by your behavior to that which does nourish your life. First ye will long
after the word, as the child does after the Teate. If the child be hungry,
neither apples, nor rattles, nor any thing else can quiet him but the Teate: So
nothing can quiet these but the word. Others may have excuses; they will have
none; Either they will live where the word is, or they will bring it home to
them; they they desire the sincere milk of the word; many things may be
mingled with the word, that do please the wit, yet those who live the life of
grace, desire the sincere word, the that they may grow thereby: many desire it
to know it only: if ye desire it as newborn babes, it will make you better
and better; many hear, but as men having an Atrophy in their bodies, they grow
not, no fruit comes thereby. Fourthly, they taste a sweetness in ground
received the word with joy; and Herod heard John Baptist with gladness; but
where there is true grace, they go farther: they delight in the word, it is
sweeter to them than the honey: few can say so in good earnest, that the pure
word is sweeter to them than Honey or the Honey Comb. Job he esteemed the word
more than his appointed food, Job. 23.12. The second food Ioh. 4.32.33.34. is
the place out of which I collect this, where Christ being asked of his
Disciples to eat: said that he had other meat that they knew not of; then
said they, has any man brought him ought to eat? He says unto them, My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Do you
good works with such a desire as men eat and drink? do you hunger and
thirst after them, desiring for to do them? Then ye are alive. Hypocrites may
do much, but it is not their meat and drink to do it; examine therefore
your selves by these signs, whether you are alive or dead. This is the
preaching of the law, to show you the narrow differences of life and death. The
first step to life is to know, that ye are in a state of death: the Law must
go before the Gospel, John Baptest before Christ: ye must be brought to
their case in the 2 Act. 37. who were pricked at the hearts, ye must be
brought unto the case of the Iaylor, and of Paul: to the case of the Prodigal,
that you may know your estate: then ye come home. Our end is to preach life
and comfort to you, not damnation. Romans 15.4. All Scripture is written for our
comfort: now there are many things in the Scripture that tend to discomfort and
terrors, yet their end is comfort: as Physic is sharp for the time, yet the
end is health. We desire not to exclude any, but to bring you in whilst you
have time: the market is then hard to make, when ye lie on your death beds,
labor to know it in time: your death is a time of spending not of getting; it
was too late for the foolish Virgins to buy oil, when they were to attend the
bridegroom. We desire not to affright you with false fears, but to admonish
you, that you be not deceived. I find this sentence, Be not deceived, prefixed
before many places of Scripture, where Gods judgment are denounced, as 1 Cor.
6.9. Be not deceived, neither fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, etc. shall
inherit the kingdom of God; and Ephesians. 5.6. Be not deceived with vain words,
for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience; to show, that men are apt to deceive themselves, in such cases as
these, thinking themselves to be in better estate then they are. Consider your
sins and apply them. Consider your particular sins, actio est singularium.
Consider your particular sins, your particular actions, these will work upon
you. This course Peter took with the Jews, Act. 2. ye have crucified the
Lord of life; so Christ told Paul, that he was a persecutor, Act. 9. so John 4.
he told the woman of Samaria her particular sins: he that she now lived
with, was not her husband; so God told Adam, thou have eaten of the forbidden
fruit, Genesis 3. If ye have committed any gross sins, as drunkenness,
covetousness pride, ambition, and the like, consider them. Consider your other
sins, minoris infamiae, not minoris culpae; as neglecting of holy duties,
mispending the time, gaming, overly performing of holy duties, unprofitable
hearing, keeping of bad company, profaning of the Sabbath, and the like.
Consider then the terrors of God and hell, know with what a God you have to
deal, and what a burden sin is, if God charge those on the consciences ye
cannot bear them. I desire not by this to burden you, but to unburthen you of
your corruptions. Now seeing this life is so excellent, I will add certain
motives to make

First, it is a happy life; and it must needs be so, because it is the life of
God and Angels: it is that life which we shall live hereafter; ye may live
this natural life, and want happiness. This life of grace and the life of
glory differ only in degrees, they differ not in kind; the competent judges of
this are the Saints, who have tried both. Heb. 11.15.16. If they had been
mindful of that country from which they came, they had liberty to have
returned, but now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly. In a
Heard of Swine, if some stray away from the rest, and return not again, it is
a sign they have found a better pasture: so when men leave their companions,
and return no more, it is a sign, they have found some better things.
Conceive not then of this life as many do; to be only a privation, or a
melancholy thing, nothing but a mere mortification; this is a life, it has
its comforts, eating, recreations, and delights; ye loose not your pleasures
if ye live it, but change them for advantage: he that leads this life, dies
as the corn does; from a seed it grows up into many stalks, he gains by
this bargain. Christ does make an hard bargain with none, he that deals
with him, gains a hundred fold. If ye part with wealth, ye have spiritual
treasures for it: if you part with your pleasures, ye have joy in the holy
Ghost: have ye crosses, ye are sanctified in that which is better; loose ye
this life, ye have eternal life.

Secondly, this life of grace has that which Prove. 3.17. All her ways are
ways of pleasure* Those that walk in the ways of God are full of pleasure;
this life brings a double pleasure, first, the reward of it, second, the
comfort in performing the actions of it. Every good work as the Hebrew
proverb is, has meat in its mouth; the living of this life, has a reward
sufficient in its self, as appears by this. All pleasures follow some
actions, and therefore men desire life, because it is a continuance of action:
so men delight in new things because as long as they are new, the intention
remains. The actions of this life are full of change; those actions that are
perfect, there is pleasure following them, as beauty follows a good
constitution, or as flame the fire. The actions of this life are perfect
actions, the perfectest actions have the most perfect delight: the actions of
this life are most perfect actions, therefore they have most perfect delight,
because they are the actions of the best faculty, about the best object. All
actions have the denomination of their perfection from their objects: these are
actions of the soul, they are occupied about God, therefore they are the best
and highest actions. He that lives about the best object, greatest content does
follow: he that lives this life, lives about the best object; therefore all the
ways of it, are ways of pleasure. There is more comfort and more Assiduity of
consolation in this life, then in any other life. In other lives, every one
according to his humor has his delights, but yet they are not permanent,
because he delights in transitory things; but he that lives the life of
grace, delights in things that are truly delightful at all times: other
delights are but delights at some times, in some places, they are not always
so: but he that lives the life of grace, pitcheth on those that are always
so. Prove. 14.15. A good conscience is a continual feast. Other comforts may
fail; a man may fall into affliction; riches and pleasures may be taken away,
then the days are evil; but a good conscience is a continual feast, that is,
be his case what it will, his comfort is never interrupted. All other comforts
are about sense, or things of this life, which are subject to alteration; but
this life and the comforts of it, admit no change. A man being sick, he cannot
do actions of health, they are restrained: so one in prison is not at liberty
to do what he would; but the actions of this life are assiduous, they cannot
be interrupted: ye may pray continually, rejoice evermore,

Thirdly, this life is a life that is least indigent of all others: it needs
least. Take a man that leads any other life, he needs many things Luk,
10.41.42. this is shadowed in that of Martha, and Mary: Martha busies herself
about many things, she wanted many; but Mary had one thing that was profitable
for all things, removes all evils, brings all happiness, and that is
Godliness which is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Fourthly, the comforts of this life are pure Psalm. 18.26. I walk purely with
those that walk purely. This is not only to be understood of the consolations
of grace, but also of common blessings, being the fruits of this life: there is
no sorrow with them, there is a pure comfort without any mixture of sorrow. God
giving these blessings in mercy, they are free from mixture of discomfort; but
being not the fruits of this life of grace, being reached by sin and sinful
means, or God giving them in his providence, not in his mercy, there is sorrow
in them: ye may have riches, honors, friends, and all outward things, and yet
they are not pure blessings, because Gods blessings is not mingled with them.

Lastly, it is a life most capacious of comforts: life, not knowing the life of
grace, is sensible of more good and evil, than sensible beasts; he apprehends
Heaven and Hell: but a man that lives the life of grace, is more capacious of
comfort: here you may suffer your faculties to run out to the utmost. If ye
desire wealth or pleasures, your affections must not run out, ye must hold
them in; else they drawn you into perdition, and pierce you through with many
sorrows. If ye affect heavenly Treasures, if ye affect praise with God, ye
may be as covetous of them as you will.

that it may have its conversation in heaven, and with God. Pervert this order,
it destroys the creature. Beasts living the life of sense, it does perfect
them, for that is their utmost end: man having reason, living as a beast,
destroys himself, because that is not his end; he that perfects himself as
a beast, destroys himself as a man: perfectio mentis est perfectio ho^inis.
Let this stir us up, to live this life: it is the utmost end of all. To be
Lawyers, Physicians, and other callings, help us in the living of this life,
yet they are subordinate to it: drown not your selves in subordinate things;
if ye do it, it is your destruction: therefore pitch on the principal.

Fourthly, that which is best in the end, (I Eccles. 7.4. The heart of the wise
is in the house of mourning, that is, this life disposes us to think of death
the end of all, which to do is wisdom. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise,
then would they consider their latter end. In other things the beginning is
good, the end is bitter; but the actions of the life of grace are sweet, ye
fare the better for them, the very remembrance of them is sweet, and the reward
of them comes not long after: All other things are called perishing meats,
John 6.27. there is a parable in it: that is, they are as perishing meats, that
are sweet in the palate, yet they pass away; but this indures unto eternal
life, it continues. The worst thing in this life ye never repent of: as it is
said of sorrow for sins; that it is sorrow never to be repented of: but the
best things that ye do in the other life, ye repent of. All other things
that ye do they may be sweet for the present; yet as it is said of
drunkenness, Prove. 23.32. so may it be said of them, that they bite like a
Serpent, and sting like an Adder, though they seem sweet. The strange woman is
sweet: yet Prove. 5.4. her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged
sword; goods evil gotten are sweet for the present, yet their mouths shall be
filled with gravel, that got them. But on the other side, the end of all the
actions of this life is good: as it is said of Job, that his latter end was
more than his beginning, Job 42.12. Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man and
behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. If a man being to dye,
and having ended his days, should put all his honors, wealth, and pleasures
into one balance, and all his good works, all his faithful prayers, all the
actions of the life of grace into another, he would find them to be best. The
bad man does as the Silkeworme does, winding up himself into his ill works,
he perishes; the other winding up himself in his gracious actions, enters
into salvation.

himself; as the creature is pleased with that which is like it. God is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and truth; he is a living God, and
does delight in a living man: we our selves delight not in dead men, no more
does God: therefore Romans 12.1. we are exhorted to give up our souls and bodies
a living sacrifice to God. God regards not dead bodies; be ye living
sacrifices, which is the act of your will, acting the duties of this life. This
is called walking with God; which is to be in his presence, to go his way,
and to maintain communion with him: this is when as men do, audire et reddere
voces: when there is natural delight: when as they are in presence one with
another; and therefore walking with God, and pleasing of God, are used
promiscuously for one and the same thing: For, Heb. 11.5. it is said of Enoch,
that he walked with God, and Genesis 5.22. It is said, that he pleased God.

But you will say, what benefit is this? Object.


I answer, Answ.
that it is great. God disposes of all things in the world; is it not wisdom
then to have him your friend? Genesis 28.9. Jacob being to take his journey,
Isaac said unto him, God all-sufficient be with thee. God is all-sufficient;
if ye have him, ye have all: In the creature there is no such thing, there is
nothing but vanity in them, they are but as candles, as Stars to the Sun.
God is all-sufficient: all the happiness of the creature, makes not men happy:
All men seek happiness, yet they never find it, without having God: All
happiness is in Gods favor; In outward happiness you must have other
compounded things: Christ rebuked the^ that counted her happy in the creatures,
saying; Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the Paps that gave thee suck;
No says Christ, these will not make a man happy; but blessed are they which
hear the word of God, and keep it; having God ye have all things, God
disposes all things, and gives the comfortable fruition of them. Ye may have
all outward things and yet want comfort, Gods curse makes all miserable, though
ye have all that the creature affords; therefore give your selves no rest,
till ye have got this life, without which he delights not in you.

Adam losing Gods Image was not happy, because God was gone from him; yet he
had all the creatures which he had before. This life of grace brings us to that
state, that Adam was in at first; this restors us to it; seek not then your
happiness where it is not to be found. We all do as the Prodigal did, we get
our portion into our own hands, Luke 15.13. to 20.
and go from our Fathers house, and seek for our happiness elsewhere; but
ye shall find at last, that all else is but husks: thus the Saints have found
it. This life of grace gives rest to the soul, all else in the creature is but
vanity and vexation of spirit. Vanity is nothing else, but an insufficiency in
the creature to give that content that we looked for in it: as when we look
for water in an empty well, seek for that in the creature that is not in it;
we see its vanity in the absence of the good we looked for, and presence of
the evil we looked not for. In God ye find rest and tranquillity, such a
tranquillity as in the Sea, when it is without waves; as is in the upper region
of the air, where no tempests are. Look on the lives of men, who are taken up
with trifles when they are young, when they come to a riper age, greater things
move them, when men are wiser, they feel the apprehension of higher things;
when ye lift up your selves and keep them on the wing, ye are freed from
troubles and cares. Paul had a greater measure of this life than other men, his
Epistles do transcribere animam, transcribe as it were his soul, declare it,
he was full of constancy and comfort: the more constantly we live this life,
the greater gainers we are.

Lastly, till ye live this life, ye have no us tremble and fear, and never
to leave till we had it. This life is a fruit of election; we know not
whether we are in Jacobs or Esau his case, till we know we have it: make haste
therefore to get it. It lies not in your power; John 3.7.8.
The Spirit breaths when and where it lists; you may fear that God will
not give it you, if you spend your life in vanity. Take one that neglects you
all the time that he is able to do you service; if he seeks unto you in his
extremity for his own ends, what answer do you give him, but this: Seeing he
has neglected you when he was able to do you service, you may justly refuse
him now, he is able to do you none? So if ye neglect God whilst ye are able
for to serve him, and seek to him in your extremity, take heed that ye
receive not that answer from him, as the Israelites did in their extremity, Go
to your Idols, and let them help you: nay, he forbids Jeremiah to pray for
them. Consider this, and make haste to live this life of grace; ye cannot get
it of your selves, God must put it into you.

Now if these motives move you to seek this life, The means to get this
spiritual life.
and after examination of your selves, ye find it not to be in you, then use
these means to get it.

in knowledge, get much light; this life consists in light, when a man judges
aright. The understanding enlightened is the primu^ vivens, the first living
part: and therefore ye shall find, that life and light are put one for the
other, Ephese. 4.14. Stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give you light:
and Ioh. 1.4. Christ was that light, and that light was the life of men, this
life stands in inlightning the mind: add to this light, ye add to life. The
reason why men are dead, is, because there is a darkness in their souls, they
see not the ways of God: therefore they act not, they step not forwards,
because they are in the dark: All shining is from light, as ye increase
light, so ye increase life. Ephe. 4.18. it is said of the Gentiles, that they
were strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them. The
knowledge of God, brings men nearer to the life of God. Ephe. 4.24. holiness is
said to proceed from truth, the words are; put on the new man, which after God
is created in righteousness and holiness, which proceeds from truth.

But you will object, Object.
that there are many who abound in knowledge, who have l^fe little enough: that
ignorant men live this life most: that none live it less, than those that know
most.

To this I answer, Answ.
that there is a double knowledge: First, there is a mere inlightening and
informing knowledge: Secondly, there is an operative knowledge: ye may have
enough of the first, and be never the near: but it is the lest that helps and
gets this life: and this knowledge is the gift of the sanctifying Spirit, this
is the operation of God: we do but inform and teach men, we cannot make them
do any thing: we cannot make them practice. Gods teaching makes this
knowledge operative; persuades every way, works every way. Secondly, there is a
knowledge in the habit, and a knowledge in the act, which produces actions:
these are set down obscurely. In the 2 Pet. 1.12.13* the Apostle there says,
that he would not be negligent to put them always in remembrance of those
things, though they knew them, and were established in the present truth: yea I
think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting
you in remembrance: Peter did not write unto them that they might know those
things habitually; for so they knew them before; but that they might know them
actively, and might presently act them: for that end he wrote. The first
knowledge is as sparks raked up in ashes, the other as sparks blown up: the
first is as the sap in the root; the later like the sap that fills the
branches with leaves and fruit: the first is a general knowledge gotten by
contemplation; the last is a practical and active knowledge, a knowledge to
practice. The Scripture exhorts to do things yt intend this knowledge. Deuteronomy.
4.1. and Deu. 6 the Israelites were exhorted to hear and know the statutes of
the Lord, that they might do them; to speak of Gods word and works, which
acts their knowledge, puts them in remembrance of Gods mercies, and stirs up
their minds. Josh. 1.8. he is commanded to read the Law, and meditate in it
day and night; not to know it, for at that time, there was little written; but
he was to read it, that he might do it.

But if we do this so much, Object.
it will hinder and interrupt our businesses, so that we shall fail of our
enterprises.

To this I answer; Answ.
that this will not hinder them, but they shall be done the better, as oyling
of the wheels makes them go the better. Psalm. 1.2. he is said to be
blessed, that does meditate in the Law of God day and night: Your knowledge
being brought to action helps you much; often hearing of the word, which puts
you in remembrance, adds to your life, though it hinders you in other things.
Those who have not the word to hear, live not under preaching Ministers, who
will not be at the cost to get them, or live where they are not, are much to
blame, and live not this life. Simon Magus sinned, in thinking that the holy
Ghost might be bought with money; do not they also sin, who do less than
he? that will not give money for to have the Gospel brought unto them. There is
the like fault, when as men may have the word, and come not to it. If they come
to it, though it adds not to their knowledge, yet it helps their acting and
life. Those who neglect the constant reading of the word, who are not constant
in private prayer, those who neglect the speaking and talking of good things,
they neglect this life. That Arabian proverb, Shut up the five windows, that
the house may be full of light; will be of good use here: that is, the five
senses being shut up, the fuller of light shall we be: the not stopping up of
them, makes men ignorant, cares and businesses possessing men's minds, there is
no room left for better things. Let your minds be still plodding on that which
may further you in grace and truth. It is ignorance that makes men, strangers
from the life of God, Ephe. 4.18. and this is not an ignorance that proceeds
from want of knowledge, but from the badnesse of your hearts; hard hearts makes
men ignorant: why do men hear and yet are ignorant, but because their hearts
are hardened? they regard not the word, and so they grow not in knowledge.

that keep the heart warm; this life like water is apt to grow cold.

But I must be full of life ere I can do actions. Object.


I answer that one begets the other: Answ.
action begets life, and life begets action; as health produces exercise, and
exercise procures health.

But I am indisposed and unfit for such actions. Object. 3.


I answer, Answ.
that if ye are indisposed, the more need you had to be doing, else you are
more unexcusable; the way to get heat is to be acting: as motion does bring
life to a benumbed member, so does it to the soul: be awaked, be stirring,
this will revive you again, Christians hearts are awaked when as they
themselves sleep; if they stir them up, there will be more life in them,
Romans 2.13. They beginning to languish, their medicine is to rise up and be
doing. Gal. 5.16. Walk in the spirit; those who have the Spirit stand not
still, as one that cannot stir: this acting helps the Spirit; first by
enlarging and intending life. Secondly, by preventing that which increases
death: the more we walk in the ways of life, the more we prevent the way
that leads to the Chambers of death: Be doing, if not one thing yet another.
In the steppings out of your callings, be doing, reading and praying;
Conferring and talking of good things. the neglect of this is the cause why
there are so many dwarfes in grace. Men content themselves with morning and
evening duties, and it is well if they do them; but do you the actions of
life more constantly and abundantly. It is the corruption of our nature that
we are not doing: life is maintained by the actions of life; habits are
maintained by actions that are suitable to them; We live in the commandments by
well doing, as the creature does by food: Good actions maintain life, it
receives strength from well-doing: set your selves to pray, do holy duties,
still pray, do more and more; the more ye do, the more life increases.



in faith and hope I care not for: the more ye believe these things, the more
ye are occupied about them.

Secondly, faith draws you on to action:

Thirdly, faith does it by fitting us for Christ, Ioh. 5.12. he that has the
Son has life. First, the Son of God infuseth life into him to whom he is
conjoined; the conjunction betwixt Christ and us is but relative: and between
the king and the subject; when the subjects resolve to take such an one for
their king, they are conjoined to him; so when a woman resolves to take such a
man for her husband, she is conjoined to him. The action of taking Christ, is
to take him as a Lord, to serve him, as a Savior, to have all comfort by him:
he that has the Son in the relative union, shall have him in the real union:
the Son will quicken you, as the soul does the body. A Chrian has the life
of the Son of God. Gal. 2.21. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: all
that I do, Christ does it in me: all that the body does, the soul does it:
the body lives not, but the soul lives in it. After that manner Christ lives
in us: not a good thought or affection, not any resolution or motion of the
soul, but comes for Christ: being united to Christ by faith he lives in us.
Ioh. 6.33. he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood shall live. As flesh
gives life to the body, so the Son gives it to the soul: To eat the flesh
of Christ, is to prize him, to desire and long after him, which is after the
spirit of bondage, to eat him, is to take him, to come to him, to have him
your God: In these stands the eating of Christ. First, in prising of him
exceedingly; to part with any thing for him; to take his Cross with all
losses. Secondly, to eat him is to beleve him, to be yours and you his: this
eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ, expresses our relative
union with him, and then follows our real union: the Spirit immediately gives
this: he that does the first, shall have the second.

Object.
But how shall we do to believe this?

I answer, ye see the old Adam communicated corruption to all his posterity,
because they were borne of him; so these who are borne of the new Adam, that
is, these who take him and believe in him, have grace communicated to them by
him: 1 Cor. 15, 45. to 50.
this new birth makes you as capable of Christ, as the other does of the first
Adam: why then shall not the second Adam communicate grace as well as the other
does corruption? The philosophers were all deceived in this point, from whence
corruption should come, but we know that it came from Adam; and so does grace
come from Christ. Ioh. 1.16.17.
To get this life, let us seek it in him, let us believe more, let us be
humbled more, repent more, and take Christ more: take him on any condition,
prize him, set him at the highest rate, hold him fast. As in the actions of
marriage, those who are to marry will not part upon any condition; they take one
another for richer, for poorer, for better for worse: after this manner must
we take Christ, the more ye take Christ thus, the more ye have the Son,
and so ye live more the life of grace. All grant that this life comes by the
Spirit; and there is no way to get the Spirit but by the Son. Ye must first
eat ere ye can be nourished; ye must fix your eyes on his passion, as the
wife does fix her eyes on her husband: ye must seek this life from the
Spirit ultimately, but ye must first have the Son, and then ye have life:
He must have the Son that will have this life; he must be ingraffed into
Christ as the branches are into the root: John 15.1, 2, 3, 4.
get Christ, and then this life shall abound in you.

The mouth of the righteous is a well spring of life, Prove. 10.20. they put
life into those that have it not, and increase it in those in whom it is, Ephe.
4.24. their speeches minister grace to the hearers; they edify them: hearing
of the word of life, and talking of the fountain of life, puts life into men.
The health of the body does not communicate it self to others; it is otherwise
in the life of the soul; the life of it makes others to live more: as Iron
sharpens Iron, so one holy man does another. See it by the contrary. In evil
men who are dead there is an aptness to dead others, their words are as
continual droppings to put out this life; their tongues are set on fire of
hell, Iame. 2.6. The tongue of good men is a cole fetched from the Altar, they
have fire within the^. When two lie together they keep one another warm;
there is action and redaction; this is powerful means to get and increase
this life. The tongue of the righteous if full of life, it is powerful to make
men live. Gal. 2.14. Paul speaking to Peter, says, why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live after the manner of the Jews? he used not outward compulsion,
his example and life was a compulsion. The company which we keep, compel us
to do as they do: evil company they are the Devils snares, they do as
brambles keep us in, and fetter us: the sutablenesse of evil companions
draws out our secret corruption: He that resolves to live this life, must
resolve to withdraw himself from evil company, who are a strong temptation
unto evil.

There is a difference between leading our selves into temptation, and being
led into it: when you lead your selves into temptation, (as you do when as you
rush into evil company) you are out of the pale of Gods protection: If ye
touch pitch ye cannot but be defiled with it, wherefore make your company
good: this is an effectual and powerful means to beget this life in you, 1 Samuel 10.10, 11, 12.
Saul being among the Prophets, changes his spirit, and became a Prophet: one
that goes fast, makes those that go with him to mend their pace. Act.
11.23.33. it is said of Barnabas, being a good man and full of the holy Ghost,
and of faith, that he added much people unto the Lord. Which manner of
speaking shows that the speeches of those who are full of faith, help to
breed faith: that if men be full of the Spirit, they quicken the Spirit. Evil
company deads men: they are the trunkes through which the Devil speaks: and
this deading is done in an insensible manner, and then most of all where it is
least perceived. Evil company poisons men; a man turning his opinion which
company can do, is most of all poisoned, when as he thinks that he has least
hurt.

the hearing of the voice of the Son of God: this will beget and increase
this life: that is, if when we speak to your ears, he speak to your hearts,
then ye live. Ye have two teachers, the one is he that speaks to you, the
other is Christ. Heb. 8.11. They shall no more teach one another, for they
shall all be taught of God. There are two sheapheards, the one is he that
feeds you, Heb. 13.20.
the other is the great sheapheard of the sheep: there are two great voices,
the one speaking outwardly to the ear, the other when as Christ speaks
effectually to the heart.

When Christ speaks inwardly to the heart, then men live and not before. This
is such a speech as Christ spoke to Lazarus, Lazarus come forth, Ioh 11.43.44.
and he came: his speaking puts life into us. Now what is this inward speaking
of life to the heart? It is nothing else but to persuade fully, and every way
to convince us, that it is best to take Christ, to set to an holy course, to
lead a new life. There is a speaking that comes near this life, and is not
it: that is, when as men hear and understand the way, and apprehend the things
of God, but practice them not. Here is a proximity to this life, yet it is not
this life. Let a man come so near as that he thinks he acts it, yet he is
dead if he act it not: when he acts it, then he is made a living man; and then
he thinks and believes, that the ways of sin are evil, and that they are
evil to him. When God does convince us that such a thing is evil, and that it
is evil to us, then we live and not before. A man having a business to do,
if all be done but one thing, this one thing crosses all the rest; but that
being done our business is brought to pass: so in this life, a man having
many offers of grace which do not fully persuade him, this is not enough, if
Gods help be absent: but when once he speaks, he does fully convince and
persuade us, and makes us to continue. As Satan hahaving leave, never gives
over vexing man; so the Spirit keeps us in good things; where there is this
life, there the Spirit dwells.

But after what manner is this effectual persuasion done? Quest.


I answer, Answ.
when as God gives an ear, and speaks a voice for it to hear: he that has
an ear to hear says Christ, let him hear. Matthew. 11.15.
We then hear, when as there is a disposition wrought within us: when as we
preach, there are many that have hard hearts and nothing for to soften them;
therefore the words falls from them as rain from a stone: but if there be a
man that God will choose, he fits his heart, and so he is persuaded. This is
called the opening of the understanding, Luke. 24.45. he opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures: when we speak to
men, we sow as it were upon fallow ground which will bear no Corn unless God
plow it. Those that saw the miracles of the Loaves, esteemed them not, because
their hearts were hardened. Ephe. 4.18. They are alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts, that is, they are not sensible of sin, and death, the word or the
threatenings: when God takes away this hardness they are fit to harken; then
comes light the beginning of life, which is the informing of the understanding,
to judge righteous judgment. Those who have the life of Christ, if he
speaks, it quickens them. It is the inward voice that quickens: seek
therefore to God earnestly, that Christ would speak to your hearts: ye hear
and are not quickened, because he speaks not. And thus much for this second
point: that all in Christ are in a state of life.

We come now to the third point, that may be noted out of these words, and it
is this.

Doct. 3.
That the voice of the Son of God, is the only means to translate men from
death to life. Men before are dead; Christ by his voice makes them living men.
This voice is the only means, there is no voice but this that is able for to
do it: that is the scope of this Text. This proposition may be resolved into
two parts. First, nothing else is able. Secondly, this is able for to do it.
As it is said of faith, that it justifies, and nothing else but it can justify:
so may it be said of this voice, that nothing else can translate men from death
to life, and this can do it. To translate from death to life is nothing else
but effectually to persuade and change the heart: now nothing else can thus
persuade and alter the heart, but this voice of the Son of God. God himself
frames the heart; it is as a curious framed lock; none can pick it, but he
that knows the turning of it. God only fits the persuasions and turnings:
men's persuasions are as one that will unlocke a lock with a wrong key. Genesis
9.27.
God only can persuade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem, I cannot do it.
Esaias 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips; that is, I make them to bring
comfort. I create the fruit of the lips for peace by my power. That this is
so you may see by diverse reasons.

First, that it is so, see it by this; Reasons of the point.
we speaking to ye quickest, often times they believe not, but the would have
the same effect at all times.

Ephesians. 1.19.20. The same power that raised up Christ from the dead, raised us
up: it is an almighty action to give this life.

he quickens whom he will: he has compassion on whom he will have
compassion* Ioh. 5.21. Romans 9.15.
If men could translate men from death to life, then it would not be proper to
God to do it.

Lastly, as nothing else can do it, so the voice of the Son of God is able
for to do it. At the first creation all was made by the voice of God; Genesis 1.3.
he says, Let there be light, and there was light: let him say to any man
follow me, and he does it. Matthew. 9.9. he says to the Publican sitting at
the receipt of Custom, follow me; and he left all, and rose up and followed
him. Christ speaking to his ear and heart, made him to follow him; his speech
was like the speech of Elias to Elisha, 1 King. 19:19.20.
he followed him and could not choose but do it: Christ speaking we cannot
but follow him.

Quest.
But what is this voice of the Son of God that translateth men from death to
life?

I answer, Ans.
it is nothing else but an inward work of the Spirit, by which he persuades
men effectually to turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God. It must be understood of the effectual working of the Spirit, because
who ever does hear it lives: this voice renews and changes men, translating
them from death to life. Now this effectual speaking consists in two things.
First, in propounding the object, the truth to the heart. Secondly, in the
persuasion of the truth.

First, the Gospel must be laid open to the Moses beginning his book says,
Genesis 1.1.
that in the beginning it was thus, and thus God did; he does not persuade them
by arguments to believe it: so John begins his Gospel without persuasions, In
the beginning was the word, Ioh. 1.1.
etc. so the Apostles commission was, Go and preach that Christ is Come; he
that believed shall be saved, Mark. 16.15.16.
he that believes not, shall be damned: The word of it self is sufficient
authority: when the Gospel it self is thus propounded, then the holy Ghost
kindles light. And therefore this life begins when as the Gospel is propounded,
and light kindled; then this life is wrought. Now there are three degrees of
working this light by the Spirit.

Act. 16.14. The holy Ghost opened the heart of Lydia, to attend unto Paul's
preaching. We sow on fallow ground till the Spirit opens the heart to attend to
the things that are spoken.

Ioh. 16.8. The Spirit shall convince the world of sin: that it, it shall
convince and persuade thoroughly: none can do this but the Spirit. It does also
farther persuade men, that it is good for them to be convinced, and this is
when the knowledge is full; when as all the corners of the heart are answered,
and the mind resolves to practice: Hypocrites and civil men are persuaded,
yet not fully; therefore they never practice; if that one objection of the
heart be unanswered, ye never came to practice.

James 1.21. The ingrafted word is that which is made able to save our souls,
and none else. Men may attend for a flash, but the Spirit must ingraft the Word
into the heart; which as a sprig ingrafted, grows bigger and bigger, and has
fruit from the sap: other men having truths not fastened on them, they grow
weaker and weaker.

To understand fully what this voice of the Son of God is; ye must know that
there is a double voice. First, an outward voice of the word which all hear.
Secondly, an inward voice of the Spirit. This I collect out of Esaias 6.9. Go to
that people and tell them, hear ye indeed but not understand; see ye indeed,
but not perceive, that is, they shall have an outward hearing, an outward
knowledge, but not an inward. There is a common knowledge which all these have,
who live in the Church: and there is a knowledge that is only proper to the
Saints which saves them. The differences twixt these two knowledges; that of
hypocrites, of them in sixth of the Hebrews; twixt common knowledge, and
effectual knowledge that is wrought in the hearts of the elect, are these.

First, common knowledge is confused and general; this is distinct, inward and
particular: Heb. 4.11. The Word is sharper than a two edged Sword, discerning
the thoughts and intentions of the heart, piercing even to the deviding asunder
the soul and spirit, and of joints and marrow: that is, that word of God that
is lively indeed; that voice of God that is effectual to salvation, it is
sharp, it strikes not in general, but enters the inward parts. A staff
cannot enter the flesh, it may bruise it; but the voice of Christ enters like a
two edged Sword, discerns twixt morrall virtues, and supernatural things
wrought by the Spirit; it distinguishes exactly twixt the rectitude and
obliquity of men's hearts: this is proper only to the saving knowledge of the
Word. As nothing is hid from God, but it is naked to his sight; so it is to his
word: See if the word be distinct to you, else you know nothing. A man never
knows any thing, till he knows the Elements, parts and grounds of it: the
voice of the Son of God only makes you know things thus particularly. So in
other things ye know not till you know particulars. Aristotle says, a man is
not a Physician, that knows things in general, in the gross, but he that
knows them in particular. This is not to be a Physician, to know that such dry
meats are good for a moist stomach, unless he also know dry meats and the
Symptoms of a moist stomach: so it is in the knowledge of the Word. To know
what regeneration is, is not enough, except ye know the parts, the kinds and
signs of it. To know that none are translated from death to life, that love
not the brethren, is not enough, except ye know the brethren and love them. To
know, that he that is in Christ has crucified the flesh, Genesis 5.24.
with the affections and lusts of it, is nothing, except ye know that ye your
selves have crucified it. This particular knowledge is it that makes manifest
to a man the secrets of his own heart, 1 Cor. 14.25. that is, the voice of the
Son of God, discerns the secrets of the heart, to know things particularly
that are in it. Ioh. 10.^
The sheep distinguish the voice of the sheapheard, from the voice of a
stranger: when men come to hear, they hear the voice and distinguish not the
sound, because they want this particular knowledge.

Secondly, this hearing of the voice of the Heb. 4.11. it is called lively in
operation: now life consists in quickness, and motion; the voice of Christ
speaking effectually breeds quickness. Sola individua agunt et sentiunt, A
knife in general cuts nothing, the particular knife cuts. To know in general
you are sinners, have corrupt natures, offend in many things, works nothing;
it is the reflection on the particular lives that works, this makes men
tremble. Act. 2. Peter having told the Jews that they had crucified Christ,
that pricked them at the heart. As of sins* so is it of comforts, particular
comforts work. If one can say, I am thus and thus, then comfort follows: so
particular threatenings make men sensible. Genesis 3.
When God said to Adam, Have thou not eaten of the tree whereof I said thou
should not eat? this made him fear. The word does breed a quick sense:
they who have not this true voice sounding to them, Esaias 6.9. in hearing they
do not hear, and seeing they do not see; their hearts are fat, their ears
heavy, and their eyes shut. Romans 11.8. God has given them the spirit of
slumber; that is, when as men hear this voice in a common manner, they are as
a man in a slumber: it stirs them not: their hearts are fat; that is, they
are senseless: for fat is without sense. The property of them that hear in an
ineffectuall manner is this; they have a spirit of slumber, they are as one
hearing a tale, when as his mind is other where. If the things propounded were
natural, they would hear them well enough; but they are spiritual, therefore
they are dull of hearing them.

Cor. 2.6.9. We preach wisdom to those that are perfect: such wisdom, as
eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man; but God reveileth it to us by his Spirit: that is, the cheifest in
knowledge, have not seen with their eyes, or heard with their ears; but those
that hear the voice of the Son of God, have an experimental knowledge which
others have not. This experimental and saving knowledge has trial 1 Ioh.
2.13. I write unto you fathers, because you have known him that was from the
beginning: expound this with the 33. of Ezekiell, 33. When this comes to
pass, then shall ye know that a Prophet has been amongst you: that is, when
I shall do this, they shall know experimentally that there was a Prophet
amongst them. 1 Ioh. 5.49. we know that we are of God; that is, we know it
experimentally; they can say of this, as it is said in the 1 of Ioh. 1.1. That
which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the words of life, declare we
unto you. David takes it as peculiar to himself, Psalm. 9.10. They that know
thy name will trust in thee, for thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek
thee: that is, they that experimentally know thee will trust in thee, for thou
never faylest them that trust thee: they know it by experience. 1 Pet. 2.3.
Desire the sincere milk of the word that you may grow thereby, if ye have
tasted that the Lord is gracious. We find in the Saints a longing after God;
they desire him, which others do not: thus did David: moreover they have
assurance of salvation, which others have not; and this assurance comes from
hence: optima demonstratio est a sensibus; the best demonstration is from
sense; as he that feels the fire hot knows it best; tasting breeds longing;
assurance from experience breeds certainty.

Ioh. 6.63. The Spirit quickens, the word profits nothing; the words then
that I speak, they are Spirit and life. Christ having spoken, that his body
was meat indeed; many were offended at it: then he said, The Spirit does
quicken, that is, ye accept not my words, because ye have not the Spirit, ye
have but flesh, that is a common knowledge; my words are spiritual, and you
are carnal, therefore they do not relish you. These words are otherwise
interpreted by some: that is, these materials profit nothing without the
Spirit; but the other is undoubtedly the meaning, for so it is through the
Scripture: the Spirit profits, that is, saving knowledge wrought by the Spirit:
men not having it, do not approve it. It cannot be otherwise; where the voice
of Christ does sound effectually, there they justify this: Wisdom is
justified of her children, Luke 7.35. Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the feet
of them that preach the Gospel of peace? that is, they see such beauty in the
ways of God, that they are beautiful to them, they are vile to others. The
Scripture often touches this, that when as there is but a common knowledge,
men relish not the word, Romans 8. they taste not the word: the spiritual part of
the word crossing them, is bitter to them. 2 Cor. 2.15. The word is compared to
a sweet savor; to many it is not so, to some it is the savor of death to
death: it is a savor diffused through the house, they abhor it, and being
guilty of death it leads them to death: In others it is the savor of life;
that is, they smell a sweetness in it, it brings them to life, to heaven; the
word being powerfully taught, there comes a savor: some smell sweetness in
it, others otherwise. Luke 2.35. When Christ shall come, the hearts of many
shall be opened, to approve or disapprove him: therefore he is the fall and
rising of many: so when he came, some said he was a good man, others that he
was a devil: some said that the Apostles were good, some that they were bad:
See how ye approve the word in its self, and as it is expressed in men's lives.

Fifthly, if it be a right knowledge, it the habit is. 1 These. 1.6. My word was
to you not in word but in power, because it did work in you joy in the holy
Ghost. Ier. 23.29. comparing the word of true and false Prophets together; My
word is as fire, says God, and as the hammer that breaks the stone: it is
the powerful word of it stirs your affections. Luke the last, Christ
speaking to the Disciples that went with him to Emmaus, their hearts burned
within them: they were full of holy affections. Consider if ye have those holy
affections. Holy affections in the Scripture are ascribed to this knowledge:
every where, where men hear, they know aright, Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is the man
that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his commandments, Psalm. 1.2.
Blessed are they that delight in the Law of the Lord: See whether there be holy
affections in you: Felix did tremble at the Word; so the second ground received
the Word with joy, but not with holy joy.

Object.
But how shall we distinguish them?

Answ.
I answer, that if your joy be holy joy, afflictions will not put it out: if
your joy be carnal joy, persecution puts it out: but joy in the holy Ghost is
not put out by the contrary.

Heb. 4. It works in men's hearts and lives mightily, to overcome all
contraries, Esa. 6.10. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed;
that is, Let them have such a common knowledge as civil men and hypocrites
have, and no more; least seeing aright, they understand with their hearts and
be converted, and they be healed. Seeing with their eyes, is meant seeing with
this knowledge, which if they see with, their hearts will be wrought on: their
hearts being wrought on, they are converted, then they are healed. This
follows on the other. Let the affections be stirred, they are the immediate
principles of action; what one aff^cts he does; these are tied all on one
string: flashy affections, flashy actions. Ioh. 6.45. They shall all be taught
of God,; every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes
to me: that is, every one that hears this true voice of the Son of God,
comes to me, that is, they breed actions whereby they come to me. See if your
knowledge be operative. Iam. 1.22. distinguishing of hearers, he says, Be not
hearers but doers; if ye find not this change, Christ has not spoken to you.

But in the Saints are many defects in their actions, Object.
ergo actions follow not hearing and knowledge.

To this I answer, Answ.
that as their actions are weak and faint, so their knowledge is weak Heb.
12.5. they often forget and must be put in mind. 2 Pet. 1.13 they must be
stirred up by putting them in remembrance of those things which they have
forgotten. Secondly, this fail is from some doubt within, from some shaking:
when as you see a defect in actions, or affections, it is because you want this
convincing knowledge. The way to stir up affection and action, is the Word,
which increases this operative knowledge.

If it be so, that the voice of the Son of God is the only means to
translate men from death to life, Use 1.
let us examine our selves, whether we have heard the voice of the Son of
God, or no? If we have not, then let us know our cases, and be humbled: they
that have not heard it are dead. Consider it is your distinct knowledge, not a
knowledge in gross or general, that inlivens you. Know ye the passages and
working of regeneration and repentance? find ye the Word as fire, and as a
hammer? the Word is in its nature, and will be found so of them that receive it
aright. Have ye an experimental knowledge? approve ye Gods Image, his ways
in the Word, or in the lives of the Saints? do ye justify wisdom? are your
hearts opened At the hearing of the Word? do ye like it? At Christ's coming
many hearts were opened, because then his Word came, and it opened many men's
hearts, showed them what they were. How do ye affect the Word, and Image of
God in the lives of the Saints? how do ye find holy affections in them?
blessedness goes always with them. Affections are always a sign of this,
have ye received the Word with them? have ye sorrowed for your sins? do
you delight in God? this will beget holy affections which will last;
afflictions put them not out, holy joy is not damped with afflictions, carnal
joy is. What are your lives and actions? If ye seeing others holy, ye cannot
do as they do, this voice has not spoken to you. All that hear Christ's
voice will come and be doing. Iam. 1.22, if doing, be joined with hearing, if
ye are doers as well as hearers, this voice has spoken to you; if your
practice be not joined, ye are deceived. If ye find upon examination that
ye have not done it: remember that Christ's sheep hear his voice; John 10.3.4.
ye may therefore fear ye be lost sheep if ye hear it not. He that has
an ear hears the Gospel; If it be hidden, 2 Cor. 4.3.4.
it is hidden to those that perish: where men live in ignorance and hear not,
God regards not it so much: Act. 17.30.
that's not the time of trial: have ye the Word as wheat with chafe, it
tries not; but the Word coming with authority, and not as the Scribes; when
Christ's voice sounds in the Word, see how ye are affected: if ye hear not ye
are dead. Cant. 2. Christ's coming is compared to a Spring time, wherein the
flowers appear on the earth, and the birds begin to sing, and the trees put
out their green fruit: that is, when Christ makes himself known, it is
Spring time: do you spring when the Word comes, when the messages of salvation
are made known unto you? if not, ye are dead. Our end in speaking this is not
to trouble you, but to bring you to salvation. I will therefore show you what
keeps men off from hearing Christ's voice, that knowing the impediments ye may
remove them. The impediments are seven.

Cor. 2.4. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness with him: therefore 1 Cor. 3.18. if any man seem to be
wise in the world, let him become a fool that he may be wise: that is, let him
lay aside that wisdom which begets pride in our hearts. Michals
disposition is in every one of us more or less, she despised David: so men
chalk out a way to themselves, in which they will go, they will seek their
own ways, and will not be subject to the Law of God. Romans 8.7. The carnal
mind is enmity with God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can it be. 2 Cor. 10.5. speaking of imaginations, says, that men with
them build up themselves against God, and will not alter their courses.The
greatest opposition is in men's minds: take a man that has a true opinion, it
is easy to remove his lusts, but false judgments are as bulwarks against Gods
wisdom. Men will do thus and thus because they think their state is good.
The Scribes and Pharisees came not to Christ, Luke 15.1. but Publicans and
sinners came: so it is with men now, do we lay open their sins unto them,
yet they will not be persuaded: men will be righteous of themselves, and will
not be persuaded that Christ must be made unto them righteousness, and
redemption, and wisdom. This opinion of our selves is a great impediment,
this contemnes the way of God, and fashions out our own ways; this contenting
of our selves with our present estate makes men err: therefore Psalm. 119.21.
Cursed are the proud that are always erring from thy Law: Self conceit makes
men err,

The second impediment is custom: men Ioh 4.12. the woman of Samaria was much
held off with this argument. Christ coming to teach her the doctrine of
salvation; Art thou greater, said she, than our father Jacob that gave us this
Well? This opinion that our fathers have gone this way, and it is transmitted
to us, hinders men much; men cannot endure newness. Lot is taxed for this by
the Sodomites, Genesis 19.9. This fellow came in to sojorne here, and will he now
be a Judge? so Act. 17. Paul preaching at Athens, the Athenians asked, What new
doctrine is this that thou preachest? men being accustomed to a way, it winns
their opinion; men having once judged, are loath to judge again: custom winns
their affection. Change is troublesome: men having gone long in a course they
will still plod on in the same tract. Custom of our fathers, or country or
place where we are, our own custom makes us loath to forsake it.

Exodus 7.22. Pharaohs heart was hardened because the Magicians did the same
miracles, that Moses and Aaron did; So similitude hinders men from embracing
the ways of Christ, and God. Men seeing Papists austerity like our
mortification, their sufferings like true martyrdom, they are persuaded of
their ways, as we are of ours: so for civility, when as men see it so like
religion, as a spark is like the fire, they embrace it: All deceit is from
similitude, false wares having the same dye that true has, deceive the buiers:
so falling stars are like other stars. When we see some men that profess
religion to be false hearted, we think all are so: wherefore Phil. 1.10. The
Apostles prays, that they might abound in all knowledge and judgment to
discern of things that differ: this proximity makes us deceived.

Fourthly, false experiments hinder us much; Exodus 8.15. when as the Froggs
were removed, Pharaoh his heart was hardened: rest made him harden his heart: so
many times it makes men slight the word, and afflictions which God lays on
them. We may see this in Soldiers and Mariners; none more ready to contemn
dangers than they, because they have often escaped; they delude the works of
God that should draw them to salvation. Roots will make the weeds grow again,
not being taken heed of: The long suffering of God should draw us to
repentance, but it does not so: 2 Pet. 3.3. In the last time shall come
mockers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of
his coming? for all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
creation; that is, men shall feel nothing, apprehend nothing; judgments being
believed they second the Word, being eluded, they hinder us and it.

The fifth impediment is ignorance; men Ioh. 4.10. If thou had known the gift
of God, and who it is that speaks to thee, thou would have asked of him.
There is enough in religion to make men love it, if they knew it: there is
virtue in it, there is beauty and profit in it. Esa. 57. There is a peace in
it; all the ways of it are ways of pleasantness: there is honor in it; old
age is honorable with righteousness. But men's hearts are full of darkness;
they see not, neither do they understand it. 2 Pet. 2.12. They speak evil of
the things they know not; Its true they know the things, (...), they know them
not experimentally and really, and that deceives them, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man
think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. One
may know all things, and yet know nothing, as he should: Ignorance deceives
many, it makes them to measure religion by a false rule, and common opinion.
Acts 24.14. it is called heresy; when ye judge of it by external shows, all
baseness is outwardly in religion, it is like a costly thing covered with
straw: Christ was hid under a Carpenters Son; preaching under the name of
foolishness: so our ignorance in attributing things to false causes keeps us
off. If the Gospel be hid, it is hidden to those that perish; there is a double
ignorance; privative, and positive; that is it, by which the God of this world
blinds men, breeding a false persuasion of good, and a good persuasion of evil.

The sixth impediment is in-consideration: men do not consider the things they
might know: if men would deduce one thing from another, and do that they know,
they might be brought to God. Deuteronomy. 29.2.3. ye have seen, says Moses, all
that the Lord did before your eyes, in the Land of Egypt, upon Pharaoh and his
servants; ye have seen those great signs and miracles which he did, yet the
Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear until this day: that is, ye have not profited because ye have not
considered. We think if that we had lived then, we had believed, yet we see
how few of them did believe: we believe the Scriptures, yet what inconsequency
is there in men's lives, because we do not consider things. Consideration
helps to perfect men's actions; it is a circular line; one part helps the
other. If we look back and examine our actions, it helps; want of it
hinders. What is repentance, but consideration? Ier. 8.6. No man repented him
of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? want of this keeps men from
salvation. 2 Chronicles. 6.37. If they bethink themselves in the Land whither they
are carried away, and turn and pray unto me, in their captivity, saying, We
have sinned, we have done amiss, and dealt wickedly; then I will hear. So
Ier. 8.6. God harkned whether any would say, What have I done? men go on and
consider not. Hosea 4.11. Whoredom, and new wine, steal away their hearts;
that is, it makes them not to consider. Mark. 6.52. They considered not the
loaves, therefore their hearts were hardened: they were fearful in the ship,
because they considered not the miracle of the loaves.

Romans 8. the flesh is not subject to the Spirit, it crosses it: one reckons
not a man his enemy unless he cross him. It must be so; every creature as
long as it has a being, opposes that which is contrary to it: so every man
that delights himself in such or such a lust, will not be circumcised,
cleansed and washed from it, he will not have Christ reign over him; he will
have his elbow room. Those men that are not translated from death to life,
they count the ways of God either vanity or folly, and will not submit unto
them, nor yet hear Christ voice.

Now the means, The means how to hear profitablie.
the helps, and ways to break through these impediments, and to receive the
Word with profit, are these.

First, to hear profitably, that the voice of the Son of God be not a common
voice, but peculiar, take that rule which is set down, Luke 8.18. Take heed
how you hear. Christ gave that admonition to his hearers, and I give it to
you: look to your selves, take heed how ye come to hear the Word; do it
diligently: the reason of this is added in the same verse: for unto him that
has shall be given, and from him that has not, shall be taken away even that
which he seemed to have: that is, if ye hear and get a little knowledge, ye
shall have more: he that yields some fruits, shall bring forth more: he that
does some things, shall do more, God will bless you. But from him that has
not, shall be taken even that which he seemed to have: that is, your hearts
shall be hardened, and that common knowledge which you have shall be taken away.
Ioh. 15.2. Every branch that bears not fruit God cuts down. God looks into
a Congregation to see who does make conscience of hearing; those that do, he
purges; but those that profit not, he curses: he takes not away their lives,
but their graces, makes them wither in the inward man, and so he comes to
death. Luke 19. he that had ten Talents, he that had most, had more given him:
To practice a little is the way to get more. The Talent is taken from him, who
did not use it, and given to him, that had most Talents. There are two rewards
for him that uses the Talent well. First, he shall have more. Secondly, he
shall be ruler over ten Cities; he shall have comfort here, and hereafter: he
shall have more comfort and grace. See how he dealt with Nathaniel, John 1.50.
Because he confessed Christ to be the Son of God, and believed because Christ
saw him under the Fig Tree, which was but a small thing; Christ tells him that
he shall see greater things than these. Ioh. 7.17. If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God: that is, if ye
practice according to your knowledge, you shall know more, it shall be
confirmed to you. Let men know and not practice, then Romans 1.21.21. Because
when they knew God, they glorify him not as God, neither are thankful,
therefore God gives them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own
hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, and to worship
Idols; as he dealt with the Gentiles. So in the 2 Thessa. 2.9. Because they
received not the love of the truth; because they heard much, and did not
embrace it, God gave them up to strong delusions to believe lies. See it by
experience: when as men play with their knowledge, God gives them up to
heresies. The Spirit of God will not strive long with them. God has commanded
us, not to cast Pearls before Swine; and will he himself do it? Consider
what ye do in every doctrine of salvation, that is preached to you; ye
either relish it, or not; ye obey it, or disobey it; ye taste it, or
disrelish it: If ye taste it not, it is a savor of death unto death; that is,
it brings death and leads to hell: if ye savor it aright, it brings to
heaven. There is no true doctrine, but the not obeying of it brings something
to your damnation. When the savor of Christ's knowledge is made manifest, nor
receiving it, ye reject it, and it brings a curse. Heb. 6.7.8. The earth which
drinks in the rain which comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet
for him by whom it is dressed, receives a blesssing of God; but that which
brings forth thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned: that is, the word is as rain, it makes herbs and weeds
to grow: if herbs grow, God does prosper it more: if it falls upon rocks it
withers more and more; God does curse it. It is not in the knowledge of
divinity as in other sciences: in them ye may neglect a year or two, and get
it again; but it is not so in this; ye will not be able to return again,
ye are near a curse, ye cannot redeem it. See what follows in the
neglecting of the Word, in the 2 Chronicles. 36.15.16. God sent his messengers
rising up early, etc. because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his Word,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose up against his
people, till there was no remedy. Grace may stand with infirmities before they
are revealed, but being reveiled the light discerns them. If men refuse, God
indures it not. Act. 17.30. The times of that ignorance God regarded not, but
now take heed, the Gospel being reveiled; God will bear no longer. Before John
Baptist came, the Axe was not laid to the root of the tree; but as soon as he
came, it was; because then the Gospel was made known; he revealed the truth.
When the truth is once revealed, if men do not then receive it, God indures it
not. Heb. 3.13. To day if ye will hear my voice, harden not your hearts. God
will not stay longer than this day. There is a day, (when it is we cannot
prescribe) after which God will not offer grace: but commonly we see that men
being of the age of discretion, and having the way showed, if they neglect it
then, they commonly perish. God has a secret time, The Jews had their day;
but because they accounted themselves unworthy of everlasting life, Paul did
turn from them to the Gentiles, Act. 13.46. Saul had his day, he had common
gifts and profited not, therefore God forsook him. So Israel had their day,
but when they neglected it, God bids Jeremiah not to pray for them. Consider
what you have heard of the Sacrament, that ye may not absent your selves from
it, in the places wherein you are, without weighty affairs, which will excuse
you before God: so for the Sabbath; you know it should be kept; because it is
holy; and if it be holy I would ask you this question; whether it be holy in
whole, or in part? If all of it be holy, it is not arbitrary, it must be
sequestered from common uses. The vessels of the Sanctuary are said to be holy,
because they were not used but about holy things: so the Temple is holy,
because it is a place set apart for Gods service: so time is holy, when it is
bestowed on holy things, holy thoughts, holy duties; consider that it is holy,
and that every part thereof is holy; and then deny if you can, that it is not
to be sanctified. Some men spend their time in idleness and gaming; most in
drunkenness and disorder, and not as they should. Ye have heard of
mortification; ye have heard the doctrine of changing from death to life;
apply them, and take heed how you hear; ye that heard it negligently shall
grow worse and worse.

The second means to hear profitably, is These. 2.13. that is, to receive the
Word, not as the word of man; but as the Word of God. This makes the word of
Christ effectual, to hear it as the Word of God: that is, consider whose word
it is. Consider the ground of it, that it proceeds from God who is present, God
is there and we speak in his stead: God spoke to the Israelits in Mount Sinay,
and would have continued for any thing we know, yet the people desired that
Moses should speak unto them. We beseech you in the stead of Christ, to be
reconciled unto God. This is of much moment, to hear it as Gods Word: morrall
truths may build you up in morrall virtues, and may be profitable to that
purpose; but they will not breed spiritual life; that the Word only does,
being received as the Word of God. John 6.65. when as Christ demanded of the
twelve, whether they also would go away? Peter made this answer; Lord, whither
shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. A man is not a living man,
but by conjunction betwixt God and the soul: God is to the soul, as the soul
is to the body, he puts life into it, and is conjoined to it by his word when
it is thus received.

The Word coming as from God, we do that which is commanded us, because God
will have us do it: and then we do it simply and sincerely, so that God
accepts it; We receive it as the word of God, it breeds life within us: when
we receive it with faith, with full Assurance, then it comes from God, then it
comes in power and in the holy Ghost, and makes us become followers of Christ,
1 Thessalonians. 1.5. when we receive the Word of God, it works effectually in us. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. when we receive it as from God with full assurance, it begets
life in us. To live is to have sense and motion, to be acting: the receiving of
the word with full assurance, makes us active; the believing of it sets men on
work 2 Chronicles. 25.5.6. 10. When as Amasiah believed that God would not be with
him unless he sent away the Israelites, then he sent them away and not
before. Caleb and Iosuah did believe, therefore they followed God constantly.
Abraham offered up his son Isaac, because he believed God, that he could
give him another son, or raise him out of ashes again. Let a man be
persuaded that such a thing will hurt him, or that such a thing will do him
good, he does the one and leaves the other. Receive therefore the Word with
full assurance, consider what is delivered, if it be the Word or no; consider
that it which ye hear, is either the Word or not the Word, it belongs to me
or not. Men take things overly, and are not rooted and grounded in faith, and
that makes them hear unprofitably. See then if your particular actions agree
with the Word, so ye shall be rooted in faith; this makes the Word a Word of
life.

The third rule and means to hear with fourth ground, in the parable of the
seed in the eight of Luke, the 15. verse, that is, to receive the Word with
honest and good hearts; having heard the Word to keep it, and to bring forth
fruit with patience. Hear the Word with honest hearts; this is done when as a
man is resolved to practice whatsoever God will reveal; when he has no
reservations or exceptions to himself; when he is resolved to practice what
he hears with an humble heart: being humbled we will do this, and not
before. The fourth ground was humbled; men will not hear this because they are
proud: now pride is an evil disposition in the creature, whereby it exalts its
self above its measure: There is this fault in men, they will pick and choose
in the ways of God. The last ground will only part with all for Christ. Act.
9. When as Paul was humbled, he then cried out, Lord what will thou have me to
do? I will do or suffer any thing for thee, and he was as good as his word.
So Act. 2.32. the Jews being humbled cried out, Men and brethren what shall
we do? we will do any thing to be saved. So Act. 16.30. The jailer being
humbled, demanded of Paul what he should do to be saved; when as a man is thus
disposed, God will teach him, Psalm. 25. God teaches the humble his ways: man
himself will do so; if he see one willing to learn, he will teach him: The
secrets of the Lord are revealed to those that fear fear^ him; to those that
stand in awe of him, and dare do nothing against him: he reveals his
peculiar truths in a peculiar manner to men, those things that are effectual
to their salvation: bring therefore humble hearts, ready to obey.

Object.
But you will say; we do obey and practice what we do hear.

I answer, Answ.
that ye may be deceived as they in the fifth of Deuteronomy. they said they would
obey, but God saw that there was another heart in them than what they said:
therefore God said; O that there were such an heart in them, that they would
fear me, and keep my commandments always, that it might go well with them
and their children for ever. So Iohanan and the other Captains, Ier. 42.20.
desires Ieremia, to go to God, to know his will, and they would do whatsoever
he should say, whether it were good or evil. But Jeremiah tells them that they
did but dissemble in their hearts; he knew they would not do it. Look to this
in the acts and the effects: what have you done when the Word crosses you in
your aims, estates, names, friends? if you have disobeyed it, then Eze. 14.4.
the word is made a stumbling block, and your iniquities before your face, and
the Lord will answer you according to the multitude of your Idols. God will
answer such men according to their coming, as they come with false hearts,
they shall be dealt withal accordingly. Come then with hearts resolved to
practice whatsoever is spoken, and desire God to make it effectual to savation.

The fourth means to hear the Word, and Ioh. 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my
words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto
you: When ye attend to the Word, if ye are affected with it but for the time,
it is nothing; except it continue with you it will not profit you; you must do
as Mary did; she laid up all the sayings that she heard of Christ, and
pondered them in her heart, Luke 2.51. The Disciples often questioned of
Christ, which proves, that they pondered his words in their hearts: So the
nobles of Berea, they searched the Scripture: so Jacob he noted the saying of
Joseph and laid it up: ye do not hear thus if you do but lend your ears
for the time, if ye work it not upon your affections, ye profit not. The
reason why there is so much preaching, and so little profit, is for want of
this. There are two kinds of ill hearers: the first are such as hear as Swine,
and trample all they hear under feet; the second, such as hear as Dogs,
snarling at the doctrine: if ye offend in either of these, ye hear amiss.
Of all the four grounds that was worst which received not the Word. When men
hear the Word there is more than a natural forgetfulness in them, the Devil
helps it. Iam. 1.23.29. He that hears the Word, and recals it not, or
practices it not, is like one that beholds his face in a glass, for he
beholds himself and goes away, and straight way forgets what manner of
man he was: ye must recall it before ye can practice it, else ye will be
like to those that behold their face in a glass, and wipe not away their spots.

Be not therefore forgetful hearers: and for this, first recall and repeat
what ye have heard when ye are gone: Secondly, practice it afterward; there
is a blessing promised to mindful hearers, there is a curse denounced against
those that are forgetful. Ioh. 13.15. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if you do them: but there is a curse for you if you do not profit; God will
make you to hear and will not give you his Spirit. Regard to prize the word if
ye will not be forgetful. Romans 1.28. those that did not like to retain God
in their knowledge, those that did hear the Word and not regard it, God gave
them up to a reprobate sense, to an Injudiciousnesse, to do those things that
were not convenient, not being able to profit by it. The ancient Fathers much
professed the repetition of Sermons, and one of them used this similitude: A
man that comes into a pleasant garden, he will not content himself with the
present sent only, but he will carry some of the flowers home with him; So in
a cold day, a man will not be content to heat himself at another man's fire,
but he will carry some fire home with him to keep him hot at home. So do ye
when ye come to hear the Word; carry home some flowers of it with you, carry
some fire home with you, to heat and warm your hearts. God regards not
flashes and moods, and such negligence in performing of holy duties as will not
warm their hearts. Men are like a Sive in the water: it is full whiles it is
in the water, but being taken out of it, it has nothing; it is not the hearing
of the Word of God, or the doing of it negligently that will profit, if ye
hear it only pro forma, and negligently: it does then no good, but it brings
Gods curse upon you. Gods curse is on many, they grow not in knowledge or grace
for want of diligence; wherefore in the 2 Pet. 3.17. the Apostle bids us beware
least being led away with the error of the wicked, we fall from our own
steadfastness: to prevent this, grow in grace, and for this purpose grow in
knowledge, for then ye grow in grace.

great sheapheard of the flock that must feed you. It is his Spirit that must
teach you. Therefore when as you come to hear, pray earnestly to God to speak
unto you by his Spirit. It is the Spirit that quickneth, Ioh. 6.63. the Word is
spiritual, and we are carnal; therefore we must pray for the Spirit to
help us for to hear: the Spirit is not bestowed without prayer. Acts
1.14.15. God promised to give his Spirit to his Apostles, yet they continued
long in prayers ere he gave it them. Luke 11.13. God gives not his Spirit but
to such as ask it, to such as continue praying, asking and knocking. David
prays to God, to open his eyes that he might see the wonders of his Law: Men
may hear the Word, yet God opens not their eyes without seeking to him. God
speaks unto you by his Ministers. Paul and Apollos are yours; we are the
Ministers of God for your sakes* for your service: if God open the door of
utterance, it is not for our sakes but yours, that you might seek the W^ord at
our mouths and believe. Acts 14.1. a (...) company of Jews and Gentiles
believed by h^^^ing the Word preached, and receiving of it. The world receives
not the Spirit, because they seek it not, John 14.17. We in preaching, can do
nothing; it is the Spirit that must do it. 2 Cor. 3.18. we can show you the
Image of God, but it is nothing to you if ye be not transformed into the same
image from glory to glory: and it is the Spirit that must thus transform you.
Conclude therefore with God in prayer, let not him deny you; one word from him
is more then a thousand from us. God fastening his Word upon your hearts it
changes you; without him we preach in vain.

The sixth means to hear profitably, is to else we sow but amongst thorns,
Ier. 4.4. we speak to men prepossessed: the seed falls on fallow ground; we
speak to men, whose hearts are full of lust, they have a noise of business
within them; and so they hear us not, because their hearts are fore possessed.
The arrows head being in the wound, it is in vain to lay plasters upon it:
therefore Iam. 1.24. when as we came to hear the Word, we are commanded, to
lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, and to receive with meekness, the
ingrafted word which is able to save our souls. Do in hearing the Word as men
do in grafting; cut off all superfluous branches; come with empty minds;
attend to the matters of grace. Men who have full stomachs God feeds not; He
feeds the hungry, others are sent empty away, they are always hearing but
never profiting. I should speak now to Ministers and people: to Ministers,
that they speak in the voice of Christ, that, they speak as he did; not in
wisdom of words, but in the evidence of the Spirit; To the people; that they
must hear them by whom Christ speaks: those who have livings to bestow, ought
to bestow them on such as speak the words of Christ; they that want his voice
ought to procure such. Now if ye will not be at cost for a good Minister, it is
a sign you love your profit above Christ. Those that dwell where Christ's voice
is not, let them remove for they sit in darkness and in the shadow of death,
Esaias 9.2. If your dwelling be pleasant, if you have bitter waters or no waters
at all, you will remove: Have not your dwellings then where the water of life
is not. If the voice of Christ be the only means to beget life, let men come
to it. It is a great fault, men come not to this voice: he tha^ came not to
the Sacrament, must be cut off: What shall be done to him that comes not to the
Word? Want of the Word preached is a great misery; therefore David complains
much of his case, when he was not able to come to the Word. O that I am
constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my habitation amongst the tents of
Keder. The daily sacrifice being taken away, it was the greatest desolation
that could be; and can men live there with comfort where the Word is wanting?
Is it a duty to come to hear the Word, or it is Arbitrary, to come or not to
come? if it be arbitrary, then ye perform but a will worship, when ye hear
it; if a duty, then ye must hear it constantly, and enquire where it is to be
had.

But you have excuses. Ob.


To this I answer, A^s.
see how ye can excuse your selves to God: How angry was Christ with those
that came not to the marriage? that is principally meant of coming to hear
the Gospel. It is a despysing of God and his ordinances not to come; it is a
contempt which brings sorth a curse, which brings a judgment that is like the
sin. Those that despise you, despise me, says Christ; the word is the power
of God to salvation: there is no salvation without faith, and there is no faith
but by hearing. Faith comes by hearing: He that hears not you, hears not me,
says Christ. Therefore if you hear not this voice of the Son of God, take
heed lest he hear not you at last.

FINIS.

