THE Attourneys Academy: OR, THE MANNER AND Form of proceeding practically,
upon any Suite, Plaint or Action whatsoever, in any Court of Record whatsoever,
within this KINGDOM: ESPECIALLY, IN THE GREAT COURTS AT Westminster, to whose
motion all other Court of Law or Equity; as well those of the two Provincial
Counsels, Those of Guild Hall London; as Those of like Cities and Towns
Corporate, And all other of Record are diurnally moved. With the Modern and
most usual Fees of the Officers and Ministers of such Courts. Published by his
MAJESTY'S special privilege, AND Intended for the public benefit of all His
Subjects.

Summum hominis bonum, bonus ex hac vita exitus. THO: POVVELL
Londino-Cambriensis.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Fisher: and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paternoster Row, at the Sign of the Talbot. 1623.

(...) Which, if he do deny, my comfort is,
my Shipwreck shall have noble Witnesses,
I sink not in a Ditch, nor by the Shore,
But dye and lie at Neptunes Palace door.
It Is thou alone that bear the Triple Mace,
can, in the very speed of all their chase,
Restrain their pursuit; do but keep in awe
their nimble, neat Nereides of the Law;
Charge Aeolus (as he does honor thee)
he do not dis-imbulke his cheeks at me.
I have done nothing to offend thy Train,
rauish't Amemone (as the Poets feign)
Nor sought to rob the Sea-gods bed of Coral,
I mean Laws mysteries: (For that is the Moral.)
If this be so, vouchsafe me thy Protection,
that I may bring this Work unto perfection.
Then will I sing thy Fortune and thy Fame,
and prove, that Williams from the Trojans came*
Show, where his Ancestors long since did build
a Seat, which hitherto their Name have filld.
Now may that Name and Honor never expire,
but in a melting Firmament of Fire.
Lutum Inmanu Fictoris: THOMAS POVVELL.

TO TRVE NOBILITY AND TRYDE LEARNING, BEHOLDEN To no Mountain for Eminence,
nor Supportment for his Height, FRANCIS, Lord Verulam, and Viscount St. Albanes.
O Give me leave to pull the Curtain by,
That clouds thy Worth in such obscurity,
Good Seneca, stay but a while thy bleeding,
T'accept what I received at thy reading:
Here I present it in a solemn strain,
And thus I plucked the Curtain back again.
The same THOMAS POVVELL.

T. N. In Commendation of this Work:
It Is good, It Is common good, what would you more?
It will be more good, when there is more store.
-- Pueri, Sacer locus est, extra meite. TO THE READER.
Sta, Lege, Plora,
Prome (precor) ora.
FRIENDLY Reader, Thy Religion and Zeal to common good, may somewhat stead,
but not secure me: For, if thou be but a temperate man in this age, wherein
the Planets themselves are so extremely distempered, the Air is sick of their
disease, and the lower bodies do all complain, and are shaken with the same
fever; Thy calm and pliable constitution:

Unless thou be superlatiue and superstitious in the faith and profession of
Public Weal, thou shall be too too innerued to meet the privy malice of
those who are only studious of private profit; Or to make up me and my good
meaning to the general advantage.

Thou may easily conceive, that my a^me is not leuelled at any Lucratiue
Land-marke, seeing no endeavor can afford a more merciless and immercenarie
return th^n this: To which, the pity of my poor Countrymen did impresse and
send me forth in the first rank, to be exposed unto the most danger: Which,
with all other difficulties in the Attempt, I have received with the one hand,
and cast away with the other: I have ^uer held it more honor and happiness to
hu^le my self headlong into the flaming Temple, then to ensafe me in the
midst of the mutinous Schimeonites.

1. Indeed, I must confess, That myself was the most unworthy and unable of
many to undergo this Task: 2. That I have waded thus far, without calling of
those of the Mystery to my guidance: 3. It may be, that I have stepped besides
the common Causway, and trespassed pedibus ambulando upon some men's Enclosure:
4. Perhaps I have sometimes erred, and mis set the Needle of my Compass: 5.
And admit I have not traveled so far as the Seas offered Passage and Pass
port unto me.
1 All this is easily answered: For you must understand, That the necessity of
the Voyage did imbarke me, when in all this age past before us, no one (how
able s^euer) would undergo the discovery: None would, or will prefer the
Prayer of posterity, before the purch^se of the present. 2. I knew not whom to
trust or call to Guide, lest I should betray the whole Voyage. 3. Beyond the
Pole of Property, I care not in what Stream my Keele leaves her dinted
impression. 4. Beyond the Line, the old Compass is to be laid by, and the new
one is to be used. 5. I have traveled as far as the Victual and Tackle,
which I was able to provide with my ready flock, would bear me. And it shall
be held amongst all well-affected English Seafarers, worthy the hazard, charge,
and time bestowed upon it, In regard that I have in this leading discovery set
forth where the way lies for farther Navigations, to drive a Trade even to the
utmost confines of those parts, and to make perfect and perpetual commerce
between us and them.
The like are my endeauours for the s^tling and establishing of a certain
course of compliance between the Officers and Ministers of our Laws and their
Clients, which would distinguish and set apart the unlearned and unconscionable
crew, from those whose endowments of acquision, and indeerements of conscience,
and innated composition speaks them far more worthy.

For my faults of deficience, I am not ashamed to inuit the supply of those
who have the advantage of breeding in their particular Offices on their sides,
if* they will afford it.

For my faults of Insufficiency, I do not blush at them: Barnardus non videt
omnia: He that knows most in the practice of the Laws, knows most how
impossible it is with the single quality of any one man living, to reduce the
infinite differing parcels of this Account, into a perfect and certain Sum
at the first collation or calculation thereof.

For my Printers faults of all kinds, I give him kindly to your mercy.

Would you have me now to leave all undone, because some part cannot be done
to perfection at the first?

Will you blame me for those few imperfect quidlibets, without whose company
and fellowship, so many useful quodlibets with which the ensuing Tractate is
forced, had never been able to hold out so teadious a Journey.

Surely, whatsoever you be that shall do it, I must tell you, that the
Million Multitude will repute and report you for a second Alexander, not the
Conqueror, but the Copper-Smith; not famous for triumph, but for Trade, Not
Alexander who in his greatness would be worshipped as a God himself; but
Alexander who in his leather Apron would have the very Puppits which his hand
rough-hued, draw an adoration and reverence amongst the people.

Good Alexander, do not fear thy trading,
Peruse me not, though thou deny thine ayding*
I ask but aid of Patience and of Time,
To frame and finish this poor work of mine:
To make, to mend, to perfect and to polish,
What Allexanders wisdom thinks so folish.
To the rest, I rest As jealous of your loves, as zealous of your liking, THO.
POVVELL.

THE ATTOVRNEYS ACADEMY.
The manner of proceeding in the CHANCERIE.
THE CHANCERIE.
NOtwithstanding the practice here before this time has bin, That no Sub
poena should be sued forth of the Court of Chancerie, without a Bill of
Complaint first exhibited. Yet laterly, for the ease of all Suitors and
Subjects, it has been thought good, that every man may have a Sub poena out
of the same Court, without any Bill first exhibited.

This Sub poena is the leading process of this Court, by which the party
Defendant against whom the Complaint is intended, is summoned and required to
appear, and make answer to the Complainant, under a certain pain, and at a
certain day to come.

The days of Return here, are the usual Returns, as in the ordinary
Almanac, Or else a Sub poena may be returnable at a certain day, after any
the said usual Returns, or the great Feast days, from whence the Returns
take their denomination, So that you must add ( Prox.) in place where cause
shall require.

As if the Feast Day be to come: Then it must be, Prox. Futur. in vnum mensem*

But if the Feast day be past, then it must be a die Paschae in vnum mensem
prox. futur.

And the like to other Returns, before or after other Feast days.

The Sub poena being by the Complaynant or some other by him appointed, served,
and returnable in manner (as aforesaid:) The Complainant has lliberty to put
in his Bill, until the day following the fourth day after every the said
Return (if the Sub poena be returnable upon the certain Return day.)

And you must account the Return day, and the fourth day after it, for two of
the said four days.

And if the Bill be not fyled on the next day after the said fourth day: The
Defendants Attorney (having the Sub poena or Labell thereof, wherewith the
Defendant was served, Or an Oath that the Sub poena was served) he may get
fitting Costs in every such case.

When the Defendant has so got Costs, he may have a Sub poena whereby to
command the Complaynant, presently upon the sight thereof, to pay the
defendant or the bringer thereof, the said costs; (as aforesaid.) And if the
complaynant do refuse to pay the said costs, accordingly: Then the Defendant
may, upon affidauit made, that the Sub paena for costs was served, have an
Attachment directed to the Sheriff of the county, to attach the Complaynant
therefore.

And upon return made by the Sheriff, that the Complaynant cannot be found,
an Attachment with Proclamation may be sued forth against the complaynant.

And that Proclamation being likewise returned by the Sheriff (as aforesaid.

Then a Commission of Rebellion may be sued forth against the complaynant.

But on the contrary side, if the Complainant do put in his Bill, And the
Defendant appears not, the next day after the costs day.

Then the Complainant (upon Oath made that the Defendant was served with a Sub
paena) may have an Attachment, and farther Process upon like Returns, (as in
case aforesaid.)

Where note, that the party which makes Oath that he served the Sub poena: Or
that the Sub poena was served, must swear as follows.

That he delivered the Sub poena to the Defendant.

Or he showed the Sub poena to the Defendant, and delivered to him a note of
the day of his appearance.

Or he left the Sub poena at the Defendants dwelling house, where the
Defendant most abides.

Or he showed the Sub poena at the Defendants dwelling house to his Wife, or
some of his servants, and there left the Labell of the Sub poena, or a note of
the day of his appearance.

Or he must swear that he heard the Defendant confess that he was served
with Sub poena.

And if the Defendant do appear within the time limited.

Then the Complainants Attorney may give unto the Defendants Attorney, on the
said day after the Costs day, a Rule, that the Defendant do make answer to the
Complaynants Bill, by the same day seven night then next to come. This Rule and
day given, must be entered into the Register.

And if the Defendant do not answer by the prefixed day so entered.

Or if he do not otherwise satisfy the Court by sufficient cause and
occasion of the delay:

Then the Complainants Attorney may take forth an Attachment against the
Defendant.

The Causes whereby the Defendant may satisfy the Court of his said delay in
answer, are these for the most part. (viz.)
HE cannot make direct answer, without sight of his Evidences or VVritings
which are in the Country:

Or he cannot answer without conference had, first with some person named in
the said Bill*

Or with some person whom the matter touches:

Or that the Defendant is not able to travel.

Of every which reasons aforesaid, Oath must be made.

ANd upon Oath so made:

Or by an especial motion made for this purpose:

The Defendants Attorney may procure a Dedimus potestatem, directed to
certain commissioners in the country, to take the defendants answer there.

And the cause whereupon this Dedimus potestatem is granted, must be entered
into the Register.

So likewise in case where the defendant does not answer within the limited
time, and an Attachment is therefore awarded against him: The Clerk which
makes the same Attachment, must enter it into the Register; showing the cause
wherefore it was granted.

But if no day be given to the defendant to answer: Then the defendant has
liberty to answer at any time during the Term.

And if he do it not within that time: Then an Attachment may be sued forth
against him of course. And the same, with the cause thereof, must be entered
into the Register: ( viz.) That the defendant appeared, and departed without
answer.

If the Sub paena be returnable so near unto the end of the Term, that there
cannot be a day given to the defendant to answer, he must at his peril
answer by the same day seuen-night following the day of his appearance,
although it be in the Vocation. For the Chancerie is always open.

If the Sub paena be Returnable on the last Return day of the Term it self:
Then the defendant is at Liberty to appear the first return of the Term
Following:

But if it be a day certain, although the same be the last day but one of the
Term, yet the Defendant must appear, and answer by that day seuen-night,
next Following the said Appearance.

If the Sub paena be returnable immediately, though it be served on the last
day of the Term, so it be served before the rising of the Court; The
Defendant must also appear and answer, by the same day seuen-night.

And if the defendant make Oath, that he cannot answer without Writings, etc.
or conference with some other person: Or if he have a dedimus protestatem, and
Commssion to make his Answer: He must, at his peril, procure his Answer to
be put in, before the day after the first Costs day of the next Term
Following; unless it be Trinity Term: And then, and in such case, it must be
put in the second day: or else the complainants Attorney may, upon such
default, make an Attachment against the defendant, and enter the same into the
Register, for that he has not Answered by the day prefixed.

Or in other case, That he appeared, and departed without Answer: Or
otherwise, That he did not return the dedimus potestatem at the day prefixed,
etc. and as the case shall require.

And though the custom has bin heretofore, That by reason that the Defendant
may abuse this liberty given to him (as aforesaid) in delaying the Complaynant
by Demurrer in Law: No such Demurrer should be allowed; yet is now permitted,
That the Defendant may, by his Answer returned by Dedimus potestatem, Demurre
in Law: For that he, not appearing in person at the first, his Counsel in
his absence may not Demurre, though the Complainants Bill be insufficient:
Because every Demurrer must be delivered into the Court by the Defendant in
proper Person, and not by his Attorney, except in Cases where the defendant is
not able to appear in Person. In which Cases it is used; That the defendant
may deliver his Demurrer to the Commissioners: Who, though they be by the
express words of their Commission, to receive the defendants Answer upon his
Oath: yet, if the defendant deny to answer, they are to certify the same,
with the reasons by him alleged, wherefore he will not answer upon Oath;
leaving the same to the consideration of the Court: And they are to take and
return such Answer as the defendant shall deliver unto them.

But where the Defendant has before appeared, and taken copy of the
Complaynants Bill, and having had conference with his Counsel thereupon, is
by him resolved that he cannot make a direct Answer, by reason of some matter
in the said Bill laid to his charge, which he cannot clear without fight of
Evidences, VVritings, or Conference with some Person; There is no reason, that
after ^ime so given to the Defendant, from the day of his Appearance, until
the beginning of the next Term following he should be admitted to demurre to
the Complaynants Bill:

For if there had been any cause of Demurrer, He might have demurred at the
day given him to Answer; So that the Complaynant might have had time to have
had the opinion of the Court, whether the Demurrer were good, or not.

So, if the Defendant, after such time so taken, do demurre in Law; The
Complaynant shall have an Attachment of course, as though no answer at all had
been put in: The said Attachment is to be entered thus, ( viz.) For that the
defendant has not answered by the day to him given, therefore an Attachment,
etc.

Upon the return of this Attachment, he may have the like Process as aforesaid.

And in case where there be more Defendants, every defendant shall be punished
alike, for his own like offense;

Except in case where a Sub poena is granted against a man and his Wife: In
which case a man shall be under punishment for his VViues Offense.

For if a man be served with a Sub poena in London against him and his Wife,
(she being in the Country) yet if he do not satisfy the Court, by some of
the courses before mentioned, as well for his Wife, as for himself (he being
here in person (an Attachment shall be granted against him and his Wife, as
though he had never appeared, which Attachment shall be entered; For that A. B.
Wife unto C. D. has not answered according to a day to them prefixed:
Therefore an Attachment is awarded against C. D. and A. B. his wife.

If the Complaynant dye, his Heir or Executor, who has the interest of the
thing whereof he complayneth, may put in a Bill of Reuiuor against the
Defendant, his Heir or Executor, as the case shall require.

Also, It is to be remembered, that if the Complaynant Exhibit his Bill
against a Man and his Wife, for matter which wholly concerns the Wife:
Whereunto they make Answer, and after answer made, the man dies, The
Complaynant cannot proceed in that suite against the Woman, without a Bill of
Reuiuor, because the woman shall not be constrained to stand to that Answer,
which she together with her Husband, or solely (as Wife unto the Man) made to
the Complaynant, for that she was then under Couerture.

And after her husbands death (she being seized or possessed of the thing in
Controversy as in her former estate) may (if she please) make a new answer,
and shall never be bound or concluded by the Answer which she made in her
Husbands lifetime, or that she was then under Couerture. And yet (if she so
please) she may stand to that former answer of hers, and proceed in that
suite accordingly.

But if the Complainant exhibit a Bill against a feme sole, whereunto she
makes answer, and afterward marries, the Complainant may proceed against
her Husband and her, without any Bill of Reuiuor: And her husband shall be
bound by that answer which she made before marriage, because she shall not be
admitted to take advantage of her own act.

Where (on the contrary) if a feme sole exhibit her Bill of Complaint,
whereunto the Defendant answers, and afterward she takes an husband, her
husband and she shall not proceed against the Defendant, without a bill of
reuiuor; because her suite is abated by her own act, whereof the Defendant may
take advantage.

And if a Man and his Wife exhibit a bill of complaint, whereunto the
Defendant answers, and the man dies, the woman shall be at her choice
whether she will exhibit a new bill, or proceed upon the Former: And the
Defendant shall be bound to his Answer made to the Man and his Wife.

Also, if two seized of joint estate; or two Executors of one Testament; Or two
Obligors or Obligees Exhibit a Bill of complaint, whereunto the defendant
answers, and one of them dies;

The Suruiuor of them may proceed against the defendant, without any Bill of
Reuiuor.

And in all cases where a Bill of Reuiuor is requisite, after the said Bill
exhibited, and a Sub paena served on the Defendant to that purpose: The
Complainant shall be in the same case, as he for his Predecessors was, at the
time when the cause of reuiuor accrewed, unless the Defendant shall appear
upon the said sub paena, and by way of answer show good cause to the
contrary: which cause must be, That the Complaynant in the Bill of reuiuor, is
not Heir, or Executor, nor stands in the like case, nor has the like
interest, or the like cause of complaint, as before in the Former suite:

And no other cause is to be allowed.

If the Complaynant exhibit his Bill of complaint, for Title of any Lands, not
of the yearly value of Forty shillings: And the same be proved by Affidiuit,
or deposed, the defendant shall be dismissed.

Also, if the defendant demurre to any B^ll exhibited against him, or
disclayme: The Complainant cannot reply:

For if the defendant be called up by sub paena, ad Reiungendum, having before
made no other answer, but a Demurrer or a Disclaymer, he shall have costs for
unjust vexation.

But after the Defendant has answered, the complaynant has liberty all that
Term to Reply at pleasure.

And if he Reply not that Term: The Defendants attoturney may give to the
complaynants Attorney a seuen-nights day in the time of the next Term
following to Reply, which day being past, and no Replication brought in; On
the day then next after it, the Defendant may have costs, as in case of a Bill
to be recovered.

But if the complaynants Replication be put into the Court, the defendant can
have no costs allowed unto him.

But then the defendant may, if he will, Reioyne gratis to the Replication, and
enforce the complaynant to go to commission.

Or else he may have commission to examine Witnesses on his own part against
the complaynant, and shall have the carriage thereof.

This commission shall be directed to Four such persons as the defendant
shall name, Or to any three or two of them, without any warning to be given to
the complaynant.

But if in this case the complaynant will, he may ioyn in commission, and have
the carriage of it himself.

And then he must name two indifferent Commissioners: and the Defendant must
name the like: (which being agreed upon) The Complaynant must give to the
Defendant fourteen days warning, of the day and place, when, and where the
said commission shall be executed.

This warning must be given, either by himself in person, Or else left in
writing, at the house or place; where the Defendant does most reside.

The complaynant in all cases of commission to examine Witnesses, shall have
the first choice of commissioners, and carriage of the commission and for his
releife.

He shall examine Witnesses, in all these cases following: (viz)
FIrst upon a Bill by him preferred to examine Witnesses in perpetual memory
of the matter, to command the defendant either by himself, or by his
Attorney to appear immediately: And within Fourteen days to show cause why
the Complaynant should not examine Witnesses (in perpetual memory.)

And if the defendant do thereuppon appear by himself, or his Attorney, and
show good cause to the contrary, such as the court shall allow, then the
complaynant shall not examine any Witnesses in perpetuam rei memoriam, or
perpetual memory.

But if he do show no sufficient cause, nor join in commission with the
complaynant, then the complaynants Attorney must prefer six commissioners
names to the Lord Keeper, or the court, etc. Four of the which, or Four such
other, as the Lord Keeper or the court shall appoint, shall be set down for
commissioners, and a commission for the complaynant shall be made forth, and
directed to the said Four commissioners, or any three, or two of them, to
examine Witnesses, according to certain Articles heretofore set down in
Chancerie, which witnesses are never to be published, during their lives,
unless Oath be made.

That the complaynent has some trial wherein he should give them in Evidence.

That the Witnesses are not able to travel to the place where the trial
should be*

Or the party Defendant will consent thereunto.

Neither can they be given in Evidence against any other, but against the party
which was called, to show cause why the said Witnesses should not be examined,
or some other, clayming under him by some interest which accrewed unto them,
after the Bill preferred by the complainant for the examination of Witnesses.

It is also used, that either party, after the Bill is exhibited, and Answer
made thereunto, may examine Witnesses in court here before one of the Examiners.

But the complaynant can have no commission to examine his Witnesses, unless,
and before the Defendant be served with a Sub poena ad Reiungendum: Which Sub
Poena must be served in such manner as is before mentioned.

And then upon Afidauit made of the serving thereof, the complaynant (if the
Defendant appear not that Term) shall have a commission directed to four
such commissioners as himself shall name, or to any three or two of them, for
the examination of witnesses on his part, against the defendant, without any
warning to be given to the defendant.

Upon the return of the said Sub paena ad reiungendum, the complaynant may
give to the defendant a new Reioyne, (viz.) the same day seuennight.

By which time, if the defendant do not reioyne he shall lose the benefit
thereof.

And when that day so given to reioyne, is past, the complaynant may give two
ordinary days, ( viz.) two Returns, for the defendant to produce his
witnesses, and then a Peremptory day.

Before which day past, if the defendant do come in, he may have a Commission
to examine witnesses of course, without any motion; but he shall lose the
benefit of Reioynder: And the Complaynant, if he please to join in the
Commission, shall have the carriage of it, giving to the Defendant fourteen
days warning, of the day and place, when and where the said Commission shall
be executed.

In the joining of this Commission, The Complainant must first name one
Commissioner, unto whom the Defendant may give general exception:

The Defendant must name the second;

The Complaynant the third,

And the Defendant the fourth.

The Common exceptions which be given to Commissioners, are these, (viz.)
THat the Commissioner named, is of Kindred or Allied to the party, for whom he
is named:

That he is a Master to the party:

That he is a Landlord unto him:

Or a Partner unto him:

Or have suite in Law with the adverse party to him, by and for whom he is
named:

Or is of Counsel, an Attorney, or a Follower of the cause of the one party:

Or one to whom the party is indebted:

Or any other apparent cause of partiality, or siding with either party.

And it is commonly used, that either party may give exception to one, and they
seldom give exception to any more then one, on either party.

If the Complainant make default, and procure not the Commission to be
executed: Then the Defendants Attorney may renew the said Commission to the
former Commissioners; and the Defendant shall have the carriage thereof (Giving
to the complainant fourteen days warning, of the day and place, when, and
where it shall be executed.)

And yet nevertheless, the complaynants Attorney may, if the complainant
will, renew the said commission also, and give the like warning also unto the
Defendant.

Upon the execution of either of which Commissions, and return whereof; either
of them may give to the other a day, to show cause why Publication should not
be granted.

The day so given, is one week; which being expired, and no cause showed to
the contrary; Then publication is granted; and neither party can examine any
Witnesses afterward, unless it be by especial order of the Court; which is
never granted, without an Oath made, that the party which requires the same,
nor any of them, has seen, or bin made privy to any examination of any the
VVitnesses formerly examined in this Court by either of the parties: And some
good cause be shown, either by Oath, or certificate of commissioners, why the
party could not get his said VVitnesses examined within the time limited for
their examination.

In which case, sometimes, the Court gives order to examine VVitnesses by a
time prefixed, at the parties peril, with this Prouiso, That the party shall
not in the mean time see the said former examination.

And sometimes the Court gives order, that the said party shall examine his
VVitnesses, to inform the conscience of the Judge only, and not otherwise.

These Depositions are never published, but by especial order or consent of the
parties; but delivered to the Judge, sealed up by the Officer, under whose
custody they do remain, to the end he may peruse them.

If any one be called by a Sub poena, to appear in this Court: And upon his
appearance, the complainant or any other does arrest him in any other Court; He
shall have a Super-sedeas to discharge the Action, because he must have free
going and free coming.

But it is not so, if the complaynant be arrested, except it be after issue is
joined, and a day is given for the matter to be heard. And the Complaynant
coming to the Court, with evidence to maintain his cause, is arrested: The
Court in this case shall defend him, and set him free to follow his suite.

But this is seldom seen: And he that is Plaintiff in the other Court, may
declare against him here Praesentem in curia, if he please. See 37. Eliz.

If any one who has Privilege in Chancerie, be arrested into another Court,
in a ioynt-action with his Wife, for matter concerning her: Notwithstanding
the Couerture, she shall not have any benefit of privilege here. See Powles
case.

If one who is privileged in another Court, as in the Kings Bench, Common
pleas, or Exchequer, do arrest one of this Court, who is here priuiledgd as a
Clerk, or otherwise: The Privilege here (how soever it is in other cases
sufficient to supersede the proceeding elsewhere) yet in this case I have
never seen it to prevail against the other privilege.

For amongst like privileged men, most speed carries it away.

The Order made and ordained by Sir NICHOLAS BACON, Knight, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, touching the Examination of witnesses in perpetuam rei memoriam:)
Dated the tenth of December, in the third year of the late Qu. Eliz. follows.
FIrst the Commissioners shall examine no Witnesses, but such as be aged and
impotent.

Item, the complaynant, or party, who sueth forth the commission, shall give
warning by precept from the commissioners, unto the party that should take
prejudice by this examination, by the space of fourteen days at the least, of
the time, and place; when, and where the said commissioners will sit upon this
commission.

And the same warning being so given: The commissioners are to be satisfied
by the Oath of the party complaynant, or of some other credible person, that
warning is given accordingly, before they shall proceed to the execution of
their Commission.

Item, If the party Aduersant, or defendant, can show before the Commissiouers
good cause of exception, either against the Witnesses produced by the
complaynant, or any of them, Or against the commissioners themselves; Or
otherwise, then they shall cease and forbear any farther execution of the
commission.

And the commissioners shall certify and return the said causes, and
execptions, up with the commission.

Item, If the party aduersant cannot show sufficicient cause (as aforesaid)
then the commissioners shall proceed to the examination of Witnesses; and the
party Aduersant, or Defendants shall have liberty to join in the examination of
the same Witnesses, or of any other likewise upon Interrogatories on his
behalf (if he think good.)

Item, The commissioners shall certify in their return of the commission,
such acceptations as the defendant shall take against the proceeding in the
same commission, and whether the defendant did appear or no?

And if the Defendant did not appear, they are likewise to certify and
return, whether Affidauit were made of the giving of warning by precept (as
aforesand) or no?

Orders to be observed before the granting of Publication of the said
Commission.
THe party who prays publication, shall first by himself, or some other,
make Oath that the depositious of the same witnesses, are necessarily to be
given in evidence on his behalf.

Item, Oath also must be made, that the same Witnesses be either dead, or so
aged, or impotent as they cannot travel to testify ( viua voce) without
danger of life.

Item, This Oath being so taken, a Master of the Chancerie must first open the
Commission, and consider whether this Order before mention^d has bin observed
in all points, wherein he being satisfied, publication is thereupon to be
granted.

Provided always, that no Depositions shall be given in evidence, but against
those persons that were warned by precept (as aforesaid) or against their
Heirs or Assigns.

And provided also, That after examination had, and taken (as aforesaid) And
after Publication had, and granted of the same examinations: The party
Aduersant, or Defendant, shall not be admitted to have any new examination on
his behalf, concerning the same matter.

Item, This Order is to be observed in case where the commission is ex part
quaerentis only, and it is to be engrossed in Parchment, and subscribed with
the hand of the Register, and to be annexed to every of the said commissions,
but not otherwise.

For if the Defendant join, then these Articles shall not need.

The difference used between a Ioynt-Commission in the aforesaid nature; And a
Commission exparte, follows.
THE Ioynt-Commission is made in form, as all other general commissions to
examine Witnesses, Super Interrogator. ministrand. be, Adding to the end of
the same, these words (viz.) in perpetuam rei memoriam permansur.

The commission ex part, is to have these rules inserted under the Registers
hand, and the commissioners names are specially to be assigned by the Lord
Keeper, or Lord Chancellor for the time being.

Termino Michaelis, Anno Regni Eliz. Reg. Sext.
MEmorandum, That all Injunctions granted for preservation of possession,
during the suite in the Court of Chancery* shall have this clause and condition
contained in them ( viz.) That the party who prays possession, was in
possession at the time of the Bill exhibited, and certain years before; And
that his intrest is not determined by forfeture, surrender, or other lawful
means.

And Bond must be put in by the party who prays the possession, of the
penalty of ten pound, with condition that this Information aforesaid is true.

Item, that all Injunctions granted for the stay of Suites at the common Law,
shall have this clause and conditon contained in them: ( viz.) That the same
Suite desired to be stayed, is for and concerning the same matter depending in
this Court, and as we begun at the common Law, after the Bill exhibited into
this Court; and that Bond be put in (as aforesaid.)

Item, That no speeiall Certiorare do pass without Bond first given, on the
behalf of the party who desires the same* with condition, That the Bill
exhibited contains matter sufficient to bear a Certiorare, And that he
shall prove the contents of his Bill to be true, within fifeteene days after
the return of the Writ, according to the Order and course of this Court.

And that upon the granting of every Procedendo, the Bond aforesaid be
remembered to the Lord Keeper.

Termino Trinitatis, Anno Regni Eliz. Reg. Septimo.
IT is ordered, that all Suites for no more then six acres of Land, or less,
except the same be worth forty shillings by the year.

And all Suites for matter under the value of ten pounds, shall be dismissed
this Court, for such cause only proved. And this Court shall not retain any
such: But the party who brings the same hither, shall pay costs to the
defendant, as this court shall award.

Termino Michaelis, Anno Regno Eliz. Reg* Septimo.
IT is Ordered, that all Process to hear Judgment, be returnable six or
seven days before the day of Hearing, and not above, saving in the beginning
of the Term, when the time will not permit so long warning.

And the said Writs must be endorsed on the backside, with the very day
appointed for the hearing of Judgment. And so much for that Term.

By the general custom, and ancient usage of this Court, all Bills shall be
retayneable here, in case where the Equity of the cause requires and bears
it, And wherein the Common Law does afford no releife, but rather pressure and
rigiour.

After Publication once had, the Complainant may procure a day of Hearing of
course, by such an one of the six Clerks as deals for him. And he may at the
end of the Term, when the Lord Keeper sets down the days of Hearings,
procure his hearing to be set down amongst those assigned for the next
succeding Term.

This was wont to be the ancient course of procuring of Hearings, howsoever it
was lately dis-vsed, And (as I take it) the same is now restored again, to the
good contentment of all Suitors in this Court.

The Order of Proceeding against such as refuse to obey his Majesty's
Injunctions, proceeding and issuing out of the Court of Chancerie.
FOr the breach of an Iniunction, there be commonly three punishments, ( viz,)

One, that the Contemptor shall not be in all the principal cause, till he
have fulfilled the Iniunction in every point.

Another, that he shall not be committed to Ward in the mean time, And there
continue, till he do conform himself, and become obedient to the Iniunction.

The third, that he shall fine to the King for his Contempt, as the Lord
Keeper, or Lord Chancellor for the time being, shall please to award. And the
Lord Keeper, or Lord Chancellor may depense herein, as they shall find cause
and reason.

Item, If the Contemptor do not appear upon sight of the Iniunction, or not
obey the same; but does commit some Act in contempt or neglect thereof, Then
upon an Affidauit made of the serving of the said Iniunction, There shall be
awarded an Attachment against the said Contemptor, etc. as in the case of
Process before mentioned and declared.

Item, If the Contemptor do appear, and has not fulfilled and performed the
Iniunction; and yet, at his coming does offer to fulfill it, alleging that
he cannot do it here conveniently: Then the Lord Keeper, or Lord Chancellor
uses to appoint him a certain day, within which he must do it: And so,
upon Bond taken of him, with Sureties, who are to undertake, (in case his own
security be not held sufficient) that he shall perform the Iniunction within
the time given, or at the day to render his body to prison, there to remain,
till he has fulfilled the same, He may be licensed to depart.

What I have hitherto set down, is desumed and collected out of the ancient
Form of practice and Orders of this Court of Chancery: I shall now deliver,
the orders and practice of latter times, most of which are agreeable with the
former: some are de nour ordained; and all are subject to addition or
alteration, as the Court shall think fitting, and done Salua Prerogatiua
Curiae.

The Modern Orders and Ordinances of Chancery follow.
Affedauits.
NO Affedauit shall be admitted or taken, which shall tend to the proof or
disproofe of the Title or matter in question, or touching the merits of the
cause:

Neither shall any such matter be colourably inserted, in any Affedauit to be
made touching the Serving of Process.

No Affedauit shall be taken against Affedauit, so far as the Master of
Chancerie can discern, or take knowledge, etc.

If any such be taken, The latter shall not be used or read in Court.

Contempts.
IN case of Contempts, granted upon force, or ill words, used upon serving of
Process, Or other words of Scandal, proved by Affedauit, the party is forthwith
to stand committed:

But for other Contempts, against the Orders or Decrees of the Court:

First, an Attachment goes forth upon Affedauit made.

Then the party is to be examined upon Interrogatories, and

His examination is to be referred:

And if upon examination, he confess matter of Contempt, he is to be
committed:

If he confess it not, The Adverse party may examine VVitnesses, to prove the
Contempt;

And if the Contempt appear upon proof, the contemptor is to be committed
therefore.

But if the Adverse party fail to prove the said Contempt, Or fail to put in
his Interrogatories or other prosecution, Then the party charged with the
Contempt, is to be discharged with good costs.

They that are in Contempt, especially so far as Proclamation of Rebellion,
are not to be heard neither in that suite, nor in any other, except the Court
of special grace, suspend the Contempt.

Imprisonment upon Contempts for matters past, may be discharged of grace,
after sufficient punishment: Or it may be otherwise dispensed withal in such
case:

But if the Imprisonment be for performance of any order of the Court in
force: Then the Contemplator ought not to be discharged, except he first obey:
Only, the Contempt may be suspended for a time.

Petitions.
NO Injunctions, Sequestration, Dismissions, Retainer upon Dismissions, or
Final Orders, shall be granted upon Petitions.

No former Order made in Court, is to be altered, crossed or explayned, upon
any Petition; But such Orders may be only stayed upon Petition, for a small
time, till the matter may be moved in Court.

No Commissions for examination of Witnesses shall be discharged; Nor any
examinations, or depositions of Witnesses, shall be suppressed upon Petition,
unless it be first referred, and Certificate be made thereupon.

No Demurrer shall be ouer-ruled upon any Petition.

Injunctions.
Injunctions for possession or for stay of Suites after verdict, are to be
presented to the Lord Keeper, or Lord Chancellor, being together with the
Orders whereupon they go forth; That his Lordship may take consideration of
the Orders, before he sign them.

No Iniunction of any nature, shall be granted, revived, dissolved, or stayed
upon private Petition.

No Iniunction to stay suites at the Common Law, shall be granted upon
Prioritie of Suite only.

Or upon the Surmise of the Complainants Bill only.

But upon matter confessed in the Answer of the Defendant.

Or matter of Record.

Or writing plainly appearing.

Or when the Defendant is in Contempt for not answering.

Or when the dept desired to be stayed, appears to be old, and has slept
long.

The creditor and the debtor have bin dead some good time, before the suite
brought.

Where the Defendant appears not, but sits an Attachment: Or when he does
appear and departs without Answer, and is under attachment for not answering:
Or where he takes Oath, that he cannot answer without sight of Evidences in
the Country* Or where after answer, he sues at Common Law by Attorney: Or
absents himself beyond Sea.

In all these cases, an Iniunction may be granted, for stay of suites at the
Common Law, until the party answer, or appear in person in Court, and the
Court give further order.

But nevertheless, upon answer put in, if there be no motion made the same
Term, or at the next general seal after the Term, to continue the
Iniunction, in regard, and upon suggestion of the insufficiency of the Answer
put in: Or in regard of the matter confessed in the Answer, then the
Iniunction shall dye, and dissolve, without any special order.

In the case aforesaid, where an Iniunction is to be granted, for stay of
Suites at the Common Law; If the like suites be in the Chancery, either by
Scire facias, or by Privilege, or English Bill, Then the suite is to be stayed
by order of the Court, as it is in other Courts by Iniunction.

Where an Iniunction has bin obtained for staying of Suites at the Common Law,
and no prosecution is had by the space of three Terms afterward: The
Iniunction is to fall of it self, without farther motion.

Where a Bill comes in after an Arrest at the Common Law for a Debt, No
Iniunction shall be granted, without bringing the principal money into the
Court, except there appear in the Defendants answer, or by sight of Writings,
plain matter, tending to discharge the Debt in Equity. But if an Iniunction
be awarded, and disobeyed in that case. Then no money shall be brought in, or
deposited, in regard of the contempt.

Injunctions for Possession are not to be granted before a Decree, but where
the Possession has continued by the space of three years past before the Bill
exhibited, and upon the same Title, and not upon any title by leave, or
determined.

In case where the Defendant sits all the process of contempt, and cannot be
found by the Sergeant at Arms, or resists the Sergeant, or makes rescues, a
Sequestration shall be granted of the Land in question, and if the Defendant do
not render himself within the year, then an Iniunction shall be granted for
the Possession.

Injunctions against felling of Timber, Or plowing up of ancient Pastures, or
for the maintaining of Enclosures, or the like, shall be granted according to
the circumstances of the case, but not in case, where the Defendant upon his
answer, claymeth a state of Inheritance, except it be where he claims the
Land in trust, or upon some other special ground.

Injunctions shall be inroled, or the Transcripts thereof be fyled.

Order.
Where any Order shall be made against the general Rules of the Court: There
the Register shall plainly and expressly set down the particular reasons and
grounds, moving the Court to vary from the general rule.

No Order of the public court is alterable upon Petition: vide in the Title
Petition.

Register: Order.
The Registers are to be sworn.

If any Order shall be made, and the court not informed of the last martial
Order formerly made; No benefit shall be taken by such Order, as being granted
by abuse, and surreption: And to that end the Register ought duly to mention
the last former Order in the present Order.

No Order shall be explayned upon any Petition, but only in Court as they are
made, and the Register is to set down the Orders, as they are pronounced by
the court, truly, at his peril, without troubling the Lord Keeper, or Lord
Chancellor; by any private attending of him, to explain his meaning, And if
any explanation be desired, It is to be done by public motion, where the
other party may be heard.

No draught of any order shall be delivered by the Register to either party,
without keeping of a copy by him: to the end that if the Order be not entered;
Nevertheless, the Court may be informed what was formerly done, and not be put
to a new trouble, and to the end also, that knowledge of Orders be not kept
back too long from either party, but may presently appear at the Office.

Where a cause has been debated upon hearing of both parties; And opinion
has been delivered by the Court; and nevertheless, the cause referred to
Treaty: The Registers are not to omit the opinion of the Court in drawing of
the Order of Reference, except the Court do specially declare, That it is to
be entered without any opinion either way.

In which case, nevertheless, the Registers are out of their short Notes, to
draw up some more full remembrance of that which passed in Court, to inform
the Court if the cause come back, and cannot be agreed.

The Registers upon delivery of the draught of any Order, unto the counsel
of cyther party, are not to respect the interlineations, or alterations of the
said counsel (be the said counsel never so great) further then as to put them
in remembrance of that which was truly delivered in Court; and so to conceive
the Order upon their Oath and duty, without any other or farther respect.

The Registers are to be careful in the penni^ and drawing up of Decrees; And
especially in matters of difficulty and weight: And therefore when they present
the same to the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, They ought to give him
understanding which are such Decrees of weight, that they may be read and
reuiewed, before his Lordship sign them.

Decrees.
THe Decrees granted at the Roles, are to be presented before the Lord Keeper,
or Lord Chancellor for the time being, with the Order whereupon they are
drawn, within two or three days after every Term.

NO Drecree shall be reuersed, altered, or explained, being once under the
Great seal but upon Bill of Reuiewe, and no bill of Reuiewe shall be admitted,
except it be upon error in Law, appearing in the body of the Decree, without
farther examination of matters in Fact, or he shall show some new matter which
has risen in time after the Decree, and not any new proof which might have
bin used when the Decree was made.

Nevertheless, upon new proof which is come to light since, and after the
Decree made, and could not possibly have bin used at the time when the Decree
passed, a Bill of Reuiew may be granted by the special Licenee of the Court,
and not otherwise.

In case of mis-casting, being a matter Demonstratiue, a Decree may be
explained, and reconciled by an order without Bill of Reuiewe.

Where note, that by the word Mis-casting, is not intended any pretended
Mis-casting, or misvaluing, but only error in the Auditing, or numbering.

No Bill of Reuiewe shall be admitted, or any other new Bill to change matter
decreed, except the Decree be first obtained, and performed: And if it be for
Land, that the possession be yielded: If it be for money, that the money be
paid, If it be for evidence, that the evidence be brought in; and so in other
cases which stand upon the strength of the Decree alone.

But if any act be desired to be done, which extinguisheth the parties right
at the Common Law (as making of Assurance or Release: Acknowledging of
satisfaction, Cancelling of Records or Evidence, and the like) Those parts of
the Decree are to be spared, until the Bill of Reuiewe be determined: But
such sparing is to be warranted by public Order made in Court.

No Decree shall be made upon pretense of equity, against the express
provision of an Act of Parliament.

Nevertheless, if the construction of such act of Parliament, has for a time
gone one way in general opinion and reputation; and after by a latter judgment
has been controled: Then Releife may be given upon matter of equity, for
cases arising before the said Judgment: because the subject was in no default.

Imprisonment for breach of a Decree is in nature of an Execution, and
therefore the custody ought to be straight, and the party not to have any
liberty to go abroad, but by special license of the Lord Keeper, or Lord
Chancellor being: But no close imprisonment is to be but by express order
for wilful and extraordinary Contempts and disobedience (as has been used.)

In case of obstinate disobedience, in the breach of a Decree, an Iniunction is
to be granted Sub poena of a sum: and upon Affedauit, or other sufficient
proof of persisting in contempt, Fines are to be pronounced by the Lord
Keeper, or Lord Chancellor in open court, and the same are to be estrated
down into the Hannaper by special order.

In case of a Decree made for the possession of Land, a Writ of Execution goes
forth, and if that be disobeyed; Then Process of Contempt, according to the
course of the Court, is to go forth against the person, unto the commission of
Rebellion; and then a Sergeant at Arms by special Warrant: and in case the
Sergeant at Arms cannot find him, Or he be resisted, Or if he upon his
commitment do persist in his disobedience, an Iniunction is to be granted for
the possession, and in case that it also be disobeyed, Then a commission is to
be made to the Sheriff, to put his adversary into possession.

Where the party is committed for breach of a Decree, He is not to be
enlarged, until the Decree be fully performed in all things which are to be
done presently.

But if there be other parts of the Decree to be performed at days or times
to come: Then he may be enlarged by order of the Court, entering into
Recognizance with Sureties for the performance de futuro, but not otherwise.

Where causes come to hearing in Court; No Decree binds any person, who was
not served with Process ad audiendum Iudicium, according to the course of the
court; Or did appear gratis in the Court.

No Decree binds any one that comes in bona fide, by Conveyance from the
Defendant before the Bill exhibited; And is made no party either by Bill or by
Order.

But where he comes in Pendente lite, and while the Suite is in full
prosecution, and without any color of allowance, or priuity of the Court;
There regularly the decree binds:

But if there were any intermission of suite; Or the court were made acquaynted
with the conueyance, The Court is to give order upon the special matter,
according to Justice.

Where a Decree is made for a Rent to be paid out of Land; Or a sum of
money to be levied upon the profits of Land; There a Sequestration of the
same Land being in the Defendants hands, may be granted upon the Decree.

Where the Decree of the Provincial counsels; Or the Court of Requests, or
the like, are by contumacy or other means interrupted: There the Court of
Chancery, upon a bill preferred for corroboration of the Decrees of that
Jurisdiction, shall give remedy.

Where any cause comes to Hearing here, which has been formerly Decreed in
any other of the Kings Courts of Justice at Westminster; Such Decree shall be
first read; and then this court shall proceed to hear the rest of the
evidences on both sides.

Decrees upon Suites brought after Judgment, shall contain no words to make
void, or weaken the Judgment: But shall only correct the corrupt conscience
of the Party, And rule him to make Restitution, of to perform other acts,
according to the equity of the cause.

Bill of Reuiewe.
DEcrees are not to be reuersed, altered, or explayned, being once under the
Great Seal, but upon Bil of Reuiewe.

Bill of Reuiewe shall not be admitted, except the Decree be first obeyed and
performed.

No Bill of Reuiewe shall be put in, except the party that preferres it, enter
into Renognizance, with Sureties for the satisfying of Costs and Damages for
the delay, if it be ^ound against him.

Reference, Report.
NO Reference upon a Demurrer, or question touching the Jurisdiction of this
Court, shall be made to the Masters of the Chance^y, But such Demurrer shall
be heard and ruled in the Court, or by the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor
himself.

For the confirming or ratifying of any Report, No Order shall be made,
without day to be given, by the space of a Seuen-night (at least) to speak
unto it in Court.

No Reference shall be made to any Master of the Court, or any other
Commissioner or Commissioners, to hear and determine, where the cause is gone
so far as to examination of Witnesses: Except it be in especial cases of
Parties near in blood, or of extreme poverty, Or by consent:

And generally, References of the state of the cause, are to be sparingly
granted; except it be by consent of the parties.

No Report shall be respected in Court, which exceeds the Warrant of the
Order of reference which leads it.

The Masters of the Court are required, that by Report they do not certify
the estate of the cause; as if they would make Breuiates of the Evidence on
both sides, which does little ease the Court; But that they do it with some
opinion; Or otherwise, in case they think it too doubtful, to give opinion
therein; And thereuppon they are to make such special Certificate; and the
cause is to go on to a Judicial hearing, without respect had to the same.

If both parties consent to a Reference for the examination of Accounts, to
make the Cause more ready for hearing, it may be granted. But generally,
matters of Account excepting in very weighty Causes, are not fit for the Court,
but are to be prepared by Reference, with this provision nevertheless; That
the Causes come first to a Hearing, and upon the entrance into a Hearing, they
may receive some direction, and be turned over to be considered and prepared.

The like course of Reference is to be taken for the examination of Court
Rolls, upon any Customs; and the Copies shall not be referred to any one
Master, but to two Masters at the least.

No Reference shall be made of the Insufficiency of any Answer, without
showing of some particular points of the defects thereof; And not upon surmize
of the Insufficiency generally.

Where a Trust is confessed by the Defendants answer, there needs no farther
hearing of the cause, but a Reference presently to be made of the Accounts, and
so they are to go on to the hearing of the accounts.

Dismission.
WHere causes are dismissed upon full Hearing, and the Dismission signed by the
Lord Keeper or Lord Chancelour, such causes shall not be retained again,
neither shall any new Bill be admitted, except it be upon new matter, like
unto the case of the Bill of Reuiewe.

In case of all other Dismissions, which are not upon Hearing of the Cause, If
any new Bill be brought, the Dismission is to be pleaded; and after Reference
and Report of the Conents of both Suites, and consideration taken of the cause
or causes of the former Dismission; The Court shall rule and order the Retyning
or Dismission of the new Bill, according to Justice and the nature of the case.

All suites grounded upon Wills Nuncupatiue, Leases paroll, Or upon Long
Leases, that tend to the defeating of the Kings Tenures, Or for the
establishing of the Perpetuities, Or granted upon Remainder over unto the
Crown, to defeat purchasers; Or for Brocage, or Rewards to make marriages, Or
for bargain at play; o^ VVagers for bargains for Offices, contrary to the
Statute of the Second of Edward the sixth; Or upon contracts for Vsu^ie or
Symony, are Regularly to be dismissed upon motion, if they be the whole matter
of the Bill; and there be no special circumstances to move the Court to allow
them a proceeding.

And all Suites under the value of ten pouuds, are regularly to be dismissed.

Dismissions are properly to be paid and had, either upon hearing, or upon
Plea unto the Bill, when the cause comes first into the Court.

But Dismissions are not to be prayed after the parties have bin at charge of
examination of witnesses, except it be upon special cause.

If the Complainant discontinue prosecution, after all the Defendants have
answered, above the space of one whole Term, the cause is to be dismissed of
course, without motion.

But after Replication is put in, the cause is to be dismissed without motion
and order of the Court.

For double vexation, the cause may be dismissed.

Where causes are removed by special Certiorare, upon a Bill containing
matter of equity, The Complaynant is upon receipt of his writ, to put in Bond
to prove his suggestions within fourteen days after the receipt, which if he
do not prove, then upon certificate from either of the Examiners, presented to
the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, the cause shall be dismissed with costs, and a
Procedendo shall be granted.

Demurrer.
DEmurrers and Pleas which tend to the discharging of any Suite, shall be
heard first upon every day of Orders, that the Subject may know, whether he
shall need to give further attendance or no.

A Demurrer is properly upon matter defective contained in the Bill it self:
or foreign matter.

But a Plea is of foreign matter, to discharge or stay the Suite, (as)

That the cause has bin formerly dismissed.

That the Complainant is vtlawed.

That the Complainant is excommunicate.

That there is another Bill depending for the same cause,

Or the like.

And such Plea may be put in without Oath, in case where the matter of Plea
appears upon Record, but if it be any thing which does not appear upon
Record, then the Plea must be put in upon Oath.

No Vtlary shall be allowed, without pleading the Record sub pede Sigilli: Nor
Plea of Excommunication without the Seal of the Ordinary.

Where any suite appears upon the Bill to be of the nature of any of those
which are Regularly to be dismissed, according to the Order before mentioned,
the said Order is to be set forth by way of Demurrer.

Answer.
WHere an Answer shall be certified to be insufficient, The Defendant is to
pay costs.

And if a second Answer be returned insufficient in the points before
certified for insufficient, then he shall pay double costs.

And upon the third like case, treble costs.

And upon the fourth, quadruple costs, and then to be committed also till he
shall have made a perfect and sufficient answer, and he shall be examined upon
Interrogatories, touching the points defective in his answer.

But if any answer be certified to be sufficient, then the Complainant is to
pay costs.

No insufficiency of answer can be taken hold of, after Replication put in,
because it is admitted for sufficient by the Replication.

An answer to a matter charged as the Defendants own fact, must be direct,
without saying that It is to his remembrance, or as he believes, If it be
laid down to be done within seven years before.

And if the Defendant do deny the Fact: Then he must trauerse it directly, and
not by way of Negative pregnant.

As if a fact be laid to be done with diverse circumstances; The Defendant may
not Trau^rse it literally, as it is laid in the Bill: But he must Traue^se the
point of substance.

So as if he be charged with the receipt of an hundred pounds; He must
Trauerse that he has not received an hundred pounds, or any part thereof. And
if he have received any part of it, he must set down what part he has
received.

If a Hearing be paid upon Bill and answer: The answer must be admitted to
be true in all points.

And a Decree ought not to be made, but upon hearing of the answer read in
Court.

Where no Counsel appears for the Defendant at the Hearing; and the Process
appears to have been served; the Answer of such Defendant is to be read in
Court.

No new matter is to be contained in any Replication, except it be to avoid
matter set forth in the Defendants Answer.

Other things Promiscuously laid together.
ALL Coppies in Chancery shall contain fifteen Lines in every Sheet thereof,
written orderly, and vnwastefully, unto which shall be subscribed the name of
the principal Clerk of the Office where it is written, or his Deputies name,
for whom he will answer. For which only Subscription, no Fee at all shall
be taken.

All Commissions for Examination of Witnesses, shall be super Interrogatorij
inclusis, or Interrogtaories enclosed only: And no return of Depositions into
this court shall be received; but such only, as shall be either comprised in
one Roll, subscribed with the names of the Commissioners; or else in diverse
Rolls, whereof each one shall be so subscribed.

If both parties agree in a commission, And upon warning given, the Defendant
brings his commissioners, but produces no Witness, nor Ministers
Interrogatories, but afterward seeks a new commission, the same shall not be
granted.

But nevertheless (upon some extraordinary excuse made for the Defendants
default, he may have liberty granted unto him by his especial order to
examine his Witnesses in court, upon the former Interrogatoris, giving to the
complainant or his Attorney notice that he may examine also if he will.

The Defendant is not to be examined upon Interrogatories, except it be in
very special cases, by express order of the court, to sift out some fraud or
practice, pregnantly appearing to the Court: Or otherwise upon Offer of the
complaynant, to be concluded by the answer of the Defendant, without any
liberty farther to disprooue such answer, or to impeach him afterward of
Perjury.

Decrees made in other courts, may be read upon Hearing, without any Warrant
by special order.

But no Depositions taken in any other Court, are to be read but by especial
order.

Regularly the Court grants no Order for reading of for^eigne Depositions;
except it be between the same parties, and upon the same Title or cause of
suite.

No examination is to be had of the credit of any Witness; but by special
order, which is likewise sparingly to be granted.

Where it shall appear the complaynant had not cause of suite, he shall pay to
the Defendant his utmost costs, to be assessed by the Court.

If any Bill, Answer, Replication, or Reioynder shall be found of an
immoderate length, both the party who put it in, And his Counsel under whose
hand it past, shall be fined by the Court.

If there be contained in any Bill, Answer, or other Pleading, or any
Interrogatory; any matter lybellous, or slanderous against any person that is
not party to the suite, or against such as are parties to the suite upon
matter impertinent, or in Derogation of the settled Authority of any of his
Majesty's Courts; Such Bills, Answers, Pleadings, or Interrogat^ries, shall be
taken off the Fyle, and suppressed; And the parties shall be severely punished
by commitment, or Ignominy, as shall be thought fit for his abuse of the Court:
And the Coun^aylors at Law who shall set their hands to the same Bills,
Answers, Pleadings, or Interrogatories, shall likewise receive reproof, or
punishment, if cause be.

No Scire facias shall be awarded upon Recognizances not enrolled, Nor upon
Ren^gnizances enrolled, unless it be upon examination of the Record with the
Writ,

No Recognizances shall be enrolled after the year, except it be upon
special order of the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor being.

No Writ of Ne exeat regna, Prohibition, Consultation, Statute of Northampton;
Certiorare special, or Procedendo special, or Certiorare, or Procedendo
general, more then once in the ^ame cause; Nor Habeas Corpus, or Corpus cum
causa, De vi ^aica amouenda, or Restitution thereupon, Or de Coronatore and
viridario elegendo, De homine replegia^do, Assistas special, De bellino
amouendo, Certiorares super praesentationibus factis coram Commissionar.
Sewars, or ad quod damnum, shall pass without warrant under the hand of the
Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, being signed by the one of them, Excepting
only such writs o^ ad quod damnum, as shall be signed by his Majesty's
Attorney General.

Writs of Privilege would be reduced to a good and fitting rule, for number
of persons privileged, and the case of Privilege.

The number would be set down by Schedule.

For the case, It is to be understood, That besides the persons privileged as
Attendants upon the Court; Suitors and Witnesses are only to have privilege
eundo, redundo, and morando, for their necessary attendance, and not otherwise.
And that such Writs of privilege do only discharge an Arrest upon the
first Process.

And yet where the party is taken in execution at time of necessary attendance
here required It is to be taken as a contempt to this Court, and accordingly to
be punished.

No Supplitauit for the Good behavior shall be granted, but upon Articles
grounded upon Oa^h at least, or upon a Certificate of any one Justice of
Assize, or two Justices of the Peace, with Oath that it is their hands, Or it
may be granted by order of the Star Chamber, or Chancerie, or other of the
Kings Courts.

No Recognizance of the good behavior and the Peace taken in the country, and
certified into the Petty-Bagge, shall be fyled within the year, without
special Warrant.

Writs of Ne exeat regna, are properly to be granted, according to the
suggestion of the Writ; In respect of Attempts, prejudicial to the King and
State: In which cases, the Lord Keeper, or Lord Chancellor will grant them,
upon the prayer of any of the Principal Secretaries, without cause showing;
Or upon such Information as his Lordship shall think to be of weight.

But otherwise also they may be granted according to the ancient practice used
in case of Interlop^rs in Trade, Great Bankrupts, in whose estate many Subjects
are intressed; or in other cases that concern multitudes of the Kings
subjects, And also in case of Duels, and some other cases.

All Writs, certificates, and whatsoever other Process returnable Little Rege
in Cancellara, shall be brought into the chapel of the Rolls, within
convenient time after the Return thereof; And shall be there filed upon their
proper files and bundles as they ought to be, and as the practice has bin
heretofore, except only the depositions of the Witnesses, which may remain
with any of the six clerks, by the space of one year next after the cause in
court shall be either determined by Decree, or otherwise dismissed.

All Injunctions with their Transcripts shall be likewise inroled, as
heretofore was used.

All days given by the court to Sheriffs to Return their Writs, Or to bring
in their Prisoners upon Writs of privilege, or otherwise be tweene party and
party vnpriuiledged, shall be filed either in the Registers Office, or in the
Petty-Bagge respectively.

And all Recognizances taken to the Kings use, or unto the courts, shall be
enroled in convenient time with the clerk of the Inrolement, And callenders
shall be made of them, and the said callenders shall be presented every
Michaelmas Term to the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor being.

In case of Suites upon the Commission for Charitable uses to avoid charge,
there shall need no Bill, but only Exceptions unto the Decree: and Answer is
to be made forthwith thereunto and thereupon: And then upon sight and
perusal of the Inquisition, and the Decree brought unto the Lord Keeper or
Lord Chancellor, by the Clerk of the Petty-Bagge; His Lordship will give order
under his hand, for an absolute Decree to be drawn up.

Upon suite for a Commission of Sewers, the names of those that are desired to
be Commissioners, are to be presented to the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor
in writing, And then his Lordshippe will send their names to some Privy
Counselor, or the Lieutenant of the County, or some Justice of Assize,
residing in those parts for which the Commission is prayed; To consider of
them, That they be not put in for private ends: And upon the Return of such
opinion, his Lordship will give farther order for the commission to pass.

No new Commission for Sewers shall be granted while the first is in force,
except it be upon discovery of abuse or fault in the first Commissioners, or
otherwise upon some great and weighty ground.

No Commission of Banquerupts shall be granted but upon Petition made to the
Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, and the names of those that are desired for
Commissioners shall be presented therewithal: Of which his Lordship will take
consideration, and always join some persons learned in the Law, with the rest
that shall be allowed; yet so as care be taken, that the same persons allowed,
be not too often used in such Commissions, And likewise, that Bond be given
with good Sureties, of the penalty of two hundred pounds at least, to prove
the party against whom the Commission is sued forth, to be a Banquerupt.

No Commission of Delegates in any case of weight shall be awarded, but upon
Petition preferred to the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, who will name the
Commissioners himself; to the end, that they may be persons of fitting
quality, having regard to the weight of the Cause, and the dignity of the Court
from whence the Appeal is.

Any man shall be admitted to defend in forma pauperis upon Oath:

But the Complaynants are ordinarily to be referred to the Court of Requests;

Or to the Provincial Counsels, if the case arise in their Jurisdictions;

Or to some Gentlemen in the Country, except it be in some special cases of
commiseration, Or potency of the adverse party.

Suites after judgment, must be brought, according to his Majesty's Order
being upon Record.

Licenses to collect for losses by Fire or by Water, are not to be granted but
upon good Certificate; And they are rarely to be renewed; And they are ever to
be directed unto the County where the loss did arise, if it were by Fire, and
the Counties adjoining unto it as the case shall require: And if it were by
Sea, Then, unto the County where the Port is from whence the Ship went, and to
some Counties adjoining.

No Exemplification shall be made of any Letters Patents inter alia, with
omission of the general words; Nor of Records made void or Cancelled; Nor of
the Decrees of this Court not Enrolled; Nor of Depositions by parcells or
fractions, omitting the residue of the said Depositions; Nor of Depositions in
Court, to which the hand of the Examiner is not subscribed; Nor of Records of
the Court, not Enrolled nor fyled; Nor of Records of any other Court, before
the same be duly certified to this Court, and orderly fyled here; Nor of any
Record upon sight and examination of any Copy in Paper; But upon sight or
examination of the Original.

I will withal set down the very words, with which the Author concludes these
last recited Orders; because you may accordingly give them extent, dimension,
and valuation.

The Words are these, (viz.)

BEcause Time and Experience may discover some of these Rules to be
inconvenient; And some other fit to be added hereunto; Therefore his Lordship
intends in every such case, from time to time, to publish such Reuocations or
Additions, as they shall offer themselves.

Howsoever I take it, there is not much alteration had in them; it may be
there is some Addition: But for the Roller side (as unto the making of Decrees,
and granting of Injunctions) which was heretofore exercised alike there, as in
Court, or on the Lord Keepers side (which I conceive grew by the connexing of
the Lord Keepers Office, and Master of the Roles in the same person) I cannot
say how the case stands at this present, having withdrawn my self now these
seven years past, from any practice in the Laws in any kind.

And because the Confirmation of Ordinances and by-Lawes, made for the better
government of Societies Incorporate, do for the most part pass through the
hands of the Lord Keeper, or Lord Chancellor for the time being, according to
the Statute of the nineteenth of K. Henry 7. Therefore, and for that it is
only the path of a very few trauelliug in the Laws; I think good to write
according to mine own Practice therein (as follows.)

IF a Corporation be newly erected, and is to have also Ordinances de nouo,
made for the better government of their Company, or Body: They must first make
a perfect draught of them by advice of Counsel in a Paper-booke.

Your Counsel would be both learned in the Laws of the Land, the Prerogative
of the King, the Subjects right; and the Privileges, Powers and Customs of
the great body of the City, or Town corporate, wherein you are sub
incorporated as Brethren of a Trade, Mystery, or Occupation.

For any Ordinances made either against the Laws of the Land, or the
Prerogative, are not only void in themselves, but farther punishable in those
who execute them, notwithstanding any confirmation whatsoever. And therefore
commonly in all Patents and Charters of Incorporation, there is a special
clause of prouiso in this point and to this purpose.

And I do herein indigite at two manner of Ordinances, under which the
Commonalties of corporation do much groan and complain their pressures.

The one is a presumption and intrusion upon the Birthright of a Freeborn
Subject ( viz) the Imprisonment of their bodies, for breach of an Ordinance of
their company (a thing most unlawful, and unreasonable, and yet too frequently
practiced by too many of them.) For color whereof, I have seen a Warrant
Dormant lying in the Halls of some companies; under which they subscribe the
names of whom they list to commit; and then deliver him to an Officer, who
attends them at their Court for the purpose; and so it is not pretended to be
their own act, but the will and commandment of a greater Magistrate.

Or an Intrusion upon the Subjects Birthright, by denying him to seek Law and
Justice before the King the Fountain of Justice, in his Court at Westminster.

Or to set up and use his Trade, after he has arrived at his Freedom by
honest service, according to the Laws of the Land, and the ancient custom of
the place.

Or to take a House for his best convenience, advantage and accommodation of
his Trade:

Or the like.

The other Agreeuance which I point at, is a Consumption and effusion of the
purse and estate of the Subject, by grievous Fines, Amercyaments and
Impositions, and by laying of Offices upon them, which draw great expense, in
Feasting and profuseness; of which I shall take occasion in a more fitting
place, to speak and write at more liberty.

I proceed with my Direction in the passing of any such Ordinances.

The Paper book being perfected by such able Counsel, you are to draw your
Petition in the names of the Master and Wardens, in name, and in the behalf
of the whole Company, to be directed and delivered with the said Book to the
Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, desiring; Where as ith ath pleased his Majesty
so to Incorporate you, and to give you power to make Orders and Constitutions
for your better government; which Orders are by the Statue of the nineteenth of
King Henry 7. to be perused, examined, and allowed, by the Lord Keeper, Lord
Treasurer, and the two Lord Chief Justices of either Benche, or three of them
at least, which provision you are ready to observe and perform on your parts.

It may therefore please his Lordship to give order to the two Lords chief
Justices, to peruse, examine, and make the same fit and worthy the confirmation
and allowance of his Lordship, and themselves, etc.

Heerevppon, his Lordship give order under your Petition: That the two Lords
chief Justices do accordingly peruse, examine and make them fit, as is desired.

They the said Lord chief Justices do by virtue of that Order and Warrant
peruse the same; and after they have so altered, added, or sustracted, as they
shall think fit.

Then their Lordships give order to one of their own Clerks, to write them
over fair again into a Paper book coppy-wise. Which when they have exactly
examined with the former so by them reformed, They subscribe the same, and send
them seal ed up back again to the Lord Keeper: who upon the opening thereof,
and sight of the approbation of the Lords chief Justices, does likewise give
order in writing, at the Foot of the said Book subscribed with his hand, That
the same be forthwith faithfully engrossed in Parchment (and in the Chancery
hand) by such an one as it shall please the two Lords chief Justices to
appoint thereunto. And that they give him testimony of the due performance
thereof, by the confirmation of the same under their several hands and Seals,
and so the Lord Keeper seals the Book up again, and returns it to the
Lords chief Justices, who give direction for the engrossement, according to
the order aforesaid.

And when the same is so engrossed, and examined with the Paper book, they set
their several hands and Seals thereunto, and deliver it to your selves, to
carry to my Lord Keeper, Upon sight whereof, he uses also to Seal and
subscribe the same.

But I pity the case very much, that there is no Inrolement, Record, or
Register of any such Ordinances kept in any place, the rather for so many
thousands of people are governed by them, being Law to which they can have noe
recourse, nor can consquenyly take the true measure, by which they should
fashion their manners, to sit smoothly to the body of their Ordinance.

It is not the reading of them once in a year in parcels and cursorily, can
take impression in the most learned of them (if there be any such) much less
in the general sort.

I hope that succeeding times will look into this evil, even in the greatest
bodies incorporate, and give it a fitting redress.

And so much shall suffice for such Ordinances.

I now return to my other scattered pieces which I have gathered together, and
fasciculated into the little bundle Following.

Instruction how to sue a Recognizance taken in Chancery.
IF you would sue a Renognizance that is taken here,

When it is Forfeited, you are to bring a Copy of the same to one of the
Clerks of the Pettie-Bagge; And he will thereupon make you two Writs of
Scire facias: The one of a Return past (if you will:) and the other of a
Return to come. These you must deliver to the Sheriff of Middlesex, who will
return them, as the Law requires him to do in this case.

And when they are returned, you are to carry them again to the Petty-Bagge.

And to retain one of the Clerks there to be your Attorney herein.

And then give the Defendant a day to appear: which if he do not
accordingly, a Judgment is to be awarded against him for his said default.

And if he do appear by the day to him so given; Then are you the Plaintiff
to Declare against him the Defendant, and he is to answer and plead to you
here, as is used in other Courts of common Law.

And when you are at full issue upon the Venire facias, you are to have your
Witnesses, and this is the utmost extent of the proceeding here in Chancery.

For then if you will go to Trial, you must have the whole proceeding here
written into Parchment; and it must either be sent by the Officer of the
Petty-bagge, sealed up to be tried in the Kings Bench, or Common pleas, (at
your election) or else it may be delivered over vn-sealed; by the Lord Keeper
or Lord Chancellor, which is agreeable with the words, se propria manu, etc.

Where note, that there can be no Trial by Jury here in Chancery.

Instruction how to sue a Statue Staple forfeited here.
IF you will sue a Statue Staple here.

You must first go to the Clerk of the Staple, and show him the date of your
Statute, when it was acknowledged, which may also appear by the Statute it
self.

And then he must make your Certificate therevppon, and seal it up.

Then are you to go with it to the Clerk of the Crown, and to get him to
make the Exigent therein.

You must deliver to the Clerk of the Crown your Certificate, You must then
have your Obligation made; and your Extent to be made and endorsed on the
backside, as is used in such cases. This endorsement of the Extent is called
the Fine of the Extent, which must be delivered unto the Sheriff: who by
virtue thereof is to impannell a Jury, to enquire, extend, and apprehend as
well the Body, as the Lands, Goods, and Chattels of the party so bounden.

And when they be so extended into the Kings hands; the Sheriff may keep them
until you bring him a Deliberate, which you are to have from one of the
Clerks of the Petty-Bagge.

Note also, that it concerns you to take good heed how you sue out this
Deliberate. For if there be not sufficient estate or goods extended, wherewith
to satisfy your Statute, and you sue your Deliberate of these Lands and Goods,
etc. extended, you shall never have more then was so first extended, and
delivered.

Wherefore if you do understand or can conceive that there be more Lands, or
Goods, extendible in any other place elsewhere, you are to get them likewise
to be extended, and when you have sufficient, to sue out your Deliberate, then
you are to deliver up your Statute, before you have your said writ, because
otherwise the Clerk of the Petty-Bagge will make you no deliberate at all.

The way how to sue forth a Writ of Supplicauit, whereby the party sued shall
not be released till the party grieved please.
FIrst you must take your corporal Oath before a Master of the Chancerie, that
you do not desire it for any Malice, Hatred, or Enuey to the party: but for
your own quietness, and safety; VVhereupon you shall have a warrant to lead
your said Supplicauit, and thereuppon consequently the writ it self, so soon
as the same may be written and sealed.

After you have the same granted, you may sue out of the Chancery a Writ of
Certiorare, which you should use in this manner, ( viz) When you have
delivered your Supplicauit to have a Warrant thereuppon for the arresting of
the person sued, and have got him likewise arrested, you must keep your
Certiorare very secret and unknown unto him, till he have put in Bond or
Recognizance thereupon, with Sureties (as the case requires.)

For if he take notice of it, Then he will lie in Prison until he have
procured a Supersedeas unto your Supplicauit; which if he do, your Certiorare
is of no force or use. Wherefore it concerns you to have care herein:

And when the party is Arrested, and has put in Sureties, to the Sheriff or
Justice, who granted the Warrant upon the Writ; And the party has given Bond
with Sureties; Then do you deliver your said Certiorare unto them that took
the Bond, And thereuppon they are tied to certify the same up accordingly.

So consequently shall he stand bounden in such manner, until you please of
your own accord to release him.

This has been a practice very frequent heretofore, And yet it appears by
an especial order made of purpose to obuiate this course, which Order I have
before recited in these collections, There was both care and provision taken,
for redress and reformation, in this particular case.

Instructions how to sue forth a Supersedeas upon the former Writ of
Supplicauit, or the like writ.
FOr that it cannot be known but by search and expense to the party against
whom the Writ for Peace or good Behavior is sued forth, In what Court the
same is so sued, until he be arrested for the most part; whether it be out
of the Chancerie, or the Kings Bench: wherefore to avoid that evil of being
bound, He may sue forth and have his Supersedeas ever in readiness about
him, if he suspect any such practice be intended against him (as before said.)

The Supersedeas must be sued forth thus, (viz.)

You shall rather in the Chancerie, then on the Kings Bench side, enter into
Bond with Sureties gratis, with condition that you shall keep the Kings peace,
or be of the good behavior, during such time as for which you shall so bind
your self, and as the occasion shall require: For if you suspect that your
Adversary will have the Writ only to bind you to the Peace, then a
Supersedeas will serve only for the Peace; if for the good behavior, then
your Supersedeas must be for the good behavior; if both, for both.

When you have so bound your self with Sureties; or Sureties in your absence
have so undertaken (as your Manucaptors) for you before a Master of the
Chancery; You may have Warrant, And upon the Warrant, your Writ of Supersedeas,
so soon as the same may be written and sealed.

And for your better ease, and direction in any of these cases of suing forth
a Supplicauit or Supersedeas; enquire for, and address your self to the
proper Clerk of the Supplicauit Office, which is ever kept, in or near unto
Chancery Lane, and at this instant, at the Rayne-bowe near to the Inner Temple
gate.

I do advise you to sue forth your Supersedeas, rather out of the Chancery
then the Kings bench, for these reasons, (viz.)

The condition of your Bond in Chancery does not tie you to make any
appearance at the determination of your time limited for Peace or behavior,
But in the Kings bench it does:

And if you do not appear there accordingly, your Bond is duly estreated;
and now more strictly prosecuted then ever heretofore:

Besides, if you do appear according to the condition of your Bond, there is
then a great charge which falls upon you of course, for the withdrawing of
your Bond, which dies in Chancerie; or at least, it requires no retraction
there:

Besides, the Supersedeas is in some case more potent, being taken out of the
Chancerie, then out of the Kings Bench: For notwithstanding the Writ to bind,
be taken out of the Chancerie, and bear Test before, yet the Supersedeas out
of the Chancerie, is sufficient against it howsoever: But I make question
whether the Supersedeas of the Kings Bench, will overrule the Supplicauit of
the Chancerie bearing date before it, or no? I am persuaded (and as I remember)
I have met the experience of the privilege of Prioritie in the Chancerie Writ,
in this Kind: Nevertheless I leave it to the farther consideration of him
that desires to buy a farther experience with farther expense herein.

Note also that you may have your Supersed^as to supersede one, or more, or all
persons whatsoever at your own election.

And so much for Writs of Peace and Behavior.

FOr the Amplitude of this Court, you shall note, that it extends it self
into a larger dimension then Smiths Common Wealth does demonstrate, both in
limnes and liuelyhood; especially in those two members of it, (viz.) the
Pettie-Bagge and Cursitorie; in both which, that Book does scent it overmuch:

For besides Offices post mortem, which is only attributes to the Pettie-Bag:
This Office has

The making out of all Writs of Summons to the Parliament:

All Latin Pleadings of the Chancerie, concerning the Question of any Patent
or other thing whatsoever which passes the great Seal:

Or whatsoever private Deed between Subictes, which is acknowledged in
Chancerie, before the Lord Keeper, the Master of the Rolls, or any the Masters
of Chancerie.

With Statutes and Recognizances taken in this Court:

Or transmitted hither.

With all suites for, or against any person privileged in the Chancery.

Besides, it is a hand whereby to transmit diverse things from the Riding Clerk
and the Inrolement Office, to the Chapel of the Roles.

And briefly, it has such variety of business, that the place requires more
learning and ability of Clerkshippe then any other Office, save that of
Prothonotaries of the Common Pleas only, (in my opinion.)

And for the Cursitors of the Chancery, They make both the original Writs of
the Chancerie, and of the Common Pleas: The Originalls of which Court of Common
Pleas, I refer to the proper place, where I shall have more occasion to
speak of them hereafter.

These Cursitors were incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, by the name of the
four and twenty Cursitors: amongst whom, the business of the several Shires
is severally distributed, and therefore you must, in all cases where your suite
is local and tied to the certain County, address your self to the proper
Cursitor of the same.

If any Suite depend before any Sheriff in his Turn or County Court, you may
have! a Writ of Chancerie from the Cursitor of that County; called a Recordare,
to remove it.

If it lie in a Court Barron, your Cursitor will call it away with an Accedas
ad Curiam.

If it lie in a Town corporate, he will remove it with a Certiorare returnable
in Chancery (as aforesaid,) which may be made of course, without any Bill
exhibited.

And a Procedendo may be also made presently thereupon, before the Return of
the said Certiorare, and that of course likewise.

And also a second Certiorare and a second Procedendo thereuppon may be made,
But the second Procedendo should be upon a Bill exhibited, showing good cause
of equity why the Complaynant should be releiued.

And upon Bond given by the complaynant or some other for him, with condition
that the complaynant shall prove the contents of the said Bill, the Court of
Chancerie does often grant a special Certiorare, signed with the hand either
of the Lord Keeper or of the Master of the Rolls for the time being.

And the condition of this last receited bond, gives the Obligor only the
liberty of fourteen days to prove the contents of the Bill, which fourteen
days must commence from the date of the return of the said Certiorare to be
granted, (as aforesaid.)

The Fees of proceeding in Chancery follow.
l. s. d. SVb Poena Writ to answer 0 2 6 If there be three in the Sub poena,
you pay six pence the more. tot.0 3 4 This Sub Poena may be served in any
liberty whatsoever, So cannot an Attachment. The charge of drawing your Bil in
the next which your counsel at Law, must do according to the Instruction
which you shall give him of the true estate of the cause. His Fee is at the
least. 0 10 0 For the engrossing of your said bill four pence a sheet at the
least 0 0 4 a sheet. The copy inde, two pence a sheet at the least. 0 0 2 a
sheet. The Attournyes Fee when you put it in, which is for the whole Term, 0
3 4 The writing of the Oath made that the Sub poena was served, 0 0 6 The Oath,
0 0 4 The Attachment where the defendant appears not. 0 2 10 l. s. d. The
breaking of it up with the Sheriff. 0 2 0 The Return of that Attachment. 0 0
4 The Proclamation of Allegiance upon the same. 0 2 10 The breaking of it up
with the Sheriff. 0 2 0 The Return of that Proclamation. 0 0 4 The Commission
of Rebellon. 0 18 2 The Rule which the complaynant gives to the Defendant to
make answer by a certain day, in case where the Defendant does appear. 0 0 4
The Attachment, The Proclamation, Commission of Rebellion. For not answering as
in case for not Appearing. as aforesaid The Defendants Appearance. 0 4 4 This is
also his Attournies Fee, for the whole Term. 0 Feod. Attourn The copy of the
Bill, at eight pence the sheet. Eigh^ pence the sheet. His counsels Fee for
drawing of his Answer; according to his direction, at the Least. 0 10 0 l. s.
d. For engrossing of this answer, at four pence the sheet at the least.
0-four pence a sheet. For Copy of this answer, at two pence the sheet at the
least. 0*two pence a sheet. For the Oath made that this answer ia true. 0 0 4
For every Defendant 4. d. pro consimil quilibit Def-pro consimil. 0 0 4 For the
Commission to take the Answer in the country by Dedimus potestatem. 0 7 10
Besides the engrossing of the bil which is concluded within it every sheet
inde, 6. d. The Sub poena for Costs, given to the Defendant, in case where the
complanant does not put in his bil within the time allowed. 0 2 6 For a Bill of
Costs and entery of it indo. 0 1 4 The Attachment, Proclamation, and
Commission, of Rebellion. as incase aforeaid. A Joint Commission to examine
Witnesses in the Countery, per piece. 0 7 10 A commission ex part, to examine
witnesses in the Country. The party bears both parts of the charge. l. s. d.
For examination of the first Witness here before Examiners. 0 2 6 For every
Witness examined afterward. 0 ^ 6 For drawing of the Replication, if it be
done by Counsel, as in case for the Bill. as for the Bill. For the Reioynder.
0 -- the like. If there be no new matter in the Replication or the Reioynder,
your Attourueies Clerk will draw them for you of course, for some small
matter. as you can agree. For the Copies of the Depositions of any Witnesses
returned by Commission. every sheet 0 0 8 For Copy of Depositions taken
here. every sheet 0 1 0 For a Motion in Court. Counsels Fee. For the
drawing of the Order thereupon cum Cop. every side 0 3 0 For entering of the
Order. every side. -- 6. d.

Fees of an Iniunction follow.
l. s. d. INjunction in all Vijs and modis. 1 2 6

Fees of a Decree follow.
FOr a decree the drawing, etc. as in case of an order. Sub Poena to Testify,
0 2 6 Sub Poena to Reioyne, 0 2 6 Sub poena to Hear Judgment: 0 2 6 For
getting the Hearing to be set down. 0 as you can agree with your Attorney.
For the Rules to publish the witnesses, being four. per piece 0 4 For copy of
Replication, Reioynder, Rebutter, and Subrebutter, as for copy of Bill or
Answer. as aforesaid for Bill and Answer. Sub poena super ordinem, to show
cause. 0 7 2 Sub poena of Ducas tecum 0 7 2 Sub poena de executione ordinis. 0
10 0

The charge of a Supplicauit in Chancerie.
l. s. d. ITem, the Oath. 0 0 4 Item, the Supplicauit it self 0 5 6 Item, the
warrant upon it, vic. 0 2 0 Item, For the Certiorare to certify the Bond taken
upon it. -- 0 2 6

Charge of a Supersedeas in Chancerie.
TO the Master of the Chancerie for taking of his Bail. 0 2 0 For the Warrant.
0 2 0 For the Writ. 0 5 6 For the Allowance of it. 0 2 0 These said Fees be
only of the ease of a single person, and for the peace only. But if it be of
more persons, or for behavior, as well as the Peace, then the charge is
accordingly enlarged.

The Fees of all original writs sealed in the Chancery.
A
l. s. d. ACcedas ad curiam. 0 2 7 Admensuratio pasturae. 0 5 7 Ad quod Damnum.
0 7 2 Annual. reddit. 0 1 6 Assis, Cuiusque general. 0 5 6 Attinct. 0 7 2
Audita queraela. 0 7 2 C
CErtiorare. 0 1 6 Cessauit. 0 2 6 Conspiracy. 0 5 6 Contentione. 0 2 6
Coranator. eligend. 0 7 2 Cui in vita. 0 2 6 Cur claudend. 0 2 6 Comperuit. 0 2
6 Sum. bre. de Covenant. 0 2 6 D
l. s. d. DIem clausit extremum. 0 2 6 Dedimus potestatem super bre. de Con.
Dot. 0 2 6 Speciall-Dedimus potestatem. 0 7 2 Original de Debt and detinew. 0
1 0 E
Electione firm. 0 2 6 Eiectione Custod. 0 2 9 Excommunicat Capiend. 0 7 2
Execut, in De. 0 2 6 Expenc. nullat. 0 7 2 Error in London. 0 7 2 Patent inde.
0 7 2 Elegit. 0 10 0 F
FAlso Iudicio. 0 2 6 For. fac. Maritag. 0 2 6 Forma Denationis. 0 2 6 H
HEred. Capt. 0 2 6 Con. repleg. 0 5 6 L
LEproso. amouendo. 0 5 6 Libertat. proband. 0 5 6 Libeatat. allocand. 0 7 2 M
MOderat. 0 2 6 Maintenand. 0 2 6 Minus. 0 2 6 Monstrauerunt. 0 5 6 Mittimus. 0
2 6 Mandamus. 0 7 2 N
NOcunt. 0 2 6 Non molestand. 0 2 6 Non Omitas 0 5 6 Non Ponend. in Assise. 0 7
2 O
OFficiar. non faciend. 0 5 6 Ordinar. non seruiend. 0 2 6 P
PAct. fract. 0 2 6 Partic. faciend 0 2 6 Paten. bre. de errore corrigend. in
Assis: attinct. 0 7 2 l. s. d. Pleg. acquietand. 0 2 6 Pone. 0 2 6 Perambulac.
faciend. 0 5 6 Palibus. reparand. 0 2 6 Post desseisin. 0 2 6 Praecipe in Cur.
0 2 6 Procedend. 0 2 6 Prohibition. 0 7 2 Propriat. proband, 0 2 6 R
Rcte claus, 0 2- 6 Recte patent. 0 2- 6 Redisseisin. 0 7 2 Reparatio Pontium
viarum domini. 0 2 6 Repleg. Original. 0 1 6 Rescous. 0 2 6 Recordare 0 2 6 STV
SIgnificauit. 0 7 2 Bre. de estat. 0 2 6 Sub paena. 0 2 6 Supersed. inde. 0 7
2 Supersed. pro pace. 0 5 6 Supersed. omn. al. 0 5 6 Trans. 0 1 0 l. s. d.
Trans. super casum. 0 2 6 Valor Maritagij. 0 2 6 Vasc. 0 2 6 Villat remouend.
0 2 2 Vitar. eligend. 0 2 2 W
WArrantia charta. 0 2 6 Warrantio Diei. 0* 5 6 Withernam. -- 8* 5 6

And so much for the Original Writs issuing out of the Chancerie.

I Must acknowledge that I have omitted the Records enrolled in the Chapel,
and those that are either in the hand of the Controler of the Seal and riding
Clerk, or else in the middle of their journey, traveling over to the
Chapel; because they are an homogeneall part of my former Tractate, touching
direction for Search of record, which I shall (by Gods assistance) both perfect
and amplify with my best and first oppertunity hereafter. And as I have also
ommitted a small colation which I have made out of the Peity-Bagge and other
places, of the several Styles of all Towns Corporate in England and Wales,
according to their several Patents of Incorporation, with the Styles of al
other Ministers of any Courts, to the which any Attorney may have occasion to
direct his Writs of Habeas Corpus, and the like in any occasion; Because this
last will be a Book of such continual use unto them, that it is only fit to
be published by it self in such a small Volume, as may be portable in every
pocket. Therefore I do likewise intend to set it forth as a little Cockboat,
to this greater vessel, very speedily, it being already finished.

And thus I conclude with the Court of Chancery, reserving the Fines payable
upon original Writs, to the practice of the Court of Common Pleas, because
they best know the price of them.

THE COURT OF REQVESTS: OR, White Hall at Westminster.
THis is likewise a Court of Conscience and Equity.

And the practice thereof is by English Bill, Answer, Replication, and
Reioynder, like to the former in Chancery,

The form of their proceeding is generally alike.

Only, This Court, in stead of the leading Writ of Sub paena, uses a Privy
Seal:

Or otherwise to summon such as are nearer hand, by their Messenger and proper
Officer of the Court.

Their Fees in the point of proceeding, are for the most part alike.

Only in stead of two shillings six pence for Summons by Sub paena, you pay
at the least for Summons by Privy Seal. 8. s.

Or if the Summons be made by the Messenger here in town, you pay to him for
his pains. 3s. 4d.

For every party summoned. -- the like

Besides for his Warrant to do it, what you please as I take it. ad libitum.

This great burden at the very entrance into a Svite here, does much hinder
the Court, if they would duly consider it.

And so much for the Court of Request.

THE COURT OF THE PROVINCIAL COUNCIL OF THE Marches of Wales.
THis Court of the Provincial Counsel for the Marches of Wales holds the
like form of proceeding generally and for the most part, as does the Chancerie
before mentioned.

The greatest difference is in the Leading Process of the same.

And therefore I shall not need to recite the same thing again, but proceed
in

THE COURT OF THE PROVINCIAL Counsel, established at YORK.
THis Provincial Counsel follows the course of preceding likewise used in
Chancerie.

And for your better direction, that you may understand the Lords Presidents
Powers and privileges, in either of the two Provincial places, I refer you
to their Instructions remaining on Record in the Chancerie, whereby you may be
fully satisfied in this point, etc.

The greatest difference here likewise is in the Leading process.

And both the Provincial Counsels are often subject to the Prohibitions of the
Courts at Westminster, which makes many of both Jurisdictions those rather to
begin their Suites here, then at their own home.

THE COURTS OF THE County Pallatine of Chester; County Pallatine of Lancaster;
Couny Pallatine of Duresme; AND The Chancerie of London; with the Exchequer
Chamber West m.
IN the formalitie of their proceeding do all imitate the practice of the
Chancery, before set forth and declared, admitting only some small mixture of
the Common Law in some especial cases.

And in some things they are led by their proper customs and prescriptions
respectively:

So that he who is a sufficient practitioner in our great Chancerie, may be
able and worthy the admission into any Court of English proceeding whatsoever
or wheresoever.

I make the next gradation to Courts of Common Law; And both for mine own
ease, and the benefit of the Reader, I will begin at the Court of Common
Pleas, as the only Leader to all other Courts, for all kind of matters
appertaining to the Common Law; Otherwise if I did begin with the Kings
Bench, for the prioritie and dignity thereof, I should run into this
inconvenience, that I must be forced to repeat the same thing over again in
personal actions, and mixed actions; both which the Kings Bench admits and
holds, etc.

THE COMMON PLEAS PRACTICE.
FIRST you are to understand of what nature the Action which you would sue to
be.

If it be for Debt upon a Bond, you must take a special care that your
Original do agree with the Bond; For otherwise your proceeding will be
erroneous.

And you must make them agree thus: ( viz.)

London: Precipe Rico. Scot. nuper de London generos. (alias Dict.) As in the
Bond literatim; and in the same words and Letters as the party sued is styled
and titled in the Bond. Re. Thom. Smith twenty pouud, etc.

If it be an Action of Trespass, Or an Action upon the Case; Then you must
style and title the Defendant whom you sue thus: ( viz.)

London: Si Thomas Smith Fec. etc. Tunc pone, etc. Ricard. Scot. in London
generos. ostens. quare cum etc. without any alias at all required, to be in
such actions.

When you have made this note of direction, for the drawing up of your
Original and leading Writ, you must deliver it to the Chancery man, which is
the Cursitor for the Shire where you lay the action, to make this your
Original Writ, and to get the same sealed.

This Original being so made, s^aled and delivered unto you, your self may
return, except the Defendant whom you sue be a Freeholder of the Sheire,
where you lay your action.

If the Defendant be a Freeholder in the Shire where the action is laid: then
you must deliver your Original to the Sheriff of the Shire to return it.

If the Sheriff do return the Defendant sufficient: then soon after the said
Return, when the Original is filed, the Plaintiffes Attorney must go to the
Office of the Philozer of the said County, and there search and be satisfied
whether any Attorney has appeared for the Defendant or no?

If the Plaintiffes Attorney do find that the Defendant appears, the
Plaintiffes Attorney (if he can) or otherwise some one Clerk of the
Prothonotaries Office whom he may procure, must draw up his Declaration against
the defendant, for which purpose the said Clerk must have the Bond, and take
out the writ into the Prothouotaries Remembrance, and also must know where the
Plaintiffes Attorney will have the Obligation to be laid for the Reinde.

When the declaration is delivered to the defendants Attorney: the Attorney
or Clerk for the Plaintiff, is upon demand to show to him the Obligation it
self, to the end that he may examine the declaration with the same, and see
and take notice of the witnesses names, who do testify it.

In like manner are you to proceed in an Action of debt upon an Indenture, or
debt due by Testament, or Letters of Administration, you must upon the
declaration and demand made, show the Indenture, the Testament, or Letters of
Administration as the case is, that they may be conferred together.

And in an action of debt upon an Indenture, the Original must be made to
agree with the Indenture, as in case of an action of debt upon Bond, in the
second addition, or the alias dict. vt supra.

The Attorney of the defendant may, when the appearance is made for his
Clyent, have Costs, and dismiss the Plaintiff, if he do not declare within
his time prefixed.

When the defendant has appeared, and the Plaintiff has declared, and
thereupon the defendant has answered, or pleaded, He may give to the
Plaintiff a day to Reply: Which if the Plaiutiffe do not accordingly, Then
the Defendants Attorney may discontinue the Action of the Plaintiff, and make
him to begin anew.

And if the Defendant be returned sufficient. And no Attorney appears for
him upon the Original: Then the Plaintiffes Attorney must put his name to
the Phillozers book, called the Remembrance, where the Original shall be
taken out: And mark the same Remembrance, when his next Process which is a
Pone shall be returnable.

This next Process he must seal and deliver to the Sheriff.

And if at the day of the Return thereof, no Attorney do yet appear for the
Defendant: Then the Plaintiffes Attorney must in like manner mark the
Remembrance, and take out another Writ against him called a Distress, and so
the Plaintiff may sue out Distress after Distress, until such time as the
Defendant does appear.

And if the Sheriff shall return such small issues for favor, as whereby the
Defendant is encouraged to stand out, and will not appear: Then the
Plaintiffes Attorney himself may move the Court for increase of issues, or
else Amerce the Sheriff.

If the Defendant have no Free hold within the Shire where he is sued: The
Plaintiffes Attorney must return the Original Writ in Debt or Trespass on
the backside thus: ( viz)

Pleg. de prosequend.

I. Do,

Rich. Roo.

Infra nominat Richardus Scot, Nihil habet in baliua mea vnde potest Sum.

Johannes Smith, mile vic.

IF the Original be in the Trespass upon the Case, Return it (as above)
saving in stead of Vnde potest Sum. let it be vnde potest Attach.

The Return of the ordinary Process of Capias to the Exigent, is, Infra
nominatus Richardus Scot, non est inuentus in balli^a mea.

There must be always between the Test of the Original, and the Return
thereof, full fiueteene days inclusie, at the least.

And so of the Cap. alias Cap. and plur. Cap.

And between the Test and the return of every Exigent, there must be five
County Court days, or five days of the Hustings, as is usual in this kind
of business.

The Exigent and Proclamation must both be the same Test and of the same
Return.

An Exigent in the Country has five County days for his Return (the County
Court being kept only once in a Month) and so consequently it requires five
Months.

But in the Hustings in London, the Return is much speedier.

And if the Defendant do not appear by Supersedias before the sifth County
day, or day of Hastings (as the Exigent lies) then he is, upon the fifth
Exact. returned vtlawed.

You must have a care withal, that upon the Return of the Plur. Cap.
preceedent, it be duly filled.

At the going forth of the Exigent, you must make your Warrant of Attorney on
this manner, ( viz) Willielmus Wild generosus, Pl. pol^ suo: I. T. verse. Ioh.
Fludd de Braynford in Com. praed. Yeom. de plac. debit. or de plac. transs. as
the action is: This you must deliver to the Clerk of the Warrants.

The Defendants attorney is to put in his warrant of attorney upon the Issue
or upon the Demurrer, and not before.

If the Sheriff have the Cepias, alias Cap. and Plur. Cap. delivered unto him,
and shall return a Cepi Corpus upon any of them, then the Plaintiff shall
have no farther Process against the Defendant.

If upon any such Return no Appearance shall be made on the Defendants part,
then the Plaintiffes Attorney must go to the Phillzoers or the
Prothonotaries, and get the same Writ or the Return thereof taken out; And
then give to the Sheriff Day to bring in the body of the Defendant, or else be
amerced at the discretion of the Judges.

And if the Sheriff do not bring in his prisoner by the day given, then the
Plaintiffes Attorney is to get the Amerciament to be Estreated; And to sue out
a Writ of Habeas Corpus to bring in the body of the prisoner.

And if the Sheriff who did so arrest the Defendant, be out of his Office
before he do return your said Habeas Corpus, and the Defendant appears not
yet; then you are to sue forth Distringas nuper vic.

The Phillozer upon making out of the first Capias, enters into the Role an
Apposen, So that it may appear upon Record: which Apposen the Plaintiff may
continue for a Term, two, or more if he please.

And their Common Process must have at the least fifeteene days between
their Test and Return.

If Process remain vncontinued by diverse Terms, and no exceptions be made
thereof by the Defendant; the same may be continued by the Plaintiffes
Attorney, paying to the Phillozer or his Clarke for every continuance, four
pence per piece.

And if the Defendant do dwell in one County, and the Suite be commenced in
another; Then there must go forth a Proclamation unto the Sheriff of the
County where the Defendant does dwell at the time when the Exigent is awarded;
And this Proclamation must bear Test and Return with the Exigent, and both
must be returned (the Defendant not ap pearing)

And if the Defendant do put in Supersedeas before the return of the Exigent,
then the Plaintiff need not care for the Return of the Proclamation.

And if the Defendants Attorney come not to the Prothonotaries Clerk, and
take a Copy of the Declaration, and make an answer to the same within nine
days after the Return of the Exigent; Judgment shall be awarded against the
Defendant.

And if the Plaintiff do not make his Declaration ready within four days
after the Return of the Exigent, Then the Defendant may call the Plaintiff
non Suite, and recover his charges.

And if the Defendant will have a Supersedeas upon Maine-prise, It must be
sued out of the Clerk of the Treasury his Office upon Sureties That if the
Defendant make default, he shall pay the fine.

If the Sheriff return to small Issues upon Distress, the Plaintiff may
have Amerciament against him, and have him called into the Court to amend the
Issues for the Kings advantage.

If the Plaintiff be not ready to Reply upon pleading, He may enter
Imparlance, and give day over until the next Term, unless the Defendants
Attorney prevent him, by giving to him a Rule and day certain to Ryply.

At the day of Imparlance, The Plaintiff is to call the Defendant, and to give
him a day to plead or answer again, or to make it known, whether he will
stand to the Plea or Answer which he made in the precedent Term or no?

And if the Defendant do neither make known, that he will then stand to his
former answer, nor answer de nouo upon ordinary days given unto him, He
shall be Condemned in the Cause: for he cannot then refuse as he might upon
an Al. bre.

When any matter is pleaded to an Issue, The Plaintiffes Attorney must have a
care, to see the Issue be rightly entered into the Prothonotaries Role, And
thereuppon put in his VVarrant of Attorney, if it be not in before at the
Exigent, in manner (as aforesaid)

But it is most requisite that the VVarrant should be put in upon the Exigent
by the Plaintiffes Attorney, for fear least the Defendant should not appear;
but be returned vtlawed.

And the Defendant, in case the Plaintiff shall fail to put in his Warrant (as
aforesaid) may sue error in the proceeding, and assign the want of a VVarrant,
which is manifest error; and thereuppon the Plaintiffes attorney shall pay
ten pounds.

After the Issue is entered, the Plaintiff may sue forth Venire facias, or
else continue it for a Term or two.

And upon the Plaintiffes default by ouerlong delay, the Defendants attorney
may sue forth Venire fac. pannell.

Note, that you may enter the first Ven. fac. returned fifteen days after; at
which day, the Writ of Nisi Prius, with the Hab. Corp. is also awarded, and
the Trial likewise (if it be in London)

After verdict upon Trial, the Postea is returnable in his due time.

Thereupon the judgment is entered, and a Capias goes forth first into
London, because the action is laid in London: This Capias is to be returned
fifeteene days after Non est inuentus; and then goes forth Capias with
Testat. into the Country where the Defendant dwells; then is execution sued
out and not before.

Note also, that if the Sheriff at the day of the Ven. fac. do return the
same sued, then the Plaintiffes attorney may have a Hab. Corp. theruppon to be
made by the Clerk of the Iuries, which he is to see well examined when he
fetches the same away from thence.

And at the Return of the said Hab. Corp if it be at the assizes, and the Jury
fill not at the calling of them, the Plaintiffes attorney may crave a December
tales et circumstantibus, Ten the like of those that be standing by, to fill up
the Jury.

But if it be at the Common Pleas Bar, He may not crave a Tales de
Circumstantibus, but a Tales only, or sue a Distress with a Tales.

The first only is a December Tales at the Bar: The second, an Octo Tales, if
the December did not fill; So from Octo, unto Quinto: and from Quinto to Duo
Tales, he must descend till the Jury be filled, all which the said process
must be taken out of the Prothonotaries Office, or the Office of the Clerk of
the Iuries, which be respectiuelie entered most duly.

And if the Sheriff upon any of these said Writs do return Tarde, for want
of sufficient time to warn the Jury, You are to sue forth an Al. distress.

Note, that if a Plea be pleaded here by the Defendant, and the Plaintiff
have therevppon replied: if if it be a plea of a former Term, the defendant
can never amend or withdraw his plea, except it be in Letters or Syllables,
But if it be in the same Term he may.

For in this Court every plea is, or ought to be entered in every Term as it is
pleaded; howsoever it is otherwise in the Kings Bench.

If the Defendant be returned sufficent in an action of Trespass, A Distress
is to be awarded.

And if he be returned Nihil: then the several Cap: and an exigent be awarded.

If an Vltary be returned, then lies a Capias vtlagant, general, which is
for the body only.

Or else a Cap. vtlagat. special; which is for the body and goods.

Note, that if you do sue any of the Nobility of this Land, who are of the
Parliament House, in any action whatsoever, wherein Process of Vtlary lies;
Although the Sheriff return him Nihil habet, yet you may not sue a Capias
against him, but a Pone, into the Shiere where his Land lies: whereupon if he
do not appear, he loses five pounds. And after a Pone, you shall sue a
Distress, and Distress after Distress, in infinitum, until he does appear.

If after the Sheriff have taken the Defendant upon a Cap. ad satisfaciend.
for the Plaintiff, He suffer him to depart upon Sureties, or pawn, and commit
him not to safe keeping, It shall be said an escape against the Sheriff.

And then the Plaintiff may at his election choose whether he will call for
the Return of the Writ, or sue the Sheriff for the Escape, and recover his
Debt and Charges against him: O therwise he may have his Capias and Exigent,
and upon Return thereof vtlaw the Defendant upon the Judgment.

After this kind of Vtlary, the Defendant shall never have his pardon, except
he first agree with the Plaintiff, and satisfy him.

Also the Plaintiff may at his election have a Writ of Elegit in this case,
to extend upon half the Lands and goods of the Defendant: except Cattle and
Oxen for his plough etc.

But it behooves the Plaintiff to take good heed how he sueth forth the said
Writ of Eligit: For if it be once entered, you shall never have any other
Execution.

Also after a judgment, the Plaintiff may have an Execution of Fieri facias de
bonis and catallis, and thereby leauey his whole sum that is given, with the
Costs, or some part thereof, according to the value of the goods of the
Defendants which he can find.

And if at the first he be not satisfied of his whole sum, he may sue forth
another Fieri fac. and so one after another, till he be fully satisfied of his
whole Debt.

Your Process being in a Writ of Rescous, and Rauishment of a Ward, as in
Trespass you shall hold like proceedings of Attach. and Distress, and for
want of Distress, three Capias and an Exigent.

The like in a Quare eiecit infra terminu^, and Eiectione firm, and this was
given by a late statute

And the like by the same Statute, in a Writ of Annuitie and Covenant upon an
Indenture.

But in a Writ of Entry, the like proceeding is not, for the Process is Grand
Cape, and Petit Cape.

The Grand Cape lies, when any of those Writs are delivered to the Sheriff to
summo^ the Lands, and, if at the return of the same, the Defendant appears
not, but makes default, then the Prothonotaries Clerk is to give a day to the
tenant to come in, or else a Grand Cape shall be awarded of the Land, whereupon
he shall be in the courtesy of the Court, whether they will grant him a
Supersedeas for the discharge of the same, or no. Otherwise he is to wage his
Law, and depose that he was not lawfully summoned, which if he do, and it be
afterward proved that he was lawfully summoned; then he is in danger of
perjury.

If the Tenant or Defendant do not appear upon the Grand Cape, then a Petit
Cape is to go forth, and a day likewise to be farther given, and upon
default of appearance, then the Lands in question are recovered, and therevppon
the Cape is directed to the Sheriff to seize the Lands into the Kings hands,
until farther Process, etc.

Note that the Demandant is to take great care, that there be no Essoyne cast
by the Tenants Attorney in this case, for him the said Tenant to appear.

For if he have before that time cast his Essyone, then may he upon day given,
call the Demandant non-suite, and cause him to begin again.

Therefore the Demandants Attorney in this case must especially inuigilate the
Office of Essoynes, and in Real actions to get his Writ filled, and to enter
a Recipitur, as in a Writ of Dower.

Warrentia charta, De droyte, and Surdisseisin, have the like proceeding,
because their Process is also alike.

If you have Judgment in any action, and suffer the Judgment to continue
without doing of any thing therein, by the space of a year and a day, you
shall then be forced by reason of such delay, before you may take out any
execution thereuppon, to sue out of the Court where your said judgment is
Recorded, a writ of Scire facias, and after the Return thereof you are to give
a day to the Defendant to come into the Court, and to show cause why the
Judgment should not be awarded against him upon his default; whereupon if good
cause be not showed, the Judgment is to be allowed, and execution may be taken
forth.

In case where the Plaintiff or Defendant happen to dye after Judgment and
before execution; Then are the Executors or Administrators of the Plaintiff to
sue out a Writ of Scire facias, against the Defendant, his Executors, or
Administrators, which being returned, then the Execution of Fieri facias at the
first, and in case where the Defendant is dead, must be awarded only of the
goods of the Testator or Defendant defunct, and not of the goods of the
Executor or Administrator.

This execution of Fieri facias, being delivered to the Sheriff to be
executed, if the Sheriff shall find that the Executor or Administrator did
diuaste the goods of the Testator or Defendant defunct; and shall thereupon
return a Divastauit; Then shall a Writ of Fieri facias be awarded de proprijs
bonis Testatoris, or Administratoris; Or otherwise Execution may be taken
forth against the body of the Executor or Administrator, at the choice of him
that sueth it out.

How to sue a matter of Error.
IF you would sue a matter of Error, you must either make a perfect true Copy
of the Original, or of the Exigent in that cause, and carry it to the Cursitor
of the Shiere, where the Action lies, thereby to make your Writ of Error.

When you have your Writ of Error (if it be before Judgment) you may deliver
it to the Clerk of the Treasury, whereupon the Attorney for the Plaintiff
is to deliver unto you the number of the Roles where every thing is entered.

And if it be after Judgment, Then before you know the number of the Roles,
you must show cause of Error to the Court; or else your Writ will not be
allowed.

And in case that when the Writ be allowed, the Plaintiffes Attorney must
deliver the number of the Roles; o the Clerk of the Treasury: who will deliver
the Writ over with the Record.

And then if the Defendants Attorney do not get his Record to be certified
the same Term, the Plaintiffes Attorney may procure a day to be given in
Court unto him to do it, and to remove the same.

By which day if the Defendant does it not accordingly, then has he lost the
benifit of the Error. And after one Writ of Error so put by; the Defendant
shall never have any more.

And if the Record be accordingly certified, then the next Term following you
are to assign the Errors there.

Otherwise there will go forth two Writs of Scire fac. to be delivered to the
Sheriff of Midd. and to give you warning to assign the Errors, which if you
do not within three or four days after the Return of the latter of the said
two Writs, the Writ of Error will be quasht, and you shall lose the benefit
thereof.

And if one be vtlawed upon mean Process, and would reuerse the same by writ
of Error, he must take this course: ( viz.)

Look if there be any Writ vnreturned, Or any Writ mis-returned: Or any Writ
vnfyled: Whether the Proclamation be fyled, or no? And whether it be well
returned: Or whether a Warrant of Attorney be put in or no?
All these before mentioned be Errors, which before Judgment the Court will
correct themselves.

And if you find any of the said Errors, you must go to the Clerk, and
show him the number Role where the Exigent is entered, and cause him to enter
the Vtlary.

This being done, you are then to get the Bundles where any such writ is fyled,
to be brought into the Court, from the Office of Custos breuium, where they be
kept.

Then you must have one to inform the Court therefore on your behalf.

If the Error which you pretend be for want of a Proclamation, then you are
to get as well the Record of the Term where the Exigent is entered, as the
bundle of Writs to be brought into the Court to be reviewed.

And the like you are to do of the mean Process.

And if it shall appear to the Court, That any of the Process be fyled and
not returned, Or there be error in the Return, Or there be want of mean
Process, or Proclamation; the Court will award the the Reuerser to be entered.

And if the party vtlawed can find no Error, and yet would undo the vtlarie,
if it be vtlary before a Judgment; He is to sue out his writ of Error, and
thereupon a Supersedeas:

Then he must sue out his pardon of Course, and upon that, He may have a
Scire facias directed to the Sheriff of the County where the Original was
laid, to give warning to the plaintiff to be ready in Court to prosecute his
action against the Defendant, if he have any thing to charge him withal.

Hereupon, if the plaintiff do not declare against him the Defendant within a
certain space given to him by the Court, Then the Defendant shall be quit of
that action; and the plaintiff is to begin his suite again if he will.

But if the party vtlawed have any goods or Cattle taken by color of that
Vtlary, Then he is to sue out a writ de non molestand. from the Clerk of the
Treasury, which writ he is to deliver to the Sheriff; Whereupon the
Sheriff is to deliver to him his goods or Cattle again without Bond.

But it is otherwise where the Defendant does not bring his Writ de non
molestand. but intends to overthrow all by Error, for in that case, he shall
be driven to enter into Bond for the proouing of the Error.

In every case where the cause goes with the Plaintiff upon a Demurrer, and
the Debt or matter recovered is not expressed, the Judges of the Court may give
their final Judgment, and grant you a Writ to enquire of damages; which writ
shall be directed and delivered to the Sheriff, who by virtue thereof, is to
impannell a Jury, who after they be sworn, upon Evidence to be produced on
the Plaintiffes part, may give in damages so much as they think in their
consciences, and as the VVitnesses shall prove upon their Oath that he has
sustained.

Also in an Action of waste you are to proceed in like sort, if you certefie
the Judges how the Defendant has made the place waste, and you do it before
Judgment is by them given.

But the Jury needs not to have such great care of the damages in waste
committed, as in other cases of inquiry in that kind: For whatsoever the Jury
gives in damages therein, the Court will, according to the Statute in that
case especially provided, double the same damages.

The Plaintiffes Attorney must be careful to look to the Clerk of the
Essoynes, and take heed where the Essoynes do lie, and whether they be
lawfully cast, or no.

And not only so, but the Attorney for the Plaintiff or Dema^dant must
farther look to the Adiournying of the Essoynes, and the casting of the
Nerecipiatur for the advantage of his Client.

And the Attorney for the Defendant should also be as watchful over the
Casting of the Essoynes; For that oftentimes it proves to be a benefit to
himself, and a commodity to his Clyent.

Every Essoyne must be adiourned in time, with such sufficient continuance as
the nature of the Action requires.

For want of Adiournement of the Essoyne, there lies a Non-suite.

The casting of an Essoyne where it will not lie, may be disalowed, quashed,
and turned into a default* But when it is rightly cast, then it is allowed, and
then it is to be adiourned.

And you must farther take heed, where the inferior Tenant may pray in aid
of the Superior Lord, and when, and in what case a Vowcher lies to recover by
force.

If Bastardy be alleged in general in any case, the Process for the trial
of it is to be directed to the Bishop, who is to certify the same.

The like course is to be held in Pleas of Aduowson, whether plenaritie or not
plenaritie to be so tried, and so certified likewise.

What Pleas Attournies may plead, and what not.
TO a Bond for pa^ment of money. 1. Conditions performed: 2. Per minas. 3. Per
Dures. 4 Non est fact. Genesis Speci.

To the Bill of Debt, -- plead Per Minas. Per Dures imprison. Deins age. Non
est fact. General. Special.

To any other Actions of Debt, plead Nihil debet per patriam. Nil debet per
Legem. Deins age. (so it be not for Apparel.
To a Bond for deli uery of Corn, etc. plead Per Dures. Per minas. Non est
factum. Deins age. Conditions performed.
The Common issues to Declarations grounded upon Simple actions be. Per legem:
or, Per Patr^am.
To a Bond for performance of Covenants upon an Indenture or an Arbitrin^ent
may be pleaded Per minas. Per dures. Non est fact. or At large.
To an Action of Trespass you may plead Non Cul. or, At large: if it be not
upon trial of a Title.
To an Action of Battery plead Ex insultu querentis: or, Non Cul.
To an Action for Rent plead Rien in arrere. To an Action of the Case upon
Assumpsit plead Non Assumpsit modo and forma. To an Action for Slande^, etc.
Non Cul. or, Justify the words.
To an Action for detaining of Corn, or any thing which should have been
delivered, and for which there is no Obligation, plead Non detinet. Upon
Eiectment. Non Eiecit. Non Cul.
Upon Account. -- Nunques Receptor pour Account render. Upon Administration. --
Plene Administrauit. Upon a Demise. -- Non demisit.
All which Pleas before mentioned are. ge. nerall, and ad oppositum.
THE general issue in an Assise, is, Null. Dissesin -- Null. Disseisin.

All special Pleas here are pleaded under the hand of one of the Sergeants at
Law.

No Attorney or Clerk of any Prothonotaries Office shall make up any Paper
book, whereunto any Sergeants hand is, unless he do first deliver the same
unto the Defendant to be perused, to whom he may give day to bring in the
same Book again, that it may be entered in convenient time; and if the
Defendant do not bring it in accordingly, the Attorney or Prothonotaries
Clerk, who dea'eth therein for the Plaintiff, may enter a Judgment therepon.

The Plaintiffes Attorney shall do well to request the Prothonotarie of the
Office to peruse the whole issue drawn into a Paper, before he carry it to his
Sergeant, to the end the Prothonotarie may see whether it be well pleaded or
no; without double matter, or departing from any special pleading, and whether
it be truly joined or no, according to the truth of the matter or case; Or
else it will be ieopardy and hazard of the cause: For the Jury are bound not
only to find out according to the issue joined, and no otherwise.

If the Defendants Attorney will suffer the Action to go against his Clyent by
a Nihil dicit, He must take heed that there be no part of the debt paid: For
if he do, his Clyent is in his Adversaries courtesy for the whole debt,
wherein the danger is the more if it be upon a Bond; For then he is liable to
the penalty and all.

A Title may be tried upon an action of Trans. tantum. But that suite does
award no possession, but damages and costs of suite only.

But it is otherwise in Trans. and Electione firm.

If your goods be remaining in another man's hands, and he do not use them, so
that there can be no conversion to his own use proved; there an action of
Trouer will not lie, but an action of detinew.

If you doubt, before you appear for the Defendant, that you shall be
compelled to plead sooner then you shall be provided of instructions for the
purpose; It is best for you in such extremity to choose the lesser evil, and
to suffer an Ameeciament for not appearing.

Or if it may be had, it were best to imparle, per licentiam interloquendi,
over until the next Term.

In the continuing of an issue, you for the Plaintiff must take heed you give
not away your benifit to the Defendant, and he Summon by Prouisio vt supra.

If upon any Trial, at the calling of the Jury, either Attorney shall think
the Jury to be favorable, and not indifferently returned by the Sheriff, or
his Ministers, he that is aggrieued may desire to have it tried and examined,
And, so if cause be, the pannell shall be quashed, and the Venire facias shall
be directed to the Coroner of the Shire.

If need be, you may except against any of the Jury, for that he is not a
sufficient Freeholder, etc.

And there may be four of the Jury, such as you hold to be most indifferent,
chosen by the Justices of the Bench for Tryers, in case you shall except
against the Jury.

And if any of the Jury be excepted against, or challenged for some special
combination or matter contrived between the Sheriff and them, or the
Sheriffs ministers and them: That shall not be tried by the Jury of the
Pannell, but by them that the Jury will appoint, or by confession of the
Sheriff, or his Ministers.

And such things as shall be alleged and objected for matter of favor to the
one party or the other; and the challenge shall be tried by certain Tryers of
the pannell, ( viz.) by men that are sworn, and not challenged upon their
Oaths, and the trial shall be in this manner following, ( viz.)

If any principal cause of Challenge shall be to any of the Jury, it shall
not be made, until he be called to be sworn.

Such cause of Challenge may be, for that he is a Tenant, a Kinsman, or
otherwise tied to be favorable more to the one party then the other.

Then shall the said Tryers go together and consider of the matter, and find
whether he be a Tenant, or a Kinsman, or so tied by special Bond to the
party for whom he is challenged or no.

And the Tryers shall find it either upon their own knowledge, or sufficient
proof, and not otherwise.

And the Jury shall not say, that the party so found is favorable, but that
he is a Tenant or a Kinsman, or so, and the Law shall judge and think him
favorable.

And so for all other principal challenges.

And so if the whole Jury be challenged at the Bar, by the one party, or the
other (as oftentimes they be) they shall be tried sigillatim, and other Tryers
be called forth to try the former ones, in their turn; and so to proceed
vicissim, till they be all tried.

The manner how to proceed in the Trial of the issue.
THe Plaintiffes Attorney shall do well to have the whole Record, and Rules
thereunto belonging in readiness, with all things pertinent thereunto, which
he must get to be read and receited unto the Jury, And for the ease of the
Jury, the issue whereof they are to enquire, must be truly and plainly
delivered unto them.

And after this is so read, and delivered (as aforesaid) the Plaintiffes
Attorney may write in a paper the issue, and give it to the Jury, that they
may know what they are to enquire of; provided, he give it to them before they
depart from the Bar.

After the Record is read, the Counsel are to say what they can for their
Clyents, severally and respectively*

Then the Witnesses in the matter are to be produced, sworn, and examined at
the Bar, what they can say to the question in issue.

And when the Jury has heard both parties, and the opinion of the Court (if it
need, for explanation of matter of Law) they are then to depart from the
Bar, and the Court appoints and swears one of purpose, that he shall safely
keep the said Jury, so that none of them shall depart from the other till they
be agreed: and that no other person who is not of the said Jury, shall in the
mean time speak with any of them, nor come among them, unless it shall be
such an one as the Court shall appoint to read the Evidences to the Jury, in
cse where none of them can read themselves:

If the verdict pass with you, you are to pray Judgment, return your Postea,
to make up a Bill of the costs and charges of your Clyent expended in this
cause, to carry your said Bl to the Prothonotarie, in whose Office the cause is
entered, to assesse your said costs and expenses, which being done, you take
ou^ what execution you please presently, Or otherwise vtlaw the Defendant upon
that Judgment, as you shall be advised.

Instructions to sue forth a Recovery.
IN a Recovery in a Writ of Entry in the Post, the Attorney who sueth it
forth, must take good advice in the drawing of his Writ of Entry, he is to
carry it to the Chancery man to make it.

And the Attorney must take with him, either his Clyent, or some other person
who knows the Land, and get him sworn before one of the Masters of the
Chancery for the true value of the Land, and what it is worth by the year.

Thenmust the value be set down on the backside of the Writ, and the name of
the Master of the Chancery, who took the Oath thereunto.

Next, this Attorney must carry it to the Kings Attourneys Clerk, who is
appointed for the same purpose to get his Masters hand unto it.

But before you have your Writ again from hence, your Clyent, or some other
for him, must enter into a Recognizance to the King in such manner, as Master
Attorney General his Clerk shall draw up and make for you, And the said
Clerk is to carry your Clyant, or other party, who is so to enter into
Recognizance to the Court of Common Pleas, to acknowledge the same before the
Judges there.

The effect and condition of the said Recognizance is, that those Lands
specified in the Writ, are not holden io Capite, and that the Recovery is not
hurtful to his Majesty, nor his successors.

And if the Lands be holden in Capite, you must take course before you sue out
your Writ of Entry for, license in that behalf; otherwise you shall run
into a great inconvenience, and be forced afterward to sue out your Pardon in
this behalf.

After your writ of Entry is passed through the Kings Attournies hand, then if
the Tenants of the Land will appear in proper person, Your Writ of Enrty with
the Return thereof, must be taken out into one of the Prothonotaries
Remembrances, where you will have your Recovery entered.

And then in the Margent of the Remembrance make the appearance of him who is
vouched.

And this being done, deliver your writ to one Sergeant, and the Remembrance to
another, when the Court is at good and fitting leisure.

Note withal, that if this be done with a single Vowcher, you are to retain
three Sergeants; and if it be to be done with a Double Vowcher* you are to
retain five Sergeants.

And when it is acknowledged, then you are to give the Writ of Entry to the
Cerke of the Office that shall enter it, and he will thereupon enter your
Recovery, and make you an Exemplification, and a Writ of Seisin in the same
term.

But if the Tenants do not appear in proper person at the Bar but by
Attorney, then you shall not get your Writ of Recovery to be fully finished
the first Term; but you must have a Sum. entered against the Tenants, and a
Writ of Seisin awarded.

And it behooves the attorney for the Demandant to be circumspect, both for
the Return of the Writ of Entry and Seisin, and for the filling of them, as
also for the Warrants of attorney on both sides, For otherwise by default or
omission in any of them, the Recovery may be overthrown again.

And for farther and more assurance in this kind, it has been therefore
used, that they have exemplified both the writ of Entry and Seisin, with the
Returns thereof; and the Warrants of attorney, for fear least afterward any
of them should be mis-filed or mis-carryed.

And if you would search for any Recovery acknowledged long before, you must
first find it with the Clerk of the Warrants.

The order to sue forth a Fine.
FIrst draw the Precipe in sheets of Paper, and Engrosse the Concord in
Parchment: Then get your writ of Covenant made up, by the Cursitor of the
Sheire where the Land lies, according to Concord.

And if the Knowledge be to be taken by special Dedimus potestatem, then you
must deliver to the Cursitor the Commissioners names that are to take the
Knowledge; Of which Commissioners one must be a Knight, and the Cursitor is to
make up the Dedimus potestatem by the Concord, etc.

Then get your Writ sealed, and deliver it to the Commissioners, with the
Concord engrossed in Parchment, with Seals and Wax unto it.

And when your Commissioners have taken the Knowledge, they are to return the
Writ of Dedimus potestatem thus, ( viz.)

Executio istius Commissionis patet in quadam Schedula huic annex.

And file the Concord unto the backe-side of the Dedimns potestatem; and the
Commissioners are to set their hands and Seals to the Concord, and their hands
to the Dedimus, etc.

You shall then proceed with your Writ of Covenant in manner following.
FIrst, you are to go to the Office, sometimes called, My Lord of Leicesters
Office in the Inner Temple, because my Lord of Leicester had the first grant
thereof: and there to compound for the value of the Land, either by
Composition, or Affedauit to be made before a Doctor who does attend for the
same purpose.

The Fine being set down by the Officers here, you are to pay it presently to
the Receiver.

Then will the proper Officers of that Office set their hands to the backside
of the Writ.

Then you must return your Writ of Covenant in this manner (viz.)

At the upper end of the Writ, Pleg. de prosequend. Ioh. Do. Ric. Roo.


In the middle, Sum. Ioh. De^. Ric. Fe^.


At the lower end, 1. M. miles vic. id est, the Sherifs name of the Shire.


THen carry your Writ of Covenant, Dedimus potestatem, and Records, to the
Custos breuium his Office, and there deliver them to the Clerk, who is for the
Shire where the Lands do lie; and he will take out into Paper what belongs to
him to do, and indorse the Writ, setting down when the Proclamation shall be
made.

Then you must carry the Writ of Covenant, Dedimus potestatem, and Concord
unto the Clerk of the Kings silver, where he will dispatch what appertains to
his Office; and where, what you must pay, and for what, shall appear in the
Calender of Fees hereafter in these present contained.

And then take and carry all to the Chirographers, or the Cirrographers (as it
is corruptly styled,) and deliver it to him who is Clerk for the Shire where
the Land lies, and he will hereupon make the Indentures of Fine; For which the
Fee shall appear hereafter in his place.

Here note, that the Dedimus potestatem and the Writ of Covenant, must agree
in Names, Acres, and place.

And if the Knowledge be taken before one of the Justices of Assize in the
Country, then the Judge sets his hand to the value of the Lands, upon Oath
taken before him, but it is written in Paper.

And when you come to pass your Fine in my Lord of Leicesters Office, so
called (as I said before) because upon the new erection of it in the days of
the late good Q^eene Elizabeth, it was conferred upon him, and was devised and
provided chiefly to take notice of Alienations, being the project of one Mr.
Sutton of Lincolnes Inn (as I take it.) Then you must borrow that Paper of the
Judge of Assize before mentioned, to show it unto the Officers here; Or else
you shall be compelled to compound anew for the value of the Lands, etc.

But if the Knowledge be made in open Court, then you must have the Precipe in
Parchment, which must be annexed to the Writ of Covenant, and you must deliver
it unto the Sergeant at Bar to draw; for which, his Fee shall be set down
hereafter: and this you may do before you pay your Fine, by which Knowledging,
you save your Clyent a good part of his charge.

And if it be Knowledged before my Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas in
his Chamber, or in any other place saving in the Court; then one of his Clerks
will make your Precipe and Concord, and write them in Parchment, whereunto he
will get my Lords hand.

And then you are to consute the Writ of Covenant to the Concord, and so pass
it through my Lord of Leicesters Office, the Custosb reuium, the Kings Silver,
and the Chirographer, as is before set down.

Note also (as I gave you to understand before in part) that if the Lands be
holden in Capite of the King, then you must sue forth your License of
Alienation for your establing in that behalf: For if you enter into the Lands
without License, the King will have a Writ of Intrufion against you for the
same, and so receive all the maine profits thereof likewise, until you have sued
forth your pardon herein, which will be a matter of much charge, etc.

How your Lieence of Alienation must be sued out.
FIrst, you must get him who is proper Clerk for the Licenses of Alienation,
to make your Dockquet, or, as it is corruptly writ, ten your Dogget, in paper,
which you are to carry to the Office called my Lord of Leicesters Office, or
Office for Alienations.

At this Office, you must compound for the value of the Land, either by
Commission or Affedauet, and you must pay the third part of the value sessed,
for a Fine, and that presently after the Master of the Chancery, or Doctor who
attends for that purpose, has set his hand to the Dockquet, the fee for
which hand, expect anon.

This being done, your Writ is to be entered there in the same Office.

And then two Clerks of the Office, to whom it does appertain of property,
will set their hands to the Dockquet, and will afterward make your License of
Alienatiou, and get it sealed for you, the several Fees of which several
passages, I reserve for their proper Station, etc.

Note that the Post-fine of every Fine knowledged, is as much as you pay in the
Chancery, and half as much more, and if it be to be levied by the Sheriff of
the Shire, where the Land lies, which did pass by the Fine after
Proclamations which is the year after the fine is leauied.

The Causes whereupon wager of Law lies.
IF any man be sued upon a simple Contract.

as,

Upon Book: Upon Emisset, or Emisit. Upon Mutuatis, or Mutauit. Upon Concessit
soluere, or Assumpsit oluere: Upon an Insimul Computauerunt. Upon a Detinet.
Upon a Trouer. Upon Debt, being not by Obligation of Bill signed and sealed.
In every of these, the Defendant may wage his Law, that is, He may dispose
that he owes the Plaintiff nothing, and so avoid his suite.

Wager of Law is to be done in this wise, (viz.) that he plead, Nil debit
perlegem.

And so he is to get day over until the next Term to do his Law, Or else he
may do his Law presently at his own election.

But if he defer the doing of his Law, until an other Term; He the
Defendant must have a care to come in at his day, and do his Law.

Or if it so happen, that he cannot come in at the time and place appointed,
His Attorney must remember the time when his Clyent was to do his Law; and
upon the same day to cast an Essoyne for him, or else the Plaintiff will have
Judgment against him by default.

And if the Defendants Attorney do so cast the Essoyne, then the Plaintiffes
Attorney is to adiourne it, which if he neglect to do, the Desendants
Attorney may call the Plaintiff Nonsuit.

But if the Plaintiff does Adtourne it, then the Defendant is to do his Law
peremptorily at the day given him; or else Judgment shall be awarded against
him by his own default.

And in case where the Attorney for the Defendant does not cast his Essoyne,
at the day, for the benefit of his Clyent, and his Clyent is not ready to do
his Law: Then the Attorney for the Plaintiff may enter a Ne recipiatur, with
the Clerk of the Essoynes, and give him day in Court to do his Law very
speedily, ( viz.) within three or four days after, and upon the Defendants
default then, the Plaintiffes Attorney may enter a Judgment against the
Defendant.

Then is the Plaintiffes Attorney to make a Bill of his Clyents charges, and
get it rated and allowed by the Prothonotarie; which done, he may make forth
Execution against the Defendant, in what sort he shall think it best.

When the Defendant comes in to do his Law, He is to bring in some of his
neighbors, or acquaintance, to depose with him in manner following: ( viz.)

Every of them must make Oath that he believes, that the Oath which the
Defendant takes and deposes is true: (He the Defendant deposing before them,
that he owes no such debt to the Plaintiff, as the Plaintiff declares for,
nor any part thereof.

And the Defendant should bring with him twelve such neighbors, or
acquaintance, compurgators with him, who should all depose in like manner (as
aforesaid.)

But there is an Officer here for the case of the subject, who will furnish the
Defendant in this case of Wager of Law, with twelve such Compurgators as
occasion shall require; for with a less number you cannot wage your Law, etc.

When the Defendant has his said full number of twelve: then his Attorney is
to get the Prothonotarie to take his Wager of Law.

Then will the Crier of the Court cause the Defendant to stand up at the Bar;
and the Justices will examine him, whether he owes or deteineth the money, or
goods, or Chattels, contained in the Declaration, or any part or parcel of the
same; whereunto the Defendant is to answer yea or no.

And if the Defendant deposes that he does not owe or deteine from him the
Plaintiff the same, nor any part or parcel thereof, and the Plaintiff will
stand to his action, then is the Defendant quit thereof for ever, and the
Plaintiff loses his action.

But if the Plaintiff will not abide his Oath, intending to charge him
otherwise afterward: The Plaintiff may be Non suit, pay the Defendant his
Costs, and be at liberty to begin a new again at another time, and to lay
his action so (in some cases) that no Wager of Law shall lie therein.

Note farther, that a man may wage his Law in diverse Real actions:

As,

In Formedowne; or, Formedon, Indescender, Remainder, or Reuerter. Waste;
Warrant chapter Donat: or Any Action where Summons lies.
For if the Sheriff return that he has summoned, where he has not
summoned, whereupon a Grand Cape is awarded; Then, and in such case may the
Defendant come in and wage his Law that he was not summoned, and so avoid the
Grand Cap.

The order to sue forth a Nisi prius extra.
IF the matter be pleaded to an issue, so that it is to be tried by Nisi prius
in London, or in the Country: Then must the Plaintiffes Attorney, after issue
is joined, see the same well entered, and examined by the Prothonotarie.

Then carry the Paper Book to the Clerk of the Nisi prius; and he or some
Clerk of his is to make up the Record.

Then let your Protonotharies Clerk make forth your Venire facias; which,
after it is sealed, you must carry to the Sheriff of the Shire where the issue
is joined, And cause him to return your Jury.

When you have your Jury, you are to carry it to the Clerk of the Iuries, that
he may therevppon make your Hab. Corp. or Distringas, which you are to deliver
to the Sheriff. Then will he return it, And make your warrant to warn the
Jury, etc.

Then you must take your Hab. Corp, and the Iuries names being filed to the
backside of the Writ, and Nisi prius; And deliver them all together to the
Clerk of the Assizes, who if you do therefore give him something more then
the Ordinary Fees, will cull the Jury at such time as you shall appoint him;
Or otherwise you may stay long enough.

Above all things, be sure that you iustruct your Counsel sufficiently in such
things as make most to prove the issue on your party.

And have your Witness or other proofs in a readiness.

If you t^y your matter in London, Then the Postea comes in on the morrow
after the trial, And Judgment is given presently upon the same.

But if the Trial be in the Country at the Assizes, Then the Postea comes
not in till the next Term following: And then you are to call for your Postea,
and thereupon to see that your Judgment be well entered, etc. ( vt supra.)

Supersedeas de non Molestando.
THis Writ de Non Molestando, is to prevent, or free the body or goods of a
party vtlawed from Arrest: and it is sued out, to the end the party vtlawed
may have security and safety thereby, in body and goods, in the mean time
while he is in reuersing of the Vtlary, whereby to be finally discharged of
that evil.

If the Plaintiff have took out Process of Vtlary, and thereby arrested the
Defendants goods or body: This Writ does discharge them both, or either of
them; and if the Sheriff have not already made sale of the goods, and before
the Return of the Cap. Vtlagat. upon the delivery of this Writ de non.
Molestand. he must return them again.

And if the defendant do bring his said Writ to the Sheriff, after the
return of the Cap. Vtlagat. is past, it is then too late, and then the
Sheriff may choose whether he will restore the goods again, or return them,
or the value of them, which must be appraised by men indifferent, for the Kings
Majesty's best behoof.

And in case after the Sheriff has so taken the goods by Cap. Vtlagat. and
upon bringing of the Writ de non molestand. shall deliver back to the
Defendant his said goods, he the said Sheriff is thereupon for his Indempunity
to take bond of the Defendant with sureties, that if he prove no^ Error in the
matter, the said goods shall not be made away, but be in readiness and
forthcomming at all times, and returned, if the Sheriff shall be compelled to
restore and answer them again.

But if the Defendant sueth forth his Writ de non molestando, and have it in a
readiness about him before that the Sheriff does attach his body or goods upon
the Vtlary, then the Sheriff upon fight thereof may not meddle with his body
or goods in any wise. And so much shall suffice for the Writ de non
molestando, etc.

Note, that all Actions of the Case, Debt, or Battery may be laid in what
Country you please, But Trans* Eiectment and Waste be local.

The Charge of proceeding in every seue. rall Case, and upon every several
Process now follows
The Charge of the Original Writ.
FIrst, for every Original Writ of the Common Pleas, being a single Writ.

l. s. d. In Debt, Trans. etc. Per piece, 0 1 4 I^de Post diem, 0 0 4 Item, for
the double Original Writ of those kinds, 0 1 6 Item, Post diem, 0 0 4 Item,
for a fine, upon every Original Writ as follows ( viz) If the Original
exceed forty pounds, it paieth to the Cursitor. 0 0 8 If the Original be a
hundred pounds, it pays Fine. 0 10 0 And so from above forty pound in
infinitum, the like proportionable Fine. -- With the first proportionably. l.
s. d. Item, for all Original Writs, besides the ordinary ones of debt, trans.
Insult. and the other twelve pe^^y writs, you shall pay Fee for making of them,
as before is set down in the Chancery. Vide the charge of Original writs in
Chancery. Item, the Common Process upon the Original of debt, trans. etc. 0 0 6
Item, the Seal of the common Process, 0 0 7 Item, the Common Process, upon
an Action of the Case, and other Actions of higher nature being most of them
Real, and not within the number of those which pay but twelve pence for the
Original. 0 1 0 Item, the Seal 0 0 7

The ordinary charge to sue an Vtlary in a single writ.
IN primis, The Original and Post diem 0 1 4 Item, the Capias and Seal, 0 1 5
Item, post diem. 0 0 4 Item, the Alias Capias, and Seal, with the Post Diem. 0
1 5 l. s. d. Item, the Attournies Fee. 0 3 4 Item, the Plur, Cap. and Seal. 0
1 1 Item, the VVarant of Attourny. 0 0 4 Item, the exigent and Seal. 0 1 6
Item, the Proclomation and Seal. 0 1 1 Item, the return of the Exigent for
every name. 0 1 0 Item, for fyling the Exigent and Proclamation. 0 0 8 Item, if
it be with a Post terminum, the fyling of the Exigentt will cost 0 1 6 Item, the
Attourneys fee. 0 3 4 Item, a general Capias vtlagat. and the seal thereof. 0
0 11 Item, a special Cap. vtlagat. and the seal thereof 0 2 4 Item, the
Attournies Fee. 0 3 4

The charges of a Nisi prius in Guild Hall in London, taken by default.
IN Primis, The Venire facias. 0 2 7 Item, the Return thereof. 0 2 0 Item, the
Post diem of the same 0 0 4 Item, the Hab. Corp. and the Seal 0 1 11 Item, the
Return of it. 0 2 4 l. s. d. Item, the Sergeant for warning of The Jury 0 3 4
For the Copy of the issue. 0 1 0 For the Seal of the Nisi prius. 0 2 2 The
Lord chief Justices Fee for entering the Record into his Book. 0 11 9 For the
Reading of the Record. 0 1 0 For the Default. 0 2 4 For the Green cloth. 0 1 0
For the keeper of the Hall. 0 1 0 For a Tales if the Jury fill not. 0 4 4 To
the Jury per piece, being of the number in the Hab. Corp. 0 0 8 To the rest
that come in by Tales per piece. 0 0 4 Item, my Lords Foot cloth servant. 0 1 0
Item, to the Sergeant for keeping of the Jury. 0 1 0 Item, for the
Barre-keeper. 0 1 0 Item, to the Crier 0 1 0 For every witness sworn per
piecce. 0 0 4 Item, the Attourneys Fee. 0 3 4 Item, for your Counsels Fee. at
least. 10. s.

The charge of a Nisi prius in the Country.
l. s. d. IN primis, the ven. fac. 0 2 7 The return thereof, vt supra. The
Post Diem, vt supra. The Habeas Co^pora and Seal, vt supra. The Return of it,
vt supra. The Bayliffes for warning the Jury, ovt supra. For sealing the Record
of Ni. prius, vt supra. The putting in the Record at Assizes. 0 15 1 Item, your
Counselors Fee, The Attourneys Fee, vt supra. Where note, that if the
Attorney, who is named Attorney upon the Record, follows the business, you
shall save 4. shillings four pence. But if you use any other, you shall pay
the more 0 4 4 Item, All other things, as Jury, The Bayliffe who keeps the
Jury, Crier, and all other, general and for the most part. 0 vt supra.

Fees belonging to the Prothonotaries, and their Clerks.
l. s. d. IN primis, for every common Declaration, not exceeding the number of
twenty lines in the Roll, And the Roll under the number of 700. 0 1 0 Where
the Original and Capias are double, the Fees generally upon the same
proceeding, be likewise double here. -- duplex f^od. Declaration upon
account. 0 2 0 Entering of an issue upon a per dures imprisonement, nunques
Executor; or ple^e administrauit. 0 2 4 Also for the Declaration, and for the
Judgment, similiter similiter. Nunques Receptor pour account render. Pro Q.
and Defen. 0 4 2 Fee of the Defen^ant for every common issue. 0 1 0 Fee of the
Plain^ffe for Conditions performed, wherein there is no Reioynder. 0 3 8 Of the
Defendant for his part, except the Bond be the longer, but 0 2 0 l. s. d.
Item, for every Declaration, if it be but twenty lines. 0 1 4 Item, for every
sheet more, if it be above twenty lines. le sheet. 0 0 4 To the Clarke for
coppying of the Pleas, and titling for every sheet. -- -- -- for every
sheet, inde. 0 0 4 The Imparlance Cop. 0 1 0 To the Prot^onotary for every
Imparlance. 0 1 0 For the entering of the Condition. 0 1 0 In Real actions, for
the Copy of every sheet. -- -- -- le sheet. 0 0 8 Entering of Non assumpsit
for the Defendant. 0 2 0 For the Plaintiff, similiter. 0 2 0 For every
Replication 0 0 4 For every Reioynder. 0 0 8 For Entering of every Bail 0 2 0
For Entering of Nihil dicit. 0 2 4 For the Copy of the same. 0 0 8 If the same
contain more then a Roll: Then you pay after the Rate of 6. s. 8. d. for
every Roll more. Every Roll more. 0 6 8 For every Judgment and Satisfaction
in Actions Real. 0 4 0 To the Prothonotarie for Single Voucher. 0 11 6 l. s.
d. To the Clerk for Entering and Exemplifying, inde, 0 4 0 The Prothonotaries
allowance to the Clerk, inde, 0 1 6 For writing and examining of every
exemplification in Writs of Entry upon Vowcher or confession, if it be a double
Vowcher. 0 5 0 To the Prothonotarie. 0 14 6 The Prothonotarie allows to the
Clerk, inde, 0 2 6 To the Clerk for Entering of every Roll. 0 0 4 To the
Prothonotarie for entering of a Summons. 0 4 6 For the Searching of any of the
old Dockquets for every Term. 0 0 4 To the Prothonotarie for a Treble Vowcher.
0 18 6 To the Clerk for entering and exemplifying, inde, 0 6 0

Fees belonging to the Phillozers of the Common Pleas.
l. s. d. IN primis, for every Cup. upon Distress, and in Debt, Detinew,
Account, and Trespass, of Common Process. 0 0 6 For signing thereof. 0 0 4
Item, for every Capias Pone, or Capias and Distress in the common Writ of the
said Action. 0 0 6 For signing thereof. 0 0 4 Item, if any such Writ be of
the number of six names. 0 1 0 Item; for a Capias Pone, and Distress. Sur.
Covenant, Annuitie, of Action upon the Statute, etc. 0 1 0 Besides the Seal.
Item, for every Exigent upon the Statute, and upon the Case. 0 1 0 Item, for
the Delivery of a Record. 0 0 4 Item, if any the aforesaid Writs be longer
then is usual, by reason of the number of names, or matter contained in them:
Then you are to pay therefore accordingly, and ratably. -- -- -- -- Ratably.

Fees of the Office of Custos Breuium.
l. s. d. INprimis, for Search of every Term. 0 0 5 Item, for the Copy of the
Writ. 0 0 4 Item, for the single bundle. 0 0 1 Item, for the Fyling of an
Exigent, if it be without a Post terminum. 0 1 8 Item, for the fyling of any
Sheriffs bundle of Writs, so that they come in within three or four days
after the first Return of the Term. 0 0 4

Note, that by reason of the manifold inconveniences, and abuses, which did
grow by occasion of the putting in, and receiving of Writs here after the day;
It was ordered and directed by the Court, That no Original Writ, or Plur.
Cap. shall be put in, or received the last day of the Return, inde.

Item, the Bagge-bearer of the Custos breuium, ought to bring in the bundles of
Writs of the Term past, on the first day of the Term following, to be
seen, perused, and used by such as have authority to do it, and that without
paying of any thing for the same.

Duties and Fees belonging to the Treasurie-house.
l. s. d. IN primis, for a Search, when you b^ing with you the Term and Number
Roll, And if it be in the Term time, or before the Door is shu^ up. -- -- --
-- every search. 0 0 4 And if you come to search in the Vacation, after the
Door is shut up, Then you pay to the Keeper of the same house for opening the
Door. 0 2 0 And if you search any of the old Terms, Then you must pay for
every of the said Terms which you do so search. 0 4 0 Item, the Officers and
Attourneys ought to search and see the Essoines Rolls and old Terms in the
Treasury, for their better information and direction in their own business,
without paying any Fee at all. No Fee in privilege. Item, for a Supersedeas*
upon Main prise, which should be taken (the Defendant being present in
person:) 0 2 0 l. s. d. Item, a Bill of Bail thereupon: 0 0 4 Item, for
writing, examinatio^n, and certifying inde, 0 12 1 Item, for Fees of Re^. of
Pardon upon an Vtlary 0 6 2 For the certifying of the Record inde, 0 2 1 Item,
for the Warden of the Fleet inde, 0 2 4 Item, for the Clerks pains 0 1 8
Item, the Siri facias inde* 0 0 6 Item, the bill of bail, 0 0 4 Item, for
every Nisiprius, so that it exceed not three Sheets. 0 2 0 For every Sheet
above three 0 0 4 For the Seal 0 vt supra.

Fees of the Clerk of the Essoynes follow.
l. s. d. IN primis for Enroling of every Esso^ne. 0 0 6 For every Idem dies. 0
0 4 For every Adiournment, 0 0 4 For every Bill of Exception, 0 0 6 For every
Ne Recipiatur 0 0 6 l. s. d. For every Supersedeas made by the Clerk of the
Treasury, 0 2 4 For every Copy thereof: 0 0 8 If any Roll be spoiled by any of
the Prothonotaries Clerk, or any other Clerk that does enter any roles, then
the party that so spoileth the^, may go to the Office, and get a new one,
paying for the same. a Roll. 0 1 0 Item, of the Lord chief Justice for making
and binding of every Term, for his Fee inde 0 13 4

The Cryers Fees.
l. s. d. IN primis, for every verdict or Non suite in the Court, 0 0 4 For
every Fine knowledged at the Bar, 0 0 8 For calli^g, keeping, and swearing of
the Jury: 0 0 4 For every wager of Law, 0 0 8 For every Recovery at the Bar.
0 1 0 Item, he ought to have of every Attorney of the same Court at the end of
every Term, which he well deserves, -- -- -- of every Attorney. 0 0 4

The charge of the reuersing of an Vtlary follows.
l. s. d. IN primis, to the Exigenter for the Term and number Roll, 0 1 4 For
a Warrant to enter the Attorney. 0 1 4 For entering of the Vtlary. 0 6 8 To the
Clerk that enters it for his pains 0 1 6 For the Pardon* 2 0 0 For the
Supersedeas, 0 3 0 For the Scire facias, and the Return inde, 0 2 4 The
Attourneys Fee. 0 3 4 Sum 3 0 2

Fees belonging to the Clarke of the Vtlaries follow.
l. s. d. IN primis, for search of every Term, 0 0 4 Item, a general Capias
Vtlagat. 0 0 10 Item, for a Special Capias Vtl^gatum, 0 2 4 l. s. d. Item, the
Certiorare upon an Vtl. 0 2 0 For a Copy and fine, 0 0 10

And for your direction Note, That if you would cause an Vtlary to be
certified, which is in the Sheriffs hands: For that the parties are agreed,
you must first get a true Copy of the Exigent, which you must bring to the
Clerk of the Vtlaries, and request him to make you a Certiorare thereby,
directed unto the Sheriff of the Shire, where the Defendant is vtlawed, This
you are to deliver unto the Sheriff, and he thereupon must certify and
return it over of force, though the Plaintiff do not withdraw the Exigent.

The charges of traversing of an Vtlary, and Pardon upon the same, whereupon
you are to proceed in this and other Courts accommodatelie.
l. s. d. IN primis, the Search of the Number Roll. 0 0 4 Item, the Certiorare
out of the Chancery to remove the Record. 0 2 6 l. s. d. Item, the Clerk of
the Treasury of this Court, for removing of the Record. 0 14 1 Item, for
drawing of the Pardon, 0 3 4 Item, for ingrosing of the pardon, 0 6 8 Item, for
examining of it. 0 1 0 Item, for inroling of it in the Chancery 0 3 4 Item, for
the great Seal. 1 0 6 Item, for the first Sciri fac. 0 2 6 Item, the Return
thereof. 0 2 0 Item, for entering of the Vtlary. 0 0 8 Item, to one of the
Prothonotaries for allowance of the pardon, 0 2 4 Item, the Post Diem of the
first Sciri facias. 0 0 4 Item, the copy of the Entry. 0 1 0 Item, to the
Clerk of the Vtlaries for discharging of the same. 0 2 0 Item, the Supersedeas
de non mo lestando. 0 2 6 Item, for the Attournies Fee, 0 3 4 Sum 3 6 4

The-charges of a Recovery at the Bar.
l. s. d. IN primis, the writ of Entry, 0 2 6 For entering of the writ of entry
in the alienatio^ office 0 0 4 To the Doctor or him that does atend for the
composition. 0 0 4 For indorsing of the wri^. 0 0 6 For filing of the same, 0 1
0 For fine thereof, according to the value made by deposition of the party. --
As in the Table following hereafter. To the Receiver. 0 0 6 For the Return
thereof. 0 2 0 To Master Attorney General for signing of the writ. 0 10 0 To
the Secondary for making the remembrance. 0 2 0 For a Single Vowcher for three
Sergeants. 0 10 0 For a Double Vowcher to four Sergeants. 0 13 4 If there be
not so many Sergeants at the Bar, at the time of the knowledging of the
recovery, whether with single or double Vowcher, as there ought to be, The
over- plus of the Sergeants due is to be delivered to the Puisne one -- -- To
the Puisne le surplus^ge. l. s. d. Justice to the Poores Box 0 0 6 Pro Justice.
^unioribus, 0 2 0 The Common Vowcher. 0 0 4 To the Crier. 0 1 0 To the Keeper.
0 0 6 To the Prrthonotarie for entering a Single Vowcher. 0 14 6 To the clerk
for exemplifying of the same. 0 5 0 For the Seal of the Recovery in green
Wax. 0 2 2 The Writ of Seisin and Seal, 0 1 1 The Return of the Post Diem
thereof. 0 2 0 The Warrant of Attorney. 0 0 8 The Attournies Fee 0 3 4 And if
there be a writ of Summons awarded, for that the Recovery cannot be perfected
in one Term, the Attorney may demand another Fee, very reasonably and
iustificably. -- Double Fee, pro Attornato. For taking of Affedauit, pro valor
terr. 0 0 4 For the Writ of Summons* 0 2 0 For the Return and Post diem. 0 2 4
Sum total* besides the Fines, 3 6 0

The Fines follow, Secundum ratum and Consuetudenem.

Value of
Land, Rate, l. s. d* Pays l. s. d. The Land of yearly valne of 3 6 8 0 6 8
The Land of yearly valne of 5 6 8 0 10 0 The Land of yearly valne of 7 13 4 0
13 0 The Land of yearly valne of 8 13 4 0 16 8 The Land of yearly valne of 11
0 0 1 0 0 The Land of yearly valne of 12 0 0 1 3 4 The Land of yearly valne
of 14 6 0 1 6 8 The Land of yearly valne of 15 6 8 1 10 0 The Land of yearly
valne of 17 13 4 1 13 4 The Land of yearly valne of 18 13 4 1 16 8 The Land of
yearly valne of 20 0 0 2 0 0 The Land of yearly valne of 22 0 0 2 3 4 The
Land of yearly valne of 24 6 8 2 6 8

And so proportionably, and according to the said Rates.

The Charges of a Fine, with license of Alienation, follows.
l. s. d. INprimis, for making of the Dockquet, 0 1 0 For signing of the
Dockquet, 0 2 0 For entering the Fine, 0 0 6 Note that The Fine for Alienation,
is the third part of the yearly profi^s of the Lands set down by the ^fficers
in the Dockquet, -- -- Fine third part Valoras terr. For making of the License,
and for sealing of it, 2 0 0 For entering of the composition. 0 0 6 The Writ of
Covenant. 0 2 6 The Fine in the Writ of Covenant, is the tenth part of the
Value, as it is set down by the Officers -- -- -- Fine bre. Covenant texth
part valoris terr. To the Custos breuium* 0 2 8 For entering of the Kings
silver. 0 0 6 To the Chirographer. 0 5 8 The allowance of the Proclamation, 0 1
0 l. s. d. For engrossing of the Fine, and expedition. 0 1 6 The Attourneys
Fee, 0 6 8 Sum Total. besides Fines. 3 4 4

The charge of a Fine knowledged by special Dedimus Potestatem.
l. s. d. INprimis, the Writ of Dedimus potestatem, 1 2 2 The Fine in the
Hannaper, 0 6 8 The Lord Chief Justice his hand to the Dedimus potestatem. 0 1
0 To the Master of the Rolls, for his hand to the same, 0 1 0 The Return of
the Dedimus potestatem, 0 2 0 The Attourneys Fee, 0 3 4 For drawing of the
Concord, 0 3 4 The Writ of Covenant, 0 2 6 The post Diem inde, 0 0 4 The
Return thereof, 0 2 0 Item, one of the Custos*breuium his Clerks, which
takes out the fine, 0 1 0 l. s. d. The Fine is according to the Value ( id
est) the tenth part of the value, 0 10. pars For the Commission or Affedauit. 0
0 4 For the Kings silver. 0 10 4 The Entering of the writ of covenant, 0 0 6 The
Custos breuium, 0 2 8 To the Chirographer, 0 6 6 If you bring your Writ of
Covenant after the Term is ended, The allowance of the Proclamation will cost
you 0 1 0 For engrossing of the Fine, 0 1 0 For Expedition, 0 0 6 For the
Attourneys Fee, 0 3 4 Sum Total. besides the Fine to the King, is 2 1 10

And so much shall suffice for the charge of a Fine so acknowledged: Now
follows,

The Charges of a Fine knowledged before my Lord chief Justice of the
Common Pleas
INprimis, for drawing of the Concord. 0 2 6 l. s. d The Writ of Covenant, 0 2
6 The Knowledging before his Lordship, 0 9 0 The fine for the Value Vt supra.
For the Affedauit and composition. 0 0 4 For entering the Writ of covenant, Vt
supra. To the Receiver, for making of the Writ, and knowledging of the same. 0
0 6 The Return of the Writ of covenant, 0 2 0 The Post D^em inde, 0 0 4 To my
Lord chief Justices man for getting of his Lords hand to the concord, 0 1 0 To
the Custos breuium, 0 2 8 For engrossing of the fine, 0 1 0 For expedition, 0 0
6 Attourneys Fee, 0 3 4 Sum Total. besides Fine to the King. 1 13 4

The Charge of knowledging a Fine at the Bar.
l. s. d. FOr engrossing of the Concord, 0 2 6 Bre^de Covenant: 0 2 6
Affedauit, 0 0 4 Allocatio Bre^e Covenant, 0 0 6 To the Receiver, 0 0 6 To the
Sergeant at Bar, 0 3 4 To the Prothonotaries Clerk for making the Knowledge,
0 0 6 To the Box, 0 0 6 To the Porter, 0 0 6 Fine to the King, vt supra.
Returue of the Writ of Covenant, 0 2 0 Custos Breuium, 0 2 8 Entering of the
Kings silver. 0 0 6 To the Chirographer, 0 5 8 Engrossing o^ the fine and
exped^tio^, 0 1 6 Sum total, besides the Kings Fine, 1 3 6 ALL Writs of
Covenant, Writs of Assize, and Writs in nature of Assize above the value of
forty shillings, pay Fine, -- -- as before is set down. Writs of Debt, and
Writs of Trans. Above 40. l. pay Fine as follows, (viz.) Above 40. l. -- unto
100. l. pays, *0. l. 6. s. 8. d.

l. s. d. l. s. d. 100 0 0 pays 0 10 0 133 6 8 pays 0 13 4 146 6 4 pays 0 16
8 200 0 0 pays 1 0 0 233 6 8 pays 1 3 4 240 13 4 pays 1 6 8 300 0 0 pays 1
10 0

Et sic progreditur in infinitum.

Writs of Forme-downe above the value of four pounds, pay Fine in form
following.

l. s. d. l. s. d. 5 6 8 pays 0 6 8 6 6 8 0 10 0 10 13 4 0 13 4 11 13 4 0 16 8
16 0 0 1 0 0 17 0 0 1 3 4 18 0 0 Ratably. 19 0 0 Ratably. 20 0 0 Ratably. 20 0
0 similiter. 22 6 8 1 10 0

Et sic de ceteris proportionabiliter procedendum est.

All Writs of

Pone of Justice. Pone of Writs of Right, Pone de auerijt bonis and Catallis, De
Conspiratione, Falso Iudicio, Recordare of all kinds except de auerijs- etc.
Accedas ad Curiam, Dedimus potestatem for knowledge of a Fine, or Deed to be
enrolled or cancelled.
l. s. d. Every one of these Writs do pay Fine, 1 6 8

I Do confess that I have here omitted the precise order of setting down the
proceedings of the Common Pleas, in the way of gradation and true footma^ship
in the scale of method numerously; as also in the delivery of the Fees of this
court.

I do acknowledge, that more might have been added; and some of these may be
subject to the quarrel of those who desire to keep their Lawmysterie in
Emblems and Caracters, like to cosncionable Caldeans; rather then to
communicate them with the public in a known way of dealing, and a familiar
language of commerce: For answer whereunto, I refer me to the preface in the
frontispice hereof.

Desiring only such as affect general good, to testify their generous and
ingenerate goodness in the assistance hereof.

Thus the Author prays in aid of your Common Pleas men especially, and as
duty more binds him, of that most worthy to be so most eminent a
Prothonotarie among you, Mr. Brownlowe with this Conclusion:

You that are Masters of this Science,
I ask your aid and free suppliance.
Cat^ra turba tuas muscas venare; ministro:
Fulminis hac valido propria praeaa: Vale.
THE KINGS BENCH.
THE Kings Bench consistes of the Prothonotary side, and the Crown Office
side, etc. On the Prothonotaries side are (as I delivered in my Search of
Record:)

Only Personal Actions, and some mixed Actions? besides such matters as the
King is party.

FOR their proceeding in personal and mixed Actions, It is generally the like
as that of the Common Pleas, and therefore shall not require a second recital.
So are their Fees generally alike: For he that is a sufficient Common Pleas
man, is able to the practice of any other Court of Common Law whatsoever.

And therefore I shall only show you in what points of proceeding they do
differ, and how easily those differences are, or may be reconciled withal.

The Kings Bench uses only a Latitat for their leading process.

To this, the first Leading Capias of the Common Pleas does answer.

For as the Capias has an Original Writ to go before it? So the Latitat
supposes and pretends a Bill of Middlesex to lead it also, For that is
granted in the Kings Bench, because it is intended that the Defendant upon
return of a Bill of Middlesex precedent does Latitare in ualliua tua, etc.

Only the Latitat is like to Doctor Giffords water, which serves for all
diseases, and so it holds one form in all cases and Actions whatsoever, and
charges the defendant only De pl. Trans, be it for debt or other cause, etc.

But the Original must contain the true cause of action, and be so exactly
set down and drawn, that all the following Process and proceeding, may be
tied to agree with it punctuatim.

The Kings Bench man pays five to the King, in debt and the like actions above
-- 40. l.

So does the Common Pleas man too.

But the Kings Bench man, he pays but halle so much as the Common Pleas man
does; and the Common pleas man is the better pay-maister too: For he pays at
the first entrance into suite, and upon the Original, whereas the other
pays not till he declares, which in many cases never is done at all.

In the Kings Bench, the Plaintiff has longer time to declare then is allowed
in the Commonpleas. And where the defendant appears upon ordinary Bail,
whosoever will, may come in and declare against him, which is not used in the
Common Pleas

In the Kings Bench you shall not need to put in special bail, unless it be
for debt upon Speciality

So is it likewise in the Common Pleas.

But the Common Pleas enioynes special Bail for 10. l. And the other not
under 20. l.

In the Kings Bench, the Attorney for the defendant may mend or alter his
Plea, after it is delivered over.

So may the Common Pleas man too.

But the Common Pleas man must do it within the same Term: whereas the Kings
Bench man has a longer time, For that he is not tied to enter by parcel, and
so soon as the Commonpleas man is; but to do it altogether, and at much more
leisure.

For the charge of removing the body of any Prisoner, by Habeas Corpus in the
one, or by Ostensum est in the other, though there be some difference in the
first rise, and here and there afterward in the proceeding of the Remove,
putting in Bail, and filing of it, yet if we confer their Bills of Costs
together: in the conclusion we shall find a very little difference in the
whole.

Both pay damage clear, that is, poundage upon every twenty shillings in a
Judgment: But the Kings Bench pays only twelve pence in the pound, and the
other pays two shillings.

There be some other few differences in the formalitie, but none in the
substance of their mysteries. And thus I leave the Prothonotary side.

For the Crown Office side: It pleased some to make an especial suite to
exclude my pen from meddling in their mystery in my former Work. And
therefore (as I then said) so I must now resolve, that I do advisedly
pretermit it, and give it back to their own care, who are better able to
perform this general good at their pleasure, when it shall please them to
intend the public. And now I bend my journey homeward, and to my native
Birth-bed: London.

LONDON, THEIR COURTS OF COMMON LAW; (viz.) First, The Lord Mayors Court: 2.
The Sheriffs Courts.
THey do all deal in Actions personal for the most part, unless on the Lord
Mayors side sometimes a Real Action falls in by chance, for matter or demand
of something lying within the City.

Their proceeding generally is ad exemplum of the Kings Bench, only differing
in such cases, as where their Customs carry their predomination.

The Defendant, if he be a Freeman, has four defaults, (that is) four the
next Court days of the place where the action lies, to put in Bail to the
cause: But the Forteyner has no such privilege.

The Plaintiff has a day over to declare, unless it be so that the
Defendant is a Prisoner lying in Durance upon the same suite; For in such case
the Plaintiff must declare upon the very next Court day following the Arrest.

And the Defendant is brought by Writ out of the prison to the Bar, to plead
unto the said Declaration.

There is one main difference between the Proceeding here, and that above at
Westminster, which is in the most familiar and ordinary action of the City, (
viz.) their Indebitatus assumpsit, And that is, that they deny wager of Law
here, upon it: which (howsoever it be countenanced, and glossed by the
Custom) I am sure it takes away the Inheritance of a freeborn Subject by the
Law.

The like opinion I have of an Attachment made of goods in proprijs minibus of
the owner.

The proceeding here generally in all cases, where they lay by their Customs,
are to the president of the Common Law at Westminster.

Only they have one help besides; Error, and Erronice emanauit, after
Verdict here, which is to mark the cause before my Lord Mayor; where how
far that Superintendency may ouerrule, I know not.

l. s. d. The charge of the proceeding in the Sheriffs Courts in any ordinary
Action, where the Judgment is had by default, is about- 0 16 0 Where the
Judgment is had by Verdict of Jury, about 1 6 8 For a Non suit, in case where
the Plaintiff does not declare, about 0 8 0

For the Customs of the City, I refer you to read

Dunthorne, and, Liber Albus:
Both which treat upon the same subject, and are kept in their common
Treasury at Guild Hall in London, as I declared in my last of Direct. on for
Search, etc.

And so much may suffice for London, in auoidance of Repetition of the same
matter over again, for fear of abusing of your patience, or accusing of mine
own memory, etc.

All other Court of Records in all Cities, and great Towns Incorporate:
THey all are led to the example of the Common Pleas, and Kings Bench
generally; And their proceeding (as unto the formalitie) is alike for the most
part: And therefore my excuse is gone before me; for that I do dwell no longer
upon them: but carry my eye higher, which is into.

THE STARRECHAMBER:
The practice of proceeding there.
FIRST, It is to be understood, that in case between party and party Subjects
here, the Leading Process is only a Sub p^na ad summonendum against the
Defendant.

And the Defendant has four days after the Return of the Sub p^na to make
his appearance, which he must carefully enter.

l. s. d. And for entering his appea rance, he is to pay. 0. 2 0 Besides the
Attourneys Fee, which seruas also for the whole Term. 0 3 4 If he appear
after the four days, and no attachment be awarded against him, he then
pays only for the Post diem

After the time limmited for the Defendants Appearance is past, upon the
defendants default, and Oath made of the serving of the Sub paena, the
Plaintiff may have an attachment against the defendant.

l. s. d He shall pay Fee for the Oath. 0 2 6 For the VVarrant for the
Attachment, 0 2 4 Also for the Writ and Seal, 0 2 6

If his Return be at a day certain, he has that day and the next day after
to appear.

But if vpou a general Return, he has four days after (as aforesaid)
wherein it appears likewise, that this Court follows the practice of the
high Court of Chancery.

If the Attachment go forth, and the Defendant be taken thereupon, and comes
in then to make his appearance: he must enter into Bond to answer the
Contempt.

Fee inde, 0. l. 2. s. 0. d

If a Bill be exhibited, the party against whom it is, may, (having notice
thereof) if he will, appear gratis unto it, and make answer without Process.

If upon the Attachment made out against the Defendant for not appearing, the
Sheriff return Nihil feci, the Plaintiff may have an Alias Attach.

l. s. d. For the Warrant Inde. 0 3 4 Writ an^ Seal, 0 2 6

If the Sheriff return Non est inuentus, upon the Attachment, the Plaintiff
may have at Attach. with Proclamation: wherein this Court still persues the
practice of the Chancerie, etc.

l. s. d. Fee for VVarrant inde, 0 3 4 Writ, 2 2 6

And if the Defendant do not appear upon the Proclamation, the Plaintiff is
to call for the Return thereof, which the Sheriff will return Proclamari
feci, and thereuppon the Plaintiff may sue forth a Commission of Rebelion,
directed to six such Commisioners as himself shall please to name, for the
apprehension of the Defendant, etc.

l. s. d. Fee for the VVarrant inde, 0 3 4 Writ and Seal, 0 15 0

If the Defendant appear upon any of the Attachments, the Plaintiff may have
him committed to the Fleet for his Contempt; upon order therein.

l. s. d. For entry and Copy of the Order inde, 0 3 0

Where note, that it is no contempt, until such time as the Counsel shall
judge and order it to be a contempt.

If the Defendant, after he has appeared upon Attachment, do depart without
answering of the Contempt; his bond may be estrated into the Exchequer, and
order may be for his Commitment likewise, notwithstanding the advantage to be
taken of the Bond.

The Plaintiff must, before he has any VVarrant for the Process here, put
into the Court a perfect Bill, or else a Bill pro forma.

If the Plaintiff do exhibit a Bill pro forma, So much time as the Defendant
has after the Return of the Sub p^na to make his appearance, even so much
time has the Plaintiff to make his Bill perfect.

If the Plaintiffes bill be not put into the Court in due time, the Defendant
may get him to be dismissed with Costs.

l. s. d. Fee for every twenty shillings assessed for costs to the Clerk^ of
the Court inde. -- -- upon the pound. 0 2 0 l. s. d. For the VVarrant to lead
the Writ whereby to demand it. 0 2 0 For the Writ and Seal. 0 2 6

If upon serving of the said Writ for Costs, and Affedauit made on that
behalf, the costs be not paid by the Plaintiff, the defendant may have an
Attachment against him.

The Fee of which Attachment, -- vt supra.

The Defendant has eight days after his appearance entered, to put in his
Answer, so as he do appear within his due time.

l. s. d. For the Copy of the Bill, for every sheet, inde 0 1 0

If the Defendant can not appear personally, by reason of Impotencie, etc.
Upon Affedauit made in that behalf, He may have a Dedimus potestatem, to take
his Answer in the Country, as is used in Chancerie.

l. s. d. Fee for the Affedauit herein, 0 2 4 The Copy thereof, 0 2 0 The Non
appearance of every several Defendant served to appear and having this
benefit, -- -- payable in Court. 0 1 4 For every the like for the same, to his
Attorney, per piece -- every name. 0 1 8 For engrossing of the Bill, for every
sheet, inde -- -- every sheet. 0 0 8 The Warrant, 0 3 4 The Wri^ and S^ale, 0
7 2

If the O^h to justify the impotencie in the said case cannot be made; Then
the said Dedimus Potestatem must be obtained, of, and from the Lord Keeper, and
by suite unto him to be made in that behalf.

l. s. d. Fee for the Entry of this Order, 0 3 0 For the other Fees, vt supra.

If neither the ^ffedauit of impotencie can be made; Nor the Lord Keepers
allowance can be had herein, Then means must be used to procure the
Plaintiffes consent, that the Answer may be made by Dedimus Potestatem in the
Country; which if it be also denied, there is no remedy, but the answer must
be made here personally, under the peril aforesaid.

After a Commission of Dedimus Potestatem is gone forth to take the Answer in
the Country, It must be returned, after it is executed, by Oath; unless one
of the Commissioners himself bring it.

l. s. d. Fee for the Oath in this case, 0 0 4 For the Entry thereof, 0 1 0

Where note, that the delivery made by a Commissioner, saves both the Oath,
and the charges of the Oath also.

And if the Defendant in this case do not answer in time: Then the Plaintiff
may make out an Attachment, ( vt supra.)

l. s. d. For the Warrant inde 0 3 4 For the Writ, 0 2 6

And upon the Attachment in this case, the Plaintiff may proceed to a
Commission of Rebellion, ( vt supra.)

And if a Dedimus Potestatem be granted to the Defendant to make answer in
the Country; The Plaintiff may, if he please, join with him therein, and
minister Interrogatories for the Defendant to answer unto likewise.

If the Plaintiff do join with the Defendant in the Dedimus potestatem; And
the Dedimus potestatem is obtained by Affedauit made ( vt supra.) The
Plaintiff must then and in such case pay to the Defendant the one half of the
charge of the Writ and Seal, etc.

l. s. d. Fee for the Warrant for the Writ, 0 3 0 The Writ, 0 7 2

The Plaintiff has four days, after the Defendant has delivered in his
Answer, to put in his Interrogatories, whereupon the Defendant is to be
examined.

l. s. d. Fee for the Copy of the Answer for every sheet, inde 0 1 0

And if the Defendant so please, he may omit the benefit of putting in of any
such Interrogatories at all: For he is not bounden thereunto.

And if the Defendant do depart out of Town, before he be examined upon
Interrogatories (as aforesaid.)

Then the Plaintiff may have an Attachment against the Defendant for such
departure.

l. s. d. Fee for the Warrant inde, 0 3 4 For the Certificate of the Examiners,
to testify that he the Defendant is not examined, 0 1 0 For the Writ, 0 2 6

And upon the said Attachment, the Plaintiff may proceed to the Commission of
Rebellion against the Defendant, if he will in manner (as aforesaid.)

If the Interrogatories be put in by the Plaintiff; The Defendant may be
examined thereupon.

l. s. d. Fee for the Examination, 0 2 4 For admittance to Attorney, 0 2 4

But if no Interrogatories be put in by the Plaintiff, within the time
limited (as aforesaid:) Then after the time (which is four days) expired, the
Defendant may safely depart out of Town,

Provided, that he the Defendant do first obtain from the Examiners a
Certificate, to testify that the plaintiff has not yet put in any
Interrogatories against him.

Fee for the Certificate, -- -- vt supra.

For his admittance to Attorney, -- vt supra.

And if the Defendant do Demurre to the Bill of the Plaintiff: Then the
Defendant shall not need to put in Sureties thereupon, but only to move the
Court, that his said Demurrer may be referred to the Examination, and
Consideration of some of his Majesty's Justices of either Bench, or to some of
his Majesty's Counsel learned in the Law: and that they may certify back to
the Court, whether the said Demurrer be sufficient or no.

l. s. d. For the entry of the Order here upon, 0 3 0

And if the Justices, or his Majesty's Counsel in the Law, to whom the said
Demurrer is so referred, and committed, do upon Examination and Consideration
thereof, certify to the Court, that they find the said Demurrer to be
insufficient: Then thereupon the Defendant is to pay to the Plaintiff for his
extraordinary costs in this behalf, forty shillings.

And the Plaintiff in this case may likewise have a Sub poena against the
Defendant to make a better Answer.

l. s. d. Fee for the Every, and Copy of the said Certific^, 0 2 0 The Warrant
for the Writ to call the Defendant to make a better answer, 0 2 0 The Writ and
Seal, 0 2 6

And if the Defendant do not pay to the Plaintiff the said sum of forty
shillings so awarded for the Insufficiency of the Demurrer; and that upon the
return of the Sub poena to make a better Answer; Then the Plaintiff may have
a Sub poena ad soluendum in that behalf against him.

l. s. d. Fee for the Warrant inde, 0 2 0 For the Writ and Seal, 0 2 6

And if the Defendant do not pay the Plaintiff upon that Sub poena being
served upon him, And Oath thereof be made: Then the Plaintiff may have an
Attachment against the Defendant for his said Costs so awarded, and proceed
thereupon: -- -- -- -- vt supra.

The Fees, inde -- -- -- vt supra.

If Affedauit be made that the Defendant is so aged or impotent, that he
cannot come to answer or Demurre here in person, His Demurrer will be
accepted, as though he were personally present here at the doing thereof.

And then if the Defendant do Demurre to one part of the Bill, and Answer to
another part of it; The Defendant is to answer to Interrogatories, touching
that part of the Bill, unto which he so answered.

And if upon examination had of the Defendants Demurrer: The Justices, or such
of his Majesty's Counsel learned in the Law, unto whom the same was referred,
do certify to the Court that they find the Demurrer to be sufficient; Then,
and thereupon the Plaintiffes Bill is to be overthrown, And the Defendant
shall be dismissed out of the Court, with his Costs in this behalf sustained,
to he allowed unto him.

l. s. d. Fee for the entry, and Copy of the said Certificate, 0 1 0 For the
dismission, 0 2 0 To his Attorney for his Bill of Costs, 0 6 8 To the Clerks
for entry, 0 2 6 For the Warrant to lead his Writ ad soluendum, 0 2 0 For the
Writ and Seal, 0 2 6

Where note, that if neither the Plaintiff, nor the Defendant does move the
Court to have the Demurrer to be referred in manner as aforesaid; there the
cause proceeds no farther, but dies.

And note, that oftentimes the sufficiency of answer made to Interrogatories,
is referred by the Court to Committees: But howsoever the Certificate is made
thereupon, for, or against either party, no dismission does follow thereupon;
Only some small costs is awarded to the party, on whose side the Certificate
is made: for the Recovery of which costs, they may take such course and order,
as is to be taken in case of a Demurrer.

Fees vnde, -- -- -- -- vt supra.

When the Defendant has put in a sufficient Answer to the Plaintiffes Bill,
and the Defendant is likewise examined upon Interrogatories (as aforesaid:)
Then the Plantiffe may Reply, and take forth a Writ ad reiungendum against the
Defendant, which must be served upon him for that purpose.

Fee for the Copy of the Answer and Examination super interr. -- 0 -- vt supra.

l. s. d. The Warrant to lead the Writ, 0 2 0 The Writ and Seal, 0 2 6

Where note that the Plaintiff is not compellable to Reply, before such time
as all the Defendants have made answer.

And if the Defendant answers generally, Not guilty: Then there shall need no
Replication to be made at all; because they be at issue upon the same Plea; And
then the Plantiffe may take out his Writ ad iungendum in Commissione, to make
the Defendant join with him in Commission.

Fees inde, -- -- -- -- vt supra.

And if the Plaintiff do Reply, before such time as the Defendant is examined
upon Interrogatories; he loses the benefit of examining the Defendant in that
kind:

And if the Plaintiff do not reply, the next day after the days expired, which
are given to him in warning, to make his Replication: The Defendant may in such
case, and upon such default of the Plaintiff, move to have the cause
dismissed, for want of effectual prosecution.

l. s. d. Fee for the Entry of the Order, 0 3 0

For the Rest, -- vt supra, for Demurrer.

When the Plaintiff has served the Writ ad Reiungendum upon the Defendant,
And Affedauit be thereof made, He may take forth his Commission to examine
Witnesses.

This Commission is to be directed unto such Commissioners, as the Plaintiff
and Defendant shall agree upon.

l. s. d. Fee for the Affedauit made for the serving of the Writ ad
Reiungendum, 0 2 4 The Warrant, 0 3 10 The Writ Com. 0 7 2

If the Defendant do refuse to join with the Plaintiff in the Commission:
Then the Plaintiff may sue out the Commission himself alone on his party, and
direct it unto four Justices of the Peace, and execute it at his pleasure:

Otherwise the Plaintiff may (if he will) examine his Witnesses here in Court.

When the Writ ad Reiungendum is served upon the Defendant, he need not to
enter any appearence thereupon, but only to Reioyne to the Replication.

Fee inde -- -- -- -- vt supra.

And if the Defendant do join with the Plaintiff in Commission: Then the
Defendant is to pay the one half of the Fee of the Commission:

Fee inde, 0 vt supra 0

If the Plaintiff do delay the suing forth of any Commission to examine
Witnesses, Then the Defendant, upon Oath made that he was served to reioyne,
may himself alone take forth a Commission to examine on his party:

Fee inde, -- -- -- -- vt supra.

Or otherwise, the Defendant for such delay of the Plaintiff, may the next
Term following move to have the Cause dismissed.

When the Commission is executed and returned* The Plaintiff or Defendant may
assign and give to each other a day to show cause why Publication should not
be granted in this matter, etc.

l. s. d. Fee for Return of the Commission, 0 0 4 The Rule for Publication, 0
1 0

After Assignement to Publication and the days so assigned be expired; if
nothing be said to the contrary, Then Publication may be entered.

l. s. d. For the entry of Publication, 0 1 0

Note, that nothing stays Publication, but it must be granted upon

Order, Affedauit, Certificate, or Consent.
After Publication is so had and procured (as aforesaid) the Cause stands
then at the highest: For until Hearing, nothing more is to be done here.

l. s. d. For the entering of the Cause then into the common Book of Hearing, 0
1 0

Lastly, you shall observe that nothing alters the aforesaid grounded rules
of this most Honorable Court, but only

Order, Affedauit, Certificate, or Consent.
Which procured upon some extraordinary accidents, do sometimes change the
prescribed custom of proceeding and rule of the Court.

The form of proceeding Ore tenus in the Star Chamber follows.
IF the Delinquent has done or spoken any thing worthy the Hearing and Censure
of this honorable Court, And be questioned for the same, And thereupon does
confess the fact or words, and subscribeth his hand to the same Confession
made in writing before the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, or any the Lords,
Judges, or the Kings Counsel; And does, when he is called to this Bar to
answer it, likewise confess the same to be true, and acknowledges his hand
subscribed to the confession made (as aforesaid:) Then, and in such case the
Court uses to proceed to Sentence and Censure in the matter.

It has not bin seen formerly, That any but the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper, the Judges, or the Kings Counsel have taken any such Examinations or
Confessions so subscribed under the Delinquents hand (as aforesaid.)

Nevertheless, if any other who has authority in this behalf, shall take
any such Examination and subscription, And the party so examined and
subscribing, shall at the Bar confess the matter, and acknowledge the hand;
The Court may proceed to Sentence and Censure thereupon:

For the life of his Examination is the Confession and acknowledgement thereof
at the Bar, when the Court does examine him (as the custom is) whether that
which is confessed in writing be true, or not.

And if the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, the Judges, the Kings Counsel, or
any other shall take any such Examination and Confession; Yet, if the party at
the Bar shall either deny his hand thereunto subscribed, or the matter
therein contained, to be true; Then the Court does not use to proceed to
sentence or censure him.

So consequently the strength of the Examination seems not to stand in the
party who takes it, if he be of authority, but in the parties Re-examining
the same at the Bar, and the Recognization thereof.

And so I conclude the practice of the Court of Star Chamber.

THE EXCHEQVER.
THE Exchequer has three several places of proceeding, according to the three
differing manner of business belonging unto it on the pleading side: ( viz.)

The Chequer Bar, The Chequer Chamber, The Court of Pleas.
For the Exchequer Chamber, It is the English Court or place where the
proceedings are held by English Bill and Answer; And the proceeding thereof is
very much like to that of the Chancerie, (as is said before) and therefore I
mean not to insist any further upon it.

For the Court of Pleas, It is the very Imitatiue of the Courts of Common Law
in the Hall, and therefore I would be loath to boil the same meat twice over
to your Trencher: but reserve my self for the Chequer Bar especially, and
the Receipt side.

The Process and Proceedings of the Chequer Bar are distributed between the
two Remembrancers of this Court; ( viz.) the Kings Remembrancer and the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer:

And what does properly appertain to the one, and what to the other, I have at
large set down in my Direction for Search of Record, according to the final
Doom and Order of Sir Richard Lyster Lord chief Baron in the time of King
Henry the eighth:

And by the view of the particular matters and businesses therein appropriated
so respectively, you may the better judge of the proceeding to be held upon
them; the rather, for that even here at the Bar side, they do in most things
follow the practice of the common Law also.

Therefore I shall bend my self to set forth the practice of those things
which are not presidented in the other Common Law Courts at all, being
matters only proper to this, etc. with that small difference which is between
this Court and those of the Common Law below Stairs, in point of Appearance
at the beginning of a Suite, etc.

The order of Appearance in the Exchequer.
IN the Exchequer the appearance may be made by Attorney, so that there be
sureties laid in to answer the matter.

This Bail must be always taken before a Baron in the Court, and not in his
Chamber, as is used in other Courts:

The Process is a Sub poena; And if the Defendant do appear thereupon by his
Attorney, his Sureties must be bound by Recognizance (as aforesaid) with
Condition that he shall render, etc. If the Defendant be condemned.

If the Plaintiff be pleased, The hand of the Defendant may be sufficient in
this case, whether he appears personally or no:

And except the matter be the greater, one Surety may suffice, etc.

The Charge of Appearance upon a Sub poena in the Exchequer.
l. s. d. I Nprimis the Appearance, 0 0 8 The Recognizance, 0 0 8 The
Attourneys Fee, 0 3 4 l. s. d. The Copy of the Information, at eight pence the
sheet, -- le sheet. 0 0 8 For entering of the Bail, if it be in general
issue, 0 5 0 If in a special issue, then for every half Roll, 0 16 4 To a
Counsailour for drawing of the Plea in Bar at the leaft, -- -- -- -- If it
will satisfy. 0 6 8 The Sub poena it self and Seal whereupon the appearance
is, 0 2 7

The charge of an Inrolement in the Exchequer.
l. s. p. I Nprimis, to the Baron before whom the acknowledgement is made, 0 6
8 To the Master of the Office for his hand, 0 6 4 For every Roll, 0 3 4 To the
Attorney. 0 3 4 Sum Total. inde 0 19 8

The charge of the Sheriffs account in the Exchequer.
l. s. d. INprimis, for the Tales upon payment of proffers, 0 2 8 For the Entry
of the same Tales, 0 1 4 For the Diem extremum clausit after the death of the
Sheriff, whereby Execution is to be returned, Sur. account. 0 13 4 For the
Warrant of Attorney, 0 1 0 The entry thereof, 0 0 8 The Vshers Fees, and poor
man's Box, 0 13 4 The Controller of the Pipe, 0 16 8 To him more in regard, 0 3
4 To his Clerk for Summons and in regard, 0 5 0 To the Clerk of the Pipe in
part of his Fee, 1 0 0 To the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, 0 13 4 To the
Foreign Opposer for changing of the green Wax, and making of the scrowle
thereof, 1 6 8 To him for allowance of the wages for the Justices of the Peace,
0 18 0 To the Clerk of the Estrats for portage of books, -- -- As you can
agree. To the Vnder-Clerke of the Pipe for the like, -- -- -- -- Similiter. The
President for the foreign Account, -- -- -- -- Quer. l. s. d. Fee in regard
of the Justices of Assize their Diet, 10 0 0 To the Attorney for the Entry
thereof, and the other Petitions, 2 0 0 To the said Attorney for his ordinary
Fee for the whole year, ad recipiendum mandat, etc. 1 6 8 To him in regard for
every Term during the Account, 0 3 4 To his Clerk in regard, 0 10 0 The Copy
of the Sheriffs Seisures, according to the number of them. -- -- -- -- --
According to the number of them. Le: Seizure old, 0 1 0 Le. Seizure new, 0 2 0
To the Clerk in regard of the same, 0 3 4 To the Remembrancers Office for
every thereof, and for joining the Tales of proffers, 0 3 4 On the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancers side for the like, -- -- -- Similiter. l. s. d. For
allowance of the same Tales, of payments of money in the Receipt of the
Exchequer, 0 1 4 For the Joining of the same, 0 0 8 For allowance of the same,
0 1 0 For every day that is given to the Sheriff for respect of his Accounts,
0 6 8 For Entry, thereof, 0 2 0 To the Usher for Proclamation when the Sheriff
is cast out of the Court, 0 2 6 For the Quietus est, the making and allowing of
the same, 1 0 0 For the Baron his Fee for the taking and allowing of the
foreign accounts, 0 6 8 To the same Baron of examining of the Sheriffs
Schedule, 0 6 8

The ordinary charge for passing of an Account.
INprimis, for delivery and receipt of three Certificates, 0 1 0 For delivery
of the Kings part of the books of Extant to the Auditor, 0 0 4 To the Auditors
man for a bag, 0 0 6 l. s. d For a Warrant of Attorney, 0 0 8 To the Teller
for Receiving of the money, and for making a Bill thereof, 0 0 4 To the
Auditors man for allowing of the Certificates, 0 1 6 To the Auditors man for
engrossing of the Accounts, 0 4 0 To the Barons man for Receiving and allowing
of the Warrants of Attorney, 0 2 0 For Entering of the Account on the Kings
Remembrancers side, 0 1 0 For the like entry with Master Smith, 0 1 0 For
joining of their two Tales, 0 0 8 For entering of the Quietus est, 0 2 0 For the
Quietus est, 0 3 4 The Attourneys Fee, 0 3 4 Sum Total* is about, 0 18 0

And thus much for the Exchequer.

The Sheriffs Fees do next offer themselves in manner following.

FEES BELONGING TO SHERIFFS.
l. s. d. INprimis, for the Return of every Cepi Corpus, 0 0 4 For the Return
of a Nihil, or a Non est inuentu^, 0 0 4 For return of a Proclamation, 0 1 0
For the return of a Venire facias, 0 1 0 For the return of a Habeas Corpor. or
Distringas, 0 2 4 For every name returned vtlawed, 0 0 4 For making of a
Warrant upon a Writ, if it be directed to the ordinary Bayliffe, then for every
name, 0 0 4 If to special Bayliffe, or Bayliffes, Then for every name, 0 2 0
For the Arrest of every Defendant, -- -- -- -- Payable by the Plaintiff. 0 1 0
l. s. d. For making the Bond wherein the Defendant is bound with two Sureties
for his appearance at the return of the Writ, and in the Court named in the
Writ, 0 0 4 For a Copy of the Warrant upon the Writ, 0 0 4 l. s. d. For a
Repleuin or Reple^it in the Shire, 0 2 0 For the return of a Recordare, 0 0 4
l. s. d. For the Return of an Accedas ad Curiam, 0 2 0 l. s. d. For the
return of a Distringas nuper vic. 0 2 0 For the allowance of a Supersedeas, if
it be after the return of the Exigent, 0 1 0 For the Executing of a Writ to
enquire of Waste: Also to enquire of Damages: Also to execute a Statute: Or
habere facias se^sinam: A Writ of Right: De partitione faciend. For removing
the Ouer-charge of Common of Pasture. Inquiry upon an Elegit. Writ of forcible
Entry, or holding with force, whereupon the party amoued is to be restored to
his possession. Execution of a Judgment, super bre. de dote. And the like.
The Sheriff has for these, as you can agree with him. For the serving of an
Execution, there is a general Rule, that he should be allowed according to
the rate thereof in poundage, -- -- See the Statute of Eliz. l. s. d. For the
Returning of a Mandaui balli^o, 0 0 4

But unless I had been thrice an Vnder-Sheriffe, it were impossible for me to
set down all his Fees plainly and honestly: Therefore I leave the rest to
offer themselves unto you, wishing it to be ever in meliorem partem; and for
your benefit and credit.

FEES BELONGING TO THE CLERK of the PEACE and his Office, now follow.
FIrst, it is to be understood, that heretofore the Clerk of the Peace, being
only Clerk under and unto the Custos Rotulorum of the County, was wont to
have wages yearly of the said Custos for his service.

The Clerk of the Peace is to make out all the Writs of warning, of all such
persons as are to give attendance at the Sessions of the Peace, to be kept at
such place, as the Justices do appoint and agree upon.

And at the place and time appointed for the Sessions, The Clerk does first
read the Commission of the Justices, And then the Sheriff of the Shire does
return four and twenty of every hundred in the County, of which there is one
Grand Jury for the body of the Shire drawn forth; and this is called the great
Enquest.

And when the great Enquest is sworn, One of the Justices gives the charge
unto them, whereupon they shall enquire.

After the charge given and ended, They do depart from the Bar, to some
room in some house near thereabouts, where they may be conveniently together.

And to them then and there are brought all Bills of Felony, Trepasse, Ryots,
or other misdemeanors and offenses given them in charge to enquire of.

And if the great Enquest find any of the said Bills or presentiments to be
true, And the parties themselves who are therein found faulty, or guilty, be
absent, so that they cannot be quitted, or punished for the present: Then, and
in such case, The Clerk of the Peace is to make forth against them three
Capias's^ and an Exigent to come in, to trauerse the presentment, or to subject
themselves to the Censure and Doom of the Court, etc.

When the great Enquest find the Bill true; they write on the Backside
thereof, Billa vera; But in case they can not find it true for want of
sufficient Evidence; Then they write on the backside thereof, Ignoramus.

If it be found, then the Clerk is to make forth Process (as aforesaid:) but
if the Jury find it not, then farther proceeding is not to be had thereupon.

If the party so indicted be present, if it be in case of Felony, etc. he
may be forthwith arraigned before the said Justices, who are to proceed upon
him farther, as the Law in such case provides.

If he be not present, nor Attached, but at liberty till he be vtlawed; Then
after such Vtlary, every Accessarie to the felony, may be arraigned and
tried; but not before.

For other offenses of inferior nature, the party indicted is to come in to
make his Fine at the discretion of the Justices, or two of them at the least,
whereof one must be of the Quorum, unless that before that time the party
can get the Indictment to be removed by Certiorare into the Kings Bench.

And if it be so Removed thither, Then the party must either there trauerse it
c^m effectu, or else compound with the Justices of the said Court for the same.

l. s. d. The Fees which every person so indicted is to pay at the Sessions, 0
2 6 Whereof to the Crier and Marshall, 0 0 6 And to the Clerk of the Peace, 0
2 0 l. s. d. And in case where a forcibly Entry, or forcible holding is found
before the Justices, or some of them, The Clerk of the Peace is to make a Writ
of Restitution, directed to the Sheriff, to put the party amoued, into the
possession: For which, his Fee is 0 6 8 l. s. d. Item, for every Warrant of the
Peace, 0 2 0 Item, for every Superfedeas, 0 2 0 Item, for every Warrant of good
Abearing, 0 2 0 Item, of every person indicted of Felony, and thereof
acquitted, 0 2 0 Item, for every person acquitted upon other Bills, 0 2 0 Item,
upon Removing of every Indictment by Certiorare into the Kings Bench: For the
allowance of the said Writ, 0 6 8 Item, for every Writ at the suite of the
party upon a Trauerse tendered, 0 2 0

Some other few Fees there be upon matter within the compass of the
Commission of the Peace, which time may enable me to add: But for the other
Fees which the Clerk of the Peace does take in civil matters; as for Licenses
of Malstors, Hyglers, etc. because he is only Clericus Clerici Rotulorum
pacis, I understand not how he claims those Fees in civil causes.

And for the License and Bond of Victualers given upon License,

The Fees are uncertain: For in some Counties the whole charges stands the
Victualler in 6. s. in some 7. s. and in some 8. s. Vijs and modis per annum
yearly. And the Victualler Licensed de nouo, in some places pays more then
the older Victualler. -- -- -- Fee uncertain.

Note withal, nevertheless, that the Victualler is the best Candle-rent
Tenant that the Clerk of the Peace has: And therefore I dare trust them
together, for I know not where I can better leave him.

The Clerk of the Assize holds the next place for taking of Fees, ( viz.)

CLERK OF THE ASSIZES FEES, (viz.)
l. s. d. INprimis, pro Quaerela, 0 2 0 Item, pro pl^in Bar. seu in Assiss. 0
2 0 Item, pro capiend. Assiss. super exit. ex vtraque part, 0 2 0 Item, pro
intratione inde in Assiss. 0 2 0 Item, pro intratione Non pros. pro Querente, 0
2 0 Item, pro quolibet bre. secundum longitudinem eiusdem, -- -- secundum
longitud. Item, pro quolibet Adior. in com. Bar, prout concordare potestis:
As ye can agree. Item, pro quolibet Adior. ex vtraque part, si dies dat. sit
vtrique parti. 0 2 0 Item, pro quolibat Warrant. Attornat. 0 0 8 Item, Quer. in
qualibet Assiss. de Seisin capt. tertia pars ex tertia part damnorum, -- -- --
Ratabiliter. Feod. de Record de Nisi prius, 0 0 6 Item, pro deliberatione
eiusdem in Curia, 0 5 0 Item, de Quer. si Def. cognouerit actionem, 0 2 0 Item,
de Def. si Quer. non vult prosequi, 0 2 0 Item, pro qualibet private Verdict, 0
8 8 Vnde Justice. 0 6 8 Item, de Def. pro indorss. cuiuslibet Record and
Informac. vbi plit. 0 4 4 Item, pro quolibet Warrant Attor. 0 0 8

And thus far my present Collations extend for the present, touching our
Clerks of the Assizes their Fees.

The Charge of proving a Will follows.

THE CHARGE OF PROOVING OF A WILL in the Arches, the Inventory being forty
pounds and not above.
l. s. d. INprimis, the Proctors Fee and Prox. for proving the Will, 0 5 8
Item, the Seal and Probate of the Will. 0 1 8 Item, for Registring of the
same, 0 1 6 Item, for engrossing of the Will, if it be but short: 0 1 0 Item,
for engrossing of the Inventory, and exhibiting of the same, 0 3 4 Item, for
the Registers hand to it, 0 1 0 Sum total. 0 14 2

Generally for Probate of Wills, and the charge thereof according to the rate
of the Inventory, see the Statute in that case, under that Title especially
provided:

If the Officers whom it concerns, can be persuaded that it was provided for
them: hinc oritur question.

COURT OF WARDS.
Instructions to sue forth a Lunaticke.
FIRST, you are to make suite to the Master of the Court of Wards for the
Custody of him whom you desire to have; not without much care, that you use a
friend worthy your trust in this behalf.

When you have a promise there, you must prefer your Petition to him that is
Master, desiring that he will be pleased to grant you a Commission for the
finding of the same Lunaticke: which Commission is to be directed to the
Feodarie of the County where the Lunaticke abides, and two others at the
least, whom it shall please the said Master to appoint.

When you have order for the Commission (as aforesaid) Then you are to go to
his Majesty's Attorney of the Court of Wards with the order, And he will
thereupon make you a Warrant for the drawing up of your said Commission.

This Warrant you must carry to the proper Clerk, who is to draw your
Commission, which he v^on sight of the Warrant, will accordingly do.

l. s. d. Fee to the said Clerk for the said Commission, 0 16 0

Note, that when you procure your Order from the Master, you must have a
special care to see that his Secretary do Register your name for the said
Grant, in the Book of Remembrances of this nature, lest it should be
forgotten, And withal it will not be amiss, that you use means to make the
said Secretary mindful of you in your absence.

When the said Commission is executed, and the Office found there upon, The
same must be delivered into the Court of Wards, And he that delivers it,
must be sworn upon the delivery, that he received it from the
Commissioners, and that in such manner as he does deliver it, being unaltered
in any point.

l. s. d. Fee for the said Oath, 0 0 4

Then it is to be delivered into the Office at the Temple, from whence it is to
be sent over to the Petty bag, where the Clerk will make you out a Copy of
the same Commission, and Inquisition found upon it, which you must carry back
to the Office of the Court of Wards, And then the chief Officer there, or the
Auditor of the Court will make your Schedule by, and out of the same Office or
Inquisition so found.

To this Schedule you are to get the hand of the Master of the Court; And that
being obtained, you are to bring the said Schedule so signed to the Officer,
who is to make your Indentures of bargain thereupon, which he, upon sight
thereof, will perform accordingly.

Then you are to carry the said indentures to the Master of the Court, who will
set his hand to one part of the same, and you that have the Grant of the said
Lunaticke, must set your hand and seal to the other part. And the part which
you are to have, must be heerevpon sealed with the seal of the Court.

But before you have your part, you must seal to the Kings part, And must also
find two Sureties to be bound with you, That you shall truly account once in
every year to the Auditor of the Court for the profits of the living of the
said Lunaticke, And to answer the stock and state of the said Lunaticke, if
he shall chance to dye, or recover his former health.

And if the parties who should be bound with you, be not in town: Then you
must have a Commission directed to four such in the Country as you will
nominate, to see and certify the signing and sealing of your said Sureties to
the said Bond.

This Commission and Bond must be returned into the Court of Wards, who
delivers it over to the proper Clerk or Officer; whereupon you shall have your
part under the hand of the Master of the Court, and the Seal of the said Court.

Then must you Inroll your part of the said Indenture, so signed and sealed in
the Auditors Office: And so you have made an end, etc.

And

You may conceive how several Fees do arise upon every several passage
aforesaid.

Instructions to pass a Ward.
IN primis, you must make means for the obtaining of a Ward, as in case of a
Lunaticke aforesaid.

When you have got the promise and order for it from the Master of the Court of
Wards, you are to go to the Kings Attorney of the said Court, and use means
unto him for a Commission to enquire and find the Ward, and a Tenure for the
King; whereupon you may have a Warrant from him to lead such a Commission.

When you have that Warrant, and thereupon your Commission; you must get that
Commission, to be by the proper Clerk to whom it does appertain, directed to
the Feodarie of the County, and two such others as you shall nominate and
appoint.

When this Commission is sped and executed, and the Tenure found for the King,
which does consequently prove the Ward, you are to return this Commission into
the Petty-bagge, and there to take a Copy of it, which you are to deliver to
the Clerk to whom it belongs in the Office of the Court of Wards; and hereupon
he will make you forth upon sight thereof a Schedule of the value of the Land.

Then you must carry that Schedule to the Secretary of the Master of the
Court, to the end that he may procure his Masters hand to be set unto the same,
And the Office for it, with the Wards exhibition, and the names of the party,
or parties, which are to have the Ward: All which must be likewise set down.

And when you have the said Schedule so signed, Thereupon the Indentures of the
grant are to be drawn up, To the one part whereof, he or they that have the
Ward, are to Seal and sign; and to the other, the Master of the Court does
use to subscribe his hand, and then the Seal of the Court is affixed thereunto.

Now if the parties who have the grant, have not also their Sureties who are
to undertake for them in this behalf, in Town, so that they may here enter
into Bond with him, with condition of making a true account, and not doing of
any waste, etc. Then there must be a Commission procured to four such persons
as the Grantee or Grantees shall name, to attend and see the sealing and
delivery made by him, or them, and his, or their Sureties, which the
Commissioners must certify and send up under their hands and seals, attested
with some Witnesses to the same.

And this must be delivered into the Office of the said Court, to the proper
Officer, with and upon Oath to be made, that it is delivered in such manner as
it was received from the Commissioners themselves unaltered, etc.

Thereupon you shall have a Bill for the receiving of the exhibition thereof,
And according to the Ancient form of practice, That Bill was wont to be then
signed by the Kings hand, by the procurement of the proper Clerk of the Office.

And when the same is so signed, it does pass through the several Seals, and
at the last under the Great Seal of England, which course, I understand not to
be altered as yet: howsoever I may suspect, in regard of the many new
Instructions which have issued of late times, for the ordering of the affairs
of this Court, that some small difference may inter^edere, etc.

When your said Patent is so sealed, you are to deliver the same and the
Schedule of the value of the Land to the Auditor of the Court, who is to see
that the same be forthwith enrolled.

And thereupon the Auditor will give order to the Feodarie of the Shire, to pay
you the exhibition yearly, etc.

The charges of obtaining a Ward, do follow.
Feod. sequuntur.
l. s. d. IN primis, for the Commission to find the Tenure for the King 0 15 0
Item, the Return therefore to the Clerk of the Petty-Bagge, 0 16 0 Item, the
Copy of the said Office at eight pence the sheet, 8. pence the sheet. Item,
to the Clerk of the petty Bag for examining of the same, 0 2 0 Item, for
making of the Bargain, 2 0 0 Item, to the said Officers Clerk who makes the
same, 0 14 4 Item, for making of three Obligations, 0 16 0 l. s. d. Item, for
the Commission for sealing of the Bargain and Obligation in the Country, in
case where the party Grantee or his Sureties be not in town to Seal, 0 5 6
Item, to Master Attourneies man for the Affedauit inde, 0 0 4 For drawing of
the Schedule. 0 6 8 For drawing of the Bill to be signed, and getting of the
Kings hand unto it. 0 6 8 To the Clerk for writing of the said Bill, 0 3 4 To
him more for entering the same into the Book, 0 2 0 To the Auditor for
enrolling of the Patent and Schedule of the Land, -- -- -- -- or rather, as you
can agree. 0 13 4 To the Clerk for writing of the Schedule, 0 1 0 Besides the
Copy of the Office, vt supra.

Thus I conclude with this Court, giving you farther to take in direction, that
you examine these with the latest Books of Instructions given and published in
Print for the ordering of this Court; whereby you shall the better discern the
alterations, if any be.

FOr the Idiot, I had almost forgot him; Howsoever the matter is not great: For
it is but a foolish business when all is done.

You have a fair example of a Lunaticke before your eyes, and therefore I
shall only need to give you this monitorie instruction touching an Idiot: That
you be assured that your self is somewhat the wiser man, before you go about
to beg him, or else never meddle with him at all, lest you chance to play at
handy da^dy, which is the Guardian, or which is the fool? and the case alter e
Conuers^, ad Con^ersum. I pray let us have no Platonisi^e in the matter: And so
much for the Idiot.

THE COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
I should say somewhat touching that great Court of Record, The Parliament. But
the object is so far removed from my sight, that I cannot presume a certain
representation, with these weak species of eying those mysteries: I make bold
by way of Explanation, Introduction and Deduction of Sir Thomas Smithes
Commonwealth, to deliver this only.

YOu shall understand thet all the Law of this Land which is Positive, does
consist either in -- -- --

Acts of Parliament: or, Proclamations.
For the Acts of Parliament, public or private: They be all kept and remain
in the Custody of the Clerks of the Parliament; Howsoever (as I showed you in
the Search of Record) that they are, or at least should be, in the Chapel of
the Rolls likewise, and most of them are brought over thither by Certiorare,
vt ibidem, etc*

These Acts (as you may read) are made and established by the King, the Peers
and Commons of the Land, so stably and sanctedly, that they be taken for Law.

And that you may the better conceive, what are the businesses, what the
practice, and what consequently the Records of this Court, I will briefly
receite the very words of Sir Thomas Smith to that point only:

( viz.)

The Parliament Abrogateth old Laws; Makes new; Gives order for things past,
and for things hereafter to be followed; Changes right and possessions of
private men; Legitimateth Bastards; Establishes forms of Religion; Alters
weights and measures; Gives form of Succession to the Crown; Decideth of
doubtful Rights and Titles, whereof there is no Law already made; Appoints
Subsidies, Tails, Taxes, and Impositions; Gives most free Pardons and
Absolutions; Restores in Blood, and Name; Naturalizeth Aliens borne out of the
Kings Allegiance, and to be short, All that ever the people of Rome might do
either in Centuriat is commitijs, or Tribunitijs, the same may be done by the
Parliament of England: And so much to the current of his stream.

It is evident, that this is the highest Court of this Realm, because the
Authority of it is absolute, and binds all manner of persons, For that they
are all parties and priuies thereunto, by way of Representation, etc.

Unto this High Court do come some, -- --

1. By reason of their Tenure. 2. By virtue of Writ. 3. By virtue of Office.
There do come by reason of Tenure these: ( viz.

Pertenu^.
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons.
These use to be summoned to appear by the space of forty days before the
Parliament.

They who do come in by Writ, are these: ( viz.)

perbre.
Knights of the Shires. Burgesses, Citizens of Cities. Barons of the 5. Ports.
The Kings Council.
There do come hither also by Writ, directed to the several Deanes, and
Archdeacons of this Kingdom:

per bre.
Two several Proctors of the Clergy, for every several Deaconrie, and
Archdeaconrie:
These Proctors of the Clergy, be elected by the Clergy also.

And every of these do bring with him two Warrants, whereof he keeps one by
himself, and the other he enrolleth with the Clerk of the Parliament.

From hence, some have gathered an Opinion, That sometimes heretofore the
Convocation house has been a member or part of the Parliament House.

But it appears to be otherwise in the Case of Phil^t, who being questioned
for Heresy, and certain heretical words by him spoken, did in his answer
allege, That the words so spoken, were delivered by him in the Convocation
house, which he held to be a place of freedom and liberty of speech, as being
a limme or member of the Parliament House, which assertion was ouer-ruled, And
the Convocation adjudged to be no member of the Parliament House. For though
they come by Writ of Summons to the Parliament; Yet they have no power over the
Laity, but only authority to charge the Spirituality; Or to make
Institutions Provincial, as Holy Days, Fasting-dayes, and such like; And an
Act of Parliament may pass without their consent, priuitie, or interposition
in any manner of wise, etc.

There do come hither, by reason and virtue of Office, these; ( viz.)

Per Scruice.
1 The chief Crier of England. 2 The chief Usher. of the Exchequer.
3 The Chancellor 4 The Treasurer 5 The Chamberlain 6 The Barons
7 The Justices of either Bench. 8 The Steward of England. 9 The Porter. 10
Grooms. 11 And all tied by service to be here done, etc.
The Stewards Office has been to place the Lords there.

The Porter has used to see that there be but one door, at which to go in
and out.

And every one of the aboue-named Officers has had his several charge
respectively.

The Allowance of the Knight, Burgesses, and Barrons of the Cinque Ports
follow: (viz.)
EVery Knight of the Shire has used to have the Allowance of a Mark by the
day, to be paid by the County whereof he is Knight; And this may be levied
by Distress, etc.

Knight: -- 13. s. -- 4. d. per diem.

Burgesses and Barons of the Cinque Ports.

These have not used to have per diem above 10. s. per piece for expenses.

And for the leuying of this, They have not used to Distreyne, but have took
forth a Writ under the Great Seal of England.

The Writ for the Barons of the Ports, is directed to the Warden.

The Writ for the Burgesses, is directed to the chief Magistrates of the City
or Town Corporate for which they are Burgesses.

And the bodies for whom the forenamed persons are employed, must pay the Fine
for their default, etc.

As,

l. s. d. For the first day wherein the Burgess shall be called, and appears
not, his Borough shall pay 0 100 0 If at the second day, the Knight of the
Shire do not appear, his Shire shall pay 100 0 0 If at the third day a Baron
of the Cinque Ports shall not appear, those of the Cinque Ports shall pay 66 6
8 If at the fourth day, the Proctor of the Clergy do make default, his Bishop
shall pay 100 0 0

And if all the Bishops, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal be absent,
having lawful Summons; Many are of opinion, That the King with this
Commonaltie may proceed alone.

The officers in Parliament are: -- -- -- --

The Speaker. Two Clerks.
Of which Clerks, one is for the Upper House, and the other for the Lower
House.

The Speaker he does commend and prefer the Bills exhibited into the
Parliament.

The Speaker is usually appointed and nominated by the King, though accepted by
the House: And the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor uses commonly, pro forma,
on the first day of a Parliament to speak to the House, that they make choice,
and name one to be their Speaker etc.

The Clerks are Custodes Rotulorum Parliamenti.

Touching their Fees: Non altum sapimus, etc. And thus I conclude with the
Parliament.

For the other part of Positive Law, which does consist in Proclamations: I may
only say what they are, And what is the power of them, according to the common
received opinion; and farther I intend not any speculation into them.

Proclamations are, where the King and his Council think fit and expedient to
publish any thing as a Law.

The effect and power of them, as also the pain of him that breaks the same,
you may read in diverse Treaties upon this subject; In all which I find this
general consent, That if the Ordinance or Proclamation so made, be in
supplement or Declaration of a Law that has been formerly made and been good;
It is to be obeyed as a Law, and the breaker thereof is to undergo the pain
of him that breaks a Law and his Allegiance, etc. So did those Prouisiones
Merton attain, and to this day do hold the name and reputation of the Statute
of Merton, etc.

Dixi.
THE OFFICE OF AN ESCHETER is set forth in these few lines following: ( viz)
REgia demandunt breuia Eschaetoribus ista
Cognoscenda; sibi Quae sint Attinctio donet;
Quantum de sese; Quantu^ de al^isque tenebat;
Per quae seruitia tenuit; Quantumque valebant
Terrae: Quoque die fatis concessit, E^ haeres
Quisnam proximior; Cuiusque aetatis ab ortu.
Note:

Where the value of the Lands to be enquired of, do exceed the value of five
pounds per annum, There he must enquire only by virtue of Writ.

Where the Lands are under that value, he may enquire by virtue of office, and
that Writ.

In every case the Inquisition found, must be returned into the Petty-bagge,
etc.

THE DVCHY COURT.
THis is a great Court of Record, and it admits Pleas as well real as
personal, as also mixed pleadings, concerning the Lands of the Duchy.

The Judges here are the Chancellor of the Duchy, assisted by his Majesty's
Attorney of the Court, and two Judges of the Common Law, who advise them for
matter or question of Law.

The Rolls and Records of this Courts proceedings, are in the custody of the
Clerk of the same, to whose Office they do appertain.

But the Kings Evidence, Leases and Grants of the Duchy Land, as well the
Possessions and Copyhold, as Fee-simple, and Fee-ferme, are all in the keeping
of the Auditors.

The Auditors of the Court are diverse, howsoever two are most principal; one
whereof for the Lands of the Duchy on this side Trent, and another for the
Lands beyond Trent.

There be diverse Surueyors for the Duchy Lands, for the Survey of them, but
they keep no Record, unless it be some models of their own making.

And so I leave the Duchy, etc.
THE CONCLUSION.
I Conclude with this humble Request made to those who have power of
Reformation, in this crying reigning evil amongst Lawyers, touching the
disappointment, and defeat of Clyents causes, for which they are retained and
Feed, and yet often fail to give attendance in the hour of Tribulation, or to
be near unto the Clyent in the day of Visitation (a foul fault in a friend,
but worse in a servant.)

It may therefore please those in Authority to give the abuse this proper
redress; (viz) That if any one of them take his Fee to be of counsel, and
to attend at such a certain time and place, and shall notwithstanding fail;
The party who so Feed him, upon complaint to the Judge before whom he was feed
to be, may have his Fee returned again, with such Damage as he shall make
appear to the said Judge that he has sustained by the Absence of such
Counsel, And that in case it shall be proved that he absented himself in
favor of the adverse party, he may be fore-iudged his practice, and receive
some other fitting and exemplary punishment in that behalf.

FINIS.
Foelix quem nulla Cyconia pinsit. T. P.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS HANDLED IN THIS succeeding TRACTATE:
And first in the Chancerie.
HOw the Sub Poena of later times was thought fit to be granted without
exhioiting of any Bill for the purpose, fol. 1. The use of the Sub Poena. fol.
2. The manner of Returns here. fol. 2. What time the Complainant has to put
in his Bill. fol. 2. How the Defendant may have costs against the Complainant,
for not putting in his Bill in due time. fol. 2. and 3. How the Defendant may
recover the said costs against the Complainant. fol. 3. How the Defendant may
in the said case sue the Complainant to the Commission of Rebellion. fol. 3.
How the Complainant may have costs against the Defendant, for not appearing.
fol. 3. How the Complainant may recover those costs against the Defendant. fol.
3. and 4. How the Oath must be made, for the serving of a Sub Poena. fol. 4.
How the Complainant may make the Defendant to answer to his Bill (the
appearance being made.) fol. eod. What course the Complainant may take against
the Defendant for not answering within the time prefixed. fol. 5. The causes
whereby the Defendant may satisfy the Court of his delay in answering. fol.
eod. How the Defendants Attorney may procure a Dedimus Potestatem, to take his
Clyents Answer in the Country. fol. 5. and 6. How the Attachment made against
the Defendant for not answering, must be entered. fol. 6. What liberty the
Defendant has to answer, where no day is given to him for that purpose. fol.
eodem. How the Attachment is to be had and entered of course against the
Defendant, for not answering. fol. eodem. How the Defendant is tied to answer,
in case the Sub poena be returnable, so near to the Terms end, that day
cannot be given to answer. fol. eod. What liberty the Defendant has to
appear, where the Sub Poena is returnable on the last day of the Term. fol.
6. and 7. How the Defendant is tied to appear and answer, being served on the
last day of the Term, with a Sub Poena returnable immediate. fol. eod. How the
Defendant, in case where he has benefit of delay, or to answer by Dedimus, is
tied to put in his answer. fol. eod. How the Defendant may by Dedimus
potestatem Demurre in his Law, and how it is to be certified. fol. 8. How, and
in what case the Defendant is denied the beuefit of Demurrer to the Bill. 8.
and 9. How an Attachment lies in case of Demurrer, not allowable. fol. 9. How
to proceed upon the said Attachment. fol. eod. How every Defendant shall be in
like pain, upon like fault. fol. eod. How the Husband shall suffer for the
wives non appearance. fol. 9. How an Attachment in such case lies against both.
fol. 10. How (in case the Complainant do dye) his Executor or Administrator
may revive the suit. fol. eod. How the Complainant shall be enforced to revive
his suite laid against the Husband and his Wife, in case where the Husband
dies; with the Wives privilege in that case for Answer. fol. eod. and fol.
11. How the Feme sole answering alone, loses that privilege in case of
after-marriage. fol. eod. How the Feme sole being Complainant, is by after
marriage enforced to revive her suit. fo. eod. The privilege of the Wife, and
her power of election, whether she will abide the Bill exhibited formerly by
her husband and her self or no: (her husband being sithence deceased.) fol.
eod. How of Ioynt*parties (after a Bill exhibited by them) the one dying, the
Suruiuor may proceed against the Defendant. fol. 12. How the Complainant upon
Bill of Reuiuor, shall be in case as when the cause of Reuiuor accrewed, except
good cause be shown to the contrary. fol. eod. The Bill exhibited for Land
under 40. s. value per annum, is to be dismissed. fol. eod. Upon Demurrer, or
Disclaimer, no Replication does lie. fol. eod. The danger thereof. fol. 12. and
13. What liberty the Complainant has to Reply, after the answer is put in.
fol. 13. What time is limited to him to reply. fol. eod. How the Defendant may
Reioyne, and enforce the Complainant to join in Commission, or otherwise
examine witnesses ex part alone. fol. eod. How that Commission shall be
directed. fol. eod. How the Complainant may join in Commission. fol. eod. How
Commissioners must be named when both parties do join. fol. 14. What warning
must be given for speeding of the Commission, and how it must be given. fol
eod. The privilege of the Complainant in naming of Commissioners, and carrying
of the Commission. fol. eod. In what cases he may examine Witnesses. fol. eod.
What warning the Defendant is to have, in case where he will examine in
perpetuam rei memoriam. fol. eod. How the Defendant upon good cause may stay
his examination in perpetual memory. fol. 14. and 15. The manner how the
Complainant may proceed to examination (no cause being shown to the contrary.)
fol. 15. How those Examinations are to be published. fol. eod. How those
Examinations may be given in Evidence. fol. 15. How either party may examine
Witnesses in the Court. fol. 16. When the Complainant is ready and able to have
a Commission to examine Witnesses. fol. eod. How the Complainant may proceed to
Commission ex part, the Sub Foena to Reioyne being served. fol. eod. What day
the Complainant may give to the Defendant to Reioyne. fol. eod. The Defendants
danger in not Reioyning accordingly. fol. eod. How the Complainant may limit
the Defendants time to produce his Witnesses. fol. eod. The benefit of the
Defendant, by coming in before the last peremptory day given. And his
prejudice for not coming in sooner, before the former days given were past.
fol. 16 and 17. How in Ioynt-Commission either party is to name his
Commissioners; with the order thereof, and the manner of exception therein
used. fol. 17. The common exceptions used to be given to Commissioners. fol.
eod. How the Defendant may renew and carry the Commission (the Complainant
failing to execute the same.) fol. 18. How the Complainant may renew it also.
fol. 18. How either party may after either Commission returned, give day for
Publication. fol. eod. What day is to be so given; and how publication is
granted after it is past. fol. eod. How no Witnesses are to be examined after
publication, but by special order, for special cause, And with what
provision, and limitation it is used to be granted. fol. 18. and * 19. How
Depositions taken by such special order, are published. fol. 19. How the
Defendant being arrested in coming to make his appearance, here upon Sub
poena, may be released by the Court. fol. eod. The difference of the case,
where the Complainant is so arrested. fol. eod. How the Complainant may be
released, and in what case. fol 19. and 20. How the party arresting may be
relieved here, against the party arrested. fol. 20. The party privileged
here, cannot privilege his Wife, where the matter concerns his Wife. fol.
eod. How in suites between men privileged in other Courts, and men
privileged here; the prioritie and first start carries it away, and enioynes
the other. fol. eod. What order was made heretofore, touching examination of
Witnesses, in perpetuam rei memoriam. fol. 21. What Witnesses shall be
examined. fol. eod. What warning the Complainant shall give to the Defendant,
of his examining. fol. eod. What care the Comissioners must have, that fitting
warning be given before they do examine. fol. eod. How the Defendant may stay
their proceeding to examine. fol. 22. How the Commissioners are to certify
this stay. fol. eod. How the Defendant may join in the Commission. fol. eod.
What Certificate the Commissioners must make upon return of their Commission.
fol. eod. What orders are to be observed, before the granting of Publication
of the aforesaid Depositions. fol. 23. What Oath must be made by him that
prays Publication of them. fol. eod. How the Commission aforesaid must be
opened when it is returned: And how Publication may be granted. fol. eod.
Against whom the said Depositions may be given in evidence. fol. eod. When the
foresaid Orders shall need, and when not. fol. 24. The difference between such
a Commission jointly, and the same ex part. fol. eod. What clauses and
conditions an Iniunction granted here for preservation of Possession, pendente
lite, shall have in them. fol. 25. The farther security that the Court will
have in such case. fol. eod. What Clauses and Conditions Injunctions granted
here for stay of suites at the Common Law must have in them, and what security
the Court requires in such case, etc. fol. eod. Upon what security and
condition, a special Certiorare may be granted here. fol. 25. and 26. How
suites may be dismissed this Court for the in^aluablenesse and unworthiness
thereof. fol. 26. How Process to hear Judgment shall be returned; and how
such Writs must be endorsed. fol. 26. and 27. The ancient custom of this Court
in reteining of suites. fol. 27. How to procure a Hearing. fol. eod. The
several Punishment for breach of an Iniunction. fol. 28. The manner how to
proceed against him that is a Contemptor in the said kind. fol. eod. How the
Contemptor appearing, may upon security to perform fitting obedience, have
his liberty de been esse, or in diem. fol. 29. How far Affedauits shall be
admitted here, and what their power and reputation shall be.
Contempts.
WHat course is to be held in case of Contempts used in serving of Process.
fol. 30 What course for Contempts against Orders and Decrees here. fol* 30. and
31. How the party charged with Contempt sh^l be righted, in case he shall
clear himself, or be not effectually prosecuted. fol. 31. How far
Contemp^ors to the Proclamation of Rebellion may be capable of grace. fol. eod.
How Prisoners upon Contempts may be discharged. How Contempt may be suspended,
when it cannot be released. fol. eod. What things cannot be granted regularly
upon Petitions. fol. 32. How far orders may be subject to alteration,
explanation, or suspension upon Petitions. fol. eod. How far Commissions to
examine, or Examinations may be shaken by Petitions. fol. eod. What preualence
Petition may have against Demurrer. fol. eod. What course the Lord Keeper uses
to take touching Injunctions, before he does sign them. fol. eod. What power
Petition has against Iniunction. fol. 32. and 33. How Iniunction to stay
suites at the Common Law shall be granted; and in what cases. fol. 33. How the
Iniunction shall dye, for not continuing of it. fol. 33. and 34. How an
Iniunction shall be stayed, by reason of the like suite in the same Court. fol.
34. How an Iniunction may fall for want of prosecution. fol. eod. How in case
of Debt after Arrest, no Iniunction is to be granted, without the money
brought into Court; And how the case may be altered for the depositing of the
money. fol. eod. When, and where Injunctions for Possession may be granted.
fol. 34. and 35. How for Contempt, a Sequestration, and afterward, an
Iniunction for Possession may be granted. fol. 35. How an Iniunction against
spoiling of Woods or grounds may be granted. fol. eod. Order for enrolling of
Injunctions. fol. eod. The Registers duty, in case an Order be made against the
general Rules of Court. fol. eod. Registers to be sworn. fol. 36. Orders made
surreptitiously to be ineffectuall. fol. eod. How orders are to be set down
plainly as they are delivered in Court, And how explanation of orders is to be
granted. fol. eod. What course the Register must hold in delivery of any
draughts of Orders to either party. fol. eod. What course the Register is to
observe in case where, upon hearing of a cause debated by both parties, the
Court shall refer it to a Treaty. fol. 37. How the Registers are to conceive
and draw the Order honestly, without respect of Counsels interlineation
thereof. fol. 37. What care and course the Register is to observe in penning,
and passing of Decrees of weight through the Lord Keepers hand. fol. eod. How
Decrees of the Rolls are to be presented to the Lord Keeper. fol. 38. How
Decrees under the Great Seal may be reuersed, altered, or explained, And how
Bill of Reuiew shall be admitted. fol. eod. How in case of mis-auditing, a
Decree may be explained without Bill of Reuiew. fol. eod. How far a Bill of
Reuiew may prevail upon a matter Decreed. fol. 39. What provision is made for
preservation of men's Rights, upon Reuiew of Decrees. fol eod. What provision is
made for Supportation of Acts of Parliament against Decrees, And what relief
in such cases. fol. eod. What kind of Imprisonment he ought to have, who
breaks a Decree, etc. fol. 40. What course is to be held against him who
does obstinately disobey and break a Decree, and persist in Contempt. fol. 40.
What course is to be held in case of a Decree for possession, from the first
Process of Execution to the last of Iniunction by graduation. fol. eod. When
the party committed for breach of a Decree, in part may be enlarged. fol. 40.
and 41. How he may be enlarged for performance of so much of the Decree as is
in future to be performed. fol. 41. How far he who was not served ad
audiendum iudicium, is bound by the Decree. fol. eod. How far he who is made
no party by Bill or Order, is bound by the Decree. fol. eod. How it binds him
where he comes in pendente lite. fol. eod. How a Sequestration of Land may be
granted for a Rent payable out of it by Decree. fol. 41. and 42. How the
Decrees of the Provincial Courts, and Court of Requests, may be strengthened
by the Chancerie. fol. 42. What respect this Court gives to the Decrees of
other Courts upon hearing here. fol. eod. How far Decrees after Judgment
here shall extend. fol. eod. How a Decree under Seal may be reuersed, altered,
or explained. fol. eod. How a Bill of Reuiew shall be admitted. fol. eod. What
security the Court requires upon putting in of a Bill of Reuiew for proving of
the same. fol. 42. and 43. Who shall have the Consideration of a Demurrer, or
question, touching the Jurisdiction of the Court. fol. 43. What time is to be
given to speak against the confirming of a Report. fol. eod When the cause is
so far proceeded, that Reference to hear and determine may not be made.
fol. eod. What respect the Court gives to a Report exceeding the Warrant. fol.
eod. What course the Masters of the Court are to observe in making their
Reports. fol. 44. When, and how Reference for examination of Accounts may be
made. fol. eod. What course of Reference is to be held for Examination of
Court Rolls. fol. eod. How reference shall be made of the insufficiency of an
Answer. fol. eod. What course is to be taken, where a Trust is confessed. fol.
45. How causes dismissed upon a full Hearing, may be retained again, and how
not. fol. eod. What course the Court holds for Retaining or Dismission of new
Bills, after Dismission of the old. fol. eod. What suites may regularly be
dismissed the Court upon Motion. fol. 45. and 46. Of what value the suites must
be which this Court holds. fol. 46 When Dismissions are to be prayed and had.
fol. eod. How the cause may be dismissed of course, by the Complainants
dis-continuance of prosecution after Answer. fol. eod. When the cause is
proceeded so far, that it cannot be dismissed without a Motion and Order.
fol. 46. What Relief for double Vexation. fol. eod. How in case where causes
are removed by Certiorare, the party is tied to prove the suggestions of his
Bill, etc. with the danger of failing therein. fol. eod. and 47. When Demurrers
and Pleas shall be heard. fol. 47. Whereupon Demurrer may be properly. fol.
eod. Whereupon a Plea lies properly. fol. eod. The particular matters upon
which a Plea does lie. fol. eod. Where the Plea may be put in without Oath. and
where not. fol. eod. How an Vtlary shall be pleaded in Demurrer to a Bill.
fol. eod. How an Excommunication shall be pleaded in Demurrer to a Bill. fol.
47. and 48. How the Order of Dismission of causes, etc. is to be recited in a
Demurrer. fol. 48. How the Defendant shall pay Costs; how double Costs, treble
and quadruple for Insufficiency of Answer. fol. eod. What farther penalty
the Defendant is to undergo upon returning his Answer insufficient at the
fourth time. fol. eod. How the Complainant may pay Costs for wrongful accusing
of the Defendant in the sufficiency of his Answer. fol. eod. After
Replication, no Insufficiency of answer can be questioned. fol. eod. What
Answer the Defendant must make, touching his own fact. fol. eod. How the
Defendant must deny his fact by Trauerse directly. fol. 49. How far you allow
the Answer to be true, where you pray Hearing upon Bill and Answer. fol. 49.
How necessary it is the Answer be read at making of a Decree, whether the
Defendants counsel do appear at Hearing or no. fol. eod. How far new
matter is to be admitted in a Replication. fol. eod. How many lines in a
sheet every Copy here shall contain. fol. 50. How Commissions to examine
Witnesses shall be upon Interrogatories, and how the Depositions thereupon
shall be received into this Court. fol. eod. How the Defendant joining in
Commission, and failing to produce his Witnesses, shall lose the benefit of any
other Commission afterward. fol. eod. How upon extraordinary cause shown, the
Defendant may afterward have liberty to examine Witnesses in the Court. fol.
50. and 51. How and on what conditions the Defendant may be examined upon
Interrogatories. fol. 51. How Decrees of other Courts may be read here. fol.
eod. How far Depositions taken in other Courts, may be allowed to be read
here. fol. 51. How far forth this Court grants order for reading of
foreign Depositions. fol. eod. How far examination may be had of the
credit of any Witness. fol. eod. Costs against the Complainant for unjust
vexation. fol. eod. Punishment of parties, and their Counsel, for immoderate
length of Bill, Answer, Replication, or Reioynder. fol. 51. and 52. How for
Libellous or Slanderous matter, in Bill, Answer, etc. the parties and their
Counsel shall be punished, and questioned: and the said Bill, Answer, etc.
be suppressed. fol. 52. How far Scire facias shall be awarded upon
Recognizances. fol. eod. Within what time Recognizances ought to be enrolled.
fol. eod. What special Writs may not pass, unless they be signed under the
hand of the Lord Keeper. fol. 52. and 53. What persons are to be privileged;
and how they are to be privileged here. fol. 53. How far an Execution served
upon a privileged man of this Court, may be held a Contempt to the Court, and
so punished. fol. 53. How a Supplicauit for the good behavior shall be
granted. fol. eod. When a Recognizance of the peace or good behavior may be
fyled. fol. 54. Upon what grounds Writs of Ne exeat regna may be granted. fol.
eodem. All Writs, Process, etc. returnable, coram Rege in Cancellar, to be
fyled in the Chapel. fol. eod. What other proceedings here are also to be
enrolled. fol. 55. Where days given to Sheriffs to return their Writs, shall
be fyled. fol. eod. What course is to be held for enrolling of Recognizances
taken to the Kings use, etc. fol. eod. What order of proceeding is to bein
suites upon the Commission for charitable uses. fol. eod. How Commissioners for
the Sewers are to be enquired of, and allowed accordingly. fol. 56. In what
case a new Commission for Sewers may be granted (the first being in forc.)
fol. eod. How Commission of Banquerupts shall be granted: what Commissioners
are to be allowed therein; and what security is to be given to prove the
party Bankquerupt. fol. 56. How Commission of Delegates is to be awarded: The
consideration of the Commissioners therein to be had. fol. 57. What course is
to be held for admission in forma pauperis here; or sending such over to other
Courts, or special References. fol. eod. How suites after Judgment must be
brought in this Court. fol. eod. How Licenses to collect for losses by Fire or
water, must be granted here, or renewed, And how they are to be directed. fol
eod. How Exemplifications shall be made of Letters Patents ( inter alia)
Records cancelled, Decrees not enrolled, Depositions by parcels, Depositions
vnattested, Records not enrolled, or Fyled, nor foreign Records vnfyled here,
Nor of Record upon sight in Paper. fol. 58. How far you may give the last
recited Rules extent, and valuation. fol. 58. and 59. How Ordinances are to be
made, for the better government of a body Incorporate and politic. fol. 59.
and 60. How your Counsel at Law in such cases should be qualified. fol. 60.
Two kind of Ordinances very pressiue to the Commonaltie of Corporations. fol.
60. How to procure an Order or Warrant from the Lord Keeper, to the Lords
chief Justices, to pass your Ordinances in Paper, and to prepare the same for
allowance and confirmation. fol. 61. and 62. How thereupon the Lords chief
Justices do peruse and make them fit, return them; And how thereupon they be
engrossed, signed and sealed by all three parties, or the Lord Treasurer in
supplement of any one of them fol. 62. and 63. How requisite it were that all
Ordinances were enrolled or registered on Record. fol. 63. and 64. How to sue a
Recognizance taken in this Court. fol. 64. How far you may proceed in the
Petty bag of the Chancerie herein, and when you are to transmit the
proceeding to the Kings Bench, or Common pleas, to be tried there by Jury.
fol. 65. How to sue a Statute Staple that is forfeited, here. fol. 66. How to
enquire, apprehend, and extend the Body, Lands and Goods of the party
forfeiting his Statute. fol. eod. How long the Sheriff may keep the Lands or
goods extended. fol. eod. From whence you are to have your deliberate. fol. 66.
and 67. What care you are to have that there be sufficient extended before the
deliberate be sued out. fol. 67. When you are to deliver up your Statu^e* and
to whom. fol. eod. How to sue forth a Writ of Supplicauit, to the most
prejudice of your Adversary. fol. 68. How you are to sue out, and manage your
Certiorare. fol. eod. and 69. How to sue forth a Supersedeas upon the foresaid
Supplicauit; and how to prevent the Arrest upon the same. fol. 69. The
Chancerie side, better then the Kings Bench side, for the Supersedeas. fol. 70.
The help of the Officer in this case. fol. 70. The Reasons why you should
rather choose the Chancerie then the Kings Bench for your Supersedeas. fol. 71.
The Chancerie side the more potent in this kind. fol. eod. How large you may
have your Writ of Supersedeas. fol. 72. The large extension of this Court. fol.
eod. What businesses do belong to the Pettybagge fol eod. What does belong to
the Cursitors. fol. eod. The Cursitors, incorporated, and severally
appropriated to their several and peculiar Shires. fol. 73. What several
Writs the Cursitor makes for removing of causes out of several Courts. fol.
eod. How a Certiorare to remove a cause out of a Town Corporate; And a
Procedendo presently thereupon may be made forth of course. fol. 73. and 74.
How the second Procedendo must be granted upon a Bill. fol. 74. How Bond must
be given to prove the Contents of the Bill upon grant of the special
Certiorare. fol. eod. What time the Complainant has to prove the Contents of
his Bill. fol. eod.
The Fees of Proceeding in this Court of Chancerie.
The Process, drawing of Pleadings, and other proceedings, -- particularly set
down from fol. 75. to fol. 81. erronice 99. The Fees of all original Writs
sealed in Chancerie, fol. 81. erronice 99. For every Writ particularly From
fol. 81. or 99. to fol. 85. erronice 103. The Authors excuse for omitting the
Records of the Rolls, etc. fol. 85. and 86.
THE COURT OF REQVESTS: OR, White Hall at Westminster.
HOw the practice of proceeding in this Court, is like to that of the
Chancerie, and the Fees in most things. fol. 87. Their difference in the
Leading Writ, fol. eod. How they use to Summon near hand, and in London and
Westminster, -- -- -- -- fol. 88. erronice 106. The Fees of Summoning by the
Messenger; and also by the Writ of Privy Seal, fol. eod.
THE COURT OF, THE PROVINCIAL COVNSAILE OF THE MARCHES of WALES.
HOw the proceeding is generally like to that of the Chancerie, and the Fees in
most things. fol. 89. The difference in their Leading Process. fol. eod.
THE COURT OF THE PROVINCIAL COVNSAILE AT YORK.
THeir Coherence with the Chancerie, in proceeding and Fees, vt supra, in
Wales, -- fol. 90. erronice 108. How you may know the powers and privileges of
the two Provincial Counsels. fol. eod. The difference between this Court,
and the Chancerie in Leading Process. fol. eod. A cause why those of the said
two Jurisdictions Provincial do dissert their own Courts, and come to
Westminster. fol eod. How the Courts of the County Pallatine of Chester; The
Pallatine of Lancaster; The Pallatine of Duresme; The Chancerie of London, and
the Exchequer Chamber Westminst. do all imitate the practice and Fees of the
great Chancerie, with some little difference. -- -- -- fol. 91. erronice 109.
The Worthiness of our Chancerie Clerk. fol. eod. The Authors excuse for
giving to the Court of Common Pleas the Leading Fyle, before the Kings Bench.
fol. 92.
THE COMMONPLEAS TABLETVRE OF CONTENTS.
INstruction first to understand the Nature of your Action. fol. 93. erronice
39. Caution to make your Bond, and Original to agree. fol. eod. How you shall
make them to agree in case of a Bond. fol. eod. How to Style the Defendant in
Action of Trespass, or the Case. fol. eod. Who is to make your Original Writ,
and to get it sealed. -- fol. 94. erronice 112 In what case you may your self
return your said Original Writ. fol. eod. In what case you must deliver it to
the Sheriff to return. fol. eod. Where (after the return made, that the
Defendant is sufficient) the Plaintiff may look for the appearance. fol. eod.
What is to be done on the Plaintiffes party touching Declaration, when the
Defendant has appeared; with other observations then required on the
Plaintiffes party. fol. eod. How the Bond is to be showed with the Declaration,
and the reasons thereof. -- -- -- fol. 95. erronice. 113. How like course for
showing of your Evidence is to be held in Action of Debt due by Indenture, or
Testament, or Letters of Administration. fol. eod. How the Original and
Indenture in such case must agree in the alias Dict. also. fol. eod. Costs and
Dismission may be had against the Plaintiff, for not declaring in time. fol.
eod. How the Defendant may afterward discontinue the Plaintiffes Action, for
not replying at a day. fol eod. and 96. What the Plaintiffes Attorney may do,
where the Defendant (being returned sufficient) does not appear. fol. 96. How
the Plaintiffes Attorney may have a Day; and then a Distress, and Distress
after Distress, till the Defendant appears. fol. eod. What course the
Plaintiffes Attorney may take, in case the Sheriff do return to small
issues. fol. eod. How the Plaintiffes Attorney must return the Writ, where
the Defendant has no Freehold within the County, in Debt and Trespass, etc.
fol. 96. and 97. The difference of the Return between those Actions, and an
Action of Trans super Casum, upon the case. fol. 97. The Return of the
Ordinary Process of Capias to the Exigent. fol. eod. What space must be
between the Test and the Return of an original Writ. fol. eod. And what
space between the Test and the return of a Cap. Alias Cap. and Plur. Cap.
fol. eod. And what space between the Test and Return of an Exigent. fol.
eod. How the Proclamation and Exigent must agree in Test and Return. fol. 98.
What time an Exigent has to be returned in the Country, and what in the
City. fol. eod. When the Defendant (not appearing) may be returned vtlawed.
fol. 98. How and when your Plur. Cap. must be fyled. fol. eod. When, and how
the Plaintiff must make your Warrant of Attorney. fol. eod. Where it must be
delivered. fol. eod. When the Defendant is to put in his Warrant of Attorney.
fol. eod. How upon any the Capias's returned Cepi, by the Sheriff, farther
Process shall be stayed. fol. eod. What course the Plaintiff shall take to
compel the Sheriff to bring in the Defendant where he appears not, ( Cepi
Corpus being returned.) fol. 99. How to proceed against the Sheriff, in case
he be out of his Office, before you can get him to bring in the Prisoner. fol.
eod. How to continue the Apposen. fol. eod. What time between Test and
return of Common Process. fol. eod. How Process may be continued by the
Plaintiffes Attorney diverse Terms. fol. eod. To what County the Proclamation
must be directed; And when it must be returned. fol. 100. In what case there
needs no return of the Proclamation. fol. eod. How after the Defendants
appearance a Judgment may be had against him, for not taking a Copy of the
Declaration, and making answer. fol. eod. How the Defendant may call the
Plaintiff Nonsuit, for not declaring in time. fol. eod. Where, and how a
Supersedeas upon Maineprise must be sued out. fol. eod. What course the
Plaintiff may take against the Sheriff, for returning too small Issues upon
Distress. fol. 101. What shift the Plaintiff has, if he be not ready to
reply. fol. eod. How the Defendant may plead a new, or stand to his old Plea at
the day of Imparlance. fol. eod. How the Defendant may then be condemned in
the cause, for not auowing his former Plea, or giving of a new one. fol. 101.
What care the Plaintiff must have to see the Issue be rightly entered, And his
Warrant put in then at the utmost. fol. eod. When it is best for the Plaintiff
to put in his Warrant. fol. eod. How the proceeding may be erroneous for want
of a Warrant, And the Plaintiffes Attorney be fined grievously for the same.
fol. 102. When the Plaintiff may sue forth Venire facias, And how long he may
continue his issue without suing it out. fol. eod. How by the Plaintiffes
delay, the Defendant may summon and sue forth Venire facias. fol. eod. How you
may enter the first Venire facias returned, And when the Nisi prius, and Habeas
Corpora, are to be awarded. fol. eod. How to proceed to Execution after Trial
and Verdict. fol. eod. How to proceed when the Sheriff returns the Venire
facias sued or served. fol. eod. How in case the Jury fill not at the Assizes,
the Plaintiff may get it to be filled up. fol. 103. How to get the Jury to be
filled at the Common pleas Bar, in case they fill not there. fol. eod. The
order of craving of Tales at the Bar, with the taking out and entry of the
same. fol. eod. What you are to do, in case the Sheriff do return Tarde
upon any your Tales. fol. eod. When, and how the Defendant may alter or mend
his Plea here after Replication, fol. eod. The difference between this Court
and the Kings Bench in Entering of their Pleas. fol. 103. and 104. What is to
be done, where the Defendant is returned sufficient in an Action of Trespass.
fol. eod. What is to be done, where he is returned Nihil. fol. 104. What in
case he is returned vtlawed. fol. eod. How you must sue any of the Nobility
who are of the Parliament House, and how to proceed against them. fol. eod. How
the Plaintiff may have his remedy and satisfaction of the Sheriff, in case
where he arrest, and deteines not the Defendant upon Capias ad satisfaciendum.
fol. eod. How he may choose whether he will take such course against the
Sheriff for an escape, or proceed against the Defendant to Vtlary after
Judgment. fol. 104 and 105. How this kind of Vtlary is pardonable, and how
not. fol. 105. How upon a judgment the Plaintiff may (...) W^t to extend
half the Lands and Goods of the Defendant, with exception of some certain
things, etc. And what heed you must take how you adventure to sue forth that
Writ. fol. eod. How after Judgment, the Plaintiff may by Writ, leuy it upon
all the goods of the Defendant which he can find. fol. eod. How the Plaintiff
may sue out as many Writs of Fieri facias as he will, till he be satisfied*
fol. 105. How to proceed in Writ of Rescous, and Ranishment of Ward. fol. eod.
How in a Quare eiecit infra terminum, and Eiectione firm. fol. eod. How in
Writ of Annuitie, and Covenant upon an Indenture. fol. 106. The proceeding upon
a Writ of Entry. fol. eod. Where, and when the Grand Cape lies; The manner of
pro^uring and proceeding upon it, with the means ^o avoid it. fol. eod. When
the Petit Cape may go forth, with the proceeding thereupon, to the recovery
of the Land in question, and the seizure thereof. fol. eod. The care to be had,
to see that no Essoyne be in the mean time cast for the Tenants appearance,
with the danger thereof to the Demandant. fol. 106. and 107. What the Demandant
must do to avoid such evils in all Real Actions. fol. eod. What proceeding is
upon Warrantia charta, Dedroite, and Surdisseisin. fol. 107. How you must set
your Judgment on foot again, in case you let it sleep above a year and a
day, without doing of any thing upon it. fol. eod. What course is to be taken,
that the Plaintiff his Executors, etc. may proceed to execution against the
Defendant, his Executors, etc. in case where either of them dies after
Judgment, and before Execution. fol. eod. and 108. Upon whose goods the
Execution must be first awarded, the Defendant being dead. fol. 108. How in
case of Diuastauit returned upon your Fieri facias, you may get it to be
awarded upon the goods of the Executor, etc. or Arrest his body for your Debt.
fol. eod. How to sue a matter of error. fol. eod. The difference of proceeding
in a matter of Error before Judgment, and matter of Error after Judgment.
fol. 109. The prejudice of the Defendant, in case he do not get his Record to
be certified in time. fol. eod. The danger of losing one Writ of Error. fol.
eod. When the Errors are to be assigned. fol. eod. The course whereby you
shall be compelled to assign Errors. fol. eod. The danger in not assigning
of Errors in due time. fol. 110. How to Reuerse Vtlary, upon mean Process by
Writ of Error. fol. eod. What be the particular Errors, which before
Judgment, the Court will correct of it self. fol. eod. How you are to proceed
when you find any of those Errors. fol. eod. How if the party vtlawed can
find no Error in Vtlary before Judgment, yet he may procure a Supersedeas,
and discharge the action by Pardon afterward. fol. 111. How the party vtlawed,
if he have any goods taken by that Vtlary, may free and have them again. fol.
111. and 112. In what case the Defendant shall be forced to enter into Bond to
prove Error. fol. 112. The practice of the Court, where the cause goes with
the Plaintiff upon a Demurrer (the D^bt or matter recovered not being
expressed) for his relief by Damage. fol. eod. The like proceeding in an
Action of Waste, if the Waste be certified in time. fol. eod. What
extraordinary provision is made, to give satisfaction in case of Waste. fol.
eod. Care is to be had by all Plaintiffes and Demandants, to heed where
Essoynes lie, and may be lawfully cast; as also to the adiourning of Essoynes,
And the casting of the Ne recipiatur. fol. 113. The Attorney for the Defendant
is to heed the casting of Essoynes as well. fol. eod. How Essoynes must be
adiourned. fol. eod. What danger in the omitting of the Adiournment. fol. 113.
The danger of casting an Essoyne, where it will not lie. fol. eod. What heed
must be had to discern where the Inferior may pray in aid of the Superior;
And where Vowcher lies. fol. eod. To whom the Process must be directed, for
clearing the Question of Bastardie. fol. eod. Also to clear and prove
Plenaritie, or not Plenaritie, in case of Aduowson. fol. eod. What Pleas
Attourneys may plead fol. 114. To a Bond for payment of money, fol. 114. To a
Bill of Debt, fol. 114. To any other Action of Debt. fol. 114. To a Bond for
delivery of Corn, etc. fol. 114. To a Bond for performance of Covenants, upon
an Indenture; Or upon an Arbitrament, fol. 115. To an Action of Trespass: fol.
eod. To an Action of Battery: fol. eod. To an Action for Rent: fol. eod. To an
Action of the Case upon Assumpsit: -- -- -- fol. eod. To an Action for Slander:
To an Action for deteining of any thing whereof there is no Bond: To an Action
upon Eiectment. fol. eod. What be the Common issues upon simple Actions. fol.
eod. What you may plead upon an Account. fol. 116. What upon Admistration: What
upon a Demise. fol. eod. What is the general issue in an Assize, fol. eod. How
all Special Pleas are pleaded here. fol. eod. How the Defendant is to peruse
any Paperbooke of special pleading, to which the Sergeants hand is put, with
the proper remedy against such Defendant, if he deteine it. fol. eod. What
advice the Plaintiffes Attorney should have upon special Pleas and Issues
upon them. fol. eod. The danger of omitting such advice. fol. 117. What heed
the Defendants Attorney must take in suffering a Nihil dicit against his
Clyent, especially upon a Bond. fol. eod. What benefit one may have by trial
of a Title, upon an Action of Trans. tantum. fol. eod. The difference between
such an Action, And Eiectione firm. fol. eod. What makes an Action at Trouer
to lie. fol. eod. The difference between Trouer and Detinet. fol. eod. In what
case it is better to suffer an Amerciament then to appear. fol. 117 and 118.
The Inconvenience of continuing an issue too large. fol. 118. What course
either party may take, if at the calling of the Jury they think them too
favorable. fol. eod. For what reason you may except against any of the Jury.
fol. eod. How many of the Jury may be chosen for Tryers to the rest. fol. eod.
How an exception against any of the Jury for combination with the Sheriff, or
his Ministers, shall be tried. fol. eod. By whom, and how, things, objected for
matter of favor ^o either party shall be tried. fol. 119. The usual causes
of Challenge to any of the Jury. fol. eod. Upon what testimony the Tryers shall
find the objection or Challenge. fol. eod. What the Jury shall find. fol.
eod. How the whole Jury (if they be challenged) shall be tried. fol. eod. The
manner how to proceed in Trial of an Issue. fol. 120. What belongs to the
Plantiffes Attorney to do at the Trial. fol. eod. What concerns the
Counsel* Witnesses, Jury, and Bayliffe attending the Jury to do at the
Trial. 120. and 121. What you are to do if the Verdict do pass with you.
fol. 121. How to sue forth a Recovery. fol. 121. What belongs to the Attorney
to do, who sueth in a Recovery, in a Writ of Entry in the Post. fol. 122.
Oath must be made of the true yearly value of the Lands. fol. eod. What is the
effect and Condition of the Recognizance which is to be entered into, when you
are to have your Writ from Mr. Attorney under his hand. fol. eod. and 123.
What course you must take before you sue out your Writ of Entry, if the Land be
held in Capite. fol. 123. What is to be done after your said Writ is past
through Mr. Attourneies hand. fol. eod. How many Sergeants you must retain in
this case a^ Bar. fol. eod. What is to be done after the Recovery is
acknowledged. fol. eod. and 124. How much you shall be cast behinde-hand
herein, by default of the Tenants personal appearance. fol. 124. What course
to take where the Tenants do no^ appear personally. fol. 124. How the
Recovery may be overthrown by the Attourneies neglect. fol. eod. What course
has been formerly an^ in times past taken for exemplifying of the Writ of
En^rie aad Seisin, with the R^urnes and The benefit of having this Writ De non
molestando in a readiness. fol. eod. Actions Transitory, and Actions Local*
fol. eod. The charge of the original Writ, and the mean Process and Seal
inde. fol. 138. and 139. The ordinary charge to sue an Vtlary in a single Writ.
fol. 139. and 140. The charge of a Nisi prius in Guild Hall London, taken by
default. fol. 140. and 141. The Charge of a Nisi prius in the Country. fol.
142. Fees belonging to the Prothon^tories and their Clerks. fol. 143. and 144.
and 145. Fees belonging to the Phillozers. fol. 146. Fees due to the Custos
Breuium. fol. 147. When Originals and Plur. Cap's. may be put in here. fol.
eod. When the Bundles of Writs of the Terms past ought to be brought in here.
fol. eod. Fees of the Treasurie-house. fol 148. and 149. Fees of the Clerk of
the Essoynes. fol. 149. and 150. The Cryers Fees. fol. 150. The Charge of
Reuersing of an Vtlary. fol 151. Fees belonging to the Clerk of the V^laries.
fol 151. and 152. How to get an Vtlarie to be certified. fol. 152. The Charge
of traversing of an Vtlarie, And the Pardon upon the same. fol. eod. and 135.
The charges of a recovery at the Bar. fol. 154. and 155. and 156. A Rate of
Fines upon Recovery and Alienation by Table for the purpose. fol. 156. The
charges of a Fine, with License of Alienation. fol. 157. and 158. What the Fine
for Alienation is. fol. 157. What the Fine is in the Writ of Covenant. fol.
eod. The charge of a Fine knowledged by special Dedimus Potestatem. fol. 158.
and 159. The charge of a Fine knowledged before my Lord chief Justice of this
Court. fol. 159. and 160 The charge of knowledging a Fine at the Bar. fol.
161. The Fines payable upon diverse kind of Writs. fol. 161. and 162. and 163.
The lymnes of the Kings Bench, with the Actions handled there. fol. 165. The
Identitie of the form of proceeding in the Kings Bench, and Common Pleas, as
also of Fees. fol. eod. In what few points of proceeding they do differ; And
how they may be reconciled. fol. 166. and 167. The Coherence of the Latitat,
and the Capias. fol. 166. Their small difference in Fine. fol. eod.
THE KINGS BENCH AND LONDON.
THeir difference in Liberty of time to declare, etc. inde. fol. 167. Their
difference in Requisition of Special Bail. fol. eod. Their difference of
liberty to amend a Plea. fol. eod. Their little difference in the whole charge
of Removing a body by Writ. fol. 167. and 168. Their difference in paying of
Damage clear, upon a Judgment. fol. 168. What be the Common Law Courts of
London. fol. 169. What Actions they deal in. fol. eod. The small difference
between them and the Kings Bench for proceeding. fol. eod. What time the
Freeman has to appear. In suo loco by mistake, it is To put in Bail, pro To
appear. fol. eod. What time the Plaintiff has to declare. fol. 170. The
difference between the Courts of London, and those of Westminster in their
Indebitatis assumpsit. fol. eod. Their usual and extraordinary help here
after Verdict. fol. eod. The Charge of proceeding to a Judgment by default of
Verdict. fol. 171. Charge of Non suit here. fol. eod. Where you shall read the
Customs of the City, which if they will let you, I would farther request your
opinion, how agreeable it is to the Law, ( viz.) That the Obligee shall arrest
the body of the Obligor, upon that Obligation, which is not yet in force
according to the prefixion of the day conditioned for payment. fol. eod. How
all other Courts of Record are generally led for formalitie of practice. fol.
172.
THE STARRECHAMBER.
OF the Star Chamber practice. fol. 173. What is their Leading Process. fol.
eod. What time the Defendant has to appear. fol. eod. Fees of his Appearance.
fol. eod. Danger of not appearing in time. fol. 174. Fees for procuring the
Attachment against the Defendant in such case. fol. eod. When the Defendant
must appear, if the Writ be returnable upon a day certain. fol. eod. What the
Defendant must do, if he be brought in upon the Attachment. fol. eod. How
the Defendant may appear gratis without Process. fol. 174. What Process may
be had against the Defendant, upon losing of the first. fol. 175. Fees inde.
fol. eod. What Process may be against the Defendant (the Sheriff returning
Non est inuentus upon the Attachment.) fol. eod. Fees inde. fol. eod. What
course the Plaintiff may take against the Defendant appearing upon Attach. cum
feod. inde. fol. eod. The danger, if the Defendant appearing upon Attach. do
depart without answering the Contempt. fol. 176. What the Plaintiff must do,
before he have Warrant for Process, here. fol. eod. What time the Plaintiff
has to perfect his Bill put in pro forma, at the first. fol. eod. How the
Defendant may get the Plaintiff to be dismissed for want of a Bill. fol. eod.
Fees of Costs given inde. fol. eod. What course the Defendant has to recover
those Costs given, upon the dismission of the Plaintiff. fol. eod. and 177.
What time the Defendant has to put in his Answer. fol. 177. How the Defendant
may answer by Commission. fol. eod. Fees inde. fol. eod. From whom, and how,
the Commission must be obtained. fol. eod. and 178. How the Commission must be
returned fol. eod. The Defendants danger, in not answering in this case. fol.
eod. How the Plaintiff may join with the Defendant in the Dedimus to answer,
and minister Interrogatories. fol. 179. How the charge shall be then borne.
fol. eod. The Plaintiffes time to put in Interrogatories. fol. eod. The danger
if the Defendant depart out of Town, before he be examined upon
Interrogatories. fol. eod. How the Defendant may depart (no Interrogatories
being put in in time.) fol. 180. What is to be done, when the Defendant has
demurred. fol. eod. and 181. The danger of the Defendant, if his Demurrer be
certified for Insufficient. fol. eod. What course the Plaintiff is to take
against the Defendant, upon Certificate of such Insufficiency. fol. eod. In
what case the Defendants Demurrer may be accepted in the Country. fol. 182.
What course to be taken, where the Defendant demurres to one part of the Bill,
and answers to another. fol. eod. How it is with the Plaintiff, when the
Defendants Demurrer is found to be sufficient. fol. eod. and 183. How the
Demurrer may dye. fol. eod. What course is held, where the Sufficiency of an
Answer made to Interrogatories, is referred to Committees. fol. eod. When the
Plaintiff may reply, and make the Defendant Reioyne. fol. eod. and 184. Where
no Replication shall need at all. fol. eod. When the Plaintiff may make the
Defendant to join in Commission. fol. eod. How the Plaintiff may lose the
benefit of examining the Defendant upon Interrogatories. fol. eod. The danger
if the Plaintiff do not reply in time. fol. eod. When the Plaintiff may take
forth Commission to examine Witnesses. fol. 185. In what case the Plaintiff
may sue out Commission alone to examine. fol. 185. How the Defendant shall
Reioyne. fol. eod. How the charge shall be borne, when both parties join.
fol. eod. How the Defendant may sue out Commission alone to examine. fol. 186.
What course the Defendant may take in case the Plaintiff do delay the
examination of Witnesses. fol. eod. When day may be given for Publication.
fol. eod. When Publication may be had. fol. eod. What may stay Publication.
fol. eod. and 187. When the cause stands at the highest here. fol. eod. How
constant and immutable the grounded Rules of this Court be. fol. eod. The form
of proceeding Ore tenus in this most Honorable Court. fol. 188. and 189.
THE EXCHEQVER.
THE Exchequer proceeding. fol. 190. The several places of proceeding in the
Exchequer. fol eod. The Exchequer Chamber proceeding. fol. eod. The Court of
Pleas proceeding. fol. eod. How the proceedings of the Exchequer Bar are
distributed. fol. 191. The order of appearance here. fol. 192. The Charge of
appearance in the Exchequer. fol. eod. and 193. The Charge of an enrolement in
the Exchequer. fol. eod. The Charge of the Sheriffs account in the Exchequer.
fol. 194. and 195 and 196. The Ordinary charge for passing of an Account. fol.
196. and 197. Fees belonging to the Sheriff in his Office. fol. 198. 199 and
200.
CLERK OF THE PEACE.
FEes belonging to the Clerk of the Peace, with the business of his Office,
and the manner of proceeding at Sessions: wherein in one place ( viz.) page
205. in stead of Clericus Custodis Rotulorum pacis: It is printed Clericus
Clerici Rotulor. etc. fol. 201. 202. 203. 204. 205.
CLERK OF THE ASSIZE.
THe Clerk of the Assizes, his Fees in his Office. fol. 206. and 207.
THE ARCHES.
THe charge of proving a Will (the Inuentory: being forty pounds, and not
above.) fol. 208.
THE COURT OF WARDS.
INstructions how you are to sue forth a Lunaticke. 209. 210. 211. Here, is
(who delivers) for which delivers. fol. 212. linea 6. Instructions how you are
to pass a Ward. fol. 212. 213. 215. The charges of obtaining and passing of a
Ward. fol. 215. 216.
THE HIGHEST COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
WHereupon all the Positive Law of the Land does consist. fol. 218. Who keeps
all the Acts of Parliament. fol. 219. What are the Parliament businesses. fol.
eod. The large power of Parliament; and how binding it is. fol. 220. Who be
called to the Parliament, and by what reason, or duty, and how they be called.
fol. eod. to the end. What time of Summons they use to have. fol. 220. How the
Proctors of the Clergy be elected, and how many of them are called by Writ,
etc. fol. 221. Reasons to prove that the Convocation house is no member of the
Parliament House. fol. eod. The Services of such as come hither by reason of
Office. fol. 222. The Allowances of the Knights, Burgesses, And Barons of the
Cinque Ports per Diem, and how they may recover it. fol. 223. Who must pay the
Fine of the forenamed persons. fol. eod. What Fines every of them is to pay,
upon their default in not appearing. fol. 224. What course the King may take,
if all the Lords be absent (according to opinion.) fol* eod. The Officers here,
and their places. fol. eod. How the Speaker is appointed. fol. 224. What
Proclamations are. fol. 225. The power of Proclamations, with the pain of him
that does break the same. fol. eod. The Office of an Eschetor. fol. 226. What
may be found by virtue of Writ, and what by Office of Eschetor, as he is a
Commission of himself. fol* eod.
THE DVCHY COURT.
WHat pleadings the Duchy Court holds. fol. 227. The Judges here. fol. eod.
Who keeps the Rolls. fol. eod. Who keeps the Leases, Grants, and charge of
the Duchy Lands. fol. 227. 228. The Auditors and Surueyors of the Duchy Court.
fol. 228. The Authors Request, touching the defeat of Clyents causes, by their
own counsels default. fol. 229. and 230.
THE OATH WHICH AN ATTOVRNEY WAS ANciently wont to take upon his Admission,
being now disused, And in stead thereof, the Oath of Allegiance is only
ministered; howsoever both would do better.
You shall do no Falsehood, nor cause any ^ be done in the Court: And if you
^ow of any to be done, you shall give knowledge ^hereof to my Lord chief
Justice or some of his brethren, that it may be reformed: you shall d^y no man
for Lucre or Malice; Nor shall increase any Fees, but be content with the old
Fees accustomed: You shall plead no Foreign Plea, Nor sue any Foreign
Suite unlawfully to the hurt of any man; But you shall sue such only, as shall
stand with the order of Law and a good Conscience: You shall seal all such
Process as you shall sue out of this Court with the Seal thereof only, and see
the Kings Majesty, and my Lord chief Justice discharged for the same: You
shall not wittingly sue, or procure to be sued any false Suite, or give aid or
consent to the same, on pain to be expulsed the Court for ever: And further,
you shall bear your self honestly and uprightly in the Office of an Attorney
of the Court, according to your best Learning and Discretion, and as good
Conscience binds you. So help you God, etc.

NOW

I bring the Returns themselves home in the Rere of my Book, as being the
only Leaders of Attourneies proceedings, and the Practice being past before:
they offer themselves in the last place, being most markable and ready to
every hand, as occasion may require.

The four Terms with their Returns.
Hillary Term begins January 23. and ends February 12. Return Days, or,
Essoyne Days. Exception day. Returna Breuium. Appearance days. Octabis Hill.
Ian. 23. Ianu* 24. Ianu. 25. Ian. 26. Quind. Hill. Ianu. 27. Ianu. 28. Ianu.
29. Ian. 30. Crast. Purif. Febru. 3. Febru. 4. Febru. 5. Febru. 6. Octab Purif.
Febr. 10 Febru. 11. Febru. 12. Febru. 13. Easter Term begins April 30. and
ends May 26. Quind. Pasch* Apr. 30. May 1. May 2. May 3. Trees Pasch. May 5.
May 6 May 7 May 8. Mense. Pasch. May 12* May 13 May 14. May 15. Quinq. Pasch.
May 19. May 20 May 21. May 2^. Craft. Ascen. May 23. May 24* May 25. May 26.
Trinity Term begins June 13. and ends July 2. Cra^. Trin. June 9. June 10.
June 11. June 12. Octab. Trin. June 16. June 17. June 18. June 19. Quind. Trin.
June 23. June 24. June 25. June 26 Tres Trin. June 30. July 1. July 2. July 3.
Michalemas Term begins, October 9. and ends November 28. Octab. Mich. October.
6. October. 7. October. 8. October. 9. Quind. Mich. Octo. 13. October. 13. October. 15.
October. 16. Tres Mich. October. 2^ October. 21. October. 22* October. 23. Mense Mich.
Octo. 27. October. 28. October. 29. October. 30 Crast. anim. Nouem. 3. Nouemb. 4.
Nouemb. 5. Nouemb. 6. Crast. Mart. Nouem. 12. Nouemb. 13. Nouemb. 14. Nouemb
15. Octab. Mart. Nou. 18. Nouem. 19. Nouemb. 20. Nouemb. 2^. Quind. Mart. Nou.
25. Nouem. 26. Nouemb. 27. Nouemb. 28.

The Law-Dayes in the Courts of
Arches, Audience, Prerogative, Consistory, Delegats, Admiralty.
In Hillary Term:
S. Hillary 13 January. S. Wolston 19 January. Conuersio S. Pauli 25 January.
S. Scholastic. 10 February. S. Valentine 14 February.
In Easter Term:
Quind. Pasch. 28 April. S. Gordian 10 May. Ascension day. 22 May.
In Trinity Term:
Corpus Christi 12 June. S. Buttolph 17 June. S. John Baptist 24 June. S. Paul.
30 June.
In Michaelmas Term:
S. Faith 6 October. S. Edward 13 October. All Souls 2 November. S. Martin 11
November. S. Edmund. 20 November.
And when and where, their several Courts are severally and respectively kept,
you shall read in the common Almanacke at large.

FINIS.
-- Cum tonat ocyus Ilex*
Sulphur discutitur sacro quam tuque Domusque.
T. P.


