A SHORT TREAtise of politic pouuer, and of the true Obedience which
subjects owe to kings and other civil Governors, with an Exhortacion to all
true natural English men, Compyled by.

D. I. P. B. R. VV.

1556.

Psalm. 118. It is better to trust in the Lord* than to trust in Princes. TO
THE GENTIL READER.
COntent thy self to read over this short ^reatise / wherein is neither
heresy / felonye / nor treason / but all that is written here in few / is
meant for thy pleyntifull benefit / necessary admonition / and faithful
instruction. And albeit the Printour is not sure / whether the author be gone to
God already (as by the discourse of the matter he seems to be) or yet still in
this life / yet for as much as the gravity of the Work / the sobrenesse of
the style / and the equity of the cause joined with substauntial Profes /
importe a mighty zeal / and aferuent care of the author for his country / he
is pleased to put furthe the Work / to the intent the travail of the doer be
not lost / neither true Englis he hearts frustrate of so worthy an instruction
/ onles they will willingly neglecte their own save guard / the state of their
country / and the Preservation of their posterity. God give thee (good
reader) a will to forsee / an heart to per ceaue / and a judgment to discern
thine own state in time / and in Christ heartily well to fare.

Amen.
VVHEROF POLITIC power grows, vverfore it was ordained, and the right use
and duty of the same: etc.
AS OXEN, SHEEP, GOATS, and such other unreasonable creatures cannot for
lack of reason rule themselves, but must be ruled by amore excellent creature,
that is man: so man, albeit he have reason, yet because through the fall of the
furst man, his reason is wonderfully corrupt, and sensuality has gotten the
over hand, is not hable by himself to rule himself, but must have a more
excellent governor. The worldlinges thought, this governor was their own
reason. They thought, they might by their own reason, do what them lusted,
nod only in private things, but also in public. Reason they thought to be
the only cause, that men furst assembled together in companies, that common
welthes were made, that policies were well governed and long continued: but
mensee, that such were utterly blinded and deceived in their ymaginacions,
their doings and inuentiones (seemed they never so wise) were so easili and so
sone (contrary to their expectacion) overthrown.

Where is the Wisdom of the Grecianes? Where is the fortitude of the Assirianes?
where is both the wis dome and force of the Romans become? All is uanished
away, nothing almost left to testify that they were, but that which well
declares, that their reason was not hable to govern them. Therefore were such
as were desirous to know the perfect and only governor of all, constrained to
seek further than them selves, and so at leynght to confess, that it was one
God that ruled all. By him we live, we have our being, and be moved. He made
us, and not we our selves. We be his people, and the sheep of his pasture. He
made all things for man: and man he made for him self, to serve and glorify
him. He has taken upon him thordre and government of man his chief creature,
and prescribed him a rule, how he should behave him self, what he should do,
and what he may not do.

This rule is the law of nature, furst planted and graffed only in the mind
of man, tha^ after for that his mind was through sin defiled, filled with
darkness se, and enco^bred with many doubts) set furthe in writing in the
decaloge or ten commandments: and after reduced by Christ our saueour i to
these two words: Thou shall love thy lord God above all things, and thy
neighbor as thy self. The later part vvherof he also thus expounds: what so
ever ye will that men do unto you, do ye even so to them.

In this law is comprehended all justice, the perfect way to serve and
glorify God, and the right mean to rule every man particularly, and all men
generally: and the only stay to maintain every co^ mo^ wealth. This is the
touchestone to try every man nes doings (be he king or beggar) whether they
be good or evil. By this all m^nes laws be discerned, when there they be just
or uniuste, godly or wicked. As for an example. Those that have authority to
make laws in a common wealth, make this law, that no pynnes shall be made, but
in their own country. It seems but a trifle. Yet if by this means the
people may be kept from idleness, it is a good and just law and pleases
God. For idleness is a uice wherewith God is offended: and the way to offend
him in breach of these commandments: Thou shall not steal, thou shall not
kill, thou shall not be a horem^, n^ ger, etc. Por all these euilles come of
(...)* On the other side, if the people be well (...) in other things, and the
people of an other country live by pynne making, and uttring the (...) if there
should be a law made, that they (...) not sell them to their neighbors of the
(...) country, otherwise well oc cupied, it were a wicked and an uniuste law.
(...) ^aking away the mean, whereby they live, a mean is devised (...) kill
them with famyne, and so is not only (...) commandment broken: Thou shall
not kill, but also the generallawe, that says: Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. And, vuhat so ever ye vuill that men do unto you, even so do you
unto the^. For you your selves vuold not be killed vuith hungre.

Likewise if there be a law made, utterly prohibiting any man that can not live
chaste, to marie: this is an unjust, an ungodly and a wicked law. For it is
an occasion, that where with marieng, he might avoid sin: he not marieng
does commit horedome in act or thought contrary to Gods will and
commandment: Thou shall not commit horedome

Again, a prince forces his subjects (under the name of request) to le^de him
that they have, which they do unwillingly: and yet for fear of a worse
turn, they must seem to be content therewith. Afterward he causes to be
assembled in a Parliament such as per chance lent nothing, or else such as
dare not displease him. They to please him, remit this general debte. This is a
wicked, ungodly, and unjust law. For they do not, as they (...) be done unto,
but be an occasion, that a great (...) be undone, their children for lack of
sustenaunce perish through famyne, and their seruav^ntes forced to (...), and
perchance to commit ^urther. So that if men ^ill weigh well this (...) and
law that God has prescribed to man, Thou shall love thy lord God above all
things, and thy neighbor as thy self. And, what so ever ye will that men do
unto you, do ye even the same unto them: they may sone learn to try good
from evil, godliness from ungodliness, right from wrong.

And it is so plain and easy to be understood, that no ignorance ca^ or
will excuse him that therein offends.

Against thoffendours of this law, there was no corporal punishment ordained
in this world, til after the destruction of the world with the great flood.
For albeit Cayn and lamech had committed horrible murders, yet were they not
corporally punished, but had a protection of God, that none should laufully
hurt them. But after the flood, when God saw his gentilnesse and patience
could not work his creatures to do their duties unforced, but iniquity
prevailed and mischief daily encreaced, and one murdered, and destroyed an
other: than was he constrained to change his lenity into severity, and to
add corporal pains to those that would not follow, but transgress his
ordinances. And so he made this law, which he declared to Noha: He that
Sheadeth the blood of man, his blood Shall be Shead by man. For man is made
after the image of God.

By this ordinance and law he instituteth politic power and gives authority
to me^ to make more laws. For he that gives man authority over the body and
life of man, because he would have man to live quietly with man, that all might
serve him quietly in holiness and righteousness, all the days of their life, it
can not be denied, but he gave him authority over goods, lands, possessiones
and all such things as might bried controversies and discordes, and so hyndre
and let, that he might not be served and glorified, as he requires. This
ordinance also teaches makers of laws, how they should behave the^ selves in
making laws: that is, to set aparte all affectiones, and to observe an
equality in pains, that they be not greater or less, than the fault
deserves, and that they punish not thinnocent or small offendour for malice,
and let the mighty and great thief escape for affection. And out of this
ordinance grows and is grounded thautoritie for Magistrates to execute
laws: for laws without execucion, be no more profitable, than belles without
clappers. But whether this authority to make laws, or the power to execute
the same, shall be and remain in one person alone, or in many, it is not
expressed, but left to the discrecio^ of the people to make so many and so
few, as they think necessary for the mayntenaunce of the state. whereupon in
some places, they have been content to obey such laws, as were made by one, as
the Israelites were with those that Moses ordained: the Lacedemones with those
that Licurgus made, the Athenes with those that Solon gave them. And in some
places with such as were made by certain outchosen men, as in Rome by the ten
men. And in some they received none, but such as all the multitude agreed
Unto. Likewise in some countries they were content to be governed, and the
laws executed by one king or Judge, in some places by many of the best sort,
in some places by the people of the lowest sort, and in some places also by
the king, nobility, and the people all together.

And these diverse kinds of states or policies hade their distinct names, as
where one ruled, a Monarchy: where many of the best, Aristocratie: where the
multitude, Democratie: and where all together, that is, a king, the nobility,
and co^mones, a mixte sta te: which men by long continuance have judged to be
the best sort of all. For where that mixte state was exerciced, there did the
common wealth longest continue. But yet every kind of these states tended to
one end, that is, to the mayntenaunce of justice, to the wealth and benefit
of the hole multitude, and not of the superior and governors alone. And when
they saw, that the governors abused their authority, they altered the state.
As among the Israelites, for the iniquity of the children of Samuel their
judge, from Judges to kings: among the Romans, for the tyranny and
oppression that Tarquinius used over the people (as the chief occasion) and
afterward for his sons lewdenesse (as the outward occasion) from kings to
Consules, and so from Consules (for their evil demeanor) to December viri and
Triumviri, that is, to ten rulers and three rulers: and so from change to
change, till it came to the state Imperial: yet always preserving and
mayntening thautoritie, albeit they altered and changed the kind of
government. For the Ethnikes themselves being led only by the law of nature
and their own reason, saw that without politic power and authority, mankind
could not be preserved, nor the world continued. The rich would oppress the
poor, and the poor seek the destruction of the rich, to have that he hade:
the mighty would destroy the weak, and as Theodoretus says, the great fish
eat up the small, and the weak seek revenge on the migh tie: and so one
seking the others destruction, all at leynght should be undone and come to
destruction. And because this authority and power, both to make laws, and
execute laws, proceeded from God, the holy ghost in scripture calls them
Gods: not for that they be naturally Godds, or that they be transubstantiated
in to Gods (for he says, they shall dye like men, and in deed their works
declare them to be non other than men) but for thautoritie and power which they
receive of God, to be his ministers here in earth, in ruling and governing his
people, and that the people should the rather obey them, and have them in
honor and reverence, according to his ordinance.

And the wonderful providence of God is herein to be well noted and considered,
of all such as love and fear God, that in all places and countries where
Gods word has been received and embraced, there for the time the people
followed God, no tirannye could enter, but all the members of the body sought
the prosperity and wealth one of an other, for Gods word taught them so to
do. Thou shall love the lord thy God (says it) above all things, and thy
neighbor as thy self. And, what ye will that men do unto you, do you even
so unto them. The fruits of his word is love one of an other, of what state or
degree in this world so ever they be. And the state of the policies and common
wealths have been disposed and ordained by God, that the headdes could not (if
they would) oppress the other members. For as among the Lacedaemonians certain
men called Ephori were ordained so see that the kings should not oppress the
people, and among the Romans, the Tribunes were ordained to defend and
mayntene the liberty of the people from the pride and injury of the nobles:
so in all Christian realms and dominiones God ordained means, that the heads
the princes and governors should not oppress the poor people after their
lusts, and make their will les their laws. As in Germanye between the emperor
and the people, a Counsel or diet: in France and England, parliamentes,
wherein there met and assembled of all sorts of people, and nothing could be
done without the knowlage and consent of all. But where the people have forsaken
God, and conte^ned utterly his word, there has the devil by his ministers,
occupied the hole country, and subverted the good ordres, justice and
equality, that was in the common wealth, and planted his unreasonable lusts
for good laws, as every man may see by the Realm of Vngarie which the Turk
in our time has occupied. And where the people have not utterly forsaken God
and his word, but have begone to be weary of it: there has not God suffered
Tyrannes by and by to rush in, and to occupy the hole, and to suppress the
good ordres of the common wealth, but by litel and litel has suffered them to
crepe in, first with the head, than with an arm, and so after with a leg,
and at leynght (were not the people penitent, and in time converted to God) to
bring in the hole body, and to work the feats of Tirannes, as hereafter it
shall be declared.

This is so manifest in most places, that it shall not need any particular
example. Wherefore it shall be the part of all Christen men to take heed, that in
forsaking God, they bring not justly the devil and tyrannes to reign over
them. And those that be called to councelles and parliamentes (and so to be
makers of laws, whereby the people should be bounden) not to neglecte their
duty, or to deceive the people of the trust and confidence, that was put in
them. For it is no little danger that may thereby follow unto them, both in
this world, and in the world to come. For that man that took upon him to do
any thing for an other (being the thing never so little of ualue) and therein did
use him self either craftily, seking his own gain and profit, or show him
self not diligent, or not passing what became of the matter committed to his
trust, our elders being men of honesty, judged and condemned for a most uile
uarlet and unhonest person: and being men of wisdom, made a law (which
continues til this day) not only that he should make recompense for the hurt
he did, but also that he should not be allowed afterward in the company or
nombre of honest men, no more than an open these. And this they did not by
will, but by reason, not rashly, but advisedly, not by the moo voices, but by
the more discrete headdes, because they saw, that men could not be always
present to do their own things, but of necessity must use the help and
trust of others. And again, nature has not made every man apt for all
things, but has made one man more mete for one purpose than an other: so
that one having need of an other, every one should be glad to do for an other,
and all be tied together in an undissoluble strong band of friendship. And
therefore was such false and unfrendly dealing taken to be most uile, because
it did uiolate two the chiefest uertues and most necessary things, without
which mankind could not continue: faith, and friendship. For noman requires
an other, to do any thing for him, whom he takes not to be his friend, nor
trusts him, whom he thinks not faithful. And therefore they thought him to
be a uery wicked and vile person, and not worthy the name of a man, that at
one time and in one thing should thus undoo the knot of friendship, and deceive
him, whom he could not have hurted, onles he hade trusted him. Now if nature,
reason, honesty and law does so grievously punish him, and cast him out of
all honest men's companies, that is necligent in a trifle, how much more
ought he to be punished and cast out of all men's sight, that is necligent in
the greatest matiers? If he ought so sharply to be used, that deceaueth one
poor man: how much more sharply ought he to be punished, and of all men to
be abhorred (yea cast to the dogs) that deceaueth a hole Realm of ten or
twenty hundred thousaunt persons? If he be thus to be abhorred and punished,
that is required to do an other man's business, and deceaueth him: how much
more ought they to be abhorred and hated, that take upon them to do for
others, not desired but suyng for it: not called thereto, but thrusting in them
self: not prayed, but payeng, giving many lyuereyes, procuring and making
friends to give them their uoices, obteynyng of great men's lettres, and
ladies tokens, feasting freholders, and making great banketting cheer: not by
the consent of the part, but by force and streinght, with tropes of horsemen,
bills, bows, pykes, gonnes, and such like kind of qualityes.

If this opinion be had, and judgment be given against a man that seeks his
own gain with the loss of his friends in small things: What opinion may
men have, what judgment shall be given of those, that (to make them selves noble
and rich) cut the throtes of those that committed themselves, their wives,
their children, their goods, yea and lives upon trust in to their hands?

If this judgment be given for worldly things, what judgment shall be given of
those that wilfully goo about to destroy me^nes souls, and to make the^ a
present to the devil, so that they for a time may be his deputies here in
earth? If men do thus abhor and punish such unfaithful and unhonest
persons: how much more will thalmightie God abhor, condemn, and exercice
his severe judgment on them, that thus abuse the authority given unto them by
him, and deceive and undoo those poor sheep of his, in whom (as his ministers)
they put their trust?

Hark, hark (while time of repentance is) to the sentence of God,
pronounced by the mouth of his servant and Prophet Esaias. VVo be unto you
(says he) that make unrighteous lauues, and devise things vuhich be to hard
to be kept, vuherby the poor are oppressed on every side, and thinnocentes of
my people are theruuith robbed of judgment, that vuydouues may be your pray,
and that ye may rob the fatherles. What vuill ye do in time of the
visitacion and destruction that shall come from far? To vuhom vuill ye run
for help? Or to vuhom vuill ye give your honor, that he may keep it? that ye
come not among the prisoners, or lie among the dead?

This terrible woe of everlasting damnacion was spoken not only to Jerusalem,
but to Germany, Italy, France, Spain, England, Scotland, and all other
countries and naciones, where the like vices shall be committed. For God is
just, and so hates sin, that he never leaves it in any place unpunished:
but the more common it is, the greater plages and force does he use to
repress it: as we may learn by thexamples of the cities Sodom and Gomor,
and Jerusalem his own city. And besides the general plage, he whippeth the
autors of it with some special scourge, that they may be a spectacle, not only
to those that are present, but also a remembrance to all that be to come.

But perchance some (that be put in trust and authority to make statutes and
laws) will say: ^e do not willingli any thing against Gods honor, or the
wealth of our country, or deceive any that put their trust in us.

If any such thing follow, it is by reason that we were ignorant.

Tell me, If beseech thee, if thou hadest hired one to be thy shepehearde, and
thy sheep should under his hand by his ignorance myscarie: or if thy
horsekeper taking wages, should (through his necligence) suffer thy horse to
perish: would thou not compte him faulty and look for amends at his hands?
Should ignorance excuse him? No, thou would say, I hired thee, and thou
tokest it upon thee. And so thou would not only force him to make
satisfaction, but also would think it just to have hi^ punished besides to
make himself no more co^nyng than the was, not to deceive any that put their
trust in him. Than they are much to blame, that being put in trust in Courts
and parliamentes to make laws and statutes to the advancement of Gods
glory, and conservation of the liberties and common wealth of their country,
neglecte their off^ce and charge, being appointed to be not only kepers of
Gods people, not of hogs, neither of horses and mules which have no
understanding, but of that dear stock which Christ purchaced with the price
of his heart blood: but also as phisicianes and Surgeons, to redress, reform
and heal, if any thing be amysse. And if a physician for lucre or other men's
pleasure, would take upon him the healing of a sore diseased per sone, and for
lack of knowlage or upon other evil pur pose would ministre things to hurt or
kill the person, were he not worthy to be taken and punished as a bocher and a
man murderer?

But ye will say: we gave credit to others, and they deceived us. Think ye,
that this balde excuse will serve? Is it not written, that if the blind lead
the blind, both shall fall in to the pit? Did the plea that Eua made for
offending in eating the forbidden apple (when she said, the serpent had
deceived her) excuse her? Nothing less. She was not only her self therefore
punished with such pains (as greater than death none could be devised) hut
also all her posterity.

Other perhaps of you will say: ye dare do non otherwise. If ye did, ye
should be taken for enemies of the governor, run in to indignation, and so
lose your bodies and goods, and undo your children. O faint hearts, Think
ye, that your parents had left you as ye be, if they had been so faint hearted?
Or think ye that this will serve your turn? Was it enough for Adam our first
father, when he fell with bearing his wife company in eating the forbidden
apple, to say, I durst not displease my wife: or to say, as he said, The
woman whom thou gave me, gave it me? No, it auailed not, but he and all his
posterity were plagued for his disobedience, as we and all that shall follow
us, do well feel, if we have any fear of God before our eyes.

When the brutishe commones of Israel were so importune upon Aaron, that he for
fear was feign to make them the golden calfe: wherewith when Moses sharply
charged him he excused him self, saying: alas Sir, this sedicious and rageing
brutishe people would needs have me perforce to do it. God knows, it was sore
against my will: did this excuse acquit him, trow you? No surely. If he had
not repented, he had been as sure of hell fire for his labor, as they be, which
have set up or said the beastly popyshe mass, at the furious enforcement of
the brutishe commones or in pretense of obedience to the Queen's procedinges in
England: onles they spedily repent, and renounce their wicked doing, as Aaron
did his.

Thus ye have heard not only whereof politic power grows, and of the true
use and duty thereof, but also what will be laid to their charge, that do not
their duty in making of laws. Now see, what is said by God to thexecutours
of laws: See what ye do (Says God) for ye execute not the judgment of man,
but of God. and what so ever ye judge, it shall redounde to your selves. Let
the fear of God therefore be before your eyes, and do all things with
diligence. For with the lord our God there is non iniquity, neither difference
of persons, nor yet has he pleasure in rewards or bribes.

But of the ministers of laws and governors of realms and contreyes, more
shall be said hereafter.

WHETHER KINGS princes, and other governors have an obsolute power and
authority over their subjects.
Forasmuch as those that be the Rulers in the world, and would be taken for
Gods (that is, the ministers and images of God here in earth, thexa^ples and
myrrours of all godliness, justice, equity, and other virtues) claim and
exercice an absolute power, which also they call a fullness of power, or
prerogative to do what they lust, and none may gaynesaye them: to dispense
with the laws as pleases them, and freely and without correction or offense
do contrary to the law of nature, and other Gods laws, and the positive
laws and customs of their countries, or break them: and use their subjects
as men do their beasts, and as lords do their villanes and bondemen,
getting their goods from them by hoke and by crook, with Sic volo, Sic iubeo,
and spending it to the destruction of their ^ubiectes: the misery of this time
requires to examyne, whether they do it rightfully or wrongfully, that if it
be right full, the people may the more willingly obeie and re ceaue the same:
if it be wrongful, that than those that use it, may the rather for the fear
of God leave it. For (no douht) God will come, and judge the world with
equity, and revenge the cause of the oppressed. Of the popes power (who
compteth himself one, yea the chief of these kind of Gods, yea above them
all, and fellow to the God of Gods) we mind not now to treat: another is it
requisite. For all men, yea half wise women and babes can well judge, that his
power is worthy to be laughed at: and were it not bolstred and propped up with
sweorde and faggot, it would (as it will notwithstanding) shortly ly in the
mire, for it is not buylt on the rock, but on the sand, not planted by the
father of heaven, but by the devil of hell, as the fruits do manyfestly
declare. But we will speak of the power of kings and princes, and such like
potentates, rulers, and governors of common wealths.

Before ye have heard, how for a great long time, that is until after the
general flood, there was no civil or politic power, and how it was tha^ furst
ordained by God him self, and for what purpose he ordained it: that is (to
comprehend all briefly) to mayntene justice: for every one doing his deutie to
God, and one to an other, is but justice. Ye have heard also, how states,
bodies politic, and common wealths ha ue authority to make laws for the
mayntenaunce of the policy, so that they be not contrary to Gods law and
the laws of nature: which, if ye note well the question before propouned
whether kings and princes have an absolute power, shall appear not doubtful,
or if any would affirm it, that he shall not be hable to maintene it. For
first touching Gods laws (by which name also the laws of nature be
comprehended) kings and princes are not joined makers hereof with God, so that
thereby of the^ selves they might claim any interest or authority to dissolve
them or dispense with them, by this Maxim or principal, that he that may knyt
together, may lose asondre: and he that may make, may mar: for before
Magistrates were, Gods laws were. Neither can it be proved, that by Gods
word they have any authority to dispense or break them: but that they be
still commanded to do right, to ministre justice, and not to swerve, neither
on the right hand or on the left. Than must it needs follow, that this
absolute authority which they use, must be mayntened by man's reason, or it
must needs be an vsurpacio^: But what can reason say? If it be not laufull, by
no laws (no neither by honesty) for any man's servant to altre his masters
(a mortal man's) commandment: can reason say, it is laufull for any person
to altre Gods commandment, or break it? That a man's servant may be
wiser than his master, that he may be iuster than his master, that he may
see what is more profitable and necessary to be done tha^ his master,
commonly it happens: and therefore he may have some appare^t cause, to altre
or break his masters co^maun dement. But to say, that any creature is, or
that any creature would seem in word or deed, to be more wise than God, more
just than God, more prudent and circumspecte than God, or knows what is
better for the creature than the creator him self (as it must needs be said,
that he does, that takes upon him to break or dispense with Gods will and
commandments) what an horrible blasphemy is it? What luciferous presumpcion
is it?

If we will not submit our selves to Gods judgment herein expressed by his
word, as Christianes should, let us yet mark the sequel: and thereby gather
Gods judgment, as Ethnikes do. For when we have wrought our wits out, and
devised and done what we can, we can not so exclude God, but he will have a
saying with us.

Gods word, will and commandment is, that he that wilfully kills a man,
shall also be killed by man: that is, the Magistrate. But this law has not
ben observed and all ways executed, but kings and princes upon affection have
dispensed and broken it, granting life and liberty to traitors, robbers,
murtherours, etc.

But what has followed of it? Have they (whose offenses have been so pardoned)
after ward showed them selves penitent to God, and thankfully profitable to the
common wealth? No, God and the commonwealthe have hade no greater enemies.
They have added murder to murder, mischief to mischief, and of private
malefactors, have become public, and of men killers, they have at leinght
grown to be destroiers of their country, yea and many times of them that
saved them from hanging and other just pains of the law. And no maruail: for
God does not oneli punish the principalles and autors of such mischief, but
also those that be accessaries and mayntenours of it, and plageth iniquity
with iniquity. Ye may likewise see, what fruits have followed, where popes,
have dispensed, that marriages might be made contrary to Gods laws. We shall
not need to rehearse any? the end will declare all. But let us leave to reason
that, wherein nothing can be said for it. And let us come to that, wherein
somewhat may be said: that is, whether kings and princes may do things
contrary to the positive laws of their country. As for example.

It is a law positive, that a mean kind of apparail, or a mean kind of
diet should be used in a common wealth, to the intent that men leaving thexcesse
thereof, whereof many occasiones both to destroy nature and to offend God
follow, they might convert that they before evil spent, to the relief of the
poverty, or defense of their country.

For answer to this question, this division ought to be made, that there be two
kinds of kings, princes, and governors.

The one, who alone may make positive laws, because the hole state and body
of their country have given, and resigned to them their authority so to do:
which nevertheless is rather to be compted a tiranne than a king, as Dionisius,
Philippus and Alexander were, who saved whom they would and spilt whom they
lusted. And the other be such, unto whom the people have not given such
authority, but keep it them selves: as we have before said concerning the
mixte state.

True it is, that in matters indifferent, that is, that of them selves be
neither good nor evil, hurtful or profitable, but for a decent order: Kings
and Princes (to whom the people have given their authority) may make such
laws, and dispense with them. But in matters not indifferent, but godly and
profitably ordained for the common wealth, there can they not (for all their
authority) break the^ or dispense with them. For Princes are ordained to do
good, not to do evil: to take away evil, not to increace it: to give example
of well doing, not to be procurers of evil: to procure the wealth and benefit
of their subjects, and not to work their hurt or undoing. And in thempire
where (by the civil laws) themperours claim, that the people gave them their
authority to make laws, albeit they have been willing, and often attempted to
execute their authority, which some Piketha^kes (to please them) say they have
by the laws, yet have they ben forced of them selves to leave of their
enterprise. But such as be indifferent expounders of the laws, be of that
mind that we before have declared: and therefore make this a general
conclusion, and as it were a rule, that the emperor willing any thing to be
done, there is no more to be done, than the laws permit to be done. For (say
they) neither pope, Emperor, nor king may do any thing to the hurt of his
people without their consent. King Antigonus Chauncelour, saying unto him, that
all things were honest and laufull to kings: ye say true (quod the king) but
to such kings as be beasts, barbarous and without humanity: but to true and
good Princes, nothing is honest, but that is honest in deed, and nothing is
just, but that is just in deed.

Anthiochus the third king of Asia, considering that as he was above the
people, so the laws were above him, wrote general lettres to all the cities of
his country, that if they should perceive, that he by any lettres, should
require any thing contrary to the laws, they should think, that such lettres
were obtained without his consent, and therefore they should not obeie them.

Now if where the people have given their authority to their governor to make
such laws, yet can he not break or dispe^se with the positive laws: how
much less may such governors, kings, and princes to who^ the people have
not given their authority (but they with the people, and the people with the^
ma ke the laws) break them or dispe^se with them? If this were tolerable,
tha^ were it in vain to make solemn as semblies of the hole state, long
Parliamentes etc? yea (I beseech the) what certayntie should therbe in any
thing, where all should depend on ones will and affection? But it will be said,
that albeit kings and princes can not make laws, but with the consent of the
people, yet may they dispense with any positive law, by reason that of long
time they have used so to do, and prescribe so to do: for long custom makes
a law.

To this it may be answered, evil customs (be they never so old) are not to
be suffered, but utterly to be abolished: and non may prescribe to do evil, be
he king or subject. If the laws appoint thee the time of thrittye or forty
years to claim a sure and a perfect interesse of that thou enioiest, yet if
thou know, that either thy self or those by Whom thou claimest, came
wrongfully by it, thou art not in deed a perfect owner of it, but art bounden to
restore it. Although the laws of man do excuse and defend thee from outward
trouble and punisheme^t, yet ca^ they not quiet the conscience, but wha^ thy
conscience reme^breth, that thou enioiest that is not thine, it will byte the
that thou haste done wrong: it will accuse the before the judgment seat of
God, and condemnethe. And if princes and governors would show themselves half
so wise, as they would men should take them to be, and by thexample of others
learn What mischief might happen to them selves, they would not (if they
might) claim, much less execute any such absolute authority. No, neither
would their Counsailours (if they loved them) maintene them in it: nor yet the
subjects (if they did but considre their own sauetie and felicity in this
life) would not if they might suffer their Prince to do what him lusted.

For the one purchase to them selves a perpetual vncer^aintie both of life and
goods: and the other procures the hatred of all, which albeit it be colored
and dissembled for a season, yet does it at leynght burst out, and works the
revenge with extremity.

There lack no examples to verify this. It was dryven in to the head of
temperour C. Caligula, that he was subject to no power, that he was above all
laws, and that he might laufully do what him lu sted. This lesson was so
sweet to the flesh, that it was no sooner moved than desired, no sooner taught
than learned, no sooner heard than practiced. First by like that thempire
should not goo out of his own race, he coupleth not with one, but with all his
susters, like bitche and dog. He kills his brother Tiberius, and all his
chiefest friends: he murdereth many of the Senators of Rome. He delited to
have honest men to be garshed, scotched and cut in the faces, and so to make
him pleasure, to have them cast to ravenous beasts to be torn and devoured in
his sight, or to be sawed asondre in the mids. It was a pleasunt pastyme for
him, to see the parents stand by, lamenting and weping, whiles their children
were tormented and killed. He used to complain and lament, that no common
calamity and notable miseries happened in his time. He rejoiced much when
news were brought him of the slaughters of hole armies of men, great hongre,
pestilence, towns burning, and openynges of the earth, wherein many people
were swalowed up. But the day he saw any of these him self, he neded neither
meat nor drink, he was so iocunde and merye. And being glutted with the
pastime of every man's death, by him self (to procure a new appetite) he
devised an other, if he could have brought it to pass. But when he could not
have it done, the memory thereof was so sweet, that he often desired: that is,
that all the he adds of the people of Rome stood on one man's neck, that he
might with ones was he cut it of. Many other noble acts by his absolute power
he wrought: and at leynght he commanded that his image should be set up in the
temple at Jerusalem, and there worshipped: as not unlike Saint Gardiners (for he
has done no small things) shall be shortly by Anti cipacio^ in England. But
what was the end of Caligulaes absolute power? wha^ he had reigned three years
and ten months, his own householde servants conspired against him, and the
general of his own^ Army slew him.

Nero the emperor was of nature very modest, gen til, and merciful, and the
first five years of this reign, he behaved him self very virtuously. After,
other counsaillours and masters, than Seneca crept into his favor, who told
him that he might do what him lusted. He was sone persuaded thereunto. And to
show some proof that he had well carried away their advise: he killed his
mother Agrippina. This cruel act did so move his wicked conscience, that he
durst not come abroad in the Senate, but kept him self secret in his privy
chamber. For he feared the hatred of the people, and knew not what was best
for hi^ to do. He lacked no flattering Counsailours. There were pleintie that
sought their own profit and gain, and the satisfieng of their lusts, more
than their princes honor and sauetie, and the common wealth of their
cou^treie Say they: Sir, whi should ye be thus amassed with the death of this
woman? She was of all people abhorred and hated: the people wonderfully rejoice
in your doi^g, and co^me^de you above the moon for so noble an act. They
desire, that ye will return in to the city, that they may with triumph
express how much their joy and gladness is, and how they love you for so
noble a feate. These crafty knaves seeing how they might blind their masters
eyes, commanded in themperours behalf, that all the people should come out of
Rome, to mete the emperor. The Senate in their best apparail comes out, all
other ordres likewise after their degrees follow, and finally man, Woman and
child.

The Emperor when he saw them, thought all was done from the botome of their
heart. The Senate showed such outward honor, the commones so great love,
eueri body pretended so great joy and gladness. And think ye, there were not
about him that said. Does not your Majesty well find all our saienges true?
may ye not credit us in that we coun sail and advise you? What followed?
The Emperor embrewed with the blood of his mother, and his unnatural act
commended by his wicked Counsailours, ceasseth not from his cruelty, but
earnestly goes forward He puts away his wife Octauia, because she seemed
to be baren. He marieth his harlot called Puppie. He sends his wife Octauia
in to an Ilan de, he byndeth her in chains, and causes her to be let blood in
all parts: and fearing least fear would drive the blood to the heart, and so
she live longer than he would, he sets her in a bayne of hot water, that
her blood might the sooner come out. But what becomes of his dear dearling
Puppie? he dalieth a while with his Puppie and at leynght his hot love being
turned in to displeasur, he spurneth her (being with Child) on the belie, and
so she dies. To late he repented, but yet ceased not his cruelty. He killed
his master Seneca, he persecuted the church of Christ most miserably, and so
thinking that he might do what him lusted, and that all was well done, were it
never so evil done, he never left of his cruelty, til the people finding
occasion and opportunity to vttre their dissembled hatred, slew him.

But what think you? who were to be blamed for these cruel acts? He for
doing the^, or others for flat tring hi^, or the Senate and people of Rome in
suffering him? Surely there is none of them to be excused, but all to be blamed,
and chiefly those that might have bridled him, and did not.

He is a good citez in, that does non evil (says a noble wiseman) but he is
a better that lets others, that they shall not do hurt nor injustice to
others. The blood of innocents shall be demanded not only at the hands of the
sheaders of blood, but also of those that make or consent to wicked laws, to
condemn innocents, or suffer their head to kill them contrary to just laws*
or to spoil them of that they justly enioie by the order of the law.

Now sith kings, princes, and governors of common wealths have not nor can
justly claim any absolute authority, but that the end of their authority is
determined and certain to maintene justice, to defend the innocent, to punish
the evil. And that so many euilles and mischiefs may follow, where such
absolute and (in deed) tira^nical power is usurped: let us pray, that they
may know their duty, and discharge the^ selves to God and to the world, or
else that those which have the authority to refourme them, may know and do
their duty, that the people finding and acknowlageing the benefit of good
rulers, may thank God for them, and labor every one to do their duty: and
that seeing the head is not spared, but euillesin it punished, they may the
more willingly abstain from tyra^nie and other evil doings, and do their
duties, and so all glorify God.

WHETHER KINGS, princes, and other politic Governors be subject to Gods
laws, and the positive laws of their countries.
HE that notes the procedinges of princes and governors in these our days,
how ambicious they are to usurp others Dominiones, and how necli ge^t they be
to see their own well governed, might think, hat they believe, that either
there is no God, or that he has not care over the things of the world: or
that they think themselves exempt from Gods laws and power. But the
Wonderful overthrow of their devises (when they think themselves most sure
and certain) is so manifest, that it is not possible to deny, but that both
there is a God, and that he has care over the things of the world. And his
word is so plain, that non can gaynsaye, but that they be subject and ought
to be obedient to Gods laws and Word. For the hole decalog and every part
thereof is as well written to kings, princes, and other public persons, as to
private persons. A king may no more commit Idolatry, than a private man: he
may^ not take the name of God in vain, he may not break the Sabbat, no more
than any private man. It is not laufull for him to disobeye his pare^tes, to
killany person contrary to the laws, to be an hooremo^ger, to steal, to lie
and bear false witness, to desire and covet any man's house, wife, servant,
maid, ox, ass, or any thing that is an others, more than any other private
man. No, he is bounden and charged under greater pains to keep them than any
other, because he is both a private man in respect of his own person, and a
public in respect of his office, which ma^e appear in a great meigny of
places when ro^ part I will recite. The holy ghost by the mouth of a king and
prophet, says: And now ye kings ^nderstande, be ye learned that judge the
earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and reioi ce with trembling. Kiss the son,
that is, receive with honor, least the Lord be angry, and ye lose the way,
when his wrath shall in a moment be kyndled. And in an other place thus: The
Lord upon thy right hand shall Smite and break in pieces eue^ kings in the
day of his wrath. Esaias also the prophet says: The Lord shall comme to
judgment against the princes and elders of the people. Likewise says the
Prophet Micheas speaking to all princes and governors under the heads of the
house of Jacob, and the leaders of the house of ^srael: He are ye princes and
governors, says Micheas: Should ye not kno we what were laufull and right?
But ye hate the good, and love the evil, ye pluck of me^nes skynnes, and the
flesh from their bones: ye cheoppe them in pieces, as it were in to a Caldron,
and as flesh in to a pot. Now the time shall come, that wha^ ye call unto
the lord, he shall not hear you, but hyde his ^ace from you, by cause that
through your own ymaginationes ye have dealt so wickedly. And again he says:
O hear ye rulers and governors, ye that abhor the thing that is lauful, and
wraste aside the thing that is straight: ye that build up Sion with blood your
magestie and tirannie with doing Wrong. For so may Sion and Jerusalem be well
expounded: O you judges, ye give sentence for gifts: O ye priests, ye teach
for lucre: O ye prophets, ye prophecy for money: yet Will they be taken as
those that hold upon God, and say* Is not the lord among us? How can than
any mysfortune happen to us? But Sion (that is, your cities) for your sakes
shall be plowed like a field: and Jerusalem (that is, your palaces) shall become
an heap of stones, and the hill of the temple (that is, your Monasteries,
frieries, and chauntries) shall be come an high woodde. The holy ghost also by
the mouth of king Solomon, says: Hear O ye kings, and understand. O
learn ye that be judges of the e^des of the earth. Give ear ye that rule the
multitudes, and delight in much people. For the power is given unto you of the
lord, and the streinght from the highest, who shall try your worcester kes, and
search out your ymaginaciones, how that ye being officers of his kingdom have
not kept the law of righteousness nor Walked after his will. Horribly and
that sone shall be appear unto you, for upon the most high, he will execute
most severe judgment. Mercy is granted unto the simple, but they that be in
authority, shall be sore punished. For God which is lord over all, shall except
no man's person, neither shall he regard any man's greatness for he has
made the small and greatand cares for all alike, but the mighty shall have
the sorer punishment. To you therefore (O princes) do I speak, that ye may
learn wisdom, and not offend.

These saienges need no particular examples to con firm them, but look on all
governors and rulers named in the hole Bible, or in any other history: and
among all ye shall find, that non has escaped Gods punishment, but
always their iniquity has been plaged in them selves or their posterity.

The cause and manner of king Saules punisheme^t and extinguishing of his
posterity, is more commonly known, than needs any rehearsal. Roboam because
he would reign as a tyranne and not be subject to law nor counsel, hade ten
tribes of his kingdom taken from him, and given to Jeroboam: who also
forasmuch as he contented not him self to be sub iecte to Gods written
word and law, but fell to his own Idolatrous inuenciones, and caused his
subjects to follow his procedinges: was so stripped from the enheritaunce of
his crown, that his sede was utterly rooted out.

The end of Achab and Iesabel is well enough understood. And king Ioram for
his stout stryuing against Gods laws and the order of his country was so
sore stricken of the lord with horrible diseases, that at leynght his guts
for extreme anguishe flewe out of his belly. But whereto bring I out particular
examples of Gods plagues and punishementes upon kings and princes that would
not be subject to Gods laws, and the laws of nature, seeing the hole body
of the Bible, and writers of profane histories be full of them?

Therefore seeing no king or governor is exempted from the laws, hand, and
power of God, but that he ought to fear and tremble at it, we may proceed to
the other part of the question: that is, whether kings, princes, and other
governors ought to be obedient and subject to the positive laws of their
country. To discuss this question, the right way and mean is as in all
other things, to resort to the fountaynes and roots, and not to depend on
the ryuers and branches. For as if men should admyt, that the church of Rome
were the catholic church, and the pope the head of it, and Gods only
vicare in earth, and not seek further how he comes by that authority: than
could noman say, but that all his doings (were they never so wicked) should
seem just: so if men should build upon thauthoritie that kings and princes
usurp over their subjects, and not seek from whens they have their authority,
nor whether that which they use, be just, there could be nothing produced to
let their cruel tyranny. But for as much as we see from whence all politic
power and authority comes, that is, from God: and why it was ordained, that
is, to mayntene justice: we ought (if we will judge rightly) by Gods word
examine to try this matter.

Saint Paul treating who should do obedience, and to whom obedience should be
done, says: Let every soul be subject to the powers that rule, for there is
no power but of God. There are that would have this word, Soul, taken for man,
not as he consists of soul and body both together, but only of the flesh:
and that so by the worcester de ( (...)) should be understood only a worldly man,
that is, a lay man or temporal man (as we term it) and not a spiritual man
and a minister of the church. Where upon Antichrist, the bishop of To me seking
for subjects to be under his kingdom, has taken for his subjects the
clergy with tagge and ragge that to them belongs: and has made laws,
that they should be his subjects, obedient to him and not to the politic
power and authority, where unto he leaves for subjects only the temporaltie.

But in scripture this word ( Soul) is taken for every kind of man, as may
appear wha^ it says, that all the souls (that is, man and woman) that were
in the arc with Noe, were eight. And that all the souls of the house of
Jacob, which came in to Egypt were lxx. In which nombres it can not be denied,
but that there were as holy and as spiritual persons, as any are or were in
the kingdom of the bishop of Rome. And Chrysostom (a priest) expounding this
text ( Let every soul be subject to the higher powers) says: yea if thou
be an apostle, an evangelist, a prophet, or what so ever thou art: for this
subjection destroieth not religion. So that it can not be denied, but by this
word ( Soul) is comprehended, every person, and none excepted. Now touching
this word ( Power) some would have it interpreted for all those persons that
execute justice, be he kaiser, king, mayre, Sherif, constable, borseholder, or
never so low: and some would have it to be interpreted only of kings and
chiefest officers. But it is here to be taken for the ministry and authority,
that all officers of justice do execute: and so it may appear by Chri stes
own words, where he says: The kings of the naciones rule over* the^, and
those that ex ercice thautoritie or power, be called gracious Benefactours, or
well doers. For as all me^ and women that seem to live together in the ho ly
ordinance of Matrimony, be not man and wife, for it may be, that the man
has an other wife living or the wife other an husband, or that they came not
together* for the love of God only, and to avoid sin, but for sensuality,
and to get riches, and so thordinaunce it self is one thing, and the persons,
that is, the man and womon an other: eue^ so is the politic power or authority
being thordinau^ce and* good gift of God, one thing, and the person that
executes the same (be he ki^ng or kaiser) an other thing. The ordinance being
godly, the man may be evil and not of God, nor come thereto by God, as the
Prophet Osee says: They have made them a king, and not through me: a prince,
and not through my counsel and will,

Neither is that power and authority which kings, princes, and other
ministres of justice exercice, only called a power: but also thauthoritie that
paren tes have over their children, and masters over their servants, is also
called a power: and neither be the parents nor masters the power it self, but
they be inistres and executours of the power, being given unto them by God:
Which also S. Paul in an other place plainly shows, saying to Titus: Warn
them to be subject to the principalities and powers. Which some interpret,
princes and powers, to make a distinction between the minister and the
Ministry. And it follows: to obey thofficers, so that always the difference
may be perceived. So than if by this word ( Soul) is meant every person
spiritual and temporal, man and woman: and by this word ( power) thautoritie
that kings and princes execute, than can not kings and princes, but be
contained under this general word ( Soul) as well as others. And they being
but executours of Gods laws, and men's just ordinances, be also not
exempted from them, but be bounden to be subject and obe dient unto them. For
good and just laws of man be Gods power and ordinances, and they are but
ministers of the laws, and not the laws self. And if they were exe^pt from
the laws, and so it were laufull for them to do what them lusts, their
authority being of God, it might be said, that God allowed their tyra^nie
robbery of their subjects, killi^g the^ without law, and so God thautor of
evil: which were a great blasphemy. Iustinia^ the emperor well considered, when
he ma de this saying to be put into the body of the laws. It is a worthy
saying (says he) for the Majesty of him that is i^ authority, to confess
that the prince is subiect^ to the laws, thauthoritie of the prince do the so
much depend on thautoritie of the laws. And certainly it is more honor than
the honor of the empire, to submit the principality unto the laws. For in
deed laws be made, that the wilful self will of men should not rule, but that
they should have a line to lead them, as they might not goo out of the way of
justice: and that (if any would say, they did them wrong) they might allege
the law for their waraunt and authority. It is also a principle of all laws
grounded on the law of nature, that every man should use himself and be
obedient to that law, that he will others be bounden unto. For otherwise he
takes away that equality (for there is no difference between the head and
foot, concerning the use and benefit of the laws) whereby common wealths be
maintened and kept up. What equality (I beseech you) should there be, where the
subject should do to his ruler all the ruler would: and the ruler to the
subject, that the ruler lusted?

The good emperor Traianus (whom for his just behaueour, the Senate of Rome
took to be a God) being in possession of his office, and minding to show, that
he was not ordained to be a tiranne, but to see the people well governed, and
that, albeit he was the minister of the laws, yet was he subject to the
laws, took a sweorde, and gave it to the Captain of the horsemen, and said:
Take this sweorde, use it for me against mine enemies in just causes: and if I
my self do not justly use it, than use it against me.

Zaleuchus the ruler and maker of laws to the locres, when he made this law,
that an aduouterour should be punished with the loss of both his eyes, and
his son hade offended the same, albeit the people made great intercession,
that his pains might be pardoned him, he would not consent unto it, but pull
ling out one of his sons eyes, to fulfill and keep the law, he suffered one
of his own eyes also to be pulled out.

But thou wilt say: What have we to do with Ethnikes? Why should we be ordered
by Ethnikes doings? I answer, that when Ethnikes do by nature that thou art
bounden also to do, not only by nature, but by the laws of God and man, such
Ethnikes shall rise in the universal judgment, to accuse the, and work thy
condemnacion. The bishop of Romes laws (which albeit he use not in him self,
yet will he have them practiced in others) say thus: It is requisite and just,
that a prince obeie his own laws. For than may he look that others shall
keep his laws, when he him self has them in honor. Justice will, that
princes be obedient and bounden to their own laws, and that they can not in
their own doings condemn those laws which they prescribe unto others.
Thauthoritie of their saying is just and indifferent, if that they suffer not
them selves to do that they prohibit unto their people. This says the
bishop of Romes law. And upon this principle after in the great general
counsel of Lateran, Which pope Innocent the third held, it may seem, it was
ordained and decreed (as they say) that when kings and princes that knowlaged
no superior, should fall out among them selves, or should misuse their power
and authority over their subiecttes, that than the matier should be heard and
corrected by the bishop of Rome

But here it may be asked, who did this justice on kings and princes before
that time, since it was but than committed to the bishop of Rome? To that at
this time we shall not need to answer, for that we do not seek presently to
know who should be judge, but only to declare and prove, that kings and
princes ought, both by Gods law, the law of nature, man's laws, and good
reason, to be obedient and subject to the positive laws of their country,
and may not break* them, and that they be not exempt from them, nor may
dispense with them, onles the makers of the laws give them express authority
so to do.

Who shall be the kings judges, hereafter thou shall hear.

IN WHAT THINGS, AND how far subjects are bounden to obeie their princes
and governors.
AS THE BODY OF MAN IS KNIT and kept together in due proporcio^ by the sinews,
so is every co^mu^ wealth kept and maitened in good order by Obedience. But as
if the sinowes be to much racked and stretched out, or to muched shrinked
together, it briedeth wonderful pains and deformity in man's body: so if
Obedience be to much or to litell in a common wealth, it causes much evil
and disordre. For to much makes the governors to for get their vocacion, and
to usurp upon their subjects: to litel briedeth a licencious liberty, and
makes the people to forget their duty. And so both ways the common wealth
grows out of order, and at leinght comes to havoc and vttre destruction,

Some there be that will have to littel obedience, as the Anabaptists. For they
because they hear of a christian liberty, would have all politic power taken
away: and so in deed no obedience.

Others (as thenglishe papists) rack and stretche out obedience to much, and
will needs have civil power obeyed in all things, and that what so ever it
commands, without respect it ought and must be done. But both of them be
in great errors. For thanabaptistes mistake christian liberty, thinking that
men may live without sin, and forget the fall of man, whereby he was brought
in to such misery, that he is no more hable to rule himself by him self, than
one beast is hable to rule an other: and that therefore God ordained civil
power (his ministre) to rule him, and to call him back, when so ever he should
pass the limits of his duty, and would that an obedience should be given
unto him.

And the papists neither considre the degrees of powers, nor over what things
civil power has authority, ne yet how far subjects ought to obey their
governors. And this they do not for lack of knowlage, but of a spiritual
malice, because it makes against their purpose, that the truth should be
disclosed.

If any christian prince should goo about to redress the abuses of the
Sacraments (brought in and devised by the papists to mainte^e their kingdom)
to correct their abominable life, their hooredome, buggery, dronkenesse,
pride, and such like vices: than is he an other Ozias, an other Osa, an
heretic, aschismatike, cursed from top to too, with book, bell, and candle,
as black as a potteside: no obedience of the subjects ought to be given unto
him. But if he be contented to wynke at their abominaciones, to run with
them, to dishonor God, to commit idolatry, to kill the true ministers and
confessors of Christ, to destroy the poor innoce^tes which abhor the
papists wicked vices, and be desirous that Gods kingdom should be promoted:
than is he an other Ezechias, a Josias, a catholic prince, a dear son of
the church, the protector of the church, the defendour of the faith, the
fosterour of the church, a confessor while he lives, after his death a
saint (yea a saint devil) canonized with Ora pro nobis: when Beelzebub daunceth
at his Dirige.

Such a one (say they) must be obeyed in all things, none may speak
against his procedinges, for he that resists the power, resists
thordinaunce of God, and he that resists, purchaceth to him self dam nacio^:
as though to leave evil undone, and to do good, were to resi ste the power.
And here also they wring this saying of S. Petre ( Servants obeie your
masters, although they be froward and churlishe) to free subjects under a
king: as if bound men and free men were all one, and kings and bondemens
lords hade like authority. So with violent wringing and false applyeng of
Gods health giving word, Caiphas and Herod ride cheke by cheke, and walk
arm in arm, with both the sweor des and cross before them. Friend to the
one, friend to both: and he that is an heretic with Caiphas, must be
atraitour to Herod*

Thus they goo about to bleare men's eyes to con firm and encreace their
deuillishe kingdom. But popis he prelates practices are no warraunt to
discharge a christian man's conscience. He must seek what God will have him
do, and not what the subtlety and violence of wicked men will force him to
do. He may not rob petre to clothe Paul, nor take from God his due to give
it unto civil power: neither may he make confusion of the powers, but yield
unto every one that is his due, nor yet obeyeng the inferiors commandment,
leave the commandment of the highest undone. Yield unto Caesar, those things
that be Cesares (says Christ) and unto God, those things that be Gods.
Civil power is a power and ordinance of God, appointed to certain things,
but no general minister over all things. God has not given it power over the
one and the best part of man, that is, the soul and conscience of man, but
only over the other and the worst part of man, that is, the body, and those
things that belong unto this temporal life of man.

And yet over that part with thappurtenaunces has he not only not given man
the hole power, and stripped him self quite of all thautoritie, but also he
has reserved to him self the power thereof. For we read, that when civil
power (his minister) has been necligent in doing his duty, or winked at the
evil life of the people, God has not holden his hand, but has whipped and
plagued such people, as he did the Sodomites, Gomorrianes, and diverse times
the Jews.

And in our days his hand is not shortened but he has and daily does plage
blasphemours, hooremongers, dronkerdes, murtherours, thieves, traitors,
tyrannes, such as in man's sight no man durst or at the least would touch:
some with incurable plages of their body, some with loss of their children,
some with loss of their goods, and some with shameful deaths.

And contrary wise when the worldly powers have violently, tyrannously, over
sharply, and wrongfully oppressed and condemned innocents, God (to testify
that he has also power of the body) has many times in all ages myghtily and
miraculously delivered his people from the power of tyrannes: as the Israelites
from Pharao, Mardocheus from A man, Susanna from the lecherous judges: Sedrach
Mesach, and Abednego sro^ the burning oven: Daniel from the lions den, Petre
from Herod, and infinite other examples we have in scriptures and histories.
And the like have not wanted in our days also, if we will advisedly consider
the condition and state of our time. So that we see God to be the supreme power
of the hole man, as well to punish as to deliver at his own will.

God is the highest power, yea the power of powers, from him is derived all
power. All people be his servants made to serve and glorify him. All other
powers are but his ministers, set to ouersee that every one he have him self,
as he ought toward God, and to do those things, that he is justly commanded
to do, by God.

that so ever God commands man to do, he ought not to considre the matter,
but straight to obeie the commander. For we are sure, what he commands, is
just and right: for from him that is all together just and right, no injustice
nor wrong can come.

So did Abraham, when contrary to that seemed to be right and just (yea contrary
to Gods general commandment) he made himself ready to kill and offer in
sacrifice his only promised son Isaac, according to Gods special
commandment. So did also the children of Israel, contrary to the general
commandment ( Thou shall not steal) rob and spoil the Egipcianes, by
Gods special commandment. And so did Phinees, who albeit he were no
Magistrate, yet of a great zeal by the inward mocion of Gods spirit thrust
his sweorde through those two whom he found committing Horedome,

But contrary in m^a^nes commandments, men ought to considre the matier, and
not the man. For all men what so ever mynisterie or vocation they exercice, are
but me^, and so may err. We see cou^celles against co^celles, parliame^tes
against parliame^tes, commandment against commandment, this day one thing
to morrow an other. It is not the man's waraunt that can discharge the, but it
is the thing it self that must justify thee. It is the matter that will accuse
thee, and defend thee: acquyte thee, and condemn thee: when thou shall come
hefore the throne of the highest and everlasting power, where no temporal power
will appear for thee, to make answer or to defend thee: but thou thy self
must answer for thy self, and for what so ever thou have done. And therefore
christen men ought well to considre, and weigh^ men's commandments, before
they be hasty to do them, to see if they be contrary or repugnaunt to Gods
commandments and justice: which if they be, they are cruel and evil, and
ought not to be obeyed. We have this special commandment from God the highest
power, often repeted by the holy ghost. Forbear to do evil, and do that is
good. S. Paul (the true teacher of obedience) teaches, that civil power and
princes be not ordained to be a ter rour to those that do well but to those
that do evil, and will not that me^ should do what so ever the power
commands, but says, will thou not fear the power? do that is good, and
thou shall have praise of it: for it is the minister of God ordained for thy
benefit, and not to thy destruction. But if thou do that is evil, than fear:
for it carries not the sweorde in vain: for it is the minister of God, a
revenger and execucionar, to punish him that shall do evil. And therefore it is
orday ned, that evil might be taken away. Men must be sub iecte, not only for
fear of punishment, but also for conscience sake. For not to obey the power,
that defends the good and virtuous, and punishes the evil and wicked, is
deadly sin, And the self same also S. Petreteacheth. Wherefore the mark that
all men ought to shoot at, is to do good, and in no wise to do evil, whosoever
ever commands it. If the ministers of the civil power command thee to
honor and glorify God, as God will be honored, to defend (with thy person
and goods) thy countreye against thenemies, to do such things as be for the
wealth and benefit of thy countreye: thou art bounden to do it: for it is
good, and God will have thee to do it. And if thou do it not, thou synnest
against God, and justly deseruest the punishment not only of the power, but of
everlasting damnacion But if the ministers of the civil power command thee
to dishonor God, to commit idolatry, to kill an innocent, to fight against
thy country, to give or lend that thou have, to such as mind the subversion
and destruction of thy country, or to mayntene them in their Wickedness, tkou
ought not to do it, but to leave it undone: for it is evil, and God (the
supreme and highest power) will not that thou should do it. Thapostles in
time of persecution did not only give us an example so to do, when the
worldly powers would have had them to follow their procedinges, but also left
us a lesson so to do. God must be obeyed (say they) rather than men. And this
lesson even from the beginning before it was written, was by the holy ghost
printed in man's heart. When Pharao the ty ran commanded the mydwyues of
the Egipcianes, to kill all the male children that should be borne of the
Israelites wives: think ye, he did only command them? No without doubt. Ye
may be sure, he commanded not only upon threatened pains, but also pro mised
them largely: and perchance as largely as those do, that being desirous of
chidren, procure the mydwyues to say, they be with child, when their belly is
puffed up with the dropsy or molle, and having bleared the common peoples eyes
with processioning, Te deum singing, and bonefire banketting, use all cere
moneys and cryeng out, whilst an other birds egg is laid in the nest. But
these good mydwiues fearing God (the high power) who had commanded them, not
to kill, would not obey this tyranne Pharaoes commandment, but left it
undone.

When the Ioilye queen Iesabel commanded, that the prophets of God should be
destroyed, that noen should be left to speak against her idols, but that all
men should follow her procedinges: did Abdias the chief officer to the king her
husband say, your grace does very well to rid the world of the^ for those
that worship the true living God, cannot be but traitors to my sovereign lord
and maistre the king your husband, and to your grace: and it is these
heretics, that bewitche and conjure you, that your grace cannot be delivered
of your child, nor sleep quietly in your bed: let me alone, I will find the
means to despeche them all, only have your grace a good opinion of me, and
think I am your own? No. Abdias (a man fearing God, and knowing this
commandment to be a wicked woman's will) did clean contrary to her
commandment, and hid and preserved an hundred of the prophets under the
earth i^ caves. When the wicked king Saul commanded his howne householde
wayters and familiar seruaun tes to kill the priest Ahimelech and his children
for hatred to David: did those his own nerest waiting servants s^attre him
forewarde, and say: your Majesty shall never be in sauetie and quiet so long
as this traitor and his prating children (that are always in their sermones
and books, meddling of the kings matters) be suffered to live? we will be your
true obedient servants, we will believe as the king believes, we will do as
the king bids us, according to our most bounden duty of allegeaunce, we
shall sone ease your highness of this grief: other of your graces chaplaynes
be more mete for that rowme than this hipocrite traitor? No. they used no
such court cruelty, but considering God to be the supreme power, and seeing
Ahimelech (by his answers) and his householde to be giltles of such matter in
form and intent as (by Doeges accusation) Saul charged him with all, they
refused to kill any of them, or ones tolaye violent hands upon them, but
plainly and utterly (being yet the kings true servants and subjects) denied
to obey the kings unlawful commandment. And when the same hipocrite Saul
commanded his servants or soldiers to kill noble Ionathas his son, who
for necessity hade taken a litel honey to recover his streinght contrary to
the king his fathers commandment: did they say, let us kill him as we be
willed, so shall some of us be made the kings lieutenaunt, we shall be an ynche
nerer to the succession, we shall have his lands, possessiones, goods and
offices parted among us: let us not stick to do it. When he is despe ched out
of the world, he can make no revenge, for dead men do no harm. No, no,
clean contrary. They knew that innocent Abels blood did cry to the lord,
Vengeance, uengeaunce, uengeaunce. And that albeit Cain hade a mark, that no
man might laufully kill him in this life, yet hangs he now (as good writers
say) in chains in hell. And thefore they would not obeie the wicked and cruel
tirannes commandment, but knowing that God will not have innocents blood
shead, but innocents against tyrannes defended, they took upon them the
defense of the good son against the tyrannical hipocrite and unnatural
father.

Julian the emperor, albeit he were an Apostata from Christ, and a great
persecutour of Christ's church, yet hade he under him soldiers that
professed Christ. When he commanded them to set forewarde to fight for the
defense of the common wealth, they obeyed him, and did it willingly: but did
they before they were commanded, seek for the christianes, and bring them to
the one and twenty Commissionares, or to the bishops colehouse? or when he
willed and commanded them to destroy such as would not deny Christ, and
follow his procedinges, worshipping idols: did they bring them to the fire,
and stand about, that they should not speak? and to see, that none should
come nere the^, to conforte and streinghten them in their faith? or when they
spoke, did they cleave their headdes in pieces with their halbeardes, or stop
their mouths with their bills? No, they confessed, that in that the emperor of
heaven thalmi ghtie God (and not the emperor of the earth a wicked man, and a
rebelle against God) was their emperor and Captai^: and therein they would not
obeie Iulia^ nor do that he commanded in that behalf. And this answer both
S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, yea and the papists (although they the^ selves
do not so) propounde and set furthe for a christian doctrine and a catholic
example, how christian and good subjects should behave the^ selves toward
wicked princes, and their wi cked commandments: that is, in no wise to obeie
the^, but to leave the^ undone. And as me^ ought not to obeie their superiors,
that shall command the^ to do any thing against Gods word, or the laws
of nature: so may they not do that they shall command the^ contrary to
civil justice, or to the hurt of the hole state. Nei there will good princes
attempt or goo about any such thing: for it is the next way to bring the^ out
of their seats, and to make the^ of kings no kings. How can that head live
and co^tinewe, where the body is consumed and dissolved? And how ca^ that body
be lusty, where the sinowes (the laws) are broken, and justice (the marie that
should nourishe it) utterly wasted and decayed?

Antiochus the third, king of Siria wrote thus to all the cities of his
dominion, that if he did co^ maunde any thing that should be contrary to the
laws, they should not pass thereon, but that rather they should think, it was
stolen or forged without his knowlage, considering that the prince or
governor is nothing else but the minister of the laws. And this same saying
of this most noble king seemed to be so just and reasonable, that it is taken
for a com mon principle, how subjects should know, when they should do that
they be commanded, and when they ought not.

Likewise a bishop of Rome, called Alexander the third, wrote to an
Archbishop, to do a thing which seemed to the Archbishop to be unreasonable
and contrary to the laws, the pope perceauing that tharbishop was offended
with his writing, and would not do that he required: desired him not to be
off^nded, but that if there were cause, why he thought he should not do that he
required, he would advertise him, and he therewith would be satisfied.

This is a popes saie^g: which who is so hardy dardie to deny to be of less
authority than a law? yea not fellow, but above Gods word? Where upon this
is a general rule, that the pope is not to be obeyed, but in laufull and honest
things; And so by good Argument from the more to the less, that princes
(being but foot stools and stirrup holders to popes) commanding their
subjects that is not godly, not just, not laufull, or hurtefull to their
country, ought not to be obeyed, but with standen. For the subjects ought not
(against nature) to further their own destruction, but to seek their own
salvation: not to maintene evil but to suppress evil: for not only the doers
but also the consentours to evil, shall be punished, say both Gods and man's
laws. And men ought to have more respect to their country, than to their
prince: to the common wealth, than to any one person. For the country and
common wealth is a degree above the king. Next unto God men ought to love
their country, and the hole common wealth before any membre of it: as kings
and princes (be they never so great) are but members: and common wealths may
stand well enough and floris he, albeit there be no kings, but contrary wise
without a common wealth there can be no king. Common wealths and realms may
live, when the head is cut of, and may put on a new head, that is, make them a
new governor, when they see their old head seek to much his own will and
not the wealth of the hole body, for the which he was only ordained. And by
that justice and law, that lately has been excuted in England (if it may be
called justice and law) it should appear, that the ministers of civil power
do sometimes command that, that the subjects ought not to do.

When the innocent Lady Jane contrary to her will, yea by force, with tears
dropping down her chekes, suffered her self to be called Queen of England^: yet
ye see, because she consented to that which was not by civil justice laufull,
she and her husband for company suffered the pains of Traitors, both headles
buried in one pit.

When the blessed man of God, Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Cantorbury did what
he might to resist to subscribe to King Edwardes will, whereby his two sisters,
the ladies Mary and Elizabeth should have been wrongfully disherited: yet
because he afterward (to content the kings mind and commandment, yea in
deed to save the innocent king from the uiole^ce of most wicked traitorous
tirannes) did subscribe unto it against his will: was it not laid unto him by
the wicked Judge Morga^ (whom God not long after plaged with taking away his
wits that was a fool before) that he ought not to do any thing unlaufull,
by commandment of any power? And so he (an innocent) piked out among a great
nombre of very evil doers (to satisfy the law) was condemned as a traitor
before he suffered as a martyr. Were not the images and Roodeloftes in England
destroyed by authority of civil power? And does not Boner the Archbocher of
london for all that force them that obeyed the authority (because he says,
it was not lauful) to make the^ up again at their own charges? But Boner, thou
that allow est nothing to be well done (by what so ever authority it be done)
except it be laufull, nor nothing to be laufull that is not agreing to thy
Canon laws: I have to say to thee* Stand still a while, whilst I rub the.
Tell me plainly, and face not out a lie, as thou art wont: speak not one
thing, and think an other, as thy nature is: ones in thy life tell the truth,
and shame thy master the devil. If thou were the son of the earth by thy
fathers side, and of an erraunt hoore by the mother, and so a bastard: hy what
authority say thou thy mass, when thy laws suffer no bastardes to be
priests without dispensacion? how come thou to be a bishop, when thy laws
say, thou may be no priest? How be thy judgments laufull, when thou by
thy Canones may be no judge? All men know, that thy mother when thou wast
begoten, was an hoore.

The common voice and fame says, and the truth is, that albeit one Boner (a
bare whippe Jack) for lucre of money took upon him to be thy father, and than
to mary thy mother, yet thou wast person Savages bastard: and of that race
come thy Cousins Wimmeslowe thy Archediacon of london (a mete eye for such a
gross head) and Wimslowe his brother, and a great meany moo notable. These
things be so evident and plain, that thou cannest not (without blushing)
deny them: neither thou will (I know) deny the^. For thou boastest and
braggest much, that thou come of gentil blood.

But thou will say, thou have a bull of dispe^sacion from the pope. I require
to know, what time it was granted. Thou say, when thou wast at Rome. It is
even that I requiered. Thou wast in deed at Rome, proctour for the princes
dowager the Queen's mother, in the cause of divorce between King Henry the viij.
and her.

When thou saw that no prebendes, no Archediaco^ries, no bishoprikes were to
be gotten by continuing on her part, thou betraiedest her cause, and becamest
of Counsel with the king. O noble counsaillour. O severe and laufull judge.

A mete man to sit in condemnacion of so many innocents: yea more mete to
stand on the pillarie, than in a pulpit: to be tied up in a boar frank, than
walk in a princes chamber: to wear (...) Tiburne tippet, than a graie amise.
But what if thou have no dispensacion? What a murtherour art thou of true
English men? What a tormentour of the people of God? How haste thou deceived
the Earls of Oxeforde and Sussex, the Lord Rich, the Maires and Sheriffs of
London, and many other of the nobility, gentilmen, and Commones, forceing them
to wash their hands in innocents blood with thee? what consciences may they
have through thee? How cannest thousalue their wounded souls? But thou will
say, it makes no matier. The clergy is fair rid of a great meany of
enemies. A dead man can do no hurt. But be thou certain, thou will be
dece^ued. What so ever becomes of thy bocherly body I wish thy soul to be
saved. Repent therefore in time: become Paul of Saul.

When the prince of Sebech called Adonisebech cut of the hands and fete of
Seventy kings, and made them live by licking up the cromes that fell Under
his table, he thought those poor maimed men could do him no hurt: but God
paid him home. For he him self hade his hands and ^ete cut of, and was forced
to pike up cromes under the table, as he hade forced the other kings.

King Abimelech caused his three score and te^ brethren by the father side, to
be all killed, because he might reign alone: he thought all was Cock, and so
did they that help him to execute so horrible an act. But what? did they
escape? No. God suffered the devil to make discord between the king and his
dear dearlinges, and first they were justly destroyed by their king, and after
he him self having his head broken with a piece of a stone let fall out of a
weak woman's hands, for shame willed his servant to kill him with a sweorde,
that it should not be reported, a woman hade killed him. King Achab and Queen
Iesabel thought non should revenge poor Nabothes death: but contrary to their
expectacion, by Gods justice, dogs slossed and licked up the blood of them
both. Queen Athalia thought her self sure when she had killed all the kings
progeny, but God served her with the like sauce: she reigned not long, but she
was killed. All the misery and mischief in the Realm of Naples came by a
woman, called Queen Ioane (a woman of muckle lust) who after she hade ben a
while married to a noble gentilman, and waxed weary of his work, caused him to
be hanged out of an open galerie in the top of the house (because noman
should see him) and not after the poor thieves manner with an halter of hemp,
but with a rope of gold Wrought with her own and her sisters Madam Mari
malecasta her own fyngers. She triumphs for a while, and after besides an
unspeakable nombre of pryuie marriages she made four by day in a little space,
but at leynght God plageth her, and she was hanged in that place, where she
before hanged her husband.

When those that conspired the death of the two brethren, the Admiral and the
Protector hade brought it to pass, so as they might rob the king, and
spoil the Realm at their pleasure: did they at leynght escape scotte free?
No* Some of them by the just judgment of God were plaged with the like
punisheme^t, with the same axe, upon the self same block and in the same
place. And the rest hereafter are not unlike without repentance (which they
show not) to receive their rewards, either in them selves or their
posterity. O wonderful works, O just judgment of God, that hat^th those
that do evil, and destroys those that work mischief: that abhor reth blood
thirsty people, and those that have double hearts and treble tongues.

But Boner, I may not leave thee thus. Give me leave ( Savage Boner) to
dispute this matter of laufull and not laufull, a little more with thee. If thou
and the rest of the traitors thy Co^paniones should persuade the fre^deles
Queen of England (who^ ye have enchau^ted) to give over the town of Calese and
Barwike to a strange prince, and (contrary to her oath not to diminishe any
part of the rightes of the Crown and liberties of the people, which kings of
England at their Coronacion in times past made, and which she also made to her
subjects, When she was crowned before she was a per^it Queen) she followed your
counsel, and some noble personage sent thider to deliver the keys, and the de
putie and garrison did not strike of the messagiers head, and set it on the
gates, but obeyed it, and not resisted it: were not thou and thy fellows
traitors for persuading her so do? hade not she broken her oath and promise?
were not that tournay a traitor for doing that he was commanded? Were not the
deputy and garrison traitors for suffering it to be done? Answer. What cannest
thou say for thy self and thy folowes? Guilty, or not guilty? Thou stand
mewet, What not a word? Thou art sure, your good will, will stand you in as
good stead, as the deed done. Neither do ye pass, though the crows be fed
with your carrion carcases, and the devil with your souls, so ye may leave
behind you a fame, that by your traytourie, the laity of England was
destroyed, and the spirituality restored to their pomp and lordly power.

But before the halter stop thy wind, Boner, let us know, what thou can
say for her. Say thou, princes be not bounden by their oaths and promises?
enough. that for the rest? let them remember that not long agoo their neighbor
Mo^sieur Ver uin, Captain of Boloigne was punished as a traitor, for that by
necessity and extremity of force he re^dred up Boloigne to king Henry theight
and did not die in the defense of it: But thou will say, he did it without
commandment of his m^ister: and these shall do it by commandment of their
maistres. But what if the commandment be not laufull? do thou not say thy
self, it is not to be obeyed? Thou say to others, that non may do that is
not laufull for any commandment. But thou will say: it is the Queen's own,
and she may laufully do with her own what she lusts. What if it be denied
to be her own? But thou will say: she has the crown by enheritaunce, and
may dispose of the realm, and every part of the Realm, as pleases her. But
I answer: that albeit she have it by enheritaunce, yet she has it with an
oath, law and condition to keep and mayn tene it, not to depart with it or
diminishe it. If she ha ue no more right to the Realm than her father hade,
and her father as much as ever any king of England: what neded he to require
the consent of the Nobility and commons (by parliament) to give the Crown to
his daughter or any other?

But thou will say, it was more than neded: for without consent of the
parliament, he might do with the Realm and eueripte thereof, what it pleased
him. Take heed what thou say. If that be true, that king Henry might do with
it without consent of the parliament: how is the Ladi mari Queen? Why might not
King Edward his some (a prince borne in laufull matrimony, and right heir to
the Crown) bequeathe the Crown where he would, and as he did? Take heed what
thou do. If the king and Queen give thee a thousau^t perdones, yet shall
thou be foun de a rank Traitor to the Realm of England. For albeit the king
or Queen of a rea^me have the Crown never (...) justly, yet may they not
dispose of the Crown or realm, as it pleases them. They have the Crown to
minister justice, but the Realm being a bodi of free men and not of bondemen,
he nor she can not give or sell them as slaves and bondemen. No, they can not
give or sell away the holds and fortes (as Calese and Barwike, or such like)
without the consent of the Commones: for it was purchaced with their blood and
moneie. Yea and thine own popes laws (whereby thou measurest all things to be
laufull or not laufull) say, that if a king or governor of any realm goo
about to diminishe the regalities and rightes of his crown, he ought to be
deposed. Thus did Pope Honorius the third command tharchebishop of Collossa
and his suffraganes to deprive a king of Vngarie, which went about to waste,
sell and give away the Regalities and rightes of his crown, o^les in time he
ceased and called back that he hade done. It is so plain, thou can not
deny it. But I see, Boner, I have chafed thee to much: thy chekes blushe and
swell for very a^gre. M. D. Cheadsei, M. D. Pe^dleto^, M. Cosins, or so^ of you
Chaplains, get my lord a cup of secke, to co^ fort his spirits My lord and
I agree almost like belles: we jar so^what but not much, his lordship
means that me^ ought to be always but not at all times honest. But I say,
they must be honest always and at al times. His lordeship would feign have a
placarde or prouiso for hi^ and his, that they might so^times (that is from the
begi^ni^g to the^de of the weke) play their parts. But Isaie, albeit his
lordship have such a privilege, yet may no honest man at any time do that is
not honest, just, and laufull, by kaisers, kings, Queen's no, neither his
commandment. For if those things which only in men's opiniones seem to be
unlawful may by no authority be done, and those that do the^, be no less to
be punisshed, than if they had done them without authority: how much less
may such things by any commandment be committed, that are in deed
unlawful: but shall be punished according to the deserts, by what so ever power
or authority they be executed? Men therefore ought to take heed, that by going
about to come out of the smoke, they fall not in to the fire: and by pleasing
of men, they run not in to the displeasure of God. If men's ordinances and
laws, or the governors authority and commandment were a sufficient
discharge for men to do what so ever were prescribed or commanded unto the^,
tell me (I beseech thee) why did Esaias the Prop het suffer rather to be sawed
in pieces, than to follow the procedinges of Manasses? why did Daniel not
follow king Darius and his counsailles commandment, forbearing to worship the
true God: but was content to be cast to the lyones? why did not the three
children, Sadrach, Mesach, and Abednego obey Nabuchadnesar in worshipping the
golden idol, and so avoid the hot burni^g furnace? why did Eleazarus
submit him self to death, and not dissemble? why did he not eat his own
meat, and absteyne from porke flesh, that the king commanded the Jews to eat
contrary to the laws, and say that he hade eaten it, as his old trustye
fre^des of the court cou^sailed hi^? whi did he not sue for a bull or perdo^ of
Antiochus, that he might use his own religion, as our En glishe halti^g
gospellers do of the pope, confessing his autoriti, which is the thing that he
only passes upon: and ^areth not how many souls be led to the devil? why
did not the seven brethren and their mother obeie the kings commandment, and
save their lives and goods, as thauncient Catharistes. and new puri stes do,
saying: all things be pure to the pure, and no Idolatry nor filthynesse can
infecte him that is pure and clean? Or why did they not say, as the
Priscianistes and Papists did in time past, and as the merchants Hill and
Petresonne with their double tongued train and dissembling sect at this
present say, that it is laufull (and no sin) to say one thing and mean
another? to lie with the lyppes, so they have the truth in the heart? to deny
God in words and works, so they ce^fesse him in thought and mind? to dance
with the devil all day, and lodge with Christ at night? why did Paul suffer
so many imprisonme^tes, so much beating, scourgeing and tormenting? And why at
leinght did he not save his life, and follow Kaiser Neroes commandment? why
did not the Prophets, thapostles, and so many thousauntes of martirs follow
the wicked tirannes commandments and procedinges, but resisted them, and
with their blood testi^ied, that they allowed the^ not? But all these holy
me^nes doi^ges in confessi^g and obeie^g the highest power God, and not
thinferiour powers in wicked and evil things, are co^me^ded and left by the
holy gooste to us in holischrift to follow and do the like. If me^nes laws
and commandments were a sufficient warau^t to me^, to do what so eueris
commanded the^: tell me (I pray thee) to what purpose is suffrig of persecu
cio^ so often repeted, so earnestly taught, so highly com mended in scripture?
Christ says: He that takes not up his cross and follows me, is not mete
for me. And again: blessed be those that suffer persecution for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Bles sed are ye, when men shall
curse you, and persecute you, and speak all evil against you, lieng for my
sake: be glad and rejoice, for your reward is pleintifull in heaven. So did
they persecute the prophets that were before you. And thapostle says: All
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And so in a
great nombre of places of scriptures.

By such persecution can not be meant the injuries that private man does to
private man: for God has ordained a mean, that is, the magistrate to
redress them. But by persecution is meant the Injuries and tirannie that the
Magistrates and governors exercice over Gods people. For they not contented
to let a christian man have justice in civil things aga inst a papist, nor an
honest man against such a one as favors their procedinges, do the^ selves
spoil the christianes and honest of their goods: and not only spoil them,
but by all manner of force, uiolence, and s^ares seek their life and blood, not
only in their own country, but where they have non authority, because they
will not obeie their commandments, and follow their wicked procedinges.

God will have his tried by persecucion, that the world may see, who love the
chief power, more than the inferior powers: his commandments, more than
men's fond procedinges: the soul, more than the flesh: the sure and
everlasting enheritaunce of heaven, more than the uncertain and temporal
possessiones of this world. Yea he has non other way to let the difference
appear to men's eyes between his servants and princes Parasites, than only
by persecucion. Papists, Turks, Jews, gentiles can dissemble, they can seem
to fast, to praie^, to give alniose, to build monasteries, and chauntries, and
to do notwarde works gaie to the eye, because they would be accounted holy of
men, but to refuse to do that is evil for justice sake, to be slaundred,
spoken evil of, whipped, scourged, spoiled of their goods, killed of the
worldly princes and tirannes, rather than they would disobeie God, and forsake
Christ: this can neither papists nor Turks, Jews nor gentiles, nor non other
do, but only thelectes of God. And yet God does not so severely require of
his people, that they should straight offer them selves to the princes
slaughterhouse, their necks to the halter, their headdes to the block, their
blood to make princes puddinges, their entrailles to make tripes, their
quartres to be boiled or roasted: but he has left them a special rule and
commandment, whereby to guide themselves, that is, in all things to seek
furst the kingdom of God. If he that is persecuted, feel in his conscience,
that he may do God greater service and glory by suffering than by fleing, he
ought rather to suffer a thousaunt deaths, than to flee one foot. But if his
conscience witness with him that he may do God greater glory by flieng than
by tarieng, he ought not to tempt God with tarieng, but is bounden by
commandment to depart. If they persecute you in one city (says Christ)
fly in to an other. And he did not only teach it, but did it him self, for
saking Iewrie, and goi^g into Galile, wha^ he heard John Baptist was laid by
the heles, because the time was not yet come, wherein he was appointed to
glorify God. And because God would have a refuge place, and sanctuary for
his, when such tirannie and persecucion should be exerciced, he would never
suffer the power and ambicious tirannes, to make one perfect Monarchy of all,
but when they hade done their best to bring all together, and the string hade
be^ almost in the nicke of the bow (as the proverb is) it has suddenly
slipped, and not only destroyed the doer, but it has fallen in to a great meany
moo shiuers than ever it was before. Thus God dalieth and plaieth with his
puppettes the princelinges of this world.

wherefore sense we be Gods people and servants, and he our lord and the
highest power: and the princes of the world be but his ministres and inferior
powers, ordained to do good and not evil: we ought to seek chiefly to do
Gods commandments before all men's, to please God rather than men. For
the princes (do they the worst they can) can but take from men their goods
and lives: but God can take from us both goods and body, and cast both body
and soul in to hell. And yet should not they be hable to work their will in
this world, nor execute their malice, if men would behave them selves toward
their lord and master God, as they ought. For as be can, so would he sone
despeche the world of tira^nes. But because many be open enemies of God, and
many dissemblers with God, God sends and suffers evil governors (and will
send worse) to plage the people for their iniquity, and to try the faith of
his elect, from whom not one hear of the head can be taken without Gods
will. And therefore seking always to do that is good, they should always eschew
to do that is evil, and commit the end to God.

But admit there be a great nombre that have dronken of the hoore of Babilons
cup, and think, that there is neither heaven nor hell, and that Gods word
is but friars matters: and that therefore (like Sardanapalus) they should seek to
eat and drink, and serve their lusts, and nothing else: yet were this no
sure way for them to do that they would, if they should obeie their princes
in what so ever they commanded.

The nature of wicked Princes is much like to the molde warpes, which if they
be suffered to have their snowtes in the ground, and be not furthewith let,
will suddenly have in all the body: or to the weselles, that conueith in his
hole body, where he has ones gotten in his head. So they if they be obeyed in
any evil thing (be it never so litell) will be obeyed in all at leinght. What
lets but that they may not only send for men's goods, but for their
headdes also, as the Turk does to his best Bassa, and all his subjects when
it pleases him? Why may not they send for their subjects children, cause
them to be killed, baked, and give it to their parents in stead of other
meat: and for a second course bring in to them, the heads, fete, and hands,
as king Astiages did to Harpagus? All the papir of England would not serve to
set our the mischiefs, that might follow, wha^ princes evil commandments
should be obeyed and fulfilled. But men that be wise, may by a litell,
considre the hole.

Seeing therefore that God will not princes commandments should be obeyed in
all things, but will have his rather suffer a thousaunt deaths, than do any
thing that is evil: and sense also so many euilles and mischiefs may follow in
this life, where wicked princes wills may stand for laws, men ought both
for Gods sake and commandment abstain to obeie such commandments, and
cleave unto this Maxim: we must obeie God rather than man, for whose sake if
we lose both goods and life, we ought to rejoice, that we be called to serve
him, and not doubt, but as he is hable to recompense it, so will he (according
to his promise) reward it. And besides also they ought to considre, that
princes be ordained for the wealth and benefit of the people, and not to
their destruction: to maintene common wealths, and not to subuerte them: which
rather than any man should consent unto, he ought (being a faithful man to his
country) to abide all losses, both of body and goods. For next after God,
men be borne to love, honor, and maintene their country.

WHETHER ALL THE SVBiectes goods be the Kaysers and kings own, and that they
may laufully take them as their own?
THE Anabaptists wresting scripture to serve their madness, among other foul
errors, have this: that all things ought to be common, they image man to be
of that purity that he was before the fall, that is, clean without sin, or
that (if he will) he may so be: and that as when there was no sin, all
things were common, so they ought now to be.

But this mingling of the st^te of man before the fall, and of him after the
fall much deceaueth them. For by the fall, and ever after the fall, this
corruptible flesh of man is clogged with sin, and shall never be rid of
sin, as long as it is in this corrupt worl de, but shall be always disposed
and prone to do that is evil. And therefore as one means to be the rather
vncombred of the heap of sin, God ordained that man should get his living by
the swette of his brows: and that he should be the more forced to labor, the
di stinctio^ of things and propretie ( mine, and thine) was (contrary to
platoes opinion) ordained, as appears by these two laws: Thou shall not
steal: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his s^ruau^t, nor his
maid, nor his ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his. Afterward in deed
scripture speaks of communion of things, not that they ought so to be (for
so scripture should be directly against scripture) but that there was such
charity among the people, that of their own free will, they gave and sold
all they had, to releue the misery of their poor brethren: who for
impotencie, or for multitude of children, were not with their labor hable to
get sufficient to releue their necessity. Nor of this so given might every man
take as much as him lusted, but to every one (accordig to his necessity)
sufficient was distributed. So that it stood in the liberality of the geuer,
and not in the liberty of the taker.

But there be some in these days, not of the meanest or poorest sort, but of
the chiefest and richest: that is, many wicked governors and rulers, who in
this error excel the common Anabaptists. For the common Anabaptists do not
only take other men's goods as common, but are content to let their own
also be common, which has some smacke of Charity: for they them selves do
non other, but that they them selves are content to suffer.

But the evil governors and rulers will have all that their subjects have,
common to them selves, but they themselves will depart with nothing, but where
they ought not: no, not so much as pay for those things, that in words they
pretend to buie of their subjects, nor pay those poor men their wages, whom
they force to labor and toil in their works. But the manner of coming thereby
is so diverse, that it makes the iustenesse of their doings much suspected.
For some do it under prete^se to do the people good: some by crafty and
subtle means, color their doings: and some of right (but without right)
claim them for their own.

Of the furst sort be those, that put great taxes and imposiciones on drink
for forasmuch as the people with overmuch drinking become dronkerdes (and so
sin against God) they would seem by making the^ pay as much or more to them
as the drink is worth, they should force them the rather to absteyne from
ouermuche drinking, and so from sin. But in this it may appear, they seek
not abstinence fro^synne, and the wealth of the people, but their ownepriuate
pro fit. For if they had their eye to Gods glory and the benefit of the
people, and the vice to be taken clean away: they would not croppe of the
branches of the tree, and let the root grow, but they would root up the
root that it should no more grow. And so^ of this sort do it to this e^de, to
make things better chea pe. For (think they) if there were but littell money,
tha^ must things be sold better cheap. As though it lay in them to make
pleyntie and scarcity, and as though the one were not the bounteous benefit of
God sentto them that fear and love him: and the other his plage justly powered
on them that hate him.

This kind of practice Was, if not first found, yet used by Emperor Julian
thapostata, a tiranne and persecutour of the Christianes (as before you have
heard) who being a subtle man, and not having his Cou^sailours, sold yours
and subjects (at his deuocio^) ready to kill whom he would of the Christianes
(who^ he knew for no private cause would rebelle) meant by policy to murder
them, spoiling them of that they had, and so not leaving them wherewith to buy
to releue their necessity. Says this enemy of God: I will use you after
your Christ's gospel. For it says: blessen be ye pcore, for yours is the
kingdom of God. And therefore I take from you all that ye ha ue presently, that
ye may the sooner come by that is promised you. Doubtless if this way were as
good and beneficial for the agentes and doers of it, as it may be profitable
for the subjects and sufferers: no doubt it were to be desired that it were
done out of hand, rather than one minute of an hour differred to be done. For
the people from the less to the more, from top to too, all be given to
covetousness, scraping, snatching and ketching.

And from Pope to the hedge massemo^ging priest, all be given to subtlety,
craft, lieng, traiterourie, and false dealing. Their heart is so on their
halpeny, that neither they considre their duty to God (no they know him not)
nor remember how much they are bounden to their country: but upon a vain
hope to save their own, are content either them selves to betraie their
countreie, or to suffer it to be betrayed of others, and one of them deuoureth
and eats up an other, that for a litel while he may the more live after his
own lust: Where contrary wise, poverty makes men to remember, seek, and
call on God, to love and defend their countreie, one to love an other like
brothre^, and finally deuiseth and works what so ever good is. But none may
pille or polle, rob or spoil, or do any mischief (says thapostle) that
good may thereof follow: and specially kings and governors of people, whom
because they be ordained to do good, and should do nothing but well, Christ
called Benefactours and not Malefactors. If they do it, whilst they pretend
(but mean it not) to bring others to heaven, they may be sure to bring them
selves to hell.

The second sort be those that rob the people in deed, yet would not have
their doings known. They walk in nets, and think no man does see the^.
And of this kind be those, that contrary to all laws (both of God and man)
and contrary to their oath, countrefaicte the coin that is ordained to run
between man and man, turning the substance from gold to copper, from silver to
worse then pewter, and aduaunceing and diminishig the price at their pleasure.
For in coins all laws command and equity will, that these four things be
observed and straightly kept. First, the pureness of the matier, that it be
not corrupted or countrefaicted. Second, that it have the just weight.
Thirdly, that it be not clipped. The last, that it be not at the princes will
sometime priced at a more value, and sometime at a less: For if a prince might
do herein even what him lusted: how might he not lightly spoil his subjects
of all that they have, or could come by* Which thing the great devil and cut
throat of England (the papists God) in his Sermon that he made at Paul's
cross, upon this Theme ( now is is the time to wake from sleep, my brethren,
for now is our joy and pom pe more nigh, than when we before dissembled to
believe in Christ. Be of good cheer, my disciples, our trouble is past, our
joy i^ at hand) let not to blustre out. In this Sermon to bring the dead
innocent and blessed king Edward (whom for his virtue he hated) in hatred of
the people: for he imputed to him (a child and a ward) the lewd and wicked
behaueour of his cruel Counsailours, and said, he maruailed that the people
could suffer so great injury, to be robbed of their prin ce, by altring the
coin from gold to copper, and sil uer to lead, and to pull it from twelve
pence to six pence, and not rise against the king to redress their injury.
He saw, that this and such like injuries were not tolerable in a prince, and
would have hade the people do that against him (whom he for his virtue hated)
which neither for this nor any vice he woldet have done, where as he seemed to
favor. For at the be ginning to mayntene Boloigne wars, which he deui de, to
pull king He^ries mind from matiers of religion, or (as afterward good likely
hood appeared) to have him taken in the wars, and carried to the bishop of
Rome: the same devil Gardyner was than the chief Counsaillour to have the money
abased, to maintene the same. And now lately (when he has broken his chain)
devised Rose mary pence, worse than ever any coin was before, as thexperience
shows, they being at leinght cried to be nothing.

The third sort of these evil princes be those, that clai me all their
subjects good for their own, who allege for them this common saying: All
things be the kaisers, all things be the kings, all things be the Princes.
And as the devil brought fur the scripture so serve his purpose against Christ,
so they abhorring all other parts of scripture, that teach them their office
or Christen duty, pike out only a piece that may mayntene their tyranny. It
is thus written, say they in the first book of kings. This shall be the right
or law of the king that shall rule over you: he will take your sons, and put
them to his charettes, and make his horsemen of them, and they must run
before his charet, and will make him Captains of them, over thousau^tes and
over fifties, and will set them to air his ground, and gather in his harvest,
and to make instruments of war and carts. And of your daughters he will
make him oyntement makers, his cokes, and bakers. And he will take the best of
your fields and of your olyue trees, and give them to his servants. And he
will take the tenthe of your sede and of your vines, and give it to his lords
and to his servants. And he will take the best of your men servants, and
women servants, and yongm^, and of your asses, and do his work with them.
And he will take the tenthe of your sheep, and ye shall be his servants. But
when ye shall cry out at that time upon your king, which ye shall have chosen
you, the lord will not hear you at that day,

This piece of scripture is their clooke: but it serves no more a kings wicked
doings, than that of the wicked sons of Eli, and the sacrisicers (whom men
call priests) to take out of men's pottes, what piece them lusted, or to take
their portion raw, contrary to Gods ordinance. For as in the one place it is
called the right or law of the king: so is it in the other place called the
right or law of the priests. But in another of these places it is called the
law or right that God appoited to kings or priests, which he set out in
other places, but such is they would usurp over the people. Another will this
mayntene the purpose, that here he speaks of a king and not of a tyranne, for
at the first a kings name was as odious, and as much abhorred, as a tyrannes.
But this was spoken of the prophet Samuel to fear the people, that they should
not goo about to altre the order and policy that God had ordained: which if
they did, they should feel what a plague it were to have a king given in Gods
fury. And if they had only sought to be ruled by one (as partly in this, that
one alone rules, a king do the diffre from other governors) they would have been content with Samuel alone, who as he was appointed by God to rule alone
over the Israelites, so did he exercite and use his office most uprightly: but
they would needs have a galaunt and pompous king, one that should ride out with
his trompettes before him, a great trope of horsemen before and behind him,
his guard all together in silk with their halbeardes about him, and eueri one
to fall flat to the ground that should mete him, as the Gentiles hade, who
were in deed tyrannes, as appears by the first called Nemrod, who for his
rebellion against God, and deuourig of Gods people, was called the stowte
huntour before or against God. And in the same kingdom of the Israelites God
showed by an evident terror to all governors, that he did not allow such
right, as the prophet said, the king would use over his subjects. For when
king Achab would have bought of his subject Naboth his vineyorde (which he
neded not to have done, if the subjects goods be the kings) and he refused to
sell it, as he might do, for by Gods law he had a propretie therein, from
which without his will and consent, he could not be forced to depart, the king
fretted so much because he could not have his will, that he fell sick in his
bed, and would not eat. His wife Dame Iesabel, a woman full of malice and
mischief (as that kind is very ^pte and prone to those virtues, and within
short space do so therein excel, as few men can in long time match them)
takes the matier in hand. What (says she) be you a mete man to be a king
over Israel, that will suffer such dishonor at your slaves hands, one that
by your ancient prerogative which has continued these hundred and three score
years, yea from the first king of Israel) ye may use in body and goods, as
pleases you? Phy for shame, pull your courage to you, arise, eat your meat, be
merry, I warau^t you the vineorde. Out goes a Commission in the kings name, to
certain Co^missionares where Naboth dwelt, such as the Queen's grace was sure,
favored her procedinges. Those she requires to cause Naboth to be endyted and
con demned for an heretic and a traitor: and so to cause him to be stoned to
death. Her will is furthewith satisfied, matier enough against Naboth prisoner
at the Bar, because she would so have it: no man might be admitted nor durst
speak the truth in the prisoners cause, least they had been clapped fast and
trussed up also for speaking against the king and Queen: no queste durst quite
him, for fear of kissing the flete: no laws, no equity, no justice might
defend the poor innocent. So the vineiorde is the kings by the order of
law. Those news be carried in post to Iesable, she shows them to her
husband, wherewith he (as soon as he heard them) was recovered, and goes to
take possession of the vineiorde. But what follows this cruelty and tira^nie?
Are not both the kings Majesty and the Queen's highness within while after
killed, and their blood licked up of dogs, according as the Prophet declared
to hi in the vineyorde, wha^ he took possession of it? and all his house so
destroyed, that there was not left thereof so much as a dog to piss against
the wall? Thus ye may see the end of lusty lords and ladies that will have
their lusts a law, and their will to be followed and obeyed of their subjects
as a right in deed. The true right and prerogative of a king was written in a
particular book by the Prophet Samuel, and laid up by the Arc, which book
(among many other) was lost, yet who so lusts to know it, may see it set
out by God i^ the book of Deu teronomie. After that God had prescribed who
should be their king, that is, no aliene or stranger, but one of their own
brethren: for naturally strangers do not favor strangers. And a strange
prince seeks by all means to destroy the natural inborne, that he may with
quietness and surety enioie and use that he comes evil by, and so leave it
to his succession: than is set furthe the right and prerogative of a king thus.
Wha^ your king is made, he shall not keep many horses, nor putting his trust in
his horsemen, he shall not bring the people again into Egipte. He shall not
have many wives, least they altre his mind from God: another yet great treasure
of silver and gold. But wha^ he is set in his throne, he shall cause a copy
of these laws and statutes to be written out of thoriginal remaining with the
Levites, and the same he shall have with hi^ all the days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the lord his God, and to keep (not to break) all the
words and ceremonies that be commanded in the law, and also to fulfill the^
in his doings: And he shall not be proud and hault over his brethren, neither
shall he swerve from the law toward the right hand or lift hand, that he
and his children may long reign over Israel. But besides this law appoi^ted
for all kings, he that will be accounted a christian king or governor, must
remember, that he is a christian man, and that by being made a king, he is not
exempt from the laws and duty of a christen man, which eueri one professes
in Baptism: but as he is called and exalted above the rest of his brethren, so
should he be an example to them of good living and virtue, in obserui^g the
law, which says as well to kings as to beggars: Thou shall not steal, thou
shall not covet any thing that is thy neighbors: and so it stablisheth and
confirms, that every one may justly keep that is his own, and none may
take it from him by any mean against his will, be it king or kaiser.

And by the doings of Samuel, who albeit he were not a king in name, yet hade
he (being the lieutenaunt and viceroie to God the chief king) as great
authority as any king in the earth: it may appear, that all things of the
subjects be not the kings own propre. For if they had been his own, what
neded Samuel (at the surrendre of his office) to offer to make an account? And
to whom, I pray you? To any bribing Auditour? No, he offered to make it to God,
and to the king that succeeded him. Behold (says the) I have done all that ye
desired me. I have made you a king to rule you. My children yet shall be with
you. But I am old, and hoar headed: that is, I ca^ not long co^ti nue. I have
be^ among you from a child to this day. Lo, I a^ ready to make mine acco^pte
before God and your king, for all things that ca^ be laid to me by any of
you. whose bullock have i taken? whose ass have I hade? to whom have I done
any uiolence or wrong? whom have I oppressed? of whom have I taken any bribes,
to maintene him in his wickedness, to wink at his faults, or to stop
justice? let him come furthe, and I will make satisfaction. And none of them
could say, black was his eye.

No, says Samuel, I take God and your king to witness against you: I am so
net, that ye shall not find one jot in my fingres, but I am hable to lay
enough against you wicked people, etc.

O Samuel, Samuel, what king or prince can say to the, as thou did to the
Israelites? They look not to make an account: no, they have counsel of crafty
Alcibiades, how they may make non account.

But they can not escape it, they shall mete with an other manner of auditour,
than any of Mousire Cinquebonets prentices: they shall reckon before him, that
has all their doings truly totted and fair engrossed all ready before
hand, and where he shall in the day of his general Audit, say to Samuel and
all true governors that rule according to Gods rule: well fare ye, ye good
and faithful servants, Come, enter in to your Masters joy: He shall
contrary wise commit these oppressors and tirannes not to the lieutenaunt of
the tower, or to the wardein of the Flete, but unto the Iailour of gehenna (to
be chained in the ward of eternal pain) and say: Away with these decea
uours of mi people to the dogs of hell, ye were masters, and not ministers?
ye were bear baitours, and not bailifes, ye were stroyes, and no stuardes,

But let us ymagine an untruth, that all the subjects goods were the
princes, and that he might take them at his pleasure. Let us ymagine, that the
subjects were only carnal men without the knowlage and fear of God. Yea and
let it be granted also, that they were spoiled of all their armor, and great
garisones set in every place to keep them in obeisaunce, so that they had not
wherewith to redress their i^iuries, as na ture would counsel them: were this
a way to make the people labor, when others should take the bread out of
their mouth? Would they desire to live, to be in such misery them selves?
Would they desire to increace the world with children, when they knew that
they should be left in worse case, than unreasonable beasts? No surely, and
that ye may see by the work of nature in the people of the West Indies, now
called new Spain: Who knew of Christ nothing at all, and of God no more than
nature taught them. The people of that countreie when the catholic Spaniardes
came thider, were simple and plain men, and lived without great labor, the
land was naturally so pleintiful of all things, and continually the trees
hade ripe fruit on them. When the Spaniardes hade by flattery put in their
foot, and by litel and litel made them selves stong, building fortes in
diverse places, they to get the gold that was there, forced the people (that
were not used to labor) to stand all the day in the hot sun gathering
gold in the sand of the rivers. By this means a great nombre of them (not
used to such pains) died, and a great nombre of them (seeing them selves
brought from so quiet a life to such misery and slavery) of desperacion
killed them selves. And many would not mary, because they would not have their
children slaves to the Spaniardes. The women when they felt them self with
child, would eat a certain herb to destroy the child in the womb. So that
where at the coming thider of the Spaniardes, there were accounted to be in
that country nine hundred thousaunt persons, there were in short time by this
means so sewe left, as Petre martyr (who was one of the emperor Charles the
fifthes counsel there, and wrote this history to the emperor) says, it was a
shame for him to name.

This is the fruit, where Princes take all their subjects things as their
own. And wheru^to at leingh^ will it come, but that either they must be no
kings, or else kings without people, which is all one. But thou will say:
whereof comes this common saying: all things be the kaisers, all things be
the kings? It can not come of noth^g. But by that that is all ready said, ye
see that every man may keep his own, and none may take it from him, so that
it ca^ not be interpreted, that all things be the kaisers or kings, as his
own propre, or that they may take the^ from their subjects at their
pleasure, but thus it is to be expounded, that they ought to defend, that
every man has, that he may quietly enioie his own, and to see that they be
not robbed or spoiled thereof. For as (...) a great man's house, all things be
said to be the Stuardes, because it is committed to his charge, to see that
every man in the house behave him self honestly, and do his duty, to see
that all things be well kept and preserved and may take nothing away from
any man, nor misspend or waste, and of his doings he must render account to
his lord for all: so in a Realm or other dominion, the realm and countreie
are Gods, he is the lord, the people are his servants, and the king or
governor is but Gods minister or stuarde, ordained not to misuse the
servants, that is, the people, neither to spoil the^ of that they have, but
to see the people do their duty to their lord God, that the goods of this
world be not abused but spent to Goods glory, to the mai^tenau^ce and
defense of the common wealth, and not to the destruction of it. The princes
watch ought to defend the poor man's house, his labor the sub iectes ease,
his diligence the subjects pleasure, his trou ble the subiecttes quietness.
And as the sunue never stands still but continually goes about the world,
doing his office: with his heat refreshing and co^fortig all natural things
in the world: so ought a good prince to be continually occupied in his mini
sterie, not seking his own profit, but the wealth of those that be committed
to his charge. And therefore Saleuchus king of Siria used to say: if men knew,
how much business and how little quietness it were to do the duty of a king,
none would take upon him that office, if he might have the crown for taking it
up out of the mire. And Antiochus the great king also of Siria, when he was
driven out of his country by Scipio the Capitain of the Romans, and had lost
all Asia, and the countreies about: he thanked the Romans, that by their
mean he was delivered of so great a part of his cares. He saw it was so
impossible for one man (were he never so diligent and watching) to execute well
so great a charge.

If these two great kings (who knew not God, but thought them selves Gods:
that hoped not on everlasting life, but thought there was non other but this
life: those that thought they could not be forced to make account of their
doings to any person) thought it so great a charge to have a rule over coun
treies: how much more should such Princes, as pretend to be christianes, that
know them selves mortal men, no Gods: servants, no masters: and who must
(because God has said it shall be so) make account for all their doings, for
all souls, men, women, and children: think their office and ministry an
heavy burden, and so give over seking and hunting after their own glory,
their pomp, their pride: and seek the glory of God and the wealth (and not
the destruction) of those that be committed to their charge, and tremble at
this saying of Chrysostom: I maruail that any governor can be saved, Which is
not spoken in vain.

WEATHER IT BE laufull to depose an evil governor, and kill a tyranne.
AS there is no better nor happier common wealth nor no greater blessing of
God, tha^ where one ru leth, if he be a good, just and godly man: so is there
no^ worse nor non more miserable, nor greater plague of God, tha^ where one
rules, that is evil, unjust and ungodly* A good man knowing that he or those
by who^ he claymeth was to such office called for his virtue, to see the hole
state well governed, and the people defended from injuries: neclecteth utterly
his own pleasure and profit, and bestows all his study and labor to see
his office well discharged. And as a good phisician earnestly seeks the
health of his pacient and a Shipmaister the wealth and sauegarde of those he
has in his ship, so does a good governor seek the wealth of those he
rules. And therefore the people feling the benefit coming by good governors,
used in time past to call such good governors, fathers: and gave the^ no less
honor, tha^ children owe to their parents. An evil person coming to the
government of any state, either by vsurpacio^, or by election or by
succession, utterly neglectig the cause why kings, princes and other
governors in common wealths be made (that is, the wealth of the people)
seeks only or chiefly his own profit and pleasure. And as a sow coming in to
a fair gardin, roteth up all the fair and swet flowers and wholesome simples,
leaving nothing behind, but her own filthye dirte: so does an evil governor
subuerte the laws and ordres, or makes them to be wrenched or racked to serve
his affectiones, that they can no longer do their office. He spoyleth the
people of their goods, either by open violence, making his ministers to take
it from them without payment therefore, or promising and never payeng: or
craftily under the name of loanes, beneuolences, contribuciones, and such like
gaye painted words, or for fear he geteth out of their possession that they
have, and never restores it. And when he has it, consumes it, not to the
benefit and profit of the common wealth, but on hoores, hooremongers,
dyceing, carding, banketting, unjust wars, and such like euilles and
mischieues, wherein he dely teth. He spoileth and takes away from them their
armor and harness, that they shall not be hable to use any force to defend
their right. And not contented to have brought the^ in to such misery (to be
sure of his sta te) seeks and takes all occasiones to despeche them of their
lives. If a man keep his house, and meddle in nothing, than shall it be said,
that he fretteth at the state. If he come abroad and speak to any other,
further with it is taken for a just conspicacie. If he say nothing, and show
a merry countenance, it i^ a token, that he despiceth the government. If he
look sorowfully, than he lamenteth the state of his countreye. how many so ever
be for any cause committed to prison, are not only asked, but be racked also to
show whether he be pryuie of their doings. If he de part, because he would
live quietly, than is he proclaimed on open enemy. To be short, there is no
doing, no gesture, no behaueour, no place can preserve or defend innocence
against such a governors cruelty: but as an huntour makes wild beasts his
pray, and uses toiles, nets, snares, trappes, dogs, firret tes, mynyng
and digging the ground, go^nes, bows, spears, and all other instruments,
engynes, devises subtilties and means, Whereby he may come by his pray: so
does a wicked governor make the people his game and pray, and uses all
kinds of subtilties, deceates, crafts, policies, force, violence, cruelty,
and such like deuillishe ways, to spoil and destroy the people, that be
committed to his charge. And when he is not hable without most manifest
cruelty to do by him self that he desires, than fayneth he unjust causes to
cast them in to prison, where like as the bearewardes mosell the bears, and tie
them to the stakes, whiles they be baited, and killed, of mastyues and curres,
so he keeps them in chains, whilst the bishops and other his tormentours
and heretical inquisitours do tear and devour them. Finally he says and
denies, he promises and breaks promise, he swears and ^orsweareth, and
another passes on God nor the devil (as the coming saying is) so he may bring
to pass that be desires. Such an evil governor proprely men call a Tiranne.

Now forasmuch as there is no express positive law for punishment of a
Tyranne among christen men, the question is, whether it be laufull to kill
such a monstre and cruel beast covered with the shape of a man.

And first for the better and more plain proof of this matter, the manifold
and continual examples that have been from time to time of the deposing of
kings, and killing of tyra^nes, do most certainly con firm it to be most
true, just and co^sonaunt to Gods judgment. The history of kings in the
old testament is full of it. And as Carnal Phoole truly cites, England
lacks not the practice and experience of the same. For they deprived king
Edward the second, because without law he killed his subjects, spoiled them
of their goods, and wasted the treasure of the Realm. And upon what just
causes Richard the the second was thrust out, and Henry the fourth put in his
place, I refer it to their own judgment. Denmark also now in our days did
nobly the like act^, when they deprived Christierne the tiranne, and committed
him to perpetual prison.

Zacharias the pope that invented first the lamps in the church, deposed
Chilperichus, king of France, because he was said to be a lecherous person,
and an unprofitable governor of the realm: and forced him to be a monk, and
made Pipine (father of Charles) king of France.

Pope Honorious (as ye heard before) commanded, that the king of Vngarie
should be deprived, because he diminished the rightes of the Crown: onles he
repented, and undid all that he had done.

A certain king of Portugale was very negligent in his office: he consumed and
wasted away the trea sure of his Realm, he oppressed his subjects, and misu
sed the^. Wherefore Pope inoce^t the fourth made the ki^ ges brother therle of
Bolone coadiutour to the king, and gave hi^ the hole charge of the Realm,
discharged the people of their oath to the king, and commanded them to be
obedient to the kings brother in all things, as king. But the Popes learned
counsel said, that he ought to have be^ utterly deposed of the Crow ne. These
doings of Popes I rehearse not, as though their usurped authority were to be
allowed, but for that ye may see, that it is no new thing to depose evil
kings and governors: and that those that have the just authority, may and
ought for the like causes, do as they did. For albeit thautoritie of the pope
be not laufull, yet is the reason that moved them so to do, honest and just,
and mete to be received and executed among reasonable creatures. And this law
of nature to depose and punish wicked governors, has not be^ only received
and exerciced in politic matters, but also in the church. For the canonistes
(the popes ow ne championes) grounding them selves upon this law of nature,
say, that popes who may be in deed (by their saying) the lieutenauntes of the
devil, albeit they call the^ selves the uicares of God, may be depryued by the
body of the church. And so at one clappe, in the cou^sail holde^ at Co^stau^ce
in Germany, in the year of our lord 1415. were three popes popped out of
their places, Gregory, John, and Benet, and the fourth (called Martin the
fifthe) chosen. Afterward in the Cou^sail of Basil was Pope Eugenius served
with that sauce. For the unluckinesse of the country the rest of Popes have
since refused that any general counsel should be kept in Germany, fearing least
they all having deserved as much as the other four deposed, should have the
like punisheme^t. And thus they confirm their doin ges. If (say they) the
Pope hade not a superior, he might beig suffered in his evil, brig the church
to de structio^. And therefore if he ca^ not otherwise be brought to amend him
self, it is laufull to use the law of nature, that is, to remove him from his
office: for he is no bishop or pope, that abuses his Popedom and bishopriche.
An evil prelate and unreformable seems not to be ordained by the will of God,
say the Canonistes, alledgeing the words of S. Jerome, upon the saye^g of the
prophet Osee, that a prince or judge is not always ordained by God. And he
brings for example king Saul, against whom God said: Seeing the people have
made them selves a king, and not a ruler by me, and not by my counsel: and yet
God hade chosen Saul. But yet because he was not chosen according to the will
of God, but according to the mind and desartes of the sinful people, God
denied him to be ordained by his will or cou^sail. The Canonistes also say,
that albeit the Popedom be by the law of God (as it is not in deed, says
the truth) yet that this man or that, Paul or Iulie is pope, it comes by the
act of man. For the Cardinales representing the uniuersal church, chose him.
And therefore if he be not according to the will of God, and for the wealth of
the uniuersal church, that is: if he be not one that seeks Gods glory, and
the wealth of christ's church, he may be justly depryued, because they erred
in chosing him. And God seems not to be against the put ting out of such an
evil person, but to favor and further it. For he said: If the salt be
unsauerie, it is good for no use, but to be cast out, and trodden under foot of
all me^. And again: If thy right eye be a let unto thee, pull it out, and cast
it from thee. For it is better that one member perish, tha^ that the hole bodi
should be cast in to hell. And again say the Canonistes (the popes lawers) in
rehearcei^g Christ's words: If our eye, foot* or hand offe^de us, let it be
taken from the rest of the bodi: for it is better to lack me^bres i^ this
woorld, tha^ that they should cari the rest of the body in to hell. By salt,
eye, foot, and hand, is understood the headdes and rulers, and not the
other me^bres and subjects. And not only the headdes and rulers in the
church, but also in all policies and common wealths.

Now if it be laufull for the body of the church to depose and punish a Pope,
being the chief priest, anointed not on the arm or sholder, as kings be, but
on the head and hands, to declare an higher authority than kings have: nor
crowned with a simple crown, as Emperors and kings be, but with a triple
crown, to show his Regalitie and power above all others: how much more by
the like arguments, reasones and authority, may Emperors, kings, princes
and other governors abusing their office, be deposed and removed out of their
places and offices, by the body or state of the Realm or common wealth?

By this law and arguments of the Canonistes and example of depriuacion of a
Pope, are all clokes (wherewith Popes, bishops, priests, kaisers and kin ges
use to defend their iniquity) utterly taken away. Say they: We are
anointed, ye may not touch us: We are only subject to God, and eueri man to
us. God will have us (O most wiked popes, bishops, priests, cruel and evil
princes) reign to plage you people, for your iniquity.

But here ye see, the body of every state may (If it will) yea and ought to
redress and correct the vices and headdes of their governors. And forasmuch
as ye have already seen, whereof politic power and government grows, and
the end whereunto it was ordained: and seeing it is before manifestly and
sufficiently proved, that kings and princes have not an absolute power over
their subjects: that they are and ought to be subject to the law of God, and
the wholesome positive laws of their country: and that they may not laufully
take or use their subjects goods at their pleasure: the reasones, arguments
and law that serve for the deposing and displacei^g of an evil governor, will
do as much for the proof, that it is laufull to kill a tiranne, if they may
be indifferently heard. As God has ordained Magistrates to hear and
determine private men's matiers, and to punish their vices: so also will he,
that the magistrates doings be called to account and reckoning, and their
vices corrected and punished by the body of the hole congregation or common
wealth.

As it is manifest by the memory of the ancient office of the high Constable
of England, unto whose authority it perteined, ont only to summone the king
personally before the parliament or other courts of judgment (to answer and
receive according to justice) but also upon just occasion to commit him unto
ward.

Kings, Princes and governors have their authority of the people, as all
laws, vsages and policies do declare and testify.

For in some places and countreies they have more and greater authority, in
some places less. And in some the people have not given this authority to any
other, but retain and exercice it themselves. And is any man so unreasonable
to deny, that the hole may do as much as they have permitted one membre to
do? or those that have appointed an office upon trust, have not authority upon
just occasion (as the abuse of it) to take away that they gave? All laws do
agree, that men may revoke their proxies and lettres of Attournaie, when it
pleases them: much more when they see their proctours and attournaies abuse
it.

But now to prove the later part of this question affirmatively, that it is
laufull to kill a tira^ne: there is no man can deny, but that the Ethnikes
(albeit they had not the right and perfect true knowlage of God) were endued
with the knowlage of the law of nature.

For it is no private law to a few or certain people, but common to all: not
written in books, but graffed in the hearts of men: not made by man, but
ordained of God: which we have not learned, received or read, but have taken,
sucked, and drawn it out of nature: whereunto we are not taught, but made: not
instructed, but seasoned: and (^s S. Paul says) man's conscience bearing
witness of it.

This law testifies to every man's conscience, that it is natural to cut
away an incurable membre, which (being suffered) would destroy the hole body.

Kings, Princes and other governors, albeit they are the headdes of a
politic body, yet they are not the hole body. And though they be the chief
members, yet they are but members: another are the people ordained for them, but
they are ordained for the people.

Upon this law of nature, and to co^serue the hole body the Ethnikes not
knowi^g that the soul is i^mortall, nor that there shall be a Resurrection of the
body and soul to judgment, but thought the soul perished with the body, and
that there was no difference between a brute beast and man's life: thought it
reasonable, and made it laufull (by their positive law) for eve ry man to kill
a tiranne. And to encourage men to entreprise to kill a tiranne, they esteemed
the deed to be worthy so great reward, that they thought him worthy perdone
that killed a tiranne, though he had killed his own natural father before.
And besides this, when they saw, that tirannes used to have their bodies
defended with great garisones and gardes of forain people, or kept them selves
in strong holds and secret chambres, so as none without great hasarde and
peril might come vere them: they propouned great rewards to him that should
destroy a tiranne. Another thought they rewards or gifts to be a sufficient
recompense for so virtuous an act, but they used also to make the image of him
that killed a tiranne, in brass: and to set it up in the most solemn place of
the city, for a perpetual memory of the act, the commendacion of the doer,
and thencouragement of others to do the like. They dedicated to hi^ praise and
honor songs and verses, and would have them taken of men as Gods worthy
immortality.

Whereof came the name of Nobility, or how were those that be called heroical
or noble personages diui ded from others, and had in such honor and
reverence, seeing all men came of one man and one woman's was it for their lusty
hawking and hunting? for their nimble diceing and co^ning carding? for their
fine singing and daunceing: for their open bragging and swearing? for their
false fliering and flattering? for their subtle piking and stealing? for their
cruel polling and pilling? for their merciles man murdering? for their
unnatural destroieng of their natural coun trey men, and traitorous betraieng
of their country? No, no, there was no such thing. The respect only of their
virtue and love to their country brought them thereto. Because they revenged
and delivered the oppressed people out of the hands of their governors, who
abused their authority, and wickedly, cruel ly and tirannously ruled over them:
the people of a grate and tha^kefull mind, gave them that estimacio^ and
honor. Of this kind of nobility was Hercules, Theseus, and such like.

Good kings, governors and states in time past took it to be the greatest
honor that could be, not to take cities and Realms to their own use (wha^
they were called to aid and releue thoppressed) as princes do now a days:
but to rescue and deliver the people and countreies from the tira^nie of the
governors, and to restore them to their liberty. So did the Romans, the
Lacedemonianes out of the tirannie of Onabis, and all Greece from the bondage
that Phi lippus (Demetrius son) king of Macedonia hade them in. So did the
noble me^ of the people of God also come to their high estimacion and honor,
as Gedeo^, Barac, Iepthe, and Samson, who for the delivery of his country from
the power of the idolatrous cruel Philistines, pulled upon him self present
death. So that this principle that evil and evil doers ought to be punished,
and rotten members to be cut away, was no peculiar law of the Ethnikes, but
it proceeds of nature, and therefore common to all men, as it is plain by the
Chronicles and experience of all ages, and purposely exemplified for our sure
stay and learning as well in the book of Judges, as in many other histories of
holy scriptures, according to the express word and commandment (applied to
this sense and meaning) which says: Let evil be taken out of the mids of
the congregation, that the rest which hear of it, may be afraied. and not
entreprise to do the like. And Christ pronounces, that every tree which
brings not furthe good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast in to the fire:
much more the evil tree, that bri^geth furthe evil fruit. And albeit some do
hold, that the manner and mean to punish evil and evil doers, is not all one
among Christianes (which be in deed that they profess i^ word) and Ethnikes,
which think it lauful for every private man (without respect of order and
time) to punish evil: yet the laws of many christian regiones do permit,
that private me^ may kill malefactors, yea though they were magistrates, in
some cases: as wha^^ governor shall soda^ly with his sword re^ne upon an
innocent, or goo about to shoot him through with a go^ne, or if he should be
found in bed with a man's wife, or goo about to defloure and rauishe a man
nes daughther: much more if goo about to betraie and make away his country
to forai^ers, etc. Nevertheless forasmuch as all things ^ every christian
common wealth ought to be done dece^tly and according to order and cha ritie:
I think it ca^ not be mai^tened by Gods word, that any private man may
kill, except (where execucio^ of just pu^isheme^t upon tira^nes, idolaters, and
traitorous governors is either by the hole state utterly neglected, or the
prince with the nobility and cou^sail co^spir^ the subuersio^ or alteracio^ of
their country and people) any private man have some special inwardeco^maundement
or surely proved mocion of God: as Moses had to kill the Egipcia^, Phinees the
Lecherours, and Ahud king Eglon, with such like: or be otherwise commanded or
permitted by common authority upon just occasion and common necessity to kill.

But now perchance thou will demand, why christen me^ never made express
positive law of the kind of punishment of tirannes. Might it not be
answered, as Solo^ did (excusing that he had not made a law for such as
killed their parents) that no man would suspecte, that so unnatural a fact
should be thought, much less committed? or that those that should be the
ministers, yea the images of God here in earth, charged both by God and man,
to see the people defended from injuries, shauld so much abuse their office
and authority, as to convert the sweorde to the destruction of them, whose
championes and defendours they ought to be? Yea rather of all to say (which is
most certain) the simple people deceived by great oaths, and begiled with fair
promises, suffered their governors to usurp such authority and power over
them, and so long winked and bare with their iniquity, that they were not
hable to take it from them.

But I beseech thee, what needs to make one general law to punish by one
name a great many offen ses, when the law is all ready made for the
punishment of eueri one of them particularly. If a prince rob and spoil his
subjects, it is theft, and as a thief ought to be punished. If he kill and
murder them contrary or without the laws of his countreye, it is murder, and
as a murtherour he ought to be punished. If he commit aduoutrie, he is an
aduouterour and ought to be punished with the same pains that others be. If he
violently rauishe men's wives, daughthers or maidens, the laws that are made
against ra uishers, ought to be executed on him. If he goo about to betraie his
country, and to bring the people under a foreyn power: he is a traitor, and
as a traitor he ought to suffer. And those that be judges in common Wealths,
ought (upon complaynt) to summone and cite them to answer to their crimes, and
so to proceed, as they do with others. For the prophet speaking unto those
that have the rule in common wealths, and that be judges and other ministers
of justice, says: ministre justice to the poor and orphan, pronounce the
miserable and poor to be innocent, if he be innocent: take the poor, and
deliver the nedy out of the hands of the wicked. When ye sit to judge, ye
shall not have respect of persons, whether they be rich or poor, great or
small: fear no man, for ye execut^ the judgment of God, says the holy ghost
by the mouth of Moses. Judge not after the outward appe araunce of men, but
judge rightly: says Christ.

God him self gave thexample of punishment of evil governors. For when the
children of Israel hade committed Idolatry, he commanded moses to take the
Princes of the people, and to hang them up against the Sun, that his wrath
and fury might be tur ned from Israel.

When that doughtie dame Queen Athalia, the woman tyranne (seeing after her
son Ahaziahu was dead, that she was childles, and past hope to have any
children) have killed all the kings progenye (saving Ioas, whom Iehosaba
Iorams daughter hid and get with his nource out of the way) purposing to
reign thereby in security, and to transpose the right of the erowne to
strangers or some other favorer of her cruel procedinges at her pleasur by the
help and subtilti of her traitorous Counsaillours, and so went on in all
abominacion and cruelty without comptrolling a great space: Did her subjects
suffer her in her wickedness still unpunished though she was the undoubted
Queen and chief governor of the land? No, no. But as soon as Ioas was a
littell nourced up, and crept somewhat out of the shell being a child of seven
years old: the nobility and commones feling by experience what misery it
was to live under the government of a mischievous woman, not only guarded Ioas
with me^ and all decent regal ceremonies unto the house of God (by thaduise and
appoyntement of Ieoiada the high priest) and there crouned himsolemnely: but
also when Athalia the Queen's highness came in, mar uailing what adoo that was,
and perceauing the matter, rent her clothes howling and crieng, as the manner of
mad women is, specially in the hot seasones of the year: they laid hands
on her (for all her crieng, Treason, treason) and when they hade carried her out
of the house of God, they slew her. And so was the realm rid of a tyranne,
the right enheritour possessed in his regal astate, the people made a new
ba^de with God to serve him syncerely accordig to his word, and banished all
idolatry and false reli gion (which the Queen had set up and used) and the
common wealth flourished a fresh in her former peace and liberty.

The prophet Elias being no civil magistrate, ca^ sed the king and Queen's
highenesse chaplaynes Baals priests to be killed before Achabs face, because
they were idolaters, and taught and mayntened false religion, though scarce so
false and idolatrous, as the popes mass and religion is. And when the Queen's
may stie dame Iesabel (that the devil) saw Iehu co^ to her p^ lace, cried and
reviled h^ as a traitor. Iehu not passing upon her words (though she was his
sovereign ladi and maistres) cried alowde: who is on my side, who? As though
he hade said, if there be any among you, that sets more by Gods true
religion and their natural countrei than by that idolatro^s witch the Queen:
cast her out at the wyndow. And so two or three of her privy Chamber threw
her out to him, bursting her neck and bones against the walls. And as soon as
Iehu hade trode^ her under his fete, dogs (as ye heard before) eat up her
flesh, and slossed up her blood,

Ioram was known the king and right enheritour of the crown of Israel. And
yet when he saw Iehu and his company come toward him, he asked him whether
he came in peace. Iehu said: what peace should there be, as long as the
horedomes of thy mother Iesabel and her witchecraftes be so great? And so for
his idolatrous tyranny and evil government Iehu slew him. And many moo such
examples in scriptures we have, which (as the rest of the Bible is) be left
for the instruction of all christen common wealths in like case, as we want
not also the like experience and examples even in these our days. Because the
remembrance of the horrible destruction of the evil governors, and alteracion
of the common wealth in Schwuzerlande and certain other places in high
Almayne, now in our time is not very pleasant, I will purposely pass it over,
albeit the matter is so fresh and grene yet still in all men's sightes, that
it is spoken of universally through the world. And was not Petrus Aloysius
(Pope Paul the thriddes son, and duke of Placenza) justly slain now lately
of his own people, because of the evil government and ^rannye he used among
them?

And where this justice is not executed, but the prin ce and the people play
together, and one wynketh and bears with the others faults, there can not be,
bust a most corrupt, ungodly and vicious state, which albeit it prospre for a
season, yet no doubt at leynght they may be sure, that unto the^ shall come
that came to Sodom, Gomorra, Jerusalem, and such other, that were utterly
destroyed.

And on the other side, where the nobility and people look diligently and
earnestly upon their autorities, and do see the same executed on their headdes
and governors, making them to yield account of their doings: than without
fail will the princes and governors be as diligent to see the people do
their duty. And so shall the common wealth be godly, and prospre, and God
shall be glorified in all. But thou will say, what if the nobility, and those
that be called to common Cou^selles, and should be the defendours of the
people, will not or dare not execute their authority: what is than to be done?
The people be not so destitute of remedy, but God has provided an other
mean, thas is, to complain to some minister of the word of God, to who^ the
keys be given to excommunicate not only common people for all notorious and
open euilles: but also kaisers, kings, princes, and all other governors, when
they spoil, rob, undoo and kill their poor subjects without justice and
good laws. And what so ever such minister of Gods word byndeth upon those
occasiones here in earth, it is fast bounden in heaven before the face of God.
And no mean to undo it, by any good work (much less by popes pardone or
friars prayers) without repentaunte of the party offending, and satisfaction
made to the party offended for the injustice and iniu ries committed: and the
mercy of God through the on ly merits of our saueour Jesus Christ. Example we
have of S Ambrose, who being no pope, nor popes Com missary, but bishop of
Millane excommunicated the Emperor Theodosius. Whose doings, because thou
may the better know, I will in few words expres se theffecte of the
history. This Theodosius, albeit he were an Emperor, and a Christen man, yet
was he of nature colerike, and much disposed to be a^grie: and as it seems,
without consideration. It chanced that in a sedicio^ at Thessalonica, so^of
his officers were stoned to death, and some very evil entreated. He in a rage
sends thider a no^bre of merciles men of war, who making no difference
between thautours of the sedicio^ and thinnocent people, make an horrible
slaughter of the poor people, man, woman and child, Afterward the emperor
after his accustumed manner, came toward the church, and S. Ambrose met him
at the church door, and would not suffer him to enter: but not only told him,
it was no place for murderers, but also did excommunicate him out of all
christen company, til he repented and made satisfaction for the hor rible
murder committed by his soldiers. The Emperor being brought up and instructed
in the word of God (as I would to God all christian princes were at this pre
sent) and knowing thoffice both of the minister of Gods word, and of an
Emperor, obeyed: and return^d wepi^g and crieng to his palace. Eight monetes
af t^r, came the feast of the nativity of Christ: and Ruffinus lord great
master or stuarde of his house came to the emperor, who^ he found very heavy,
weping and sobbing. He beig familiar with him, desired to know the cause of
his sorrow. Ah Ruffinus (says thempe rour) thou art merry, for thou felest not
mi pains. I l^ me^t and mourn for my calamity. It is free for slaves and
beggars to goo to the church, and there to pray to God, but I may not come
there: no, heaven gats be schut to me. Christ's words goo not out of my heart:
what so ever ye bind on earth, shall be bou^de^ also in heaven. At leynght
being e^couraged by Ruffinus, that he might be absoiled of S. Ambrose, he
sends hi^ before, to be a mean for hi^, and he him self followed. But
Ruffinus could not entreat the bishop. After the emperor comes, but durst not
enter in to the church, but without the doors fell on his knees to S. Ambrose,
and desired absolucion. S. Ambrose said, he was not mete to be absoiled, for
his coming was more like a tiranne, one that would by force be absoiled, than a
christen man that showed him self penitent and sorry. No (says the emperor) I
will not presume against the order of the church to enter in by force, but I
humbly beseech thee to lose me out of these bo^des of exco^municatio^, and that
thou wilt reme^ bre the mercy that God uses: and that thou will not shut
against me the gate that God opened to all that be penitent. The bishop asked
him, what worthy penance he had showed sith the time he had committed that
wicked act, or with what medicine he had healed those most grievous wounds. It
is your part (says the emperor) to prepare the medicine, and mine to re ceaue
and use it. At leynght S. Ambrose required there might be a law ordained, that
thexecucion of revenge should not be done suddenly but delaied, so as it should
not proced of anger, and the emperor made that law. Afterward he was releassed
of thexco^municatio^: and coming in to the church, he made his prayers, not
standing nor kneling, but lyeng flat on the ground, pulling his hear,
beating his browe, wepi^g, lame^ting and cryeng with David: My soul cleaves
to the pauement, quicken me (O lord) according to thy word: and asked mercy
and forgiveness. Thus ye see, what any minister of the church may do upon
the greatest prince, if he will execute his office and the power that Christ
gives him. But thou will say, what if the minister pass not on his duty,
but be content to wink at all the uices of the governors, be they never so
wic ked, so he may have a bishopriche, a dea^rie, a prebe^de, or a good fat
benefice, and live u^punished in all abomi nacio^? Yea and what if there be
such special grudges be twene the nobility and commones, that the one sort
neither trusts nor loves the other, so as the one dare not open the
necessity and mean of such correction and redress of the evil governors
vices, for fear least if the purpose come to light before hand, the matter be
dashed, and the mocionar leap headles for his labor, as it is in these days
often seen: What shifte than? In deed there be certain examples and paternes in
the holy Bible, Which I will not stick to rehearse, though not expound, but
holly refer them to the further debating and judgment of thine own
conscience, through the holy ghost, by whose providence they are enrolled for
our learning.

We read that after the lord God hade sundry times delivered his people of
Israel from wicked tira^nes, with whom he hade plaged them for their
wickedness and Idolatry: at leinght when through abundance of wealth and
quietness they fell to a certain careless security of life, not only
forgetting God and his holy sincere word, but also seking every one his own
singular self gain with the hurt and contempt of his neighbor. God took from
them their natural liege lord, the good Judge Othoniel, and placed, ye
(says the scripture) he streynghtened a strange prince among them, an
Idolatrous person and a wicked, called Eglon. This Eglon used the matier so
with bribing those Israelites, that for preferrement would be traitors to their
natural country, and specially in bringing in a great power of Ammonites and
Amalekites (two kinds of people in beggarly pride and filthiness of life much
like to the common nature of Italianes and Spaniardes) as well to guard his
pson, as to fortify the strong holds and mu nicio^es: that by and by sei^g
himself strong enough with his strangers and Inborne traitors, he brought the
country and people under his subjection by fine force, so that he continued
their ordinary Prince and chief ruler xviij. years long. What oppressing of the
poor, what robbing of the rich, what taking up of corn and vitail for the
king and his strangers, and no money paid for it, what taxes and paimentes
the people were yowked withal, what rauishing of men's wives, daughters and
servants, what heading and hanging of the natural Israelites to make the
strangers lords and gentilmen, what common miseries and continual calamities
there were during that space, no doubt it is unspeakable.

But what remedy? No man durst make moan to his neighbor for fear of
bewraieng, none durst ones whistre against the king, they must bend or break,
no remedy, patience perforce, all were feign to serve and please king Eglon.
But at leinght they sent (as their yearly accustomed manner was) a present to
the king by a wittye messagier, called Ahud: who having access to the kig,
said he hade to say unto his Majesty secretly from God. And when the king
hade commanded all his servants away, so that Ahud and the king were alone
in his somer parlour, Ahud thrust his dagger so hard in to the kings fat
paunche, that there lay king Fglon dead, and Ahud fled away.

Now, was this well done or evil? For so the the deed is so commended in
scripture, that the holy ghost reports Ahud to be a saueour of Israel.

But note by the way, the text says not, that Ahud was sent of the people
to kill the king, nor that he told them what he intended: for by that mean,
one Judas or other would have betrayed him, and so should he have been drawn,
hanged and quarted for his entreprise, and all his conspiratours have lost
both life, lands and goods for their conspiracy.

Only the scripture says, that Ahud (being a private person) was stered up
only by the spirit of God.

Likewise when Sisara lieutenaunt general of king Iabins wars fleing from
Barac sought succor to hide his head, having long noied and hurt Israel with
oppression and wars, a woman named Iael called him in to her house, and hid
him under a Covering. He thought him self sure, and for weariness dropped
hard on sleep.

Iael takes a great long spikig nail, and drives it with a hammer so hard
in to his brains, that Sisara troubled Israel no more, nor never told who
hurt hi^.

Mattathias being by the kings Commissionares required and commanded to
conform him self to the kings procedinges (which was to commit Idolatry)
as all his countrymen the Jews hade done (and as the like case stands now
in England) not only refused to obey king Antiohus commandment, or to follow
his procedinges in that behalf, but also when he saw a Jew committee
Idolatry before his face, he ran upon the Jew in a great zeal and slew
him, and fell also upon the ordinary Commissioners sent from Antiochus the
ordinary king of the Realm, and slew them out of hand. These examples need
no further exposicion, the scripture is plain enough. But if neither the hole
state nor the minister of Gods word would do their common duty, nor any
other laufull shifte before mentioned can be hade, nor dare be attempted: yet
are not the poor people destitute all together of remedy: but God has left
unto them two weapones, hable to conquer and destroy the greatest Tira^ne
that ever was: that is, Penance and Prayer. Penance for their own sins,
which provoke the anger and displeasure of God, and make him to suffer
tirannes, wars, famine, pestilence and all plages to reign among the people.
And prayer, that he will withdraw his wrath, and show his merciful
countenance.

Hereof we have not only commandment, but also manifest examples in the
scriptures. For when the Ark of God was taken away from the people of Israel
by the Philistines in batail, and the glory of Israel brought under foot (the
people being miserably for their sins pressed and plagued by the Philistines
twenty years long) so that the people despering of their honor and liberty,
and seeing no mar^ial wepon, nor help of man hable to redress their state,
cried and continued in lamenting their thraldom and grievous condition: at
leynght by the advice and commandment of the good Prophet Samuel, the people
fell to these two means: Penance, and prayer, with fasting: and the lord God
not only delivered them out of thoppression of the Philistines unto their
former liberty, but also gave them such victories, that the Philistines many
years after, durst not ones move war against them.

Thus was also the cruel tiranne Herod vainquished. Thapostles and people in
the primative church lamenting their sins, and calling to God for mercy,
the angel of God stroke Herod sitting in his throne, in his princely apparail,
making an Oracion to the people, and they commending it to be the voice of God,
and not of man, and so he was eaten up of lice or worms. Likewise when Julian
the emperor and Apostata had long persecuted the church, at leinght wh^ the
people fell to repentance and common prayer, he going in to Persia, was
slain, and none of the family of Constantine (whereof he came) after that was
Emperor. And in like manner not long since when that tiranne Duke George of
Saxony persecuted all such as professed the word of God, revived and pulled
out of purgatory, by the worthy instrument of God D. Luther: and at leynght
threatened, that he would burn and destroy the university of wittenberg,
which when Luther heard, he went in to the pulpit, and exhorted eueri man to
put on his armor: that is, Penance and prayer. And sone after, God rid the
world of that tiranne, and so not only delivered his church, but also
augmented it with an other university, called Lipsia, and all the hole
country of this cruel duke was converted to Christ's Gospel.

These be the wonderful works of almighty God, whose power is as great and
as ready at a pinche as ever it was, and his mercy as willing to be showed, if
his poor afflicted people would do on their weapon: that is, be sorry for
their sins, and, desire him to with draw his sourges, and to hold his
merciful hand over them.

WHAT CONFIDENce is to be given to princes and potentates.
WHEN the king of Macedonia, Alexander the great, heard the philosopher
Anaxagoras say there were many worlds, the worm of ambicion so tickled and
troubled his heart, that the water gushed out of his eyes. And when he was
asked, what made him to weep: have I not just occasion to weep (says he)
that hearing of so many worlds, I am not yet lord of one? This worm without
fail was the devil, who not contented that kings (the ministers of God)
should serve God in their vocation (to have them the sooner fall from God, and
ser ue him) puts them in hope they shall be lords of all the world, if they
will take him for their chief lord and sovereign. But because he sees the
inconstauncie of kings, that they no longer abide by their oaths and promises
than they may thereby have profit, gain, and their desire, he does not
furthewith put them in possession, but to try their fidelity, he shows them
by what means they shall come to it, putting to their good will, help, and
industry. He doubts not, but if he may bring them ones in to the puddle
over the shoen, they will through thick and thine whatsoe ^er comes of it, to
come to that they looked for. These ways of the Devil p^de out of his schole of
practices and they be in a generality, two: that is, open force and secret
subtlety: the one whereof, that is, force and manhood, having often tried and
most times it has not succeeded after their mind, they have not so much put
in use, but have rather trusted on the other, that is, subtlety and craft
whereby they work a great deal more mischief than by open force and streinght
of men, and with less peril of them selves. For when they goo about it by
force, the devil their master is not hable to warraunt them the success. For
all victory and good success comes of God, who when he sees the people
(against whom the devil and his kings work) fall to repentance for their
sins, he overthrows his and their enemies with a fillip, as he did proud
Olofernes and Se^nacherib: the one being slain by the good and faithful woman
to God and her country Judith: all his power being an hundred and twenty
thousaunt fotemen, and twelve thousau^t archers on horseback destroyed by a
few. And the others army being an hundred four score and five thousaunt
persons was destroyed by the angel of God without the work of man, and he
forced to fly: and at his return home was killed of his own two sons.

But the other means, that is, subtlety and craft (which the world calls
policy) they more practice: and therein daily do so proceed, that within short
time many of them have be^ doctors. And they have a priciple of this art,
which is, that to come by a kingdom, to com by that they desire, they may
break all men's laws, all oaths, all promises, yea the laws of God and
honesty. This art of subtlety of princes (otherwise called policy)
consists chiefly in this, for a man to appear outwardly that he is not
inwardly: to say one thing with the mouth, and think an other in the heart:
to smyle upon him, whose throat he would gladly see cut: and so pretend to
the eye all amity, benevolence and love, where they bear greatest hatred,
envy, and malice, till convenient time may be had with least daungier, to
execute their conceived mischief. And because they be not hable alone to do
their feats, look where they can understand of any of their nature, them they
reteyne, to them give they great chains of gold, feed them with great
pensions and fees promised. And yet they be not ignorant, that such vile men
(as will for money betraye their own countreye, and serve their wicked
purposes) are like unto common soldiers and lance knights, who serve him
that gives a penny more: and will, when they may have greater bribes of an
other, sone buy and sell their present master. For how is it possible for any
man to think, that he whom he has corrupted with rewards to serve his
purpose* will or can be faithful to hi that is a stranger, that so well
knows what they be, and finds them false to their native country: in the
defense whereof all he nest men be bounden, and be content to bestow their
life, their blood, their goods, and what so ever they have? Do not princes
use traitors, as men use Coloquintes, Turbith, Elleborum, and such like
poisones? that is, to serve their purpose, when they have need of them, and
after can not abide their sight, no, not their savor, but cast them out on the
dong hill?

Yes doubtless it is most certain. When one had betrayed in to Cesars hands
certain towns: what said Caesar? I love treason (says he) but traitors I
do abhor. So said also king Antigonus. I love trai tours (says he)
whilst they betraye, but when they have betrayed, and served my purpose, I
utterly hate and abhor them,

Aurelianus the emperor having long besieged the city of Tiana in Asia, and
being without hope to get it by force, practiced with one Heracleo (a great
rich man and citezin of the city, than being in the city) to betraye the
city to him.

This Heracleo fearing least if the city should be won by force, he should
also lose his riches, and hoping of great gain by this bargayn, consented to
the emperor, and did that he required. The Emperor as soon as he came into the
city, caused this traitor Heracleo to be killed (albeit he had done alone
that for the emperor, that all themperours power was not habie to obtain for
theperour) because he could not abide his sight, that had betrayed his
country, the de^e was so horrible and against nature. Yet because he would not
seem to have done it for desire of his riches, he gave them to his children,
whom he preserved. And writing to his friend the matter as it was done, shows
that he could not love nor abide Traitors, nor that he could keep promise with
such as should not be faithful and loving to their country.

It is written of one called Cacanus king in Bai^erland in Germany, that he
invaded a country some time called Carnia, now called Frioly in Italy, and
other places belonging to the Venecianes with a great power: and at the furst
meting of him and thenemies, he overcame and killed one Gisulfus a Lombarde,
Duke of that country. After that he besieged a city, wherein Romilda the Dukes
wife was.

She desiring to see this king what manner man he was, neded not to have his
image pourtred unto her, but looked over the walls advisedly upon him. When she
saw he was a goodly and fair person, she was by and by in love with him. She
whisheth, that she might feel him enter in to her own hold. Meat nor drin ke
could do her good, she could not sleep, she sobbeth she howleth, she sou^deth,
she teareth her hear, and is more tha^ half mad, for lack of her lust.

To be short, contrary to all honesty and womanly shamefastenesse, she woeth
him to be her husband: and having no regard of the love that eueri honest
creature ought to bear to his coun trey, she promises to give him city,
country, iewelles, goods, and what so ever she could polle of her subjects,
and make for him, so that he would marie her. The king lacking no wit (or at
least wanting no wyttye counsel) and knowing what peril might chance unto
him, if he should seek to win it by force, takes the offer.

And according to his promise he married her, and one night took pains to shake
up her lecherous rot ten ribs. In the next morning he leaves his chamber,
and her gates open free to every man: and (as some, God give them grace to
repent in time, did to the wicked woman of Feuersham in Kent, that not long
since killed her husband) he gave every man liberty that would, to offer his
devotion in to her corporesse. So at leynght when he thought her tired, and her
insatiable lust somewhat staunched (for by li ke it would never have been fully
glutted) he caused her to be thrust on a stake naked, that all me^ might see
those vgli parts, which to satiffie she was content to betraye her natural
countreie: and that it should be an example to all others, to take heed to do
the like, he causes the hole city to be clean overthrown.

This may ye see, that kings spare neither male nor female, great nor small,
that for any respect betraye their own natural country: because they know,
those can never be faithful to strangers that be false to their pare^t, their
country. And would to God they were as earnestly set to absteyne from doing
evil, as i these examples they to have be^ ready to do justice.

But what shall we need to bring furthe examples of practicers, of strange and
far countries, wha^ every man may find pleyntie in his own? To what
purpose shall it be, to allege those of a great meany years past and stale,
when there be pleyntie every day fresh to be found? Only to let men see by
comparison of the old with the new, and the new with the old, the present
with the past, and the past with the present, that the devil has always ben,
is and shall be the devil: and such fetches as he has used, such he does and
will use. And that his disciples, as they never forget the principles of their
science, so ha ue they at leynght their masters reward, worthy their desartes.

When wriothesley, Arundell and Southwell conspired with thambicious and subtle
Alcibiades of England, the Earl of warwike (afterward duke of Northumberland)
to pull the good duke of Somerset king Edwardes uncle and protector out of his
authority, and by forgeing a great meany of false lettres and lies to make the
Protector hated, brought to pass war wikes purpose: who than for a while, but
they three? Wriothesley that before was banished the Court* is lodged with his
wife and son next to the king. Every man repaireth to Wriothsley, honors
Wriothesley, sueth unto Wrio thesley (as the Assirianes did to Ammon) and all
thin ges be done by his advise: and who but Wriothesley^ Arundell his promised
to be next to the king, grome of his stole, or Comptrollour of his house at the
least. Southwell (for his whisking and double diligence) must be a great
Counsaillour in any wise. But what was the end? The earl as crafty as the best
(seeing that his desire should not take place, if these men might have that they
hoped for) so handles the matier, that Wriothesley is feign in the night to
get him out of the court to his own house: where upon narowe examination,
fearing least he should come to some open shamfull end, he either poisoned him
self, or pyned away for thought.

Southwell is committed to the Flete, where being examined, he confessed enough
to be hanged for, and hade gone very nere it, hade not his examiners upon hope
of his amendment breaking out of his eye, but not out of his heart, obtained
therles favor.

And at therles suit Arundel has his head with the axe divided from the
shoulders.

And how at leinght was P. the master of practices handled, that will have one
part in every pagent, if he may by prayeng or paieng put in his foot? But
before I proceed to speak of this master of practices it shall not be amysse,
that I tell you somewhat of his master the doctor of practices. For albeit
this doctor be now (but to late) thoroughly known, yet it shall be requisite,
that our posterity know what he was, and by his description see, how nature
had shaped the outward parts, to declare what wa^ within. This doctor hade a
swart color, an hanging look, frowning brows, eyes an ynche within the head,
a nose hooked like a bussarde, wide nose trilles like a horse, ever snuffing in
to the wind, a sparowe mouth, great paws like the devil, talauntes on his
fete like a grype, two inches longer than the natural toes, and so tied to
with sinowes, that he could not abide to be touched, nor scarce suffer them to
touch the stones.

And nature having thus shaped the form of an outward monstre, it gave him a
vengeable wit, which at Cambridge by labor and diligence he hade made a
great deal worse, and brought up many in that faculty: Wriothesley, Germayne
Gardener (whom he caused spedily to be hanged, least he should have to mu che
disclosed his masters art) and among many other, this master or proctour of
practices, whom we are now entered to speak of.

This doctor to geuesome signification of his nature and co^ning to come
alofte, that he might do the more mischief, betrayeth his M. Carnal wolsei:
and more than any other labors the divorce between king Henry and the
dowager. And by and by he earnestly sought to have ridde^ in the kiges boots:
worse could not content him. But when he saw that would not be, and considred
it better to have stoare than one only pair (for so perchance he might have
found them somtymes not all clean when he would have used the^, and also it
should be a let to bring to pass that he pur posed) he changes his purpose^:
and because none should remember his practices before, nor suspecte the rest
to come, he shaueth his crown as broad as a sawcer, and decketh him self with
a white smock like a portour of the Stiliarde. But what needs such
circumlocucion, when every body knows this doctor of practices was called D.
Stephan Gardi ner? After this, his luck was to be committed to the tower, when
Tyburne hade ben a place more worthy his deserts. His scholar the master or
proctour of practices, remembering how much he had prospred by the means of
the doctor, and bending his disposicion to make thankful requital of part
of his received benefits, puts the doctor in memory of an old lesson he
had taught him: that is, to give back two foot with the ram, that he might
win the third. But whether this D. Gardener was offended with his scholar the
proctour, for his ouerranke practiceing, or how it happened, I can not tell, I
am sure that in this one, he answered honestly: let my scholar goo on as he
has begone (says he) for Gardener can not play the knave so. Words of
Gardier: but he was not unskilled (I say) i the art of practices. No in deed,
he was excellent in that feate, as it well appeared. For when he had wrought
and made sure the great marriage to avoid the hatred of the people, he made his
scholar to father it, and to have the outward thanks. And no maruail of his
conning. For he was his master, and hade studied longer the art, than the
proctour, and hade a better wit, and spent yearly the half of his
bishopriche in bribing, or else he had lost his head long before: for his
treasones were not altogether vnknowem, albeit they were covered and hidden.

But what does this master or proctour of practices? Does he not dissemble
with the earl of warwike, serves his turn i all that his wits would serve?

But what at leinght becomes of our practiceing P.? He is committed to ward,
his garter with shame pulled from his leg, his robe from his back, his coat
armor pulled down, spurned out of Windsore church, trodden under foot, and he
him self at leinght with great favor obtein^th, that he might redeem the rest
of his corporal pains with open confession at the bar in the Star chamber
on his knes of his bribery, extorcion, dissimulacion, ambicion, robbing of the
king, and such like virtues, whereby he became noble.

If we minded in this place to displaye the packing and practiceing of the
Nobility and counsel of England in the sickness and at the death of king
Edward the vi. for the pretensed placeing of the lady Jane in the regaleseat,
and their sudden slipping the coler. and deceauing of one an other: it were
matter enough to teach men, how litel confidence and trust ought to be given
either to the smothe cou^tenaunces, fair words, confident promises, bloody
oaths, or swearing upon the holy Euangelies, either yet to the lettres and
hand writings of the Princes and potentates of the world. They that were
sworn chief of counsel with the lady Jane, and caused the Queen to be
proclaimed a bastar^e throughout all England and Irelande: and they that were
the sorest forcers of men (yea under the threatened pains of Treason) to swear
and subscribe unto their doings, bewraied the matter them selves under hand by
their wives and other secret shifts, and afterward became counsaillours (I
will not say, procurers) of the innocent Lady Ianes death: and at this
present are in the highest authority in the Queen's house, and the chiefest
officers and doers in the common wealth.

And some of them that wrote most earnestly to a certain ancient lord of the
Realm (among many other, in the favor of the Lady Jane, bebastarding and
railing upon the Queen, were not ashamed within few days after (when the same
lord was locked up in the tower, for his constaunt although constrained
obedience to the common order of the Counsel) to be his most strange and
rough examiners on the contrary part, as though they them selves hade never
halted in the matter.

But I know these practicers answer: that if they hade not used that practice,
they should not only have standen in hasarde them selves, but also failed of
their privy purpose. Well. In the mean time it is enough to know, that a man
may not trust nor believe them, either by their words, oaths, or hand
writings further tha^ he sees and hears them, and scarcely so far.

And I pray you, has not the realm good cause to thank and trust the
potentates, Prelates and Parliament men for banishing the sacred testament and
Gospel of God with the sincere administracion of his holy Sacraments, and for
bringing the deuillishe power of the Romish Antichrist in to England again
with his miserable Mass and all popish slavery? By the which they have not
only broken their oath and loy altie to God, and to themperial Crown of
England, pullig eternal co^de^nacio^ upon themselves, and *puokig the heavy
hand of Gods wrath and plage upon their sede, and upon the hole realm, i
co^pellig the people to sin by fallig from the true service of the liuig God
ito most wicked supersticion and idolatry (alas therefore) but also have been
and are guilty of the innocent blood of thanks, and the Queen's favor
increaced toward him. But his just reward yet is not come, let h^ not look
to speed any better than Heracleo, if he continue Judas still. I would wish,
he would in time become a Petre, I trust he is not so far past, but he may
be prayed for. He is my good lord, and Mason ones my great friend, and nere
neighbor. I wish them both well. Thus ye see the final success and reward
of traitors. Wherefore it is to be wondered, that such practicers which work
so much mischief for others, can not take heed of the evil that is toward
them selves. But Gods word must be verified of the wicked. Behold, the
wicked trauaileth with mischief (says the worthy prophet and king David, a
man of great experience) He has conceived unhappines, and brought furthe a
lie. He has graven and dug up a pit, but he shall fall him self in to
the pit that he has made. For the mischief that he minds to others, shall
come on his own head, and his wickedness shall fall on his own pate.

But forasmuch as all these fetches and practices be only made and laid to
disceaue those that be honest, faithful, true, and natural to their countreie:
it is requisite to treat how they may be avoided. Deceat would not be knocked
out with deceat, if it might so be, but honest men should always and at all
times deal plainly and honestly. And therefore the honestest mean before
things be done, is to be wise and circumspecte: and to forsee the end, what
mischief may follow, before they suddenly, rashely and unadvisedly consent to
any thing. To use such honest wisdom and forsight, is permitted both by
Gods word and nature. Yea Gods word and nature command honest men to
use it. For those things that can but ones be done, and whereon so great weigh
thangeth, ought to be well done. Therefore men ought not to give credit to
fair words, large promises, and great oaths (for these are the instruments
to deceive the honest and well meaning) but the fairer the words be, the
larger the promises, and the greater the oaths, the more to suspecte. For godly
and honest things may be well enough done without painted and smothe words,
fair promises and oaths. There ought to be such equality in doing of things,
that such deceates need not. Only subtlety and craft devised long writings,
great promises, and many solemn ceremonies. Wha^ the great marriage was
treated in the privy Counsel and so great promises made, the old Duke of Nor
folk said, they were golden words, but how shall they be performed, said
he? Afterward when it was propouned to the lords in the parliament to be
ratified, the Lord Windsori like manner asked who should be suertie for the
perfourmaunce thereof, and who should sue the forfaite? Another of the^ lacked
wisdom and forsight, to see that under painted papir, much mischief was
hid. Long erperience had taught it the duke, being long trained in Princes
practices: and nature suffered not the other lord to be utterly void of it.
But both of them lacked that courage, magnanimity, and fortitude, that ought
to be in noble men. But it might be, that they hade it, but durst not vttre it,
partly for that the one was in hope to recover that he had a time lacked, and the
other for fear to lose that he hade: but chiefly (as it may be gathered)
because they saw their peers mouth^s stopped. But let them be sure, all will
not serve, if practicers part; may take place. For such things would be all
together overthrown, or not meddled with: for at leinght the least let will be
called to memory, they may be sure. And because public matters of a Realm,
that concern all and every man's life, wife, children, lands, goods, and
what so ever can not be tretted upon by all me^, but all must put their trust
in a few: men ought to be wise and circu^specte who^ they trust. For there be
to many that pass not what become of their neighbors, so they may prospre
them selves: what become of the hole Realm, so their own families may stand
still. He that makes suit to be a deputy for a multitude, seems to sue for
his own vainglorie or profit. Those that send lettres, not to chose this man,
but to chose such a man: have in their headdes more than the universal wealth
of all. He that brings lettres to be preferred, means not the benefit of
them that he would serve. He that gives money, and makes great feasts,
thinks some other fetch, than the service of his neighbors. He that refuses
or releasseth his ordinary wages, looks for some greater extraordinary
reward. He that is always or often at princes platters, or in practi cers
Palaces, ca^ not long continue the peoples true pro ctour. And therefore in
Venece (as they write) none of the Senate and officers upon pain of his head,
dare talk pryuily with an other, nor take rewards or fees of any foreign
Prince. For they are so gelous of the hole state, because they have been so
often deceived by practicers in their own companies. Which lesson all wise men
and honest men should learn, and by all means suspecte princes promises and
withstand practicers doings, and not believe one word that they say, be it
never so gentil: nor yet their deeds, what so ever shine or pretense of love
they declare. Such a realm as England is, is well gotten, how so ever it is
gotten. But thou that art a true english man, seeing the fetches and fal^ehead
of these named and such other ^s they be, look in time to thy self and to the
state of thy natural countraye, and trust not unto them, though their use
never so much fliering, though they swear never so fast, though they speak
never so fair, and though they give thee their hand writing. Be thou
Pr^metheus and not Epimetheus. Remember that our country man Adam Afterwitte
has a great while ben the lord For rewittes fool. Be taught therefore in
time, before thou be taken. Say not to late: Hade I wist. Thou have sufficient
warning, God give thee grace to considre it and use it.

AN EXHORTACION or rather a warnyng to the Lords and Commones of England.
IHARTILY wish (natural englishemen and good countrymen) that it had pleased
God, to have given some cause, whereby ye with me, and I with you might have
rejoiced, and not to have lamented one of us to an other of our misery. For
sorrowful things are neither grate to the hearer, nor pleasant to the teller.
But as if one should come to his dear friend or good neighbor, finding him
very so re wounded, and did but lament with him, and not went about to help
him to cure his wounds, he should ra there augment his pains and increace his
sorrow: so if in this miserable misery, wherein we and our poor country of
England stand, and yet is not come to the full and ripeness, I should but
lament and wayle with you, which I can not but do, onles I should show my
seelf toto unnatural and unkind, I should but encreace (I think) your sorrows
and pains: but most certainly I am sure mine own. But as it is a most sure
token of death, when the sick man feleth not his disease, nor ca^ tell where
his grief is, being asked in what place his pain lies: so in all Realms and
congregaciones of people, when they do not feel the common calamities and
miseries that are among them, it is a most certain and infallible sign that
the destruction and the end of it is at hand. And therefore give me leave (I
beseech you) to open your wounds, and to search the cause of your calamities,
and than to ministre and power in to them some wholesome bawme, and cover them
with some comfortable plastre.

And albeit I do it not so finely as some others can, but boisteously after my
rude manner, yet I doubt not, but by Gods grace ye shall find confort, or at
least perceive, that I have an earnest desire to see you helped. For I mean
your wealth and health, as one brother ought of an other, that is borne of
the same father and mother.

There was never great misery, destruction, plage or visitacion of God, that
came on any nation, city or country, which as they be in deed, so may they
justly be called wounds, but be sent of God for sin, and be not suddenly
laid on the people, but are before prophesied and declared by the prophets
and ministers of Gods word, or by some reuelaciones, wondres, monstres in
the earth, or to kens and signs in thelement.

For God as he is most just, and will not fail to punish sin, so is he most
merciful, and will not the death of sinners, but rather that they should
turn to him and live.

And therefore before hand gives them warning what shall follow, if in time
they repent not, as by the histories of all ages it does appear. And none of
these admoniciones have ye lacked, country men.

For the preachers and ministers of Gods word, in the time of the godly
Josias king Edward the Sixthe preached and prophesied unto you, what miseries
and plages should certainly come to you: the food of Gods word to be clean
taken away from you, famyn of the body, pestilence, wars, the loss of your
goods, the deflouring and rauishing of your wives and daughters before your
eyes, the captivity of your bodies, wives and children: the subversion of the
policy and state of the Realm: that a strange king and strange people (not
only in country, but also in condiciones and manners in respect of your own)
should reign and rule by force over you, if ye in time repented you not of
your wickedness, amended your lives, and called to God for mercy.

But than ye passed nothing on it, but as the Jews being downed in sin,
mocked, scorned and murthred the prophets of God which long before prophesied
unto them their captiuities and utter destruction: so ye laughed and iested at
your preachers words, nothing regarding the threattes of God, but conte^nyng
the^, yea increacei^g in your wickedness, a^dnowat leyn ght murdering most
cruelly the ministers of God.

And seeing words of warnyng took no place with you, God for his loving mercy
has warned you also by monstrous maruailes on the earth, and horrible
wonders in thelement, to put you beside all manner of excuses. What wonderful
monstres have there now lately ben borne in England? What celestial signs most
horrible? A child borne besides Oxforde in the year, M. D. LII. with two
heads and two parts of two evil shaped bodies joined in one. A child borne
at Couentree, in the year M. D. LV without arms or legs. A child borne at
Fulha^ by London even now this year, with a great head, evil shaped, the arms
with bags hanging out at the Elbowes and heles, and fete lame. A child new
borne at London furthewith speaking as a prophet and mes sager of God. An
horrible Comete this year, besides diverse eclipses, which follow. But what
were these? only bare signs? No certainly, they do and must signify the
great wrath and indignacion of God.

Not long after the passion of our saueour Christ, when the Britains our
co^treymen went about to re cover their liberty, and to be despeched of the
most cruel servitude and misery which the Romans kept the^ in, wherein no
Britayn was certain of wife, children goods, no, not of their lives, all thigs
were so in bo^d^ ge of the cruel Romans pleasur: there were of our cou^treyme^
slain at one time three score and ten thousau^t me^, and at an other time
thrittie thousau^t. Before which slaughters there were many wonders seen in Eng
la^d. Thimage of the Idol which the Romans hade in their temple called
Victory was turned back, as though she gave place to thenenies. The sea was
like blood, images of me^nes bodies found on the sea side. And women were out
of their wits, and cried: destruction at hand, destruction at hand: so that
the Britaynes were in great hope, and the Romans in great fear. Before
Britayn (now called England) came in to the full power of the Danes, king
Edmu^de the son of Ethelberte being slain, there were diverse strange
things, whereby all men gessed, that an alteration of the Realm was toward:
but chiefly they gessed the great calamity by the sudden swelling of the sea
without any evident cause, which so brake in to the land, that it destroyed
many towns and people. Before that great slaughter of English men and
Norma^des which was by reason of the wars that were in Normandy, between
king He^ri the furst, king of England, and Robert Duke of Normandy his
brother (at which time Normandy was joined to England) the river of Trent did
not run one hole day together, but was so empty, that men passed over on
foot: and at that time a sow brought furthe a monstre with the face of a man,
and a hen a four foted monstre. So that by that that is past, ye may the
boldlier divine of that that is to come.

The child by Oxforde, what did it betoken, but that our one sweet head, king
Edward should be taken away (as he was in deed) and that there should be in
his place two headdes, diverse governors, and a toward division of the
people, but not all together: which so manyfestly followed, that no man can
deny it: or two people should be knytte together, but not in god proporcion
nor agreement. The child of Couentrie without the principal members to help
and defend the body, must needs signify, that the natural body, that is, the
people of England shall be helpeles, ready to be trodden under the foot of every
creature, and non to releue or succor it.

The child of Fulham, what can it signify, but that the natural body of
England shall be weak, the chief members (tharmes and legs) which is the
nobility, so clogged with chains of gold, and bags of money, that the
hand shall not be hable to draw out the sweorde, nor the heles to spur the
horse to help and defend the body, that is, the commones. And as the head of
it is the greatest part, and greater than it ought to be, with to much
superfluity of that it should not have, wherefore it must pull from the other
members to confort it, and lack of that good proporcion it ought to have: so
shall the governors and headdes of England suck out the wealth and
substance of the people (the politic body) and keep it bare, so that it shall
not be hable to help it self, yet shall the head never come to that nature
requires. What is to be gathered of the yo^g chil de, I do not say it is
true, because the father was forced (onles he would have lost his life) to
r^cant it: but might it not be true? Is there not as much to be said for it,
as for the popes tra^substa^ciacion? Does not Eusebius Pamphili (a man of as
good credit, as Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, Gratianus, and such other the
inue^tours and mainteners of transubstanciacion) write, that a lamb contrary
to nature and possibility, did in plain words before declare the nature and
disposicion of Bochorus king of Egypt? They that write the cronicles of the
Romans say, that a dog, a serpent, and oxen did speak. But scripture
plainly says, that Baalams ass (a creature unreasonable, without
possibility to speak) did say to his master: why beatest thou me? And John
the baptist contrary to the common course of nature, lept and reioiced in his
mothers womb, when Christ's mother being with child came to see Elizabeth his
mother.

If men that believed not the miracles, which the gogle ^ied Roode of Boxley,
the Idol of walsingha^, the bawd of willesdo^, which every fool might see to
be deceates and open illusions, were condemned and burned for heretics: how
should they be taken, that do not believe the manifest works of God?

The horible Comete and blasing star that was seen this year greater in
England than else where, what else does it betoken, but the great
displeasure of God? and therefore famine, pestilence, wars, sedicio^, death of
princes, invasion of forain naciones, destruction of some or many cities and
countreies, and the alteracion and chaungeing of the state and government? For
if it be laufull for man to divine of Gods wonderful works, and by the like
things past, conjecture those that be to come: why should we not affirm, that
these plages will follow? Before the great wars made by Xerses against the
Grecianes, and the overthrowing of the hole state of Greece, there was a blasing
star seen of the shape of an hor^e, and an eclipse of the sun.

Before the last and utter destruction of the city of Jerusalem, there was seen
hanging in thelement over the temple a burning sweorde almost the space of a
hole year. In the time of cruel Nero, there was a Comete that continued six
months.

After that followed great sedicion and alteracion in thempire: and the kingdom
of the Jews (mark well) was utterly destroyed. Before the death of our
country man Constantine the great, who was the furst professor of the Gospel
of Christ among all themperours: and no doubt a special fauourour and promotour
of it. For he did not prohibit lay men to read Gods word, as some princes
do at this time, but he caused examples of the Bible to be written at his own
charges, and sent in to all countries: there was a great Comete, and afterward
followed a wonderful and cruel war, which who so deliteth in histories, may
perceive.

Before the dissension and deadly wars that was between the brethren of
Lotarius the emperor, son of Lodouicus Piu^* for the division of
thinheritaunce (whereby such slaughter grew in France, that the Frenchemen
were never after hable to recover perfitly their force) there were many Cometes
seen.

About the year of Christ M. I. there was an horrible Comete seen, and than
followed wonderful famines and pestilence?

In the year MLXI. before thinuasion of William Conquer our in to England, and
the conquest of the same, and in which Heralde king of England with twenty
thousaunt true Englishemen in the defense of their country against the tiranne
were slaine^ther was seen a wonderful Comete, which every man thought (as in
deed it followed) to be much mischief and thalteracion of the state, as
herafter ye shall hear. A little before the great wars in Normandy (whereof
ye have heard before) there was seen in Normandy a great Comet, and two full
mones at one time shyning, the one in the east, the other in the west. In the
year MCCXXI. whilst the wars were in Asia between the christen men and the
unchristian, where unto king Henry the third sent a power of Englishemen under
therle of Chestre (for the maintenau^ce whereof the nobility furst grau^ ted
the king the wardeship of their children, as Polidore writes) before the
Christen men lost the city of Damiata, and a great overthrow of them was in
Egypt, many wonders were seen in diverse places, and also in England a very
great Comete, a wonderful great earthequake, all the winter horrible thonders,
which in England seldom in Somer be heard: such great raines, and tempests
of winds, that it ouerthrewe many houses: and the sea drowned mani places,
which every man said, betokened the hurt that followed on christen men. In the
year MCCXLI. a little before wales was brought to the subjection of the king
of England, there appeared in England a terrible Comete, by the space of xxx.
days?

In the year M. D. XXXI. there was an horrible Comete. And what followed of it?
The Turk occupied a great part of Vngarie: the kig of Denmark Christierne
inuading his country with a great army, and so minding to recover his
kingdom, was taken and his son. And why should not ye of England t^ike, that
these signs be only (or at the least chiefly) for you? Compare your selves,
and your lives and doings with the Jews, or the worst nation, if any can be
worse: and see whether ye be not hable to match them, yea to ouermatche them,
and to drop vie, three for one? In what nation under the cope of heaven,
has God showed greater tokens of his savor, and it so little set by, as in
England? What contempt of him, his word and ministers has be^ there? What
dissimulacion with God? what hypocrisy? What swearing and soreswearing? What
traiterye to their countreye? What disobedience to the governors in good,
godly and necessary things? What ready obedience to their rulers in wicked and
evil thiges? What unnatural bitcherie used between the father and daughter,
brother and sister? What abominable hooredome suffered unpunished? yea in many
and the chiefest places the greatest hooremongers, the impudentest ribauldes,
the peltingest bribers, and the lewdest persons made Justices of the peace,
and correctours of vice? What railing and reuiling of the worthy pure preachers
of Gods gospel for only rebuking of vice? What horrible murdres secret and
open, not only of private persons, but also of the most honorable peers and
reverend ministers of God? What bochering and burning of true English
christianes, young and old, hole and lame, seeing and blind, man, woman, and
child, without respect of age, sex or astate? What pillig and polling,
taking and snatching, stealing and robbing, not only among the mean sort, but
among the greatest? Where is so great hatred and malice, so little love and
charity, as in England* I should never make an end, if I should tell but
that I have my self seen and known, much less if I should declare all that
other credible persons of their own knowlage report to be most certain and
true.

But to return to the matter. Look well England, look well, whether this
Comete past, and eclipses to come, touch the? Art thou not all ready plaged
with famine? Yes, and with such a famine, as thou never before heardest of. It
is true, ye had darthes in the time of kings Henry and Edward, but those were
dearthes without need: only they were occasioned by the gredinesse and malice
of naughty men without scarcity or lack of things: and for lack of
dilligent ouerseing and good government, and not by the direct plage of God.
But these two years since king Edwardes death, from the restitucion of your
cursed popish mass, ye have had scarcity by the direct plage of God. The
earth not brought furthe such plaintie as it customably did before. Where
before time the country fed London, London contrary wise was and is forced
of her former provision to feed the countreie. Where Dantis^e and other the
north east parts were the barnes and garners of corn, for they had the
provision of corn for many years before hand, and nourished all the low
parts of Germany, Denmark Friselande, holande, Zelande, Brabaunt, Flanders,
Hispaine and many other: now by reason of their bringing so much to releue
England, onles a stay be made in time, they them selves will perish of
famine. When were ever things so dear in England, as in this time of the
popish mass and other Idolatry restored? Who ever heard or read before,
that a pound of beef was at iiij. d. A sheep xx. s. A pound of Candelles at
iiij. d. A pound of Buttur at iiij. d. ob. A pound of Chese at iiij. d. two
eggs a penie, a quarter of wheat, lxiiij. s. A quartre of malt at l. s. or
above: the people driven of hongre to grind accornes for bread meal, and to
drink water instead of ale? And what? Shall this famine away, before his
walki^g mate and fellow (pestilence) come? No surely, without your earnest
spedy repentance, and Gods exceeding miraculous mercy, it is not possible:
for hitherto the one went never before, but the other came either arm in arm,
or else quickly after.

But it shall almost come to late for common persons, for they be so hanged up
by xx. and xl. in a plumpe (and a great nombre of them, because they confessed
and professed, that they should be saved by thonly merits of Christ's passion)
that the pestilence shall have litel matier among the mean sort to be
occupied on: but therefore must be the more occupied with the great.

And have thou (England) had no sedicion and inward grudge? Yes, so much that
the headdes and governors durst not pepe out of their privy chambres: nor one
neighbor seem to talk with an other, for fear to be noted and accused of
conspiracy. Yea and that (that is worst of all, and to be lamented of all
english men) there is inward grudge, and secret malice between the members,
that is, the Nobility and Commones.

The one hates and contemns the other, which is the work of the devil, and
his ministers the popish Prelates and priests. They cast water in to the
coals, to make the fire greater: for they know, onles such division and
dissension be fostred and nourished, their kingdom would sone lie in the
dirte. This is the practice of such as mind the conquest or utter destruction
of any people, to maintene and prick forewarde dissension, division and
discord among the people. For Christ's words are true, who says, that every
ki^gdome divided in it self shall be desolate, and every city or house divided
against it self, shall not continue. The prophet prophecieng of the destruction
of the kingdom of the Jews, said before, that there should be civil and
inward sedicion, as there was in deed in Jerusalem, between three pestilent
factiones and parts, whereof Simon, Ioannes, and Eleazarus were the autors and
headdes. This was Xerses practice to set the Grecianes by the ears, to
maintene Civil wars and dissension among them, that so when one had
destroyed an other, he might easily enjoy all. This policy have all other
ambicious monark^s hitherto in all places practiced. And as Gardyner when he
should dye, did not lament his sins, but sent for the Queen, and wept to her,
that he could no longer live to serve her grace, that is, to undo the
nobility and commons of the Realm: but he desired her to proceed as he
counseled her by his word and writing: so Granuell when he should also dye,
sent word to the emperor Charles, and required him, not to forget his counsel,
but still use it, that is, to nourishe and mayntene dissension among the sta
tes of Germany, and so he should at leynght easily come by the hole. In like
manner if the traitorous bishops and priests can ones set the co^mones
against the nobility and gentilmen, they will sone (the nobility being ones
suppressed) send the co^mones to clymbe a dawes nest, and use them at their
pleasur. But wise me^ and such as loved their country in time past, foresawe
this mischief that came by inward grudge and civil discord: and ever (as
much as in them lay) went about to let it. They thought it was most necessare
to provide for the sauegarde of the hole by all means, and not for any
particular part: which may well appear by the wisdom of Thrasibulus, who being
dry uen out of Athens (his country) by the xxx. tirannes, because he would not
consent to their tirannye, ad to see his country destroyed: at leynght
gathered to gether all those that were banished with him, and by the help of
the Thebanes their neighbors, took a castle besides Athenes, and afterward in
batail he overcame the tirannes, and restored all those that were banished, to
their country, and their old laws that we re taken away by the tyra^nes.
And sei^g what mischief might follow, if he did not tak away thi^warde grudge
that was among the people, and make an unity between the^, albeit the poor
banished men were spoiled of all that they had, and their goods in those
hands, that hade no right thereto, yet made he the^ all to give a promise, that
non should claim any thing of an other, but that all should be forgeuen and
forgoten. And the same wisdom did the Romans many times use, to make
quietness among the people, and to preserve the hole common wealth. Yea the
noble men of Rome, albeit they were as ambicious as others, and one envied an
others glory, yet when the common wealth was in hasarde, and that their
service must be used for the defense of their country, they did clean forgive
and forget all private injuries and inward grudge: yea it was the chief mean
to reconcile enemies. And no maruail among wisemen, for they saw, if the hole
body of their country should perish, they could not prospre. There can be no
arm, where there is no body: and it is a feeble body that lacks the arms and
legs. Yea it is a most misera ble body where the arms and legs beat the
body, and the body goes about to shake of tharms and legs. And albeyt there
be no people, that have been more pla ged by inward sedicion and civil
discord, than Englishemen: yet is there none that less considre it. I can not
tell, whereof it comes, but commonly they neither remember that is past, nor
forsee that is to come, but only (as unreasonable creatures) look upon those
thin ges that be present. The dissension and discord that was in Britayne our
country (which now is called En gla^d) and between our own country me^,
brought first the Romans in to England: who after they were en tred, sone
took all to the^ selves: they murdered a great no^bre of the Britaynes, of some
they took their children pledges, and sent the^ to Rome: and to rid the
Realm of strong and lusty persons, that there might be none to withsta^de
the^, they sent armies and garisones of the^ out of the realm, to serve in
foreign cou^treies. Those that were lest at home, they spoiled of their goods
with great taxes and imposiciones: and a great nombre made slaves and bondemen,
and glad was he, that could find favor to enjoy any litel part of his own
as long as he lived. By this means was the real me almost made desolate, and
than the Pictes (a barbarous and cruel nation) invaded Britayne, and destroyed
man, woman, and child, that came in to their hands: and so greater misery
followed, the people forced to fly in to montaynes, wooddes and caves for their
sauegarde, and by that means the ground not tilled, great famyncame on them,
and than wonderful pestilence, as lightli the one goes not without the other.
Thus our countreimen the Britaynes being oppressed by the Pictes, sought aid
of the Saxones (men of great force, but of little truth) who when they were
come in to the Realm, and saw the fertility of it, subtily devised, to marie
Ronix daughter to their captayn Hengistus, to the king of Britayne called
Vortiger. She being instruct what she should do found the means, that her
own countrymen should be placed nyghest the king, and have the greatest
offices. Thus were our countrymen the Britaynes removed from their king,
strangers placed in all offices and holds, and at leynght the land was
ouerrunne, and possessed of Strangers. And the mane of Britayne put away, and
the realm called England.

The Danes after understanding how fertile and pleyntifull England was, sought
means by little and little, to place themselves in England, and after a king of
De^marke in his own person invaded England in the North, and made wonderful
cruel wars, they spared none, they burned and wasted Yorkshire,
Northumberlande, and all places, so that the enhabitauntes were forced to sue
for peace at the Danes han des. Then built they the town of Dancastre (that
is, the Castle of the Danes) and whiles they had peace, sent for moo Danes: and
when they thought their for ce and power big enough, they passed not upon
promyses and leagues that they had made, but renewed the wars, killed, burned
and spoiled in every place, til they came to Excestre: the people and realm
was most miserably tormented, and made tributarie to them. Diverse of the
nobility of England upon light yea no occasiones, but only because they were
thought not to favor the Danes, were taken, their nose trilles most
villanously slytted, their hands cut of* Ah good God, who can remember these
things without weping? Who that fears thy wrath (lord) will not am^de his
life, and call to thee for mercy? What naugh tie nobility were that, that
would oppress the common nes, and afterward be used and oppressed them selves,
by strangers, as their predecessors have been before time? What deuillis he
Co^mones might that be called, that would repyne or rebelle against the
nobility and gentilmen, and than to be ouerrunne them selves with priests and
forayners, and to be pyned with such misery, as ye hear that our auncettours
were: and all because the gentilmen and co^mones agred not among them selves?
Who is a natural English man, that will not in time forsee and considre the
misery toward his countreye and him self, and by all means seek to let it?
who is it, that ca^ hope for quietness, pea ce, health, pleyntie, and such
like gifts of God, without Gods favor and mercy. And how is it possible
that God should use mercy with them, that bear inward hatred and grudge one
to an other, and will use no merci with others? If ye forgive other me^ their
offenses that they commit against you (says Christ) your heavenly father
will forgive thoffenses that ye have committed against him. But if ye do not
forgive other me^ their faults, neither will your father forgive you your
faults. No whilst ye say the lords prayer, and be full of ra^cour, malice,
hatred, and e^uie toward your neighbor, ye condemn your selves, and desire
Gods plages and vengeance to fall on your selves: for ye mean ve^geau^ce to
your neighbors, and wish all evil to fall on them. And so it does fall on
you: as ye see by experience of the plays and miseries that are and shall come
to you. But from inward sedicion and civil discord, that briedeth so much
mischief, let us come to outward wars and inuasiones made by strangers. But
ye will say, ye have no wars with any forain prince. It is true: but shall
ye have none? yes, yes: the time is not yet come, all is not hatched that is
under the hen. Your wings must be dubbed, your feathers must be pulled, your
co^bes must be cut, you must be clean piked, your substance shall be gotten by
littel and littell out of your hands, by taxes and subsidies, by beneuolences
and loanes, and so from a litell to more, and from more to more: and at leynght
all the merchants goods to be confiscate in Flaunders by an inquisitio^, and
others in England by an open exco^municatio^. And when ye be ones clean
stripped of your stoare, and thus weakened out of courage, and your heart in
your hose, as they say: than shall your king return to his well-beloved wife,
England, with great po^pe and power, and shall compel you (in despite of your
hearts) to re^ dre and deliver her holly in to his hands. Than shall the
easter linges (upon hope to recover their old and greater privileges) aid him
with me^, money and ship pes: as already they have offered and promised, as
diverse credible lettres have declared. Tha^ shall they in uade England, and
shall be by shiploades (if no worse happen unto you) carried in to new Spain,
and there not live at liberty, but because ye are a stubburne and un faithful
generacio^, ye shall be tied in chains, forced to row in the galie, to dig in
the mines and to pike up the gold in the hot sand. And so with soro we to
your soppes, your three man's song shall be, Alas, and Weal away. Than shall
ye know the pride and lord lynesse of the Spanyardes, though for a while til
they may get the over hand, they crepe and crouche, feed men with sweet
words (Baso las manos) and women with confettes, sweet wynes, pleasant
pfumes, gaye apparail, and such like vain to yes: but when they be ones
alofte, there is no nacio^ under the cope of Christ, like the^ in pride,
cruelty, unmercifulness, nor so far from all humanity as the Spanyardes
be: which thig the realm of Naples, the Dukedom of Milane, the city of
Siena, many parts of Duchelande, and the land of Iulike Cleuelande and Geldre
land can to their cost right well testify.

And may it not be thought, that the French kig (wha^ he sees opportunity)
will set in a foot, makig claim to England, in the right of the Queen of
Scotts, as heir to hing Henry theight by his eldest sister? And may it not
be suspected, that the pope (to do the French king a pleasure) shall say the
Divorce between king Henry and the dowager was by the canon laws laufull: and
shall excommunicate the realm, onles they revoke thacte of parliament, whereby
the Dyuorce of late was judged unlawful?

Remember, remember (good country men, and true English hearts) the misery
that followed in our poor country upon the conquest made by thambicious
William Duke of Norma^die: upon how small a title he entered, and how
tyra^nously he used him self. His only color was a bequest or promise made to
him by king Edward, brother to Cauntus and Heraldus kings of England, wha^ he
was a banished man in Normandy, if he should dye without issue, as he did. At
his first en try, he had a great batail with the new chose^ king of England,
and slew hi and twenty thousau^t of our cou^treye me^, which put such a
fear in all men, the Nobility, the clergy, the Lo^doners, and others the
commons, that it m^de the^sue for peace, and to give pledges for their
^delitie, whom he sent in to Normandy. At the first he made the^ many fair
promises of peace, quietness and justice, wherewith the folishe fo^de people
were sone begyle^. They thought they had hade God by the too, but they h^de the
wolf (yea the devil) by the ears. He first fortified the holds and ports by
the sea side, and in his absence (as many times he was forced upon rebelliones
in Norma^die, to tetourne) he made a Cou^sail of his own country me^, and
made the Bishop of Ba^on his brother, his lieutenau^t i England. But wha^ he
was ones satled, and thought him self strong enough to keep the Englisheme^
under: tha^ Fare well all fair promises, he begineth to play Rex, yea the
devil in dedc. He spoiled the nobility of their goods and possessiones, made
the^ slaves, and his own slaves Lords: and upon the Co^mo^s he put wonderful
taxes and imposiciones. He took from the people their weapones and harness,
and made a law, that no man should come out of his house after the bell ro^g,
which was at eight of the clo cke, but to cover the fire and to bed. Wherefore
until this day the bell that tha^ ringeth, is called Couerfiewe. And tha^ he
built at Notingha^, lyncolne, york, and hasting, and set in the^ garrisons of
Norma^des. And not contented herewith, he executed many wonderful cruel
thiges, and specially on the nobility, and such as he saw to be stowte me^:
some he caused to be murthred, some their nosetrilles to be slitte, and their
hands cut of. Happy was he that could fly out of the Realm: he so spoiled
york shire, and durha^, and all the north pertes, that te^ years together it
lay waste and uninhabited. He could in n^ wise abide the English nobility, but
utter ly destroyed the^. And all this he did by the law of the devil, which
they call the law of arms. The good laws and. ustomes of England he clean
took away, and made his own lusts his laws, and put the^ in his own
Norma^de tongue, that his fre^des might always have thin terpretacion of the^,
and that he might catch the poor Englishema^, wha^ it pleased him: and would
have the laws to be pleaded and al things to be done in Fre^ che. And he was
not taken to be the Norma^des friend, nor no gentilman, that could not speak
french. And thereof comes the old proverb: Jack would be a ge^ tilma^, but
he ca^ no french. He removed thenglishe bishops, and placed Norma^des by the
aid of the bishop of Rome. He pulled down towns, villages, and houses, and
put out the poor people to make him sporti^g places, pri^cely pleasures,
forestes, perkes and chaces. O miserable England, that ones thus wast by a
tiranne and outward enemies plaged. But how much more miserable shall thou be
by the wars that are most certain to come shortly ont he. God be merciful
unto thee. But me thinks I hear your papists bishops, priests, friars,
and such like Antichristian mo^ stres say, that these plages which have
fallen and shall come to England (for they know, they can not be a voided, no
they are occasioned and helped forewarde by them) have grown for things done
in king Henry and king Edwardes time, for that their abominacion was disclosed,
their buries and de^nes dug up, their monasteries throwe^ down, and the
lands divided and sold to the laity. Ah hipocrites, Ah subtle wolves, ah
viperous generation. When the fox preaches, bewa re your geese. Where in
scripture do they find, that any such belly Gods as they are* should be
mai^tened? No, scriptur would have such merchants whipped out of the church,
such buiers and sellers of men's souls. woe be unto you hipocrites (says
Christ) for ye swalo we up the houses of the poor and miserable, that is, that
which should be converted to the relief of the poor and nedy: and that under
prete^se of long prayers. Woe be unto you (ye masking Mahoundes) which goo from
place to place, by sea and by land, to make a nouice of your own order, and
when ye have him, ye make him the child of hell fire two fold more tha^ your
self. I kno we you not (says Christ) away from me, ye workers of iniquity.
It is only their God the belly, that they seek to serve, they another pass on
the God in heaven, nor the devil in hell, so they may have wherewith to
maintene them selves on earth, in their hooredome, burgerie, pride and al
abominacion. And this that I say, is not feined nor ymagined, but evident in
all men's eyes that will not be wilfully blind.

Those that be desirous to be rulers in monasteries, ab bottes and priours
before they come to it, they pine them self away with fasting, wear hear,
and use the rest of thi^strume^tes of hypocrisy for a while: but wha^ they
have ones caught the fish they cast for, they she we what they be plainly. Who
so great belly Gods? Who so great hooremongers? Where such knauerie used? I am
ashamed to tell it. In like manner play these Chaplains of honor, that seek
for bishopriches: all saving one M. doctor Westo^ (the common bull of
dissembled virginity, and the boar of old rusted wido whead) who before
hand shewth what he will be. But as the world goes, his plain dealing has
not nor will put hi^ to any afterdeale. Where is such an hooremo^ger (yea worse
tha^ an hooremo^ger) as this old hipocrite Paul the fourth now bishop of
Rome? Who so great a glutto^? Who so proud and ambicious? Who so great a
tira^ne and torme^tour? Who so great a warrior? And yet before he came to that
high seat of antichrist, he would seem a saint, no religion nor order of
hipocrites was strait enough for him. He was a friar, a monk, a Capuccine an
anchorite, yea what was he not? But ye see the mark these hipocrites sho ote
at. And I ca^ tell thee somewhat of mine own know lage, which may not be
denied: for the author is a man of good crede^ce both abroad and at home with
the gre atest and meanest. After the begi^ni^g of the Queen's rei gne, and the
sudden alteracio^ of all things (contrary to oath and promise) there came one
of mine order unto me, as I walked in a gardei^, and went about to persuade me
to i^cline to the Queen's procedi^ges: Play the wise man) says he) and do as
I and other me^ do: I have known thee of long time, to be a good fellow. I
warrau^t thee, thou shall recover thy loss and live in honor, if thou will be
ruled by reason. And with that helept up to clappe me on the sholder, for onles
he stood on tippe to, he could not reach it. Tushe (said he) thou art a
fool: If the Turk ruled in England, I would frame mi self to live according. I
may not nor will tell you his name, because I hope he will ones remember himself,
and call to God for grace. But to put you somewhat from musing, I will tell you
somewhat. In king Henry's time, wha^ Gardener was called the bear, he was
called the ape. What said dro^ke^ doctor Westo^ in the mids of his cups
(for wine will disclose secrets, if it be as well plied, as his maistership
does) by the mass, says he, that bocher the bishop of London will cut all the
ge^tilme^s throtes in England, if he ca^. Thus ye may see the marcke, whereat
these hippocrites the papists shoot. They make religion and Gods word
nothing else tha^ a color to cover their wickedness, and to mai^tene their
lewdness. And therefore they wraste and wrythe scripture to serve their
purpose, and so they have need to do: for there is not one word in all the
scripture for the^, but every word against the^. And because ye be returned
to their deuociones, have forsaken God and his word, and cleave to the pope
and his tradiciones, and maintene such a sort of hipocrites, dissemblers, and
open enemies of God and the Realm of England: therefore have all these plages
lighted on you, and the rest will shortly follow without fail. Look upon the
xxviij. Chap. of deuteronomie, where it is written thus. If thou will not
hearke^ to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and to do all his
commandments and his ordinances, which I co^^au^de the this day, al these
curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the tow
ne, and cursed i^ the field, cursed shall thy basket be and thy stoare. Cursed
shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, and the fruit of
thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep. The lord shall send upon thee
cursing, destruction and rebuke, to all that thou set thy hand to, and
that thou do, until he destroy thee, and bring thee to naught quickly,
because of the wickedness of thine inuenciones, and because thou have forsaken
me. The lord shall smite thee with mad nesse, blyndenesse, and dasing of
heart. Thou shall be oppressed with wrong, and be polled evermore, and no man
shah succor thee. Thou shall be betrouthed to a wife, and an other man shall
lie with her. Thou shall build an house, and not dwell therein. Thine oxe^
shall be killed before thine eyes, and thou shall not eat thereof. Thine ass
shall be violently taken from the, and shall not be restored to the again. Thy
sheep shall be given to thine enemies, and noman shall rescue the^. The fruit of
thy land and all thy labors shall a nation which thou know not, eat: and
thou shall continually suffer violence, and be oppressed alwaie, so that thou
shall be clean beside thy self, for the sight that thine eyes shall see. Thou
shall carry much sede out in to the field, and shall gather but a litel in, for
the gresse hoppers shall destroy it. All thy trees and fr^te of thy land
shall be marred with blasting. The stranger that is among you, shall climb
above thee on high, and thou shall come down beneathe allow. Moreover all
these curses shall come upon thee, and shall follow the and overtake the, til
thou be destroyed: because thou herkenedest not to the voice of the lor de thy
God, to keep his commandments and ordinances, which he commanded the, and
they shall be upon the as miracles, and upon thy sede for ever, because thou
seruedest not the lord thy, God with ioifulnesse and with a good heart, when
thou hadest abou^dau^ce of al things: therefore thou shall serve thine enemy,
which the lord shall send upon thee, in hu^gre and thirst, in nakedness and
in need of all thing: and he shall put a yowke of Iron about thy neck, til he
have brought the to naught. And the lord shall bring a nation upon thee, a
nation whose tongue thou shall not understand: an hard favored nacio^, which
shall not regard the person of the old, nor have compassion on the young. The
same shall eat the fruit of thy catail, and the fruit of thy land, til he have
destroyed thee: and shall leawe thee neither corn, wine nor oil, neither the
increace of thine oxen, nor the flocks of thy sheep, til he have brought the
to naught. And the lord shall send upon the and thy sede great plagues and of
long continuance, evil sickenesses and of long duraunce. And it shall come to
pass, that as the lord reioiced over you to do you good, and to multiply
you: even so he will rejoice over you, to destroy you, and to bring you to
naught, And among these naciones thou shall find non ease, neither shall the
sole of thy foot have rest. But the lord shall give the an unquiet heart, and
dasing eyes, and sorrow of mind, etc. And in the end of the xxix. Chap. of
the same it follows. Than shall all naciones say, wherefore has the lord
done on this facion unto this land? And men shall say* because they left the
Testament of their fathers, which he made with them, when he brought the^ out
of the land of Egypt. For they went and served strange gods, and worshipped
the. Gods which they know not, and which hade given them naught. And the
wrath of the lord waxed hot against this land, to bring upon it all the
curses that are written i^ this book. etc. By this scripture ye are plain ly
told the undeniable cause and matter, wherefore the lord God threatens and
sends plages. Read all the histories of the bible, and the prophecies of the
Prophets, and ye shall evidently see, how people and nations have be^ destroyed
for mainteni^g of such Idolaters and wicked livers, as the papists are, and
where such wickedness has be^ used (as is among you) and not cor rected, as
I have before declared. But thou wilt say: what shall we do, to avoid the
calamity and misery that is both present and toward? would to God thou
did ask it from the botome of thy heart. But I fear thou do dissemble
and speak it with thy lips only, as thou wast wont. Wha^ the great sweat was
in England in the time of king Edward, a little signi ficatio^ of a greater
scourge foloweing: and many that were merry at dinner, were buried in the
euenyng: some that went at night to sleep lusty, were found in bed dead in
the morning: some that went not far from their own house, never returned.
Than as long as the ferue^tnesse of the plage lasted, there was cryeng Peccaui,
peccaui, peccaui: I have sinned, I have syn^ed, I have si^ned, mercy good
lord, mercy, mercy, mercy. The ministers of Gods word were sought for in
eueri corner, they could not rest, they might not sleep: ye must come to my
lord, ye must come to my lady, my master prays you to come straight unto
hi^, my maistres must needs speak with you. Come, if ye love God: and if ye
love their salvation, tarry not. For Gods sake, M. Minister (say the sick
folks) tell us what we shall do, to avoid Godds wroth. Ta ke these bags,
pay so much to such a man, for I deceived him: give him so much, for I gate
it of him by ^surie: I made a crafty bargain with such a one, restore him so
much, and desire him to forgive me. I have taken bribes of such a one, I pray
you give him so much more again. I have spoken evil of such a man, God
forgive it me, I have been a hooremo^gre, a bawd, God perdone me. Dyuide this
bag among the poor, carry this to the hospital, pray for me for Gods sake.
Good lord forgive me, I have dissembled with thee: I pretended to love thy
word with my lips, but I thought it not with my heart: but now I see thou
know the secretest secrets, and wilt not leave evil unpunished. Have mercy
on me, and forgive me good lord, I beseech thee from the botome of my heart.
This was the dissimulacio^ of the people for three or four days whiles
thexecucion was: but after wha^ the rage was somewhat swaged, than return they
to their vomit, worse than ever they were. Than that they had before caused to
be restored and given in almose, they seek to recover by more evil favored
Cheuisaunses. But God is not blind, another is his hand shortened: he has
begone to mete with you, and will pay you that he owes you to thuttermost.
But whether thou requirest me unfeignedly, to know how to avoid the plage to
come, or do disse^ble with me, I hade rather thou should be found in
fault, than I not to do that I before promised thee. Gods word requires
and co^ maundeth every man to help his neighbor in word and deed, as much
as in him lies. I will therefore tell thee my best advise, and heartily pray God
thou may earnestly follow it. All these plages that before thou have heard
rehearced, famyn, pestilence, sedicio^, wars, destructiones of countrayes,
captivity of people* and alteraciones of states, are the instruments of God
sent and powered on the people for their sins, that they should be sorry and
repent the^ of their former wicked life, call to God for mercy, and lead a
new life in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life: Which if
ye will earnestly do, no doubt but as God is merciful, so will he use mercy
toward you. For God that never deceived any, but abhors all practices, all
deceit, and all practicers (the workers of deceit) promises it by the mouth
of his prophet Ezechiel. If (says he) the ungodly will turn away from all
his sins that he has done, and will keep all my commandments, and do
the thing that is just and right, doubtless he shall live and not dye. For all the
sines that he did before, shall not be thought upon any more: but in his
righteousness that he has done, he shall live. For I have no pleasur in the
death of a sinner (says God) but that he should repent him of his wicked
life and live etc. It follows in the prophet thus* where fore repent and
return from your wickedness, and your wickedness shall not be your
destruction. Cast from you all your ungodliness, make you a new heart and a
new spirit: wherefore will ye dye, O you house of Israel (that is, all such as
trust to be saved by christ) seeing I hare no pleasur in the death of him that
dies, says the lord God. Turn therefore, and ye shall live.

This is not holy water of the court, bare words of course, as the princes of
the world use, whiles they goo about to deceive the poor people with their
practices, but he says no less, than hewil do: he pro miseth no more, than
he will justly and fully perform. Scripture is full of examples to prove it.
After the death of Gedeon, the children of Israel fell from the worshipping of
the true God, became Idolaters, and worshipped Baalim and Astaroth, and other
Gods as the Ethnikes did, wherefore God plaged them wonderfully with
inuasiones and ouerrunning of the Philistines by the space of xviij. years:
they seemed in words to do penance, but god saw they did but dissemble with
him, and therefore he would not hear the^. But after they hade done penance in
deed, that is, destroyed the Idols, and cast them out of their countreye, than
God sent the^ the noble captain Iepte, who defended them, and revenged the
malice of the philistines, Likewise where the children of Israel had in the time
of Hely the priest received by the Philistines many slaughters of the people,
and had lost many cities and towns for the Idolatry they had committed, yet
when by thadmonicion of Samuel they repented (as ye heard before) and turned to
God, God turned to them, and was merciful. And when the philistines had
prepared a wonderful great force against the children of Israel, God sent
suddenly such a terrible thondre and lightenyng, that they were dispersed and
ra^^e away. The children of Israel persecuted the^ and slew the^, and
recovered their cities, and all that they had lost. Wha^ the moabites,
a^monites and Idumites thought to have ouerru^ne Judah in the time of king
Iosaphat, yet when the king and his people lamented to God and called for
mercy, God turned away his wrath, and poured* it on their enemies, and made
them to fall out among them selves, and so to kill one an other. When Benadab the
king of Siria besieged Samaria, there was so great a fami in the city, that
women e^e their own children: but when king Ioram and the people fell to re
pentau^ce, and called to God for mercy, they had in one day plei^tie of al
things. For God sent such a terror among the Sirianes with the noise of
armor, that they fled, and left all their vitaile bag and baggage behind
them for those of Samaria. Ye have heard before also, how Olofernes and
Se^nacherib that invaded Israel, were with their hole armies destroyed of God,
after the people repented the^ of their sins, and called for mercy. And so
ye have i^numerable examples of the great mercy of God toward all that
repented truly, and called for mercy. As of the city of Niniue, whom albeit
God had threatened utterly to destroy the^, yet wha^ God saw they were
penitent for their for mer wicked life* and called unto hi^ for mercy, he
withdrewe his plage, and held out his merciful hand over the^: eue^ so ye
(good country me^ a^n true english hearts) if ye will in time earnestly repent
you of your sins, leave your Idolatry, and honor and worship God truly, as
ye were taught* i^ blessed king Edwardes time, abhor the fond pha^tasies and
folishe tradiciones of me^* and cleave to the sincere word of God, and be
desirous of the knowlage of it: leave your blasphemy and vain swearing and
horrible for swearing and perjury, no longer hate your countreie, but be true
and faithful to it, and by all godly means seek the wealth and sauegarde of
it: if ye will obey Gods commandments before your governors, and your
governors in that is godly, honest, and just, and not ^lles: ^f ye will leave
your bawdrie, horedome and bitcherye, and drive out of al places al hoores,
hooremo^gers and stuehouses* and all such as favor and mai^tene the^: ^f ye
will abstain from cruel murdering of the Saints of God and innoce^tes, and
rather your selves be co^te^t to suffer all martyrdom, tha^ ye will embrewe
your fingres i^ their blood, or consent to it: if ye will leave oppressing of
your neighbors, your subtlety, craft and deceat, and your selves leave to
love gredinesse, and inordinate desire of the trashe of this world: if you
leave your inward hat reed, grudge and malice one to an other, if the
nobility will love and chearishe the co^monaltie, and the co^mones honor and
love the nobility: if one will show him self a brother and neighbor in deed
to an other: tha^ no doubt if ye do these shi^ges from the botome of the har
te, that the mouth and heart agree together, your saienges and doings be al
one: than shall ye perceive, that God will be easily entreated to turn. Tha^
may ye boldly ask of God in Christ's name, and your desires shall be heard
and granted. But ye may i^ no wise dissemble with hi^, as the Israelites did,
wha^ they said they would commit no more Idolatry, and yet kept their
Idols, as you pulled down your images, but yet kept them secretly in your
cha^bres: nor yet as Judas Iscarioth did, who lamented his sins and repented,
but returned not to God: nor yet as your selves did dissemble in the last
sweat, whiles Gods whippe was in your necks, but ye must clean do away
the old man and put on the new: ye must refuse and cast away all euilles,
and do that is good, and ever study to do that shall please God, and in no
wise look (as lottes wi^e did) backwarde: but still goo forewarde. And tha^ if
ye call to God for mercy, putting your full and only trust in him, he will
hear you, and take from you those plages that lie on you, and the other which
most certainly (if ye repent not, hang over you, and will come upon you. Than
will he send you his benedictio^ for maledictio^, plei^tie for fami^, heal the
for pestilence, peace for wars, quietness for trouble, for cruel tira^nie, a
godly and just government: for sedicio^, such force and power, that you
being a few, shall be hable to withsta^de all the tirannes of the world, and
enemies of God and our country, and utterly co^fou^de the^ and destroy the^.
Ye shall avoid the eternal pains of hell prepared for sinners: and at leinght
ye shall be sure also to make a change from your earthly country, to the
heavenly Paradise: from variable England, to the co^staunt Jerusalem: from the
company of men, to the feloweship of Angels: from mutable and frowning
cou^tenau^ces of worldely powers, to the unchangeable and most comfortable
sight of the king of all kings, our most merciful eternal heavenly father. To
who^ with the son and the holy ghost, be all honor, praise and glory now and
ever.

Amen.

