A HISTORICAL RELATION Of the famous Siege of the City CALLED THE BVSSE.

Hereunto is added a general Map of the whole Camp and Siege, with
particular Mappes of all the several Approches in every Quarter.

Compyled together and designed according to the just measure and rule of
Geometry BY JAMES PREMPART, Ingener to his Majesty of Sweden.

AT AMSTERDAM, For Henrico Hondio. M.DC.XXX.

TO THE READER.
WHereas I perceive that as yet none have taken in hand to set forth any thing
for the content of desirous spirits, touching the famous Siege of the BVSSE:
and that this Siege was so remarkable and worthy as ever was known, I have
thought good to imparte unto you, that which I have gotten as well by my own
experience in the said Siege, as that which J have from the principal
Ingeners. And for the better explayning of the particulars, I have placed in
this Historical Relation first a Map of two great Leaves, containing the
whole Siege with all the circumferences. Secondly a great Leaf representing
the situation of the City, with the approches of every Quarter. Thirdly here
follow Mappes of the several approches in every Quarter, and of the Princes
Quarter set forth in two Leaves, by reason the most force, charge and labor
passed there, and because the City was vvonne there by degrees, which is
alltogeather compyled and set forth according to the just measure with great
care and industry, as by the Mappes more at large may appear, which I hope
will be acceptable and pleasing to you.

A LIST OF OUR NOBLEMEN, VOLLUNTEIRS, and Gentlemen of our Nation, which bore
Arms and trayled Pikes at the Siege of the BUSSE, under the four English
Coronells Companies, and first of those which were under my Lord General Vere
his first Company, Coronell of Dort.
MY Lord Haughton. Sir Walter Earl. Sir Roger Bartu. Sir Henry Hungate. Sariant
Mayor Grove. Captain Thelwall. Captain Wyborowe. Lieutenant Price. Lieutenant
Pomroy. Lieutenant Cansor. Lieutenant Deemae. Lieutenant Kettleby. Ensign
Luttrell. Ensign Hammon. Ensign Weynd. Ensign Holman. Ensige Grimes. Ensign
Goldwel. Ensign Hudson. Mr: Winwood. Mr: Grifford. Mr: Byron. Mr: Thine. Mr:
Brigman. Mr: Fariefax. Mr: Hotham. Mr: Stone. Mr: Pellard. Mr: Bruster. Mr:
Knevet. Mr: Langford. Mr: Wayeman. Mr: Absley. Mr: Rolt. Mr: Knasborow. Mr:
Cave. Mr: Williams. Mr: Powel. Mr: Horner. Mr: Vein. Mr: Wright. Mr: Basset.
Mr: Berry. Mr. Prat. Mr: Bonnington Mr: Bradshaw. Mr: Green. Mr: Langdon. Mr:
Hooe. Mr: Ansell. Mr: Hangerford. Mr: Crewell. Mr: Wilmore. Mr: Cullum. Mr:
Essex. Mr: Mildmay. Mr: Polley. Mr: Maddocks. Mr: Humfreys. Mr: Ellis. Mr:
Banberie. Mr: Garling.
Of my Lord General Vere his second Company of Schoonhoven.
Captain Francisco de Valrey. Captain Strasly. Lieutenant Tumor. Ensign
Quarles. Cornet Harbart. Mr: Wrengham. Mr: Bammham. Mr: Weldon. Mr: Norman. Mr:
Sprye. Mr: Slippon. Mr: Coope. Mr: Harecourt. Mr: Maycote. Mr: White. Mr:
Hearle. Mr: Inglot. Mr: Brown. Mr: Copley. Mr: Brimingham. Mr: Rolt. Mr: Guyn.
Mr: Chitwood. Mr: Knightly. Mr: Sanderson. Mr: Harmon. Mr: Sedgwicks. Mr:
Wittington. Mr: Lee. M: Throgmotton. Mr: Nancy. Mr: King. Mr: Williams. Mr:
Black.
Volunteirs of my Lord General Cieils Company, Vicount of Wimbleton.
Leames Lord of Doncaster. Boswell Lord Peelding. William Lord Graven. Sr:
Thomas Glemman Captain Henry Tyllie. Captain Butler. Captain Lucan. Sariant
Mayor Boules. Lieutenant Froeman. Lieutenant Caswell. Mr: Cicill. Mr:
Whitepole. Mr: Clyford. Mr: Tate. Mr: Butler. M: Simon. Mr: Itby. Mr: Cheyncy.
Mr: Broadbanke. Mr: Courtney. Mr: Downs. Mr: Footeman. Mr: Flood. Mr: John
Tate. Mr: Bois. Mr: Stuckling. Mr: Flemming. Mr: Rice Powell. Mr: Haughton. Mr:
Hipsley. Mr: Appleyard. Mr: Ridley. Mr: Vackell. Mr: Solwin. Mr: Danniel. Mr:
Colpher. Mr: Smith. Mr: Leg. Mr: Moynes.
Volunteirs and Gentlemen of General Morgans Company.
Sr: Thomas Bland. Sr: Shefeld Calpham. Sr: John Cosling. Mr: Fowler. Mr:
Mumford. Mr: Io: Withers. Mr: William Withers. Mr: Isaac Absley. Mr: Henry
Absley. Mr: Morgan. Mr: Tiffin. Mr: Elcott. Mr: Caruis. Mr: Read. Mr:
Andrews. Mr: Booth. Mr: Merrick. Mr: Martin. Mr: Adam. Mr: Worly. Mr: John
Ashley. Mr: Williams. Mr: Turner. Mr: Warret Mr: Garvis Wood Mr: Marshall.
Volunteirs and Gentlemen of Coronell Harwoods Company.
Captain Perkins. Captain Boules. Captain Low. Lieutenant Smith. Lieutenant
Gamish. Ensign Dolman. Ensign Marison. Ensign Hering. Mr: Lucas. Ensign
Byron. Mr: Muschamp. Mr: Snelling. Mr: Brown.
Gentlemen of quality.
Mr: Crofts. Mr: Gorges. Mr: Saint John Mr: Bareford. Mr: Digby. Mr: Moss. Mr:
Gilby. Mr: Lehunt, Mr: Waller. Mr: Ieffryes. Mr: Fleetewood. Mr: Killegrey. Mr:
Lambart. Mr: Knightly. Lr: Bagshot. Mr: Young. Mr: Frith. Mr: Boulton. Mr.
Stewtly. Mr. Keckwich. Mr. Bendish. Mr: Roe. Mr: Rassell. Mr: Carter.
Volunteirs and Gentlemen of Sr. Edward Veres Company deceased.
Lieu. Harewood. Lieu. Turbot. M: Marshan. M: Mando. M: Gallope. Of Captain
John Cromwels Company. Mr: Harry Cromwell. Mr: Rochester Karre. Officers and
Soldiers slain before the BUSSE. Of French. The Baron of Courtemer, and 8.
Captains more. Of the Dutch. Coronell Fama. Monsieur Grenue. Captain Omkaes,
and Capt. Hatton. Of English. Sir Edward Vere Lieut. Colonel. Capt. Roes
Lieut. and Capt-Byroues. Of Scotch. Capt. Ramsey, Lieut. Huns, my Lord of
Buckcloughs Ensign. Of all Nations according to the lift given up, about 1600.
A SHORT DESCRIPTION OR Historical Relation of the famous Siege of the BVSSE.
And such things as passed there, as well within as without the City. Under the
command of the Most Illustrious PRINCE OF ORANGE.
THE High and Mighty Lords the States General, with the most Illustrious
Prince of Orange, taking nothing more to heart then the Prosperity of these
Free United Provinces, and the good Inhabitants in the same, had several
assemblies with the Prins of Orange, consulting how to take in hand and have
in readiness whatsoever should be needful and fitting for a Famous Siege, and
so resolved to besiege the city called the Busse, but before we will speak
further of this Siege, we shall first inform you of the situation,
Antiquitye, power and Renown of this place.

This place where the Busse is now situated, has been formerly according to
the general opinion of all men, a Wood or Park where the Duke of Braband did
use to hunte, and for this purpose himself did cause a cottage or small
dwelling place, to be built there for his Hunters and Hounds. But by reason
the same place was very comodious and had running streams of fresh Water
through it, many people of several Towns did meet there on Market days to
trade with one another. And some of them built a few houses there for to
entertain and lodge people, and others for to have there commodities always
in readiness: But the Burgers of Heusden envyeing their good, did destroy
them twyse. Nevertheless those people complaining to the Duke of the wrongs
done unto them, he did grant them to environ themselves with Walls and
Moates: After which this place did greatly increase as well of trade as of
people, yea many strangers came to live there, and prospered well, insomuch
that the Duke made it the fourth chief City in Braband, yet retayning the
name of's Hertogenbos, which by in interpretation is the Dukes-Wood, but
commonly being called the BUSSE. And so this City builded a Townehouse, a
Court to entertayne the Duke, likewise many Churches, and in these latter times
exceeding many Monastaries. And in the year of our Lord 1380. the foundation
of the great Church called Saint John's Church was laid.

Also in those times the City was enlarged and made greater, and new Walls
moates and Bolwarkes, and four several gates made to it, under the command
of this city at present does belong Kempenlande, Peellande, Maselande, and the
Land of Oosterwyke, in which Lands are situate four chief Towns as
Helmont, Eyndhoven, Megen and the Grave, besides three score and twelve
Villages, wherein are one hundred and one Parish churches: Through this city
of the Busse runs a fair Ryver called the Diese, it lies 2. leagues from
the Ryver called the Mase, 3. leagues from Heusden, and 12. leages from
Anwerpe. This city is marveillous strong by reason of the land which lies
round about it, being very low meddowes which almost continually are
overwhelmed with water, especially in the Winter season, insomuch that none can
assault it from without. Besides the strong Fortification of this city of
high Bulwarks, very broad Moates, Hornworkes, half Moons. It was
strengthened with three great and very strong Fortresses or Sconces, two of
them near the Vuchter gate, where some high ground lies. The greater and
outwardmost is called the Fort Isabella. The lesser which lies between that
and the city is called Saint Antonio. And the other which lies on the
Eastside of the city in a Morrace, is called the Petler-Sconce. Thus much
touching the describing of the city to you.

Now to return to this present Siege, the Prins of Orange by order of the
Lords the States General, did begin very timely in the year sent up some
shipping with Ordinance, Ammunition and other warrelike necessaries to Nimmegen,
and to the Sconce of's Gravenweert. After this about the midst of April Anno
1629. the Prins caused the most part of his Forces to be raised out of their
Garrisons, taking their Rendevous toward the said Sconce: And so with a
great Resolutenesse and courage on the 24. of April early in the morning at
6. of the clock, his Eccellence departed out of the Hage with a brave Train
of Valliant Commanders and Officers, and went directly for Utrick, from thence
for Arnhem, and so for's Gravenweert. Where his Eccellence finding his Troops
in readiness, instantly departed and marched to the Mokerheath, and there the
whole Army stood in Battle the 28. of April, and quartered that night under
the Heavens Canopy. The next morning at the break of day they marched forward
to the city called the Grave over the Bridge, and so directly toward the
BVSSE, where a Troop of Horse came that same evening. And the next day which
was the 30. of April they viewed the City, and in the afternoon about three
a clock his Eccellentie came thither with his whole Army, enquartering
himself with 134. Companies at Vucht, a Village very near to the two great
Sconces called Isabella and Anthonio, and took his own lodging in a fair
old building called Heymshouse. The other chief Quarters his Excellence
ordered in this manner. Count Ernst at Hintem with 50. Companies, Count
William of Nassau, the Governor of Heusden at Orten with 32. Companies. The
Lord of Brederode about the Petteler-Sconce with 26. Companies, and the Count
of Solms at Engelen, near Crevecoeur, for the safety of our Victual and
Ammunition Shipping which lay there.

And one the 11. of May Mons. Pinsen came thither with 23. Companies, and
took his Quarter at Deuteren. In the mean time all the Quarters being laid
out, and every Regiment and Company having their ground given them: His
Excel. caused certain thousands of Husbandemen to come out of the Betuw, the
Tieler and Bommeler-Weerd, and other places to the camp, which with the help
of the Soldiers did in few days entrench every Quarter: and being defensible,
as so many bees to their hiues, so each Soldier brings some thing to make
himself a Hutt. This being done his Excellence rides about to view the ground:
The Line of circumvallation being nigh 30. English Miles in circuit. The Siege
running thus, from the right side of the Dam, (where a River called the Dommel
was stopped) it ran along by General Cicills Regiment, and so to Coronell
Harwords, from thence to the French and Walloones, and along the Heath to the
stone Gallows. Then a long to Deuteren, from thence to the Busse-Sloate, and
so along the men of war to Engelen and Crevecoeur, and from thence on the
other side of the River called the Diese down to Orten, from thence to Hintem,
where Count Ernst his Quarter lay, and so forward to Coudwater and to the Lord
of Brederods Quarter, and thence along the Uffrouws Sconce and Berkel-Sconce to
the Dam, where the out Line met again.

The Governor of the BVSSE called Grobbendoncq, hearing that our Army came
marching toward the City, and seeing our Horsemen making a bravado, in
compassing and viewing thereof, could not believe or be persuaded that it was
intended to besiege him, but that the plott was laid to besiege Breda. Yea he
said playnlie that he did think the Prins was not so unwise for to begin
such a foolish act. But presently after perceiving that he settled his
Quarters, and his Army approaching toward the City and to annoye it, he
began to ponder his own negligence, that he had not provided the City
sufficiently of Men, Ordinance and Gunpowther, although a little before he
could have had certain thousand weight of powther from Luyke, which for the
couetuousnesse of monnie took noe effect. This news coming to Brussels and
other places in Braband, some set very light by it, esteeming this City to be
invincible, but others considering their vnpreparednesse and want of men and
monnie, were much amassed.

The Archduchesse sent one Post after another for Spain, caused her chief
Commanders of war to assemble, and began to lay their wits together
how to raise monnies, for the pay of their Soldiers, that so they might
get them in feelde. Grobbendoncq wrote in all have for more men and powther,
and that the Archduchesse would use some speedy means to relieve the City,
some of the Enemies chief Commanders, when they heard of this (as I am
credibly informed) said smylinglie, that Grobbendoncq was one of those stout
and valliant men, which did not fear the Devil himself, yea scoffed at him,
and as it were desired to see hem. As this Governor did often wish that the
Prins would come and visit him, but when he saw him indeed, he was as sore
affrayde as the rest, and desired soonest to be rid of him.

His Excellence the first day of May suffered diverse Women, Children, Nuns
and Maydservantes to depart out of the City. The Troops of Horsemen, which
lay in Garnison within the City, thought also to pass out of the City,
without any consent of the Prins, but were forced to return in the Town
again. Between the 4. and 5. of May in the night, there slipped into the Town
some 800. Men, which came from Breda by the way of Vlymen and along Deuteren,
(where Monsieur Pinsens Quarters was afterward) and from thence wading up to
the Armepitts in the water got into Saint John's gate. By reason whereof his
Excellence did cause a Dyke to be made from the Vuchterheath to Pinsens
Quarter, over the drownedland by Grobbendoncks Koy, and likewise along the
Busse-Sloate, as far as to Engelen, wrought all by Pesants, which brought
earth and Sand thither in boats, with twigs of trees or brush to lay under
and betwixt the earth, that the water might not wash it away. And so the whole
Siege was compassed and shutt in 8. or 10. days.

Between the 11. and 12. of May Count Ernst did approach in his Quarter as
far as is noted in the Map from A to B, and there made a Corpse de guarde,
and bargayned with his Workmen to make him a Battery there of six pieces of
ordinance, which Battery within ten or twelve days after was made, being
very near within Musket shot of the Town.

And by reason the water increased there could be noe nearer approches made at
that time, because all the ground toward the City stood blanke under water,
to which end the Enemy in the City cut asunder the Cadyke, going toward the
Orterdyke, noted with the letter D.

The 14. day of May our men brought 40. flat Turfe Ships in the Camp to make
Bridges. The 15. the enemy sallied forth of the Petler upon the Lord of
Brederoods Quarter, but were soon drouen back again. The 16. they of Town
sallied forth of the Town in boats upon Count Ernst his Quarter, but were
feign to retraict, not effecting any thing against us. About the 20. we began
to make an out Line betwixt Engelen and Crevecoeur, for the safety of our
Horse, and all the Lines having two steps: The bottom thereof being about
16. foot, and the top 6. foot broad. And by the Vlymer-Bridge his Excellence
caused a Sconce to be made against the straggling Soldiers of Breda, which was
thought invincible. The 22. Count William caused some Canon shot to be made
into the Town of 6. and 7. pound bullets, and afterward having perfected a
Battery, did continue in shooting with two half Cannons, which sent in
bullets of 24. pound, and a little piece which shot 6. pound.

The 23. a Post ventured to get into the Town, but being descryed and followed
was drownde by the way, but nevertheless our people got him dead, and brought
his secrett Letters to the Prince.

The Outline of the Siege being thus finished and made defencible, then the
English and French, which were in his Excellencies Quarter, broake ground, and
each Nation striving for his honor made toward the Town, to wit the French
toward the great Sconce Isabella, with their Ingeners Mons. Porcibal and his
Son, and the English toward

The 28. Count Ernst commanded to make shot into the City, with three half
Cannons; and suddenly after his Battery being finished, did continue shooting
with two half Cannons, which shot Bullets of 24. pound, and afterward with
three pieces more of 12. pound shot.





The same day Count William caused shot to be made into the Town from a
second Battery, with three pieces of Ordinance, which carried Bullets of 24.
pound, and with other three pieces of 12. pound, and his first Battery with
three pieces of 6. pound, and one of 3. pound, also continuing.



The same day those of the little Sconce sallied forth, and killed an English
Lieftenante and his man, with Musket short hurting another Soldier, and so
were drouen in again.

The first of June in the night they of the Town fyred upon the top of the
Church steeple three times, pulling up the fire every time thrice: the French
seeing this fell upon some Works, which those of the great Sconce had made,
chasing them out of their Works and got many shouelles, arms and other
implements.

The English in the mean time making Way and Passage toward the little
Sconce, drawing nearer and nearer.

And by reason the water began to diminish and fall at this time, Count Ernst
went forward with his approches, and made the two Lines, marked with C and E,
and made a Corpse de guarde upon F, in the Hintemer-Waye.

This Corpse de guarde was finished in few days after, being made Canon
proof, and guarded with Pallisadoes.

The same time the French won the Line of the great Sconce, which broke our
Line which was made the 29. of May. At that time were slain a Leeftenant and
a Volantarie, likewise Monsieur de Vitre was shot in his shoulder and thigh,
near to the Conterscharpe of the great Sconce.

Between the second and third day, Count Ernst approached with the Lines,
which are marked G, H, I, to some small millhills K, and there made a Corpse de
guarde, which afterward was changed and made a Battery for two half
Cannons.

On Whitsonday the 3. of June the French began to shoot with 6.

The same day at night they of the Town drew up fire again in the great
Church steeple.

The 6. and 7. of June, And whereas the approaches and Corpse de gardes in
Count Ernst his Quarter daily were furthered, so he approached from the said
Millhills along the Line L, and at M made a Corpse de guard, from whence his men
went to the letter N, the Line of Communication along the Kadyke to the Quarter
of Count William. And the same night approached to the Stonebridge in the
Hintemer-Way to the letter O, and the 7. they began to sap over that Bridge,
and the night following made the Corpse de guard, which is marked with the
letter P. And the days following they did sap toward the Horneworke, at the
Hintemer-end along the little Way on both sides thereof, because the Land
lay under Water. Insomuch that his Grace bargayned to make a Battery there
the 14. of June, for 3. pieces of Ordinance, at the letter Q. and afterward
another Battery of 2. pieces at the letter R.

The 8. a French Captain, called Monsieur de Vittenval, was shot in the
Trenches, looking between two Cannon Baskets, and his Lieftennante succeeded
in his place.

The same day the French began to make Cannon shot of 24. pound upon the
Horneworke of the great Sconce.

The 9. His Excellentie caused above 140. Cannon shot to be made upon the
little Sconce and into the City from the great Battery. And the same day
some Soldiers came forth of the Town toward Pinsens Quarter to take some
Horse and Workmen, but were drouen back again.

Count Ernst at this time was advised by his Ingener Matthijs van Voord, to
make a great Gallerie directly upon the City from the letter N. between the
Hintemer-end and the Orter Bulwark, which should be made in this manner. The
plain thereof should be a foot height above water, and 12. foot broad
between the Walls thereof on both sides, which Walls should be Cannon
proof. And at every 8. or 10. foot length a Travers to be made also Cannon
proof. Which his Excellentie and Count Ernst, with the States Committies
approoved of: And so instantly order was given that it should be made. To this
end the two Batteries marked S and T, were put forth to be made, each of them
for eight pieces of Ordinance. The Wings or Hinderparte thereof closing
together, and having on the sides Corpse de guardes, for the safety of the
Batteries, and so this great Gallerie was begun the 8. of July by these
Ingeners Matthijs van Voord and James Slip.

And by reason the Place where this great Gallerie was to be made was
alltogeather a Morrace, which was overflowne with Water at some places a man's
height, we were feign to fill the Way as we worked forward with brush and
earth, which was brought thither from afar of in Carts. And for the more
security of this Gallerie, there were made the Batteries V and W.

The same day at night six Frenchmen went in Armor of Musket proof, to view
the Conterscharfe of the Horneworke belonging to the great Sconce, but never a
shot was made at them.

The same night the French advanced their works to the Conterscharfe

The 11. came into Count Ernsts Quarter eleauen Companies more of Scotsh.

This day the English began to make Cannonshot of 24. pound at the



Dito Monsieur de Candale came into the Quarter and had the Watch in the
Trenches.

The 14. the English began to shoot Grenades out of 2. Morters into the
great Sconce Isabella, and the little Sconce Saint Antony, whereof

The same day his Excellentie and the States went upon the Battery, and sent
some Grenades into the little Sconce, which made part of the Walls to fly
up, that we could hardly see the Sconce for Dust and Smoke.

The last night they in the Town drew up fire again in the Church steeple.

The same day Count Ernst went forward with his sap along the small Way
toward the Hintemer-end, raising the passage with Brush and earth; and
advanced so much that the 19. the Corpse de guarde Numero 1. and upon the 28.
the Corpse de guarde Numer. 2. were made. And to advance the works of the main
Gallerie at Numer. 3. and 4. two Batteries were made each of one piece of
Ordinance.

The 15. His Excel. commanded to let the Water, which was stopped at the
Dommel, to run round about his Quarter: And the same day the English sent
six Grenades into the two Sconces, whereof two made a fearful stir among
them, and threw some of their Hutts over the Walls. Forcing the Enemy to
save themselves in the Outworkes, until the Grenades had done their
operation, we in the mean time playeing upon them with Cannon and Musket shot
as fast as we could.

The 16. in the night the Enemy sallied forth of the Hintemer-gate, and beat
the Scotsh out of their Trenches: as likewise those of the

The same night the English sent three Grenades into the little Sconce, and
did great endeavor to fill the moate of the half Moon with Brush and earth,
but they of the Sconce threw forth hooks and pulled out our Brush sometimes as
fast as we did put it in, and cast out firebrandes and Handegranadoes to burn
it, so that we had hot work to prevail with them.

Likewise they of the great Sconce threw forth Handegranadoes and Firebrandes
to break and burn the Gallerie, which the French began to make toward the
Horneworke, but nevertheless they got up that night three posts or joints of
their Gallerie.

The 17. the English were minded to have made an assault upon the

The 18. the French began to make a Gallerie directly upon the middlewing

The 19. the English began to make a Gallerie toward the half

The 21. were sent 8. Grenades more into the little Sconse, with many
Cannonshot every day and instant.

The 20. the French began a second Gallerie on the right hand of the

And the same day the French broake a mine into the Horneworke.

The 21. the English broake a mine into the half Moon of the little

The 22. in the night the English went courageously forward with their
Gallerie, but they of the Sconce sallied forth and set it on fire. The English
nevertheless watching an oppurtunity, suddenly fell upon the Enemy, insomuch
that they had noe time to seek and return the same way which they came
forth. And so diverse of them being enforced to make speed or to be put to the
sword leaped into the moate and there were drowned.

The same night the English set fire on their mine and made an assault upon
each side of the half Moon, but the mine operating contrary to their
expectation, they began another mine and went forward with their Galleries.

The French also gave fire to a mine but effected little.

At this time Count Henry of Berck Mustered his Army at Turnhout, being in
number some 25000. Men foot and horse.

In the afternoon the French gave fire to two mines more, but avayled not.
The third made such a breach into the Wall of the Horneworke, that we could
see the Enemy in it from top to toe. And so they should have made an assault
upon them, but by reason the springing of the mine cast so much earth into the
Mouth of the Gallerie, that they could not go forth of it, they were prevented
and the breach suddenly stoppet again.

The 24. and 25. we did effect little.

The 26. there was a great fire in three several places of te Siege, as
namely in the Horse Quarter, in the English Quarter and in Brederoes Quarter,
it was suspected to be villainy of Traitors, but we could not find them out.

At this time Count Henry of Berch marching toward us, lodged his Forces at
Sprang, Wallwyke, Druynen and Loon.

At the same time the King of Bohemia came unto the Siege, and went with his
Excel. into the Trenches, and viewed our Approaches, Batteries and other
Works.



The same day Count Henry of Berch came with his Army to Vlymen, and appeared
in our sight at several places with his Horse, which went up and down to
view our Outworkes. In the night they of the Town caused an Alarm to be
made, which made us think that the Enemy would have fallen upon us from
without and within, but they attempted nothing.

The 28. Count Henry appeared with his Forces in the night near the Hollands
Dyke, and by our great Sconces called the 3. Sisters, but we having sent them
some 10. or 12. Cannonshot they retired back: Our whole Army nevertheless
standing in Battle all the night long.

The 29. many of the Enemies Soldiers came into our Quarters, complaining of
great scarsitie, hunger and hardness.

The 30. the Enemy lay themselves in Embuscado near the Uffrou Sconce, and
took diverse of Wagons and Waggonmen, which went forth for Brush. Likewise
they took the House of Hesop and Boxtel, where we had some small strength of
Soldiers, which they let pass with their Arms and Baggagie into our Camp.
In the morning came two of the Enemies Sloopes to the 3. Sisters and the
Hollands Dyke, to take measure of the depth of the Water, which made our Army
to rise in Arms. Some more Soldiers of the Enemy coming to us, reported
that in their Camp Cheese was sold for 12. stiuers a pound, and a Pot of
Beer for 6. stiuers: Insomuch that the common Soldiers were almost famished
for want of monnie and food, which caused them to flee from them.

The second of July Monsieur Fama was shot and dyed of it.

The Enemy continually buzzing up and down, sent some 4000. Horse and foot
with 800. firelockes, each having a leather bag of powther to put them into the
Town, between the Petler Sconce and Count Ernst Quarter, and brought along
with them Spades, Fagots and Plankes to fall upon a Horneworke of ours, not
far from Coudwater, but being discovered by our men in the night, which stood
ready to receive them, the Alarm being given; They were beat of some of them
drowned, and others being shot and wounded, retreated and left some of their
powther baggs behind them. This failling he had other designs by the help of
two treacherous Pesants for the cutting of our Damme.

The same night these Pesants as their Guides brought his men along the little
Dyke, which runs from the Dam to Boxtel by the Boores Houses, but they in the
night discovered General Cicills Tents, which were newly set up, their hearts
misgaue them, thinking we knew of their plot, and so retreated without
attempting it, part of a Company only having the guarde at the poinct upon
the Dyke, while the rest of the Companies were drawn to the Line upon the
Heath, they might easily have effected it. Our Men in the morning discovering
them as they marched toward Count Henryes Quarter, the two half Cannons
which lay upon Cicills Battery let fly at them, and slew some of them: But to
prevent this the next day his Excel. caused abundance of Pallisadoes to be
driven into the Dyke, and made a Battery where they should have come one, and
from thence to Berckel Sconce chayned boats together over the Water; setting
watch in them by night, for the defense of the Damme.

Count Henry of Berke being then quartered at Boxtel, Cromforde and Helforde,
within an English mile and a half of our Line, we were feign to make the
nights our days, and the days our nights, expecting continually his coming
upon us with maine Force, which oftentimes he attempted but to little effect,
which lasted above three weeks together until he left us. In the mean time
the Companies of all Nations beset the Line of Circumvallation, some two
hundred paces distant one from another round about the Army: The Horse standing
behind them in Battle ready to receive him. His Excellentie every night
about midnight goeing the grand Round to answer all Alarmes. The same night
that he intended to put in these firelockes and their powther bags into the
Town, and to have cut the Damme, and to have let in a Sea of water upon us,
which ran rownde about our Quarters, returning from Vlymen with the gross of
his Army, he discovered himself betimes in the morning, as soon as it began
to be light by the downs, and had laid an Embuscado of Musketteirs in a ditch
by some trees, and behind the downs he made a halte with his Horse and foot,
and sends out first some 10. or 12. Horse to entertain a skermish with some of
our Horse, which stood ready in Arms without our Line upon the Heath, having
the Outguarde. The Trumpets sound a Charge, and our Canno^s roares from all
the Batteries at the Enemy, and as the skermish enceased, so we sent them the
more Bullets, which made diverse of their Horsemen to turn up their heels, we
seeing oftentimes legs and Arms fly up, and their Horse roll over one
another. At last there came three troop of Horse, which changed Bullets with
our Horsemen, and still our Ordinance giving fire among them, and our Horse
charging them toward the foot of the downs, the feigned a retreat to draw
on our Horse within their Embuscado. Monsieur Mauue a French Captain of a
troop of Horse, charging home his Horse from the Embuscado was slain under
him. The Enemy falls out again with more Horse and takes this French Captain
prisoner. The Duke of Bullen seeing him thus engaged, charge with a troop or
two for to rescue him, and while two of the Enemies men were a disputing
whose prisoner he should be, our Horse charges them again, and drives them to
a retreat, they not having time to carry their Prisonner away, to end the
dispute pistole him, and so the Duke brought of his dead body. This skirmish
during a while after, Count Henry marched away, and we to our Quarters.

The 4. of July in the night the Enemy came upon our Army, intending to break
the stoppage of the Dommel, but were prevented and many of them slain. At
this time some Pesants were taken, which had led the Enemy and shown them the
way through the water how to come upon us as they did several times in the
night. Whereof two were hanged in his Excel: Quarter.

Having made this digression, I return again to our Approaches, before the
English came to the laying over of their first Gallerie. There the Captain of
his Excel: Guard got a dangerous shot in the forhead that he lost his eye.
Captain Omkaes a worthy Ingener showing his body too open was snapt of and
slain with a firelocke, and Captain Clarke shot through both his legs, and
having brought over their Gallerie, they could not come to the moate of the
little Sconce, before they had beaten the Enemy out of two Traverses, and a
point which came out of the Conterscharfe in the form of a half Moon on our
right hand next the Dommel, at the entrance of the Gallerie: Over this first
Water on the left hand they had a Battery upon which Coronell Harwood was shot
through his hat; The Lord of Oxford standing by. The Gallerie being over they
began to sap and made a mine in the Enemies first Traverse, that night which
Sir Jacob Ashley commanded in the Trenches desirous of honor, he was appointed
with some 60. Pikes and Musketteirs to fall on after the Mine was sprung; and
Captain Gouldwell as eldest Captain to second him with more Men before the
Mine was blown up, he gave the Enemy an Alarm to draw them on toward our
Mine; and the Mine being sprung set on with his Men and beat the Enemy to a
retreat out of part of their Travers, our Men and the Enemy giving fire
bravely one to another a good while, but the English lyeing open to the
Bulwark of the little Sconce, and their other Traverse, were feign to retreat
again into the Mouth of their Gallerie. This Mine took not well, but sprang
rather backward then forward, and did more hurt to our Men then to the Enemy;
yet from this earth which was cast up out of the Enemies Travers they began
to sap forward, which the Enemy seeing at last they quitted it, and so became
Masters of it, and getting a little more elbowe room they advanced forward to
the moate of the little Sconce, making Guardes, Batteries and Blindes, till
they came to the very brinke of it, where they began a second Gallerie.

The 7. of July in the evening about eleauen a clock, Monsieur Douchant,
Leeftenante to Coronel Chattillon, commanding the French Trenches, they of the
Conterscharfe sallied forth in number about 100.

The 8. the Enemy blewe up a Mine upon the English, but did them noe harm.

The 9. Mons. Chattillons Company having the guard in the French Approaches,
fell upon the Horneworke of the great Sconce, and found but 7. or 8. Men in
it, which did not dispute the matter long and quitted it and retired to their
Conterscharfe, where on their right hand they cut it off, and made a small
Travers in it, whence they gave fire with their Musketteirs and firelockes upon
them. But the French having put their Gallerie over the moate of the
Conterscharfe, they came to the second moate of the great Sconce, where they
likewise put over a Gallerie into the Faulsebray. On the left hand of their
Gallerie, the Enemy had cut off their Faulcebray to hinder our Workmen and
Miners by giving fire from a small Travers upon them.

The 11. his Excellencye caused an inward Line to be made toward the City,
beginning at Pinsens Quarter, and so passing by his Excellent. Quarter came to
Brederoes Quarter, and went from thence to Count Ernsts Quarter, being
fortified with many Redouts, whereby those of the Town were prevented to come
forth unto our Quarters.

The 12. Count Morris of Nassau was made Coronel in steed of Monsieur Fama.

The 14. his Excel: gave order for the repayring of the Watermills

The Gallerie in Count Ernsts Quarter Numer. 5. was appointed to be made the 8.
of July, but not begone before the 14. for want of earth, upon which Gallerie
the Enemy shot very hotly, both with Cannon and musketts; insomuch that many
of the Workmen in the Mouth of this Gallerie were slain.

The Gallerie being brought over, the Enemy retired in those places which they
had cut off, noted in the Map Numer. 8. and 9. but in respect the Scotsh
continually went forward with sapping along the side of the Horneworke, the
Enemy was forced likewise to leave those places.

The 15. Count Henry of Berke raised his Army and departed from Boxtel,
marching toward the Grave, and passed the Mase over the Moakerheath, but
first sent a Pesant to bring a Letter to the Gouvernor Grobbendonk in the
Town, which Pesant was taken in our Army upon some suspicion and the Letter
found, and brought to his Excellentie. The tennor whereof was as follows.

MY LORD.
Seeing it is impossible to overmaster the Enemy in his Works, with that
strength which I have at present, in respect he has fastened himself
extraordinarily. I have thought good to raise my Army and depart from hence,
and to join my Forces with those of the Emperors, which now are ready in
Arms, and in great number marching to Wesel, as well Horse as Footmen,
intending to take in hand some remarkable thing, whereby the Enemy shall be
compelled to fight with us, and that it pleasing God to give us the Victory
therein, the City shall be thereby relieved, you in the mean time keeping it
yet for a while, which I thought fitting at present to give you notice of.
Praying when you have received this, to draw up in the night a great fire in
the steeple of S. John's Church, stirring it oftentimes, and the next day to
let a great smoke appear above the steeple, whereby I may know this Letter
was delivered you; and when this Messenger shall return with your answer,
that you make the like sign in the night following and with smoke the next
day in the mean time. I rest

MY LORD Your affected and faithful Friend HENRY COUNT OF BERKE.
From our Camp at Boxtel the 16. of July 1629. The Superscription was thus, To
My Lord, the Baron of Grobbendonk, Knight of the Order of S. James, Coronell of
a Regiment of Walloons, and Governor of the BUSSE.




But this Letter falling into the hands of his Excellentie, he sent it to the
Lords the States General of these Unyted Low Country Provinces, with his
advyse and counsel what he thought fitting to be done against the Enemies
plot, his Excellentie likewise ordered an Army of Foot and Horse out of his
Camp, under the command of Count Otto van Stierum, to follow Count Henry,
and watch what he intended; nevertheless himself continueing the Siege before
the BUSSE.

The 18. the Lord van Dieden, Governor of Emmerick, then commanding in the
French Trenches, having blown up a Mine in the great Sconce, which
overwhelmed two of our men that stood too near it.

The 19. of July in the morning about three a clock, the Enemy likewise

The same day Coronell Harwood commanding the English Trenches, after he had
taken the little Sconce, went forward and likewise

The 20. Count Otto van Stirum departed out of our Camp with an Army of 1200.
Horse and 4000. foot to follow the Enemy.

The 23. came news to our Camp that Count Henry with his and the Emperors
Forces, were got over the Ryver called the Ysell into the Veluw, which daunted
us much, being the Enemy could run up from thence without passing over any
more Waters, even to the principal Cities of Hollande, as he did partly, his
dessigne being thereby to make us break up the Siege of the BUSSE, and to come
to prevent his proceeding. But his Excel. seeing the Town could not hold out
long, sent forth Count Ernst with Coronell Harwood, and so many foot and Horse
as he could spare out of his Camp, to hinder the Enemies coming over the Ryne
into the Betu, as he afterward (when he had brought his Forces into the Velu)
did oftentimes attempt, which if he could have effected, would have been
greatly to our disadvantage.



The 28. the Enemy sallied forth of the Town in Boats, and took diverse
Prisoners, whereof some were Burgers, that were gone too near the Town to see
strange things.

The same day came into our Camp the Young Prins of Denmark with a Regiment of
Dutch.

The 3. of August a Bridge of rushes was brought over the moate of the Tenaille.

The 4. Monsieur Douchant having the Watch in the Approaches

The 6. of August Monsieur de Candale commanding the French

The same day Monsieur Pinsen made a Battery very near the City, from
whence he cast them many Grenades.

The 8. Monsieur Maurice Coronell of the Walloones having the watch in the
Trenches, the Enemy left the Tenaille, after two Mines were sprung, the third
being ready, and so was taken and a great Battery made of it of nine half
Cannons.

On the 10. of August Grobbendonk in the night sent forth two Soldiers,
apparrelled like Countriemen, with Letters to the Arch-Duchesse, each of them
having a pair of Doves, which should have been cast up and fly into the
Town with answer back again: But their hearts failing them, and fearing to
be taken by our Men in passing the Line and Watches: the one Soldier being
more willing then the other, drew out his Knife and threatened to kill the
other, if he would not go along with him to the Prince, and so calling to our
Centinells; the Guard received them in: the contents of the Letters were, that
he could not hold out the Town above three weeks longer, and the Burgers for
the saving of their lives and goods, and shunning of sudden danger would force
him to a composition, and therefore required releife within that time, or else
it would go very hard with them, of all which the Prince made good use.

To go on the Tenaille being ours, we began a new sap from the right point
thereof toward the Enemies half Moon, without the Vuchter-Gate running the
Approaches by oblique Lines, windings and turnings till we came to the very
brinke of the Moate of the Town, where the Dommell falls into it, making the
moate and it above 300. foot over, and ever as we got ground so we advanced
our Ordinance, made Batteries, Gards and Blinds for the safeguard of our Men:
there began in their half Moon. In this Feelde also we began to lay over a
second Gallerie on the right face of the Bulwark; but the Enemies Ordinance
from the Bulwarks on the further side of the Gate shot through it 8. or 10.
times, breaking some of the posts asunder, at the entrance of it into the
moate, yet at the last our Battery in that Feelde put them to silence, and an
English Captain an excellent Cannonnier dismounted their half Cannon, that
day the Lord of Oxford had the Guarde after, which our Men working more
safely in both the Galleries.

The 13. many Grenades were cast into the Town, which threw down many
Houses.

The 15. of August in the night the Enemy had a Stratagem to cut our Trench
by the little Mill and Coudwater, between Count Ernst and Brederoes Quarter,
and so to have let in the Water upon our Approaches; to put this into
execution, Grobbendonk sent out of the Town some hundred and fifty firelockes
and spades, which stole in the night between the Petler-Sconce and Count
Ernsts Quarter through the inward Line, where it was not finished and came to
the little Windmill by our out Line; and there having laid an Embuscado of some
of their firelockes in a ditch, and behind some bushes fell to work apace to
cut our Trench some 30. foot broad between the Horneworke, and the Redouts
upon the Line, not far from that place where Count Henry of Berks Men would
have attempted it before: But part of Captain Brogs Company having the guard
in a Redoubt next unto them gave fire, and the Alarm being given: Our Horse,
which had the guard in a House not far from thence, came up to charge them,
and giving fire likewise from that Redoubt, they left their work, and
retreated back to their Ambush, leaving their Spades and a pair of old Shoes
behind them, and as they retreated gave fire upon our Horse, and slew a
Corporal and hurt two or three more: But by reason of the Morrace and the
Ditches, our Horsemen could not come to charge them, neither durst our foot
leave their Guardes: and so they retreated back again into the Town, some
two English mile where they fell a cutting. Surely if they had stayed but one
half quarter of an hour longer, or cut the gap not so broad, they had
effected the business they came for, because the Water was not passing three
inches lower then the top of the Trench, and so should have let in an
Inundation of Water upon us.

The 16. of August news came to our Camp that the Enemy had taken Amersford.

The 17. Count William then commanding the Quarter and Works of Count Ernst,
caused two Mines to be blown up, which were made under the Horneworke of the
Hintemergate, also made two assaults upon the Enemy, but prevayled not.

The 18. in the morning the Enemy sallied forth of the Town near Pinsens
Quarter, and robbed some of the Victualers and so departed: the night following
the Leeftenant Coronell Sir Edward Vere had the command in the Trenches. And
on Sunday his Excellence who oftentimes ventered his person very much, came
down to the Gallerie to see the Approaches, a little before the said
Leeftenante Coronell was relieved, he went to show the Prince the Works and
the Sap, the Companies being relieved, were drawn off as far as the little
Sconce. The said Leeftennante Coronell Vere having showen his Excellentie the
Sap, and taking his leave of him, walking off with Sir Thomas Conway, being a
Tall man, came an unhappy Musketshot through the Blind, and shot him behind in
his head, that it perished his brains: that night being brought to his Tent
within some four days afterward dyed, whose extraordinary valor
sufficiency and complete abilities for a Commander as they were well known,
so was his loss exceedingly lamented by his Excellentie and the Chiefes of
our Army. My Lord General Vere, my Lord of Oxford, many Captains, Officers,
Voluntaries and Gentlemen of quality, who had been at his funeral in Bommell
returning home that night.

The English Regiment had the guard in the Approaches, and a civil worthy
Gentleman of my Lords Company of Dort, one M. Mollenax that bare the sword of
the said Leeftenant Coronell before his corpse, goeing to see the sap, was the
first that night which followed him the way of all flesh; my Lord General
Vere bestird himself, had all his Officers and Soldiers in readiness, that
upon the first occasion, if the Enemy had either sallied out upon our Sappers
or Workmen, or if they should have attempted the firing of the Gallerie, they
might have beat them in again. Captain Rookewood of my Lord Veres Regiment
as eldest Captain, executed my Lords command with valor and discretion, had
his Granado-Men at hand, and placed diverse Musketteirs upon all flanks to play
upon the Enemy, and to keep them under for shooting upon the end of our
Gallerie and our Workmen, and now and then sent them some Cannon Bullets,
which shot upon the topp of their Bulwark, and upon their half Moon to keep
them under, sometimes sending a Granado into the Town, and throwing
Handgranadoes amongst them into their half Moon. Toward midnight the Enemy
likewise did cast Handgranadoes upon our Blind next to their half Moon and
set fire on it, which brake out into a great flame, but the vigilency of my
Lord Vere was such fearing, that the fire might take further hold, he gave
order that some Soldiers should take shouells and spades from the Workmen,
and cast earth and water upon it, which caused it to slake, and had two or
three Granadoemen there, which paid them with their own coin, but sure it
was good that the Wind blew Southwest, for had the Wind blewe Northwest and had
blown stiff, as it did, it had not only endangered the firing of all our
Blindes, but also our Gallerie, which would have hindered our Approaches and
cast us a great deal behind hand. And so this day and night following the
Gallerie and Works were well advanced. This day Sir Harry Hungate got a mark
of honor by a Bullet, which shot him through his buffe Ierkin, and grazed upon
his flesh.

Before our Regiment had the Watch again in the Approaches the Gallerie was
well advanced, and they got about three Posts night and day, it was then my
Lord of Oxfords turn to command, who was made Leeftenante Coronell in Sir
Edward Veres place deceased. The Bridge being laid over the Ditch of the
Enemies half Moon. The English began to sap, and lodged in the left corner of
it, because of the Trees that lay a cross in it. This night there was
discovered an engine upon a floate from the furthest part of their half Moon
by the moate, which we presupposed they had prepared for the firing of our
Gallerie. To prevent this my Lord of Oxford got a Sloope, which was brought
about toward our Gallerie, that on a sudden ten or twelve resolute
Soldiers, with short swords and Pistolls might chop into it, to hinder the
Enemy from fastening any fireworkes upon our Gallerie, which the Enemy
perceauing, attempted nothing. The Lord of Oxford gave order likewise that our
Musketteirs from all flanks should continually be playeing, and our Ordinance
shooting upon the top of their Bulwark and their half Moon to keep the
Enemy from peeping over and giving fire upon our Workmen. This night although
it was Moonelight, the Brush and faggots were laid over to the left hand of the
Bulwark, from the end of our second Gallerie in the Bleachfeelde, and thanks
be to God, but one Man shot in layeing them over, and another Soldier of
Captain Skippons shot, which stood Centinell in our Long Gallerie. My Lord
Crauen whose worth and liberallitie was known here extraordinarily, this
night and the day followeing (as at other times he used to do) watched with
my Lord of Oxford, the next night with my Lord Cicills Company, and the third
night with General Morgans Regiment. My Lord of Doncaster and my Lord fielding
trayled Pikes under my Lord Cicills Company, and went constantly down to the
Approaches upon any service, and exposed their bodies both to danger and
sickness. My Lord of Oxford an hour before he was relieved, had about with
the Enemy upon the left corner of the half Moon; and my Lord Veres
Musketteirs of Dort coming up almost to the top of the half Moon, gave fire
in the teeth of the Enemy, and came to the push of Pike through the Blinds, this
startled them and made them throw stones and Handgranadoes amongst our Men,
but his Lord caused a Soldier of Captain Roockwoods Company to cast 14.
Handgranadoes among them into their half Moon, which made them give back and
cry, Guarda, Guarda. The Grenades being burst they came up again to the top
of the half Moon, and gave fire upon our Men, but my Lord caused Musketteirs
to be drawn to the top of our gards, especially that of Captain Clarke,
which was high, they gave fire apace upon them, fetched some of them off, which
showed their heads and bodies; this piece of service being ended, my Lord of
Oxford being relieved drew away to his Quarter.

On Count Ernests side the 19. of August the Brush and Planks were laid over to
the Enemies Horneworke, and a Mine made into it: This Mine being sprung, the
Scotsh and the Duchess fell on courageously, and they and the Enemy gave fire
apace one at another for three quarters of an hour, our Ordinance playing from
all Batteries as fast as they could charge and discharge; in this time the
Enemy stood out very stoutly three assaults, with the loss of many men:
But the Enemy gave fire in such manner from the Wall of the Town, and out of
the great half Moon, that our Men were forced to retreat into the mouth of
their Gallerie and Works, yet this advantage we got that we did set up some
Musket-baskets, and lodge some of our men upon the right corner of their
Horneworke, from whence we began a Sap, and made Blinds toward their half
Moon, which after another Mine was sprung caused the Enemy on the 21. of
August to quit it, and so retired in their half Moon. In this fight were
slain Captain Ramsey, and two days after a Dutch Captain, called Captain
Hatton, who carried themselves very worthily.

And when as Count Ernest had strengthened the Betuw, and all the Cities and
places thereabouts, as also along the River called the Yssel, against all
assaults of the Enemy, for the furtherance of which the Prince sending him
daily more Forces as he could spare and raise them.

It happened that upon the 20. day of August these glad tidings came to the
Prince to wit a Letter from that worthy and Valliant Commander Otto de Gendt
and Oyen, Lord of Dyden, Governor of Emrick, unto the Prince of Orange, the
tennor whereof follows.

MY LORD,
THE bearer hereof my Cossen Merode is come to make report unto your
Excellentie of the good success of the surprising of the City of Wesel. The
Enemy has likewise quitted both the Sconces, making not one shot against us.
Their man of war they have sunk themselves; and having a parcel of small
shipping in the Ryne, I did cause part of them to be burnt, I have found
great number of Ordinance here, and 13. or 14. Boats upon Karts. And for the
better securing of this City, I have sent for more Companies out of Emmerick
and Rees: And if it please your Excellentie, I should desire more strength.
Thus in have I take my leave.

WESEL the 19. of August 1629. In the morning between 4. and 5. of the Clock.
Your Excellenties humble and faithful OTTO OF GENDT AND OYEN:


The first Undertakers of this Enterprise were Peter Mulder, Richard Mulder his
Brother and John Rootleer all three Burgers of WESEL, men of a mean condition,
but of a good spirit and resolution. This Peter Mulder diverse times fayning to
learn to swim, had pilde the depth of the moate on that side, which he
intended the City should be assaulted, and spying out all opportunities, made
a great Iron hammer to beat down the Pallisadoe, which stood upon the
Bulwark on the East side of the Town, wherewithal the Prince being aquainted
as also of the possibillitie of this design. His Excellentie appointed the
Lord of Dyden for the mannaging thereof. The time and place being appointed the
18. of August, Peter Mulder went out of WESEL at one Gate, and his Brother out
of another Gate, about three hours before the shutting of the Gates. Peter
Rootleer followed a while after, to avoyde all suspicion, all three meeting
together in the dark at the place appointed: And having called upon the Name
of the Lord of Hosts, for his aid and assistance herein, that thereby their
fellow Brethren and Citizens might be released from the bondage and vexation
of their Enemies. The Lord of Dyden about midnight came unto them, with some
sixteen hundred foot (some musketeers others firelockes and half pikes) and
eight Troops of Horse. Before they went on the Lord of Dyden to do noe man
wrong, made the Captains to draw Billets, who should fall on first: And Peter
Muller with his two Comrades went on before them couragiouslye. But ere our
Troops came thither, and that the Lord of Dyden had ordered the business
thus, it began to be light, so that they imagined it was not practicable. The
Enemy likewise seeing the day broke, and that it began to be light, drew off
their By-watch from that place, and betook themselves to their rest: But God,
who is the disposer of all things, and gives courage to men, at last our men
waded through the moate, and entered the Bulwark. And Peter Muller with his
Comrades broke down the Pallisadoe and made an entrance. The Officers and
Soldiers seconded him bravely, and enters the Town on Sundaye morning the
19. of August 1629. a little before Sun rising, after the guarde was drawn
off: And cutting off the two gardes next adjoining to that place with small
resistance, bore up stiff to the Market place. The Alarm was so suddayne that
the Enemies men running too and again to answer it knew not our Men from
their own until it was to late for them; for in the mean space Peter Muller
got a smith and opened the Bruynish Gate, and let in our Horsemen. The
Spaniards seeing the City lost fled to the Sconces out of the Town, which
they yielded upon Composition: The brunt being over the Soldiers fell a
plundering got into the Spaniards shops, and into bitterest Papists and Jews
Houses, ransacks the Nunneries, breaks down the Images and got an incredible
booty, as Count Henry of Berk his plate and chiefest Baggage, Monte Cuculies
money and goods, which the Emperor had sent to him, and the Riches which the
Crawats had got in the Germane Wars, and left there behind them for safety in
their expedition for the Velu. To conclude, the Foot devyded the spoil, and
the Horsemen shared Bags and Barrells of Rijcxdollers by hatts full: But that
which was most remarkable, that Church which they had bolted up against the
Protestants, that very Sunday was made a Prisson for their Officers and
Soldiers, till on the morrow they were sent to Arnhem. The Governor and
Officers standing good for the ransom of 1042. Soldiers, who the next day
were set over the Water with their Wives and Children. Three of the Enemies
Captains were slain and about 70. Soldiers, and we lost but 9. Men in all.
Besides this there was found in the Town many small Barrells of Pistolls and
Rijcxdollers, for the payment of the Enemies Army, 46. pieces of Brass
Ordinance upon the Walls, and 2. in the Market place, and 2. in the Magasin,
and 2. Morters, Arms as Corselets, Pikes, Muskets and Firelockes to arm 5000.
men, above 1000. Barrells of Powther, besides this great store of meal
abundance of Corn and other Victual, and provision for their Army, which the
Lord thus delivered in our hands.

On the 24. of August we had a general thanksgiving and a triumph throughout
the Army, in acknowledgment of the great goodness of God for the taking of
WESEL. The Triumph was made in this manner: First the Musketteirs were drawn
off from all our Guardes, saving the Approaches, and out of our Quarters and
placed along the inward Line next the Town some six foot distant one from
another. The Pikes were drawn to the Outline and Outguardes, the rest stood by
devisions in the Quarters, every one of them having a Wisp of straw upon the
head of his Pike to be set on fire, when the signal should be given. The
volley of Musketteirs should begin at Crevecoeur, where the Princess lay, and
so to Engelen; from thence along the Men of war, and the Redoubts by the
Busseslote to Monsieur Pinsens Quarter, so the French Line, the Approaches and
then to the English, from thence to the Lord of Brederoes Quarter, and so along
to Count Ernests Quarter, and so to Count Williams Quarter, where it ended
betwixt every volley, the Cannon, which lay upon the Batteries of the Outline
those, which were drawn out of our Quarters to the heath by the stone
Gallows, and those which were in all the Approaches, should be shot off. The
signal was thus, about ten a clock in the night, when a Granadoe was shot
into the Town, then the first volley should begin, and the Wispes of straw
upon the heads of the Pikes should be set on fire, all which was done
accordingly, and made a brave show. The volley met with a stop at the first,
but when it came to the French Line, to the Approaches, to the English, the
Lord of Brederoes, to Count Ernests Quarter and Count Williams Quarter, it
ran well, between the Volleyes there were about 300. pieces of Ordinance,
from Crevecoeur and round about our Army discharged. Those of the Town
acknowledged afterward, that shooting at once with so many Ordinance out of
our Approaches into the Town, did much amaze them, and then they began to
believe indeed that WESEL was Geux; Though the Governor by all means labored
to conceal it from them.

The 25. of August the Enemy sallied forth into the Works of Count Ernest,
and burnt about some 20. Posts of his Gallerie.

The 26. News came to us in the Siege, that the Enemy had left Amersford, and
that the States had laid 1500. Men in it.

The same day went forth of our Army two Companies of Horse, and 200.
Firelocks, which met with a Convoy of the Enemies goeing to Breda, whereof our
Men killed some, and took 40. of them prisoners, and some fourscore fair
Horses, with their Saddles and Pistolls, and brought them with good store of
munition and match into our Camp together, with the Lieftennante and the
Cornet or Ensign bearer of the Enemies Troops, which became surtie for the
value of the Wagons, which our Men left behind them.

The 30. A Pesant which had carried Letters too and fro, in and out of the
BUSSE, and had been our Prisoner some ten weeks, was condemned and hanged
in the Princes Quarter.

The first of September. the Enemy quitted the Counterscharfe of their Half
Moon, which lay before the Vuchter-Gate.

The same day our men attempted to make a Mine into the Bulwark of the Town
Walls, but could not effect it by reason of a piece of Ordinance, which the
Enemy had sunk, wherewithal they slew many of our Men at the end of the
Gallerie.

The second of September. Monsieur Stakenbrooke Lieftenant of our Horse, and the
Duke of Bullen with 1000. Horse, three hundred Firelocks, and diverse English
and French Musketeers taken out of diverse Companies, and three half French
Cannon toward evening were drawn out of our Quarters, and marched that night
to a small Town and Castle in Braband, called Endhouen, some six hours going
from the BUSSE, where some 400. of the Enemies Wardgelders, or as we term
them freshwater Soldiers, taken on by those of Flanders, who lay lurking
there, to see if in the night they could have cut our Trench upon the Outline,
and let in the water upon us, which stood blanke without our Entrenchment, by
reason of the stoppage: But his Excellentie having intelligence of them,
prepared this Camisado for them. They having advertisement by some Countriemen
their friends, of our Men's coming, stole away in the night and trusted rather
to their heels then to their Arms: Yet they were not gone so far, but the
Duke of Bullen with his Horse overtooke them, and rounds them in a Morrace and
by a Ditch, and charging upon them, slew about 70. of them, the rest cried out
for quarter, and because they were such Soldiers, the Duke was in a quandary
whether he would give them quarter or not, but at last by much entreaty he
granted them quarter, and brought away about some eight score of them
prisoners. In the Castle of Endhouen (which our Men took in to their
possession) we found four Petars made of oken Planks some 5. Inches thick, and
the chamber or briche lined with iron; these should have been charged with
Powther and stones, to have been discharged out of their sloopes upon our
Trench, and so having made a rupture in our Line, have let a Sea of water to
have drowned and overflowne all our Approaches, these engines were brought
likewise in Karts to his Excellency House in his Quarter.

The 3. we began to mine under the Halfe-Moone of the Vuchter-Gate.

The 4. we sprung a Mine in the Wall of the Halfe-Moone, but nevertheless we
were not able to lodge in it.

The same day the Scotch which had the guarde in the Approaches of Count
Ernest, won the Raveline running between the Horneworke and the Town.

On the fifth of September. the Trench and Faggots being laid from the end of our
long Gallerie, to the very foundation of the Bulwark. The Miners began a Mine
through the Brickes into it, and discovered a Mine which the Enemy had made;
nevertheless taking their course another way very skillfullie, went
forward being undertaken by three Englishmen to wit John Scot, William Lee and
especially Richard Pristman, who had good skill in digging and underpropping
of Colepits in England; who performed it very well. This commendations one
may give them that it took the best effect of any Mine which was ever sprung
before the BUSSE.

Well then on the tenth of September. being Mundaye betime in the morning, Sir
Jacob Ashly, Lieftennant Coronell to General Morgans Regiment, had the
command that night in the Approaches, and with much a do a Mine was made in
the Enemies half Moon before the Gate, ere the Mine was sprung he sent a
Sargeant with six Musketteirs to the top of the Halfe-Moone, to give the Enemy
an Alarm to bring them on toward our Mine, and then for fear of endangering
our men, he was to retreat back again, all which was done accordingly: The
Mine then being blown up, took but little effect, and made noe great
entrance. After this Sir Simon Harcourts Ensign was commanded to fall up with
some 30. Musketteirs to the top of the half Moon, and to give fire among the
Enemy, which he did. The Enemy stood it out a good while, thinking to draw
on our Men to two of their own Mines, which were to be sprung, now the
Enemies two Mines being blown up, Sir Jacob Ashly fell up, and gave order to
Sir Simon Harcourt to fall into the Enemies Halfe-Moone with 50. Musketteirs
and Pikes more, with his Ensign and the said 30. Musketteirs. The Enemy
disputing it a good while, but at last Sir Simon and his men beat them up to
their entrance into their half Moon by the moate side, and there Changed
bullets one with another and came to Push of pike, and after they had
maintained that place a pretty while he drove them from thence along the moate
side to a Traverse which was cast up some 60. paces from the said entrance of
the half Moon, where following them close along the moate of the Town
Bulwark, and giving fire upon them at last they bid him farewell and retreated
into the Town by Saint John's gate.

This being done he himself with his men made a stand at the entrance into the
half Moon, where the Enemy stood it out till it began to be light and till
our men were lodged in the top of the halve Moon, in those places which might
most offend the Enemy; this was the first work, which was carried away by
force of Arms and really disputed: In this fight Sir Simon Harcourt was five
times thrust and shot through his clothes, and yet ir pleased God he came of
well and with honor: After the English had thus taken the Halfe-Moone, his
Excellency came down into the Gallerie and gave the English extraordinary
thanks for carryeing themselves so well, and rewarded some of the Soldiers
with money: And thus the Enemy on this side were shutt up into the Town.

The same night came on Sir Harry Harbourd, Lieftennant Coronell to Coronell
Harwood, and relieved Sir Jacob Ashly, he brought with him for the relief, my
Lord Veres Company of Schoonhouen, Sir Harry Harbourds own Company, Captain
Gouldwells, Captain Abrihalls and Captain Welsons Companies. The Gallerie
being got over 91. Posts from the end of it, the Brush and Planks, and a Blind
was laid to the Bulwark, and the Mine being ready the Powder was chambered,
and the train laid to it. His Excellentie as merciful as valliant (to try
what the Enemy would do) gave order to Sir Harry Harbourd that on Tewsday
morning, after the Mine was sprung in the Bulwark, our men should fall on, and
though they should possess the Bulwark and be Masters of it, yet they should
retire into the Gallerie: The mine being blown up took good effect, and cast
up a great deal of earth and stones into the air, and shattred some two
rodds of our Gallerie in pieces, and made a breach mountable; after this Sir
Harry gave order that Captain Abrihalls Sargeant (who was slain goeing on)
should fall up to the Breach with his Musketteirs; that Captain Welson should
do the like with 30. men more to second the Sargeant, and Captain Gouldwell
to second them with the Pikes, from the end of the Gallerie; all which was done
accordingly, our men falling up to the Breach gave fire in the very teeth of
the Enemy, and our other Musketteirs giving fire from all Guardes and Flanks,
and our Ordinance thundering from all Batteries did so amaze and startle them,
that they quitted the Bulwark and retreated where it was cut off to the skirt
of the Wall by the Vuchtergate. This being done our men stayed a little while
upon the Breach till they discharged all their Bandeliers, and till that Sir
Harry caused them (according to his Excellency command) to retreat again
into the Gallerie, our men being drawn off, the Enemy came again to the
Breach, and cast up a little defense of earth, which the mine had blown up,
and Brush upon it, but our two half Cannon, which lay upon the right side of
our entrance into the Gallerie, beat the earth and Brush, which they cast up
about their ears, and shore off the heads of the Soldiers Pikes, which stood
there for the defense of their Workmen. This made a terrible Alarm in the
Town so that the Bells rung, the Women and Children cried, the Burgers and
Popish Priests by flocks ran to the Governor, and told him that now or never
it was time to lissen to a seasonable and an honorable Composition, for the
safeguard of their lives and goods: The Governor taking hold of this occasion
strikes his sail, and came with the Bishop Abbot and diverse Officers to the
Parapet of the Vuchter-Gate, sending a Drum, which reported that there were
some Gentlemen of quality overwhelmed and stifled in the springing of our
Mine, and requested that they might be sought for and burryed. His Excellentie
then being near at hand, sitting in the Gallerie, gave way to their request;
but as indeed the matter being otherwise: The Drum came up again, and
requested to speak with some of our Officers, and told them that the
Governor, Magistracy and Clergy in the Town were minded to parley with us;
presently after came four Persons of quality down the Breach to his
Excellency in the Gallerie, desyring four days time to writ to the
Archduchesse, and if so be they were not relieved within that time, they would
deliver over the City upon Composition: But his Excellency denyeing them this
request. They resolved notwithstanding to treat upon a Composition, and
Hostages were received and delivered on both sides. In the mean time the Walls
of the City were black of Burgers and Women, and Spiritual Persons to take
view of our doeings and the danger they were in.

The 13. of September the Commissioners, which the Town had appointed, dyned
with the Prince, and in the afternoon they left their commission with the
Prince and the States, and took their resolution with them.

The 14. the Aggreement was concluded to render up the City with the
Petler-Sconce to us, within three days after, and so accordingly was
subscrybed by both parties. In the mean time came many thousands of people
out of Holland and other Provinces thereabouts to see this famous Siege, with
the departure of the Enemy out of the City.

The 17. in the morning the Prince of Orange appointed all his Army to stand in
Battle order, in every Quarter, especially those of his own Quarter, as well
Horse as foot, and placed them in this manner: Along Monsieur Pinsens Quarter
(where the Enemy was to march through first) stood some threescore Companies of
Footmen, being Scotsh and Dutchmen, from Pinsens Quarter along the
Hollandes-Dyke stood some 40. Companies of French, and near to the very place
where the Enemy was to march out of our Line, stood some 40. Companies of
English; and without our Line along the heath stood some 30. Companies of
Horse. This being the Way which his Excel: had ordered for the Enemy to pass
through. Between the English and French stood a great Battery of twenty
Pieces of Ordinance to play upon the Heath, where his Excel: caused two
Princely Tents to be set up, for the Princess, the Queen of Bohemia, and the
Ladies and Gentlewomen which were there. The Prince sitting on Horseback, with
the King of Bohemia and the Prince of Denmark, and some 40. more, whereof most
of them were Dukes, Earls, Barrons, Lords, and the rest Coronells and of the
Chief Commanders, besides this the great number of our own Burgers and
people, which came thither to, behold this sight was so great that they could
hardly get beer for their monnie, and many of them were feign to sleep in
the feelde under the sky for want of better lodgings.

Now to relate the manner of their marching forth: First in the morning there
marched forth some 50. Horsemen, and as many firelocks and Musketteirs. Then
followed about eleauen hundred Wagons and Karts, whereof some 400. of them
were laden with sick and mayned Soldiers, and the rest with goods,
houshouldstuffe, Images, Clergieme^ and Women; and about eleauen of the clock
came the Jesuits and Priests ryding upon Wagons, and some barefooted Monks
and Friars goeing a foot. His Excel: being gone to dinner with the King and
Queen of Bohemia, and the rest of the Lords and Ladies, which stood upon the
Battery in the two Tents. In the mean time came the Governors Wife in her
Koach, who was but 3. weeks old in childbed, accompanied with her daughter
and her Child, lyeing upon the Nurses lap in the forepart of the Koach.
General Morgan and some others courts her, and made her stay before his
Excel: Tent, till he with his train returned from dinner. His Excel: coming
saluted her, and had some small discourse with her, and then took his leave
and let her pass. Toward evening came the Governor himself marching in the
midst of his Troops, he staid long because his Cannon was graveld and sunk
into the ground that he could not draw them away; the night drawing on his
Excel: sent him word by the Sergeant Major General that he would send them
after him on the morrow. The Governor had ordered his Men by three divisions,
the first were the Walloones consisting of six coulouts being some 400. Pikes
firelocks and Musketteirs. The second were Burgonians. The third and great
division were Highdutches with nine colors.

These 3. divisions were a matter 1400. men: Then followed the Governor on
Horseback, and passing by, his Excellency had some small speech with him:
After the foot came three Troops of Horse, which brought up the Rear, the
first was about 70. in number, the second about 80. and the last Troop about
90. all well mounted, well armed, proper Men, with red scarfes about them.
During this Siege the Enemy confessed there were slain some eleauen hundred
Soldiers, and not above 16. or 18. Burgers, by reason they refused to endanger
themselves in the Outworkes. They had with them according to the Articles of
Composition three whole and three half Cannon, very fair pieces, and two
Granado Morters. They left besides these in the Town some 36. brass Pieces
of Ordinance and six Iron pieces, the most part of the Brass Ordinance being
Sling-peeces and Faukenetts, and few half Cannons, except some which the
noses were bruised and shot off: And little or not Powder to speak of, which
indeed was the principal occasion they yielded up their Sconces, Traverses,
Halfe-moones and at last the City it self sooner then they needed.

In this Siege there happened many strange passages, which would be too
tedious to rehearse, only two things of note, I cannot but make the gentle
Reader acquainted with first in the Crossebrethren Cloister, a little before
the Town was yielded, there was a Monk in the Chancill sitting in one of the
Seats of the Quire, and reading in one of his Massebookes about midnight, we
shot a Granado into the Town, which fell just into the Seat where he sat,
and took him, his Seat and Book away that scarcely they could find a
Mommock left of him, only leaving the tincture of his blood upon the Wall for
a memorial, which is yet to be seen to this day. The second there was a
strange shot happened as in Ostend, there was a Cannon Bullet of the Enemies
shot from the down Battery, just into the mouth of one of our Cannons, which
lay upon the West-Bulwarke charged. These two Bullets stryking together,
gave fire to the loose corns of Powder, which were not driven home: Our Cannon
went of and sent the Enemy their own Bullet and ours back to them again. So
before the BUSSE a Soldiers presenting his Musket to give fire upon the
Enemy: The Enemy being quicker then he, discharged first upon him, and shot
just into the Bore of his Musket, part of the lead beating out at the
Tutch-hole, and so by the providence of God this Soldier escaped a scouring.

To return again where I left having related unto you the departure of the
Enemy, so in the morning about eight a clock his Excellency sent into the
Town his own Guarde, with six other Companies to take possession of the
Bulwarks, and about the evening came in some ten Companies more.

The 18. all strangers were suffered to come into the Town, and view all the
Enemies Works, Churches and Nonneries, one of them clymed up to the top of
Saint John's Church, steeple and set an Orange silk Flag above the
Wethercocke.

The Burgers for the mostparte were very well provided of all kind of
Victuals, except Cheese and Butter. The same day his Excellency came into
the Town, but returned suddenly back again.

The 19. our Ministers preached in three of the Churches, and in the great
Church were three Children baptized, where the PRINCE OF ORANGE, the King of
Bohemia and the Princess of Orange were Godfathers to them.

After this his Excellency placed new Magistrates in the Town and discharged
the old Magistrates, and all the rest of the Burgers of the oath, which they
had made to the King of Spain, and received them into the oath of the States
of these Unyted Provinces. And so left the Baron of Brederode with 36.
Companies of foot and 10. Companies of Horse for Garrison in the Town. The
States prescrybing a day of Thanksgiving to the Lord throughout the Provinces
for these Victories.

ARTICLES Granted by his Excie. my Lord the Prince of Orengie, to the Governor
of the Busse, and the Captains, Officiers and Soldiers therein.
I.
THAT the Governor of the Busse, with all the Officers of ware, and for diers
of what quality, or condition so ever they be; as well Horsemen, as foot, none
excepted: yea though they have abandoned the service of my Lords the States,
and given themselves into that of the King of Spaines, shall go out of the
Town without any disturbance, or molestation with their arms and Baggage; The
horse by the sound of the trumpet, their Cornets displayed, armed Complete,
and their Pistolles in their hands: The foot beating their drums, their
Coullers flying, their matches lighted at both ends, bullet in mouth, and in
rank and form, as they use to march in Battle, with their goods and the
safety of their lives to the town of Die.

II.
They shall carry with them six pieces of Ordinance, and two Morters at the
choice of the Governor, with all their train, equipage, and munition of
war, sufficient to discarge every one a dussen shot.

III.
They shall be furnished with horse, Wagons, and their Conductours sufficent to
draw Ordinance and Morters with all their train and Munition unto the town of
Die.

IIII.
All munitions of war and of Victuals appertaining to the King of Spain,
shall be delivered by such as his Excel: shall appoint to this effect, saving
those Victuals which were sold before the 12. of this month, when we began
to treat, which shall remain sold, without search or making inquiry after
any man that made any sail of them.

V.
All Officers and Soldiers, as well sick as hurt in the Gesthouse or in any
other place shall remain there till they have recovered their healths, and are
able to go away, giving them safe Conuoy and commodity to bring them their
Arms and Baggage to the town of Die or Breda.

VI.
A sufficient number of wagons and horse which the Governor shall require,
as well for his particular service, as for the Officers and Soldiers to carry
their goods and Baggage to Die is granted them, comprehending therein all
their Arms: yea the soldiers of the garrison of the Town, absent sick,
dead, hurt or fled, and that the said wagons shall in noe case be visited.

VII.
Those which will desire to carty their Goods and Baggage to Antwerpe, shall
have boats without any charge to them, to bring them thither through Holland,
freed from all manner of taxes, toles, or impositions permitting them men to
look unto their goods and Baggage, which shall not be visited nor stayed in
any place, under any pretense whatsoever, but shall pass to Antwerpe without
disbarking themselves.

VIII.
The Governor, Chiefs, Officers military, Judges, Soldiers, and all others
receiving pay from the King of Spain, as well Clergy men as Laye-men none
excepted, as also the widows and children, which have in the said Town any
houses, Inheritances, Rents, either upon the States of Brabant in these
quarters, or the Town, or upon houses or particular grounds, other goods
moveable or immovable, shall have the space and time of two years after the
signing of this Treaty, to tra^sport them, to morgage them at their wills, or
otherwise, to dispose of their goods, and during the said time shall enjoy
their Rents, hyres of houses, fruits and goods got or to be gotten, of what
nature and condition soever they be.

IX.
That the Officers an soldiers of what charge or condition soever they be, may
leave their wives and children in the town and during this term of two years
may dispose of their goods moveable and immouable situated in the said Town,
or else where none excepted, without any confiscation or prize to be made of
them.

X.
That the Officiers and soldiers, leaving their charg and service within the
time of two years, may freely return into the said Town, and enjoy this
Treaty as other Burgers and Inhabitants do, provided that first they give
notice thereof to his Excel: or the Governor of the said Town.

XI.
Noe Officers or Soldiers goods or Baggage shall be arrested here for any debts
whether he goes out with the garrison, or being sick or hurt, or at his going
out when he is recovered.

XII.
The prisoners as well on the one side as on the other, of what Condition soever
they be, shall be set at liberty without paying of ransom, but only for their
diet according to the taxation of the place.

XIII.
That all the boot made by those of the Town, as well before as during the
siege, shall not be restord back by them, but shall remain with them.

XIV.
After the Articles of this Composition are signed, time shall be given to the
Governor of the Busse to send an express messenger to the Serenissime Infanta
of Spain, with safe Conduct and assurance, to give her advice of what is past,
and it is to be understood that the Governor may do that the same day as the
articles are signed.

XV.
The Conditions being concluded, two days at the least shall he given to the
Governor and soldiers, to prepare themselves for their departure.

XVI.
The time limited being expired the said Governor and Officers do promise to
depart the garrison, to wit on Monday next betime in the morning, which will be
the 17. of this present month of September.

XVII.
Yet to be understood that during the time of these two days noe man in the
Town may come into the Army, nor those of the Army go into the Town, and
that for the avoiding of disorder, but every one in the mean while to keep
themselves in the trenches and Fortifications, without making of any approach
or act hostility, in assurance whereof hostages shall be given on both sides.

XVIII.
That before the garrison depart sufficient Hostages shall be given on his Excel:
behalf, who shall march with the garrison, Arms and Baggage to Die, and a
counter change for them by the Governor, which shall remain in the Army, til
his Excel: hostages and wagons be returned, and as soon as they are come
back, his Excel: will send their hostages with safe conduct and assurance unto
the Town of Die.

XIX.
The Officers, Captains and Officers, comprised in the first Article of this
Treaty, having any arms, boats, sloopes or other preparations of war,
belonging particularly to themselves, may sell or transport them, without any
enquiry to be made about those which shall buy or carry them away.

XX.
There shall be noe Restitution made of any horses, marchandises, wares or any
other goods sold or held for booty, nor noe man called in question about that.

XXI.
Those of the garrison of Breda being in the Town, as well Officers as
particular Soldiers, may return to Breda with the safety of their lives and
goods, as likewise shall be given to them a sufficient number of horse and
wagons, and a hostage to carry them and their goods thither in all assurance,
according to the tennor of the first Article as comprehended therein.

Given at the Camp before Busse the 14. of September 1629. and was signed F.
Henry de Nassau. A. de Grobindonck.
And beneath written By his Excel: order I. Iunius,
And sealed with his Excel: seal of Arms.
POINTS Agreed on by his Excellency the Prince of Orange, and the Deputies of
the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the United Provinces, to the
Ecclesiastickes, Magistracy, and Burgeses on the City of the BVSSE.
I.
FIrst that all Offenses, Injuries, and acts of hostillity, committed happened,
and effectuated between this Town, and those of the united Provinces, as well
from the beginning of these intestine troubles, Commotions and Wars, as
likewise during this siege, in what manner soever, either in general, or in
particular, as well within, as without, are, and shall remain pardoned, and
forgot, and held as if they had never happened, so that at no time any mention,
molestation, pretense, suite or inquisition in law within or without, for the
causes above said shall be made, prosecuted, or laid to the charge of the
living or heirs of the dead, or also to any goods belonging to them.

II.
That the Inhabitants of this town shall carry themselves conformable to the
Edicts of this Land, enjoying the liberty of Conscientie, as they usually do
over all. And that all Ecclesiastical and Clergy men, shall depart the Town
within the space of two months, behauing themselves in the mean while
according to the Edicts of the Land, and may take and carry along with them
their moueables, Images, Pictures and Church ornaments.

III.
The said Ecclesiastickes shall enjoy during their life the revenues and
fruits of their goods, in such places where they pay Contribution, yet is to
be understood, that the Ecclesiastical and Pastoral goods shall fall to the
High and Mighty Lords the States General, who shall have the disposing of
them, as well for the profit of the Town as other wise.

IV.
That de Nunns and other Ecclesiastical women, may abide in the Town, and
shall be maintained during their lives out of the revenues of their Cloisters,
yet remaining in the disposition of the high and mighty Lords de States
General, whether they shall be accommodated in their Cloisters, or provided
with other dvvellings.

V.
That also all the Inhabitants of this town, asvvell Ecclesiastics, Nunns,
as secular persons fled or otherwise, whosoever they be, bearing Office in
the oath, Government, and service of his Majesty, as soldiers or others, the
States of Brabant belonging to this town or not, their lives and goods shall be
preserved, asvvell in General as particular, if they contrary not the
precedent Article.

VI.
Also that this town with the Inhabitants and Burgers thereof, asvvell the
clergy as lay men shall be received and used in all gentleness and benignity
by the Lords, the States General, henceforvvard to live in all friendship and
Concordance with the other United Provinces and Towns, to trade and traffic
one with another according to their ancient liberty as is fitting.

VII.
That the High and mighty Lords the States General and his Excel: the Prince
of Orange, shall use exercise in the said town, liberty, territories and
Jurisdiction thereof, for so much as they are annexed to the town, the same
right and Jurisdiction as the Dukes and Duchesses of Brabant hitherto have had,
and to treat with this town so and in like manner as the capital Towns
of Brabant are used to do.

VIII.
That this Town, Burgesses and Inhabitants thereof, shall retain within the
liberty of the said town, all their rights, Customs freedoms, exemptions,
and all other privileges, asvvell general as particular which they have
enjoyed and possessed a long time before the vvarres, asvvell by water als by
Land within and with out the town, as in Brabant, Gelderland, Holland,
Zeeland, upon the Rhyne, and other Provinces, places and rivers, asvvell taxes,
toles of timber, Ingebot, the staple af oxen, and others none excepted,
forasmuch as concerns their lavvfull possession.

IX.
That the ruling and government of the town, as well for the Administration of
justice, as in politic affairs shall continue with the Magistrates, and the
three members of the Town, and that noe other persons shall be promoted
thereunto, or chosen, but such as are natifs of the said town, or which have
received holy baptism there, or such others as the High and Mighty Lords the
States General shall think good to naturallize and qualify thereunto: Saving
that for this time the Government both in justice and policy, as well in
chief as subordinate Magistrates shall be absolute appointed and constituted by
his Excel: and the Deputyes of the high and Mighty Lords the States General.

X.
That the town shall hold in their own Government and disposition, all their
inhabitants, right of impositions, Fisheries ways, corn measure, and
monthly monyes, and all their rightes and revenues in the same manner, and as
they have hitherto enjoyed the disposition and ordering of them, provided that
they have right thereunto, and without preiudicing the other members of the
united Provinces.

XI.
Those of the town shall keep still the residue of their victuals,
materials and other their common goods sold for the benefit, and the easing
of the town of charge, and preserved at the disposition of the abouesaid three
members, except the Ordinance, Arms and other munitions kept for the Town,
which may not be sold.

XII.
That all Confraternities, Artilleries, gilds and occupations, being at this
present in the town, shall remain in esse and keep their ancient Charters,
Ordinances, and Priuilidges together with all their goods ready or unready, and
to this end in time to come they may be ordered by the said co^fraternities,
occupatio^s, gilds, or sold or bought by them, and so to be governed by the
Marshalls headmen, and Rulers thereof for the common good, and to dispose of
them according to their pleasures.

XIII.
That in the County of Holland, and other united Provinces the three Arms of
this town shall not be stamped or counterfeited, neither any the marks
belonging to the gilds, or occupations of this town, as the Cutlars, the
pointmakers, and other hand crafts men, but that every one shall keep, and use
their own propper mark, and that of the towns where the worke-manship is
made. And that all gilds, and manifactures as also the Dyers and the new
yearly fayres procured during these troubles in the maioury of this City shall
cease, un less those of the maioury being heard there upon touching their
anuall faires, otherwise shall be disposed of in all equity, by the High and
Mighty Lords the States General.

XIV.
The Inhabitants of the Busse, and those in the country sitting under
co^tribution have granted them, and shall be entreated as the other good
Inhabitants of the United Provinces, as well within the Town as Dwellers in the
plain country.

XV.
And for that which co^cernes the Rents, and lawful debts made by the three
members of the city or their Deputies, also ordained by the Magistrate, or
accepted to be paid, as well during this siege as before, whether they are
enrovvled or sealed or not, the Magistrates of the town, shall deliver over a
pertinent state, that the high and mighty Lords afterward may in all equity
dispose thereof.

XVI.
And for the payment of them, and all other charges of the Town, the present
accises, impositions and other means of the Town in future time, shall take
their usual course, which may be increased or diminished by the three members:
yet so as they do noe prejudice to the means which is raised for the common
weal.

XVII.
That all acts, Resolutions, Decrees and Ordinances made by the three members
or Magistracy, forasmuch as they do not contradict the State or good of the
United Provinces, also the sentences given in power of Judicature by the
Shriefes, as likewise all euiction of goods duly solemnized, situated, with in
or without this town, shall remain in their force and vigor, yet so as that
it be no prejudice of the interessed party, neither upon the right of appeal,
or reformation, if that belongs unto them.

XVIII.
That those which are at this present in the Magistracis, or have bin
heretofore, shall not be molested, not troubled, because of the Acts and
Ordinances, granted by them for the distribution or payment of any money for
the Town, or other Provisions made, neither shall also the receivers be called
to an account for any money that they have paid and received, nor that the
Accounts of the abouesaid receivers, and other Deputies of this Town, shallbe
subject to any search or rivision. As likewise all the Accounts given up by the
receiver of the Demaines, States of Brabandt receivers of licenses, Conuoyes,
and Fortifications, shall continue as they are without any inquity made after
them.

XIX.
That the government of the table of the holy ghost, the great hospital, the
fabric of Churches, orphane houses, Lasories, findlings, madmen, and other
foundations of Hospital, for men and women, and the authorisation of the
Overseers, and directours of them, shall be conferred and given by the three
members in conformity and according to the Privileges of the City and as they
have been exercised heretofore.

XX.
That also the owners of winde-mills, and oyle-mills within this town and the
freedom thereof during this siege, or which by former wars have bin broken
off, or shot down, or otherwise demolished, may build them up again in the
same places, without suing any new warrants for them, or to pay any other
rights, then those which they have used to pay heretofore, except the service
of the Land should otherwise require it.

XXI.
That every Layeman of what condition soever he be, being in the oath and
service of his Majest: of Spain, whether of the town or not, he shall be freely
permitted, after the surrendering to depart out of it with his family and goods,
and to this end may send for wagons, karres, boats or shipping out of
Brabant, Holland, and other Newtrall Towns, without any of their persons,
goods, or the conductours of them, either going or coming shall be hindered,
molested, or troubled by the Soldiers or Fiscals, or any other, and that
without requiring any other pasport or consent but this.

XXII.
Moreover the Burgers departed out of the town, and such as are desirous to
dwell in the town, as likewise those which have bin in the service, oath,
military of his Majest: or not, and the heeyrs belonging to them, shall have
three years liberty ensuing that they may in all places, as well in the town,
liberty, and maioury thereof, sell, transport, change, barter their goods, as
they think good and fitting, or to have them received or administrated by such
as shall seem best to them, and coming dye within or without the town,
during the same time, by will or without making of will, in such a case their
goods shall fall to their instituted inheritours, or to the next of their
kindred.

XXIII.
And those in the mean time, and during the aforesaid three years, which will
go into the Provinces and towns, belonging to and under the obedience of his
Majest: about their particular affairs may freely do the same four times a
year, with the former knowledge of the Governor, of whom they shall be bound
to require a pasport, which he shall give them, unless he has some just
reasons to the contrary: And at end of these three years may make their abode
in this town or in other places, where they pay Contribution, where they shall
enjoy the same liberty, for to go, to pass, and to traffic every where, for
the enjoying of the effect of this present treaty.

XXIV.
That noe other Governor shallbe appointed or made over the Town, nor his
Substitute, but one of the House of Nassawe, or some other Nederlandish Lords
of Vassalls.

XXV.
That the garrisons shall not enjoy any exemption or freedom of imposition
from the means of the town, but shall help to bear the accise, as other
inhabitants do.

XXVI.
That all persons absent, their wives and children, as well clergy as lay men
fled, shall be included, and comprehended in this treaty.

XXVII.
That all sick and hurt, at this present in the great Hospital or other
houses, either Soldiers or others may bide therein, till they are thoroughly
recovered, or afterward to stay or to depart, as it pleases them, and to that
end shall be assisted with waggo^s, or carts to carry away their Baggage without
any impeachment.

XXVIII.
All these Articles are approved, agreed unto by his Excie and the Deputies of
the High and mighty Lords the States General, and accepted on by the
Ecclesiastickes, Magistrates and Burgers of the said Town, in power of their
letters, or Attorney, in witness whereof we have signed hereunto at Vucht in
the Camp before the BUSSE the 14. of September 1629.

And was signed F. Henry de Nassaw. Fr. Michael Bishop of the Busse. Fr.
Johannes Moore Abbet of Bernes. Johannes Hermanus, Deacon of the Busse. R. van
Voorne. R. van Greeneven. Blooff van de Sloote. Henry Summars. Peeter Huberts
Herialthuvel.

THE RATIFICATION.
THE States General of the United Provinces, having heard the Report of their
Deputies, after the sight, lecture, and examination of the points and Articles
above named, have with ripe deliberation approved and ratified the same as
their Highness and Mightines do approve and ratify them by these, promising to
keep and observe them, and cause them to be kept and observed; according to
the tenor and form of them.

Given in the Camp before the BUSSE the 14. of September 1629. And was signed
Hen. Ter Cuylen. Vt supra.
And under eath was written By the order of the High and Mighty Lords the
States General. Signed Corn. Musch. And sealed with the seal of their
Highnesses and Mightigesses.



FINIS.
Printed at AMSTERDAM, By Ian Fredericksz Stam. M.DC.XXX.

start of three page map Carte, representant les Approches du Quartier du
Prince d'Orange jusques aux deux Forteresses Isabelle et St. Anthoyne Par le
Sr. Jacques Prempart Ingenieur du Roy de Swede.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V X Y Z Aa Bb Cc Dd Ee Ff Gg Hh Ii Kk Ll
Mm


continuation of map Autre Carte, representant la continuation des Aproches du
Quartier du Prince d' Orange, depuis la petite forteresse St. Anthoyne, jusques
a la Ville et Boulevard, la ou on a faict saulter la derniere Mine, Par le Sr.
Jacques Prempart Ingenieur du Roy de Swede.
continuation of map LES APPROCHES DV COMTE GVILLAVME DE NASSAV.


map of the approaches of Count Erneste Casimir on Bois le Duc Les Approches du
Comte Erneste Casimir de Nassau, Gouverneur de Frise, Marshall gen: du Camp
devant Bois le Duc.


map of the approaches of Baron Brederode on Fort de Petteler Les APPROCHES DV
BARON DE BREDERODE verse le Fort de Petteler.


map of the approaches of Sr. Pinsen LES APPROCHES DV SR. PINSEN Gouverneur de
Rees. Amstelodami Henricus Hondius Excudit. Anno 1630.


map of the district of the Count of Solms CARTE contenant le Quartier du Comte
de Solms a Engelen, avec les Moulins a eau faict par le commandment du Prince
d'Orange, et autres ouvrages d'alentour.

Amsterodami, HENRICUS HONDIVS EXCVDIT. Anno 1630.



four scanned partial images of one map Nouvelle Carte representant la Ville de
BOLDVC en plan, avec ses Rempars, Fossez, Forteresses d'alentour etc.

Ensemble Les APPROCHES de chaque Quartier de ceux de dehors jusques a la dite
Ville.

tout Mesure et Dessigne, Par le Sr. Jaques Prempart, Gentilhomme Francois,
Ingenieur du Roy de Swede.




