A LIVELES LIFE: OR, Man's Spiritual death in Sin. Wherein is both learnedly
and profitably handled these four Doctrines The Spiritual Death in Sin. The
Doctrine of Humiliation. Mercy to be found in Christ. Continuance in sin,
dangerous.
Being the substance of several Sermons upon EPHESIANS. 2. 1, 2, 3. And you has he
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, etc. Whereunto is annexed a
profitable Sermon at LINCOLNES INN, On GENESIS XXII. XIV. Delivered by that late
faithful Preacher, and worthy Instrument of Gods glory, JOHN PRESTON, Dr. in
Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuel College in
Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolns-Inne.

ROMANS 7. 9. For I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment
came, sin revived, and I dyed. LONDON: Printed by I. Beale, for Andrew
Crook, at the Black Bear in Paul's Churchyard, 1633.

AN EXCELLENT TREATISE OF THE SPIRITVALL DEATH IN SIN.
EPHESIANS. 2. 1, 2, 3. And you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins.

Wherein in times past ye walked according to the course of this world,
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works
in the children of disobedience.

Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of
our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by
nature the children of wrath, even as others.


THe scope of the Apostle in the former part of this Chapter, The scope of the
Chapter.
is, to stir up the Ephesians to a high estimation of their redemption by
Christ; and that he might the better do this, he shows them their estate
without Christ; That they were children of wrath, and dead in sins and
trespasses: and that they were dead in sin, he proves, Because they walked
in sin: That they walked in sin, he proves, Because they had amongst them
some false guides, Three false guides among the Ephesians.
which here he reckons up, and declares them to be these three:

First, the World; ( They walked according to the course of the world.)
Secondly, the Devil; ( According to the prince of the power of the air.)
Thirdly, the lusts of the flesh; ( Among whom also we all had our conversation,
in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, etc.)
The first point that we will observe as naturally arising out of the words,
Doct.
is this,

That all men by nature are dead in trespasses and sins.

This point is to be considered of all men, both those which are alive, and
quickened out of this Lethargy; and those which are yet dead in their
trespasses and sins. That we are thus dead in sin, The Doctrine proved
first by Reason,
it plainly appears by this reason; All mankind were represented in our first
parent Adam, of whose fall this death of sin, and of nature, was made a part
of the punishment; now he being the root of us all, and that being dead, all
the branches must needs be dead also. Secondly, by Scriptures.
It is also plain by places of Scripture: as, Ioh 5. 25. The dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live: so again,
Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light. Also in the Gospel, our Savior Christ says, Let the
dead go bury the dead: that is, let such as are dead in trespasses and
sins, go bury those that are dead through sin. By all which places it
plainly appears, that all men by nature are dead in sin. This men consider
not: You would think it a gashly sight to see Churches, streets, and houses
for to lie full of dead corpse: but for to see places full of men spiritually
dead, which is far the worse, is a more gashly sight; and yet who amongst us
is there, almost, that does consider it?

In this death in trespasses and sins, for our fuller understanding of it, I
will show you these five things: 1. What this death is. 2. The kinds of this
death. 3. The signs of this death. 4. The degrees of this death. 5. The use to
be made of it. 1* What this death is.



First, What this death is.

To know this, we must understand that as a corporal death, Two things, a
natural and a spiritual death
so a spiritual death has two things in it:

First, As in the natural death there is a privation of life when the soul is
separated from the body; so in the spiritual death there is a privation of
the life of the soul; namely, the extinction of original righteousness; by
reason of which, a man can neither set hand nor foot forward in the ways of
goodness; as Paul confesses of himself: for as the separation of the soul
makes the body to dye; so the extinction of original righteousness makes the
soul to dye.

Secondly, As in the death of the body there is a stinking carcass left, when
the soul is departed thence; so in the death of the soul there is a positive
corrupted quality left, called the flesh, whereby a man is prone to do all
evil: And therefore they are called dead works: Dead works why so called.
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works,
etc. Heb. 6. 1. And so again in the 9. chapter of the same Epistle,, and 15.
verse; where it is said, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God. Now it seems a contradiction that
they should be works, and yet dead; but yet it is so, because besides the
privation of good, there is a positive evil, and stirring quality, which is
active, and brings forth these evil and dead works.

Now for the chief seat of this death: The seat of this death.
It is chiefly seated in the mind and understanding, and not in the will. The
Understanding is primum vivens, and moriens primum; the first living, and first
dead: for although the will be corrupted, yet whatsoever is in it, is carried
through the understanding. And this death of the understanding is such a
darkness of judgment, as thereby a man esteems not, but dislikes the ways
of God and goodness, and approves the ways of sin and wickedness. And in
this faculty of man, the understanding, is this death of sin chiefly seated;
therefore it it is said, Ioh. 1. 4, 5. In him was light, and that light was the
life of men. So also, Ephesians. 5. 14. the place before mentioned, Awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: Ephesians.
5. 1^.
where he says, not life, but light; for if there be light, life will
certainly follow: So again, Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes, that they may
turn from darkness to light. One would think, that in these places it should
be life, and not light; but it is so put to show that the chiefest seat of
this death is in the understanding. Therefore also is it said, Be renewed in
the spirit of your minds, Romans 12. 2. And to the same purpose also says
James, Iam. 1. 18. The word of Truth begat you: now Truth has a reference to
the understanding. And thus briefly have I given you a taste what this death
is, and the place wherein it is seated.

2. 2. The kinds of this death.
Now it follows that we speak of the kinds of this death; which for the
better handling, and benefit of your memories, I will range into these three
sorts: 1 The death of guilt, by which we are bound oover to eternal damnation:
and so in the same manner usually we say, a man condemned is a dead man. 2 The
death which is opposed to the life of grace which is the separation of grace
from our soul. 3. The death which is opposed to the lif of joy and comfort,
which is a thousand times more terrible than all deaths, if it were truly, and
as it is indeed apprehended.


Which latter death, that you may the better conceive of, I will open it a
little to you.

God joins with every man's soul, and gives to the most wicked man some
seeming life of grace, and some colorable life of comfort; for else they would
endure an hell here upon earth.

For the first; although the wicked have no true grace, yet they have a shadow
of it, as is manifest in their moral virtues. So for the second, for comfort,
they have some, although no true comfort: for God is the author of comfort, as
the Sun is of light; which all, both good and bad, do more or less
participate of, or else they could not subsist: As may appear by the contrary;
for, when he does but once withdraw his comfort from us, How terrible the
taking away of Gods presence is.
it is the terriblest thing in the world: An example of this we may see in
Christ; when this comfort was with-drawne from him but in sense and feeling
only, it made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew.
27. 46. Where Gods presence is taken away, there is nothing but horror and
trembling: and I have known such, that in his absence, when his presence has
been taken away, have had their souls so pressed with horror, that they have
said, That if at a thousan^ years end they might enjoy the comfortable
presence of God, they would think themselves the happiest men in the world.
The absence of this, made Luther to say, That if all the creatures in heaven
and hell should set to torment him, they could not do it so much as the
withdrawing of Gods comfort did.

Alas, poor creatures, now in this world God is not separated from you, you
feel not the torment of this death, but now you enjoy the crepusculum, and
daylight of this comfort; and therefore although it be now slightly esteemed,
and little regarded, yet when that day shall come that the Lord shall totally
separate them from his presence, they shall by lamentable experience learn how
terrible a thing it is. Thus much for the second point, the kinds of this death.

3. 3. The signs of this death.
For the signs of this death.

The signs of it may be taken from them of the bodily death; the signs of
that are these four: 1. The understanding fails. Four signs of bodily death.
2. There is want of sense. 3. Want of motion. 4. There is a deadness in the
face.


These four things you shall find in a spiritual death: 1. Privation of
reason.
First, As those that are corporally dead, want reason and understanding, so
do those that are spiritually dead; they cannot understand the things of God,
no more then men can judge of colors in the dark.

I but some man will object and say, Object.
The carnal man knows many things, he has a general notion of the Godhead,
and can talk of the creation of man, and his redemption by Christ, he can
discourse of faith, repentance, etc.

There is a great difference between knowing Spiritual things, Answ. A
difference between knowing spiritual things, and knowing them in a right
manner.
and knowing them after a right manner; a carnal man knows them, but not in
a right manner, not in a spiritual manner. And hence is that of the Apostle,
Tit. 1. 16. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him,
being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate: The
word which there is translated reprobate, is (...); signifying, unable to
judge. Indeed in the general they may understand and like the things that are
of God, but come to particular circumstances, that crosses them; they, as a
Divine says of them, love veritatem lucentem, non redarguentem; they wholly
dislike particulars, because they bring them to hic et nunc, to particulars. In
the abstract they love holiness, but not as it is applied to particulars, as
it convinces them of their particular sins. Hence it is that godly men are
most hated of them that come nearest to them in show, because they bring light
home to them, and discover their acerrima proximorumodiv, their inward and
bosom hatred of their neighbors: It is as much as if one should bring a Torch
to one that is a doing some unlawful thing, some deed of darkness, he would
wish him further off: their lives shine as lights, and therefore giving good
examples by a shining and godly conversation, which is contrary to the life of
the ungodly and hypocritical ones, they cannot choose but hate them: and as all
wicked men hate them, so especially those that are nighest unto them in show;
because that their life does not only shine unto them, and lay open their
vildnesse, but scorch them also; and therefore they being occupied about the
works of darkness, wish them as far off as they can: So that hence we see,
with an approving judgment, not any save those which are quickened, can
understand spiritual things.

2. 2. Privation of sense.
The second thing wherein a natural death consists, was in a privation of
sense; so also is it in the Spiritual death; for their hearts are strong and
cannot be moved; although I deny not but sometime they may have a little
griping of conscience, and sense of Gods judgment, which naturally arises
from conscience; but they never have any real and true feeling of it.

3. 3. Want of motion.
In a natural death they are without motion; so likewise it is in a Spiritual
death; for the wicked can no more move themselves unto any good work, than a
dead man can move himself out of his grave.

4. 4. Want of beauty and vigor.
In a natural death there is a want of vigorousnesse and beauty, as well in
the face as in all other parts of the body; so also there is in the Spiritual
death the loss of that vigorous beauty which follows the life of grace; they
may be seen to have death in the face; if a living man beholds them, he
knows how to discern it: although I deny not but that they may have
hypocritical painted virtues, which may to weak eyes for a great while seem
true ones; as men may have painted faces that have been taken for living ones,
but they are not true graces, such as proceed from the life of grace indeed.

I but some may here object and say, Object.
have not some men many excellent moral virtues, such as even the godly
themselves have not?

Indeed it is true that they have, Answ. How wicked men may have moral virtues
and these are Gods gifts also, but yet they are but as chains of gold about a
dead ma^s neck, oras pearls in a swines snout: There may be many good things in
them, but they make them not good men; for as the evil actions of good men
redound not to their persons to make them evil, so these good actions in evil
men, redound not to their persons to make them good; they may have good in
them, but are not good. And thus much for this third point, the signs of this
death.

4. To come to the degrees of this death: First, 4. The degrees of this death.
The death of guilt.
for the death of guilt, that has degrees; some men are more bound over than
others, as the Heathen men that were guided only by the light of nature, they
indeed were guilty; but the Jews which had a more perfect knowledge, they were
more guilty then they: and now we that live under the tropicke of the Gospel,
and have Sermon upon Sermon, line upon line, and every day are instructed, are
more guilty then the Jews: and amongst us, they that have most means, and
profit least, are most guilty of all; and therefore are most bound over unto
this death.

Secondly, The death opposite to the life of grace.
for the death that is opposite to the life of grace and sanctification, that
also admits degrees:

1. For the first part, the privation of life, indeed there is no degree; but
all that are dead, in regard of the privation and absence of original
righteousness, are all dead alike.

2. But for the second, to wit, the positive corrupt quality, which is called
the flesh, that admits degrees: for one may be mad and drunk both alike, but
the one may have some sparks of reason more then the other. The degrees
therefore of this death, Three degrees of this death. The first.
are these three that follow:

1. When men do oppose and set themselves against a holy life, although it be
closely and cover^ly under other names, for against them directly the Devil
will not speak, because the knows it will not be regarded; but he speaks
against them under names of reproach, which he himself has invented. These
men are one of the bottom stairs of the chamber of death; and therefore it is
almost impossible they should ever rise, but must needs remain in a pitiful
case, although it may be they think far otherwise.

2. When men are given up to voluptuousness and sensuality; The second.
as Paul speaks of the wanton widow, 1. Tim. 5. 6. that because she lived in
voluptuousness, she was dead while she lived: Even so, the more a man is
sunk into voluptuous courses, the more he is dead, and as it were buried in
his corruptions, so that he is altogether unable to stir out of them; it is
a very difficult thing to leave them; The third.
as in the sins of uncleanness.

3. When we are indifferent, and care not how things go; and this is when a
man is addicted unto the death of civil men, which is a degree nearer to life,
yet is truly and indeed no better than a death: such as have much restraining
grace, these are nearer the gate of heaven then others, yet they are as truly
shut out as they that are furthest off; it is no matter how near they are to
heaven, since they are all out of heaven alike; they shall be sure, if never
any more quickened, to go to hell as well as others.

Thirdly, The death opposite to the life of joy.
The death that is opposed to the life of joy and comfort, that has also
degrees: God sometimes with-drawes his comfort from some more than others, and
so suffers some to have less horror then others: Thus I have briefly explained
this death, in which all men naturally are. I will now answer an objection of
Bellarmine against that which has been said, and so come to the fifth thing.

Some there be that say, Object.
If all men are dead in sin, as you say they are, then to what end is all our
Preaching, and your hearing? for the dead are without life, and cannot be moved
with any of these things, and therefore they are all in vain.

To this I answer; Ans. 1
first, that although every man by nature be dead unto grace, yet he has the
lif^ of reason in sin, whereby he is able to perceive two things:

1. To see that they are dead, and without this life of grace, their conscience
telling them so.

2. By the sight and feeling of their death, they are able to bring themselves
to the means of life, as to the Word and Sacraments.

Secondly, I answer; Ans. 2.
that though all men be dead, yet there is an end and effect of our speaking,
and their hearing: for the Word that we speak may put life into them, as the
word that Christ spoke unto Lazarus, was able to raise him from the dead.

Thirdly, Ans. 3. A difference between the spiritual and corporal death.
We must know that there is a great difference between this spiritual death,
and the corporal death; for this death consists in the understanding and
will, and is a free willing death; in it they freely slye good, and embrace
evil; they freely choose the ways of death, and therefore are said to be
already dead: as, suppose a man is resolved to commit murder, or treason, and a
friend come to him, and persuade him from it, and cannot prevail, that man may
be said to be dead, because he will do that that will cost him his life:
Even so we may affirm that that man is dead already, because he will do that
that will bring death after the doing of it.

5. 5. The Uses of this point.
Now for the fifth thing, the uses of this point, That all men by nature are
dead in sin.

The first Use then that we may make of this point, Uses. 1.
is, If all men are dead in sin, then let us be exhorted not to defer our
repentance, Not to defer repentance.
saying, we will repent afterward. This is a fault usual amongst young men,
and such as presume of their strength and ability of nature to live a great
while, they find nature strong in them, and therefore put off repentance till
they be sick, and age bring them to think of death: but let such consider that
they are dead already, and repentance is a putting of a new life into them:
Do thou think it is in thy power to create a new life in thee when thou art
dead? Surely, How the devil deceives men in persuading them to put off their
repentance,
no more is it in thy power to repent when thou would. Hereby the devil
entrappeth many, in putting this conceit into them, that they may repent when
they will; and this he brings them unto, by making them to mistake
repentance, in conceiving of it to be nothing else but a sorrow for sin past,
and a purpose to live well afterward, and leave all sin: he never tells them,
nor they never think that it is the creation of a new life in them; for then
they would say more: but they are decejued, this is not to repent, for thou
may do all this, and yet when thou have done, be damned. But such
repentance as will save thy soul, Saving repentance what it is.
is a sorrow for they sin that is past, and a purpose for the time to come to
endeavor to leave all sin, arising out of a love to God: for all repentance
arises either out of a love of God, or else from self-love: if it be out of a
love of God, thou will presently give thy self unto his service, and forsake
thy sin: if it be not out of love to God, but out of self-love, that thou
purposest to forsake thy sin, then it is not true repentance, b^^ false, and
rises from by-respects. Repentance is hard to be had, it is not in thine own
power; except God breathe a new life into thee, thou can not repent; thou art
as the red clod of earth before God, of which he made Adam; it had no life,
until he breathed into it: so while the spirit breaths in us, we are dead. A
Beast may desire his own life, so may a man his own salvation, but he can
do nothing without the spirit blows. When then the spirit blows, why will thou be so foolish as to defer thy repentance unto another time? If a man
upon pain of death were within twenty days to be beyond the Seas, Simile.
if the wind should blow well for his purpose the first, second, or third day,
would he be so foolish as to neglect it, and defer his journey, and say, it
may be it will blow again ten days hence, and then I will go? No, he will
not be so foolish, for he knows the wind blows where and when it lists;
and therefore he will take it when it blows, least it blow there no more. In
these earthly things men are not so foolish, why therefore are they so ignorant
in this point of spiritual wisdom? Let every one of us then hereby be
persuaded to learn wisdom; when the spirit blows, neglect it not: certain
it is, that except it does blow in thy heart, thou art damned; therefore when
it does blow, suppose it be at 17. or 18. years of age, neglect it not, omit
it not, neither defer it, it may be it will never blow again, and thou can
not make it blow when thou would, for it is free.

There are none which live under the Gospel, but at some time or other have
had some blasts of the Spirit, but in some it vanishes as bubbles in the
water: but let us take heed of that, and unless we could have them again when
we would, let us not let them pass: when thou have but the least spark, let
it not go out, leave it not till it is become a slame to purify thy heart.

Francis Spira neglecting these comfortable blasts, An example of Spira.
at the last wished that he might have had but one drop of that comfort which
once he despised; and so till his last breath, cried out, I am damned. God not
therefore still on in thy sins, falsely persuading thy self, saying, thou
shall be saved: Remember what God threatens unto such men, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. He
that hearing the words of this curse, shall bless himself, saying, I shall
have peace though I follow my sins; the Lord will not be merciful to that
man. Sit down therefore but one half hour, and consider with thy self, that
thou art but a dead man, and that thou can not quicken thy self, but it is
God only that is able to quicken thee; and the quickens whom he will, and
those whom he quickens are but very few, as the gleaning after the harvest,
or the grapes after the vintage, and thou know not whether thou art in that
small number: Consider, I say, but this with thy self, and surely this will
make thee never to give thy self rest, until thou find life in thee, and
never be quiet until thou art sure thou art quickened.

Another Use which we will make of this point, Use 2. How to esteem civil men.
is, If naturally all men are dead in trespasses and sins, this should teach
us how to esteem of civil men, and such like; we should esteem of such men
as of dead men: and therefore, 1 We should not overvalue them. 2 We should not
make them our companions.


First, We should not overvalue them. For their beauty, they have none that is
true beauty: what beauty have dead men in them? they are dead, let us not
regard their seeming beauty. Esteem the poor Saints; for they, though never
so mean, are better then those, though never so brave. Grant your civil men
be as Lions, (then which no irrational creature is better,) and that your
Saints are but as dogs (then which no creature is worser,) yet a living dog
is better than a dead Lion. It Is a sign of a new life to esteem no carnal
excellency: so says Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 16, 17. Wherefore henceforth know we no
man after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
now henceforth know we him no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature: old things are past away; behold all things are become new: he,
that is, a new creature, will not regard these things, but they will be dead
in his account. They account us but dead men, therefore let us account them so
also.

Secondly, Make them not your companions.

We may, and ought to love them with the love of pity, but not with the love
of delight and complacency: if thou love them, and delight in them, it is a
sign thou art dead also; yet in this we are to blame, that we do not more
pity them, and seek their salvation, but we must not delight in them, and
make them our familiar acquaintance, for we can never thrive in grace till we
leave them: for although they be dead, yet they have a leaven which will infect
thee, although thou perceivest it not. We use to say, we will make use to our
selves of the good in them, but let the hurt go: but we cannot do so; for
we are insensibly hurt, when we think we are furthest from it: Simile.
Even as a man is tanned when he is working in the Sun, and he never
perceives it; so does their company infect us insensibly, when we think least
of it: It Is therefore but a folly to purpose to serve God, and not to break
off their company; Simile.
yea, it is a plain contradiction. Every man is compared to a coal, he is
either living or dead; if he be a living coal, he will kindle him that is
next him; but if he be a dead coal, he then will black and fully thee:
Even so it is with company, if it be good and zealous, it will kindle our
affections; but if bad, it will be sure to infect us: therefore from such
company thou must either gain good or harm; but for good, certain it is that
thou can receive none, and therefore thou must receive harm: If thou walk
with the wise, thou shall be more wise; if with the fool, thou shall learn
folly, Pro. 13. 20.

The third Use we will make of this point, is this, Use 3. To stir up to
thankfulness for being quickened.
Seeing that by nature all of us are children of wrath, and dead in trespasses
and sins, This should stir up those that are quickened, to be thankful to
God therefore. Above all, we ever labor to be most thankful to him that
has saved our lives; and this God has done for us, let us therefore stir up
ourselves to thankfulness. Paul, as we may read, Romans 7. 24, 25. joins these
two together, his deliverance, and his thankfulness; O wretched man that I am!
Who shall deliver me from this body of death? I thank God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. I confess the world esteems not this, but if they have
riches therein, they rejoice; and so like the dunghill Cock, or unskilful
Lapidaries, prefer vain things before this precious Jewel; but they that
have once found the sweetness of it, will not lose it for a world: for if we
have but this, what though we lose wife, children, goods, credit, and good
name? they are all too light being laid in the balance with this. Do ye
every one therefore consider who it was that gave thee this, and to him yield
all thankfulness. Let us love much, because as much is forgiven, so much is
given to us: Paul was much stirred up with this consideration, thinking that he
could never do enough for Christ, who had done so much for him; as appears in
many places of his Epistles.

The fourth Use we will make of this point, is, If we are all dead in
trespasses and sins, Use 4. How to esteem of the means of grace.
then this teaches us how we should esteem of the means of grace: if we are
dead, then it must be an Omnipotent power which must quicken us. All the
means, as the Word preached, the receiving the Sacraments, etc. are but dead
letters, they are but as pens without ink, God must put ink into them if
ever they be effectual: and therefore as we must not give too little to the
means, so we must not give too much, nor rest in them. When we come to hear
the Word preached, it is not the hearing of the Minister, but Christ in the
Word preached, which makes us live. It is good to hear the Minister, but
except we hear another voice speaking to the heart, as his does to the ear,
we shall never be the better: it is Christ's voice in the Word which does
quicken and put life in our souls. But here let me warn you to take heed of
breaking the Conduit-pipe from the Fountain; if thou hear and profitest
not, know that it is because Christ speaks not to the ears of the heart, as
well as the Minister to our outward ears.

The fifth and last Use we will make of this point shall be, Use 5. To examine
ourselves whether we have life in us or no. Simile.
If that naturally all men are dead in sin, this should teach us to try our
selves, and see whether we are dead or alive. Consider the shortness and
uncertainty of thy life here: Man's life is like an houre-glasse; if it runs
his course it is but an hour, and it may be broken before it is run out: ye
have but a short while to live here, according to the course of Nature, and yet
perhaps that course may not run out too, it may be broken off before we are
aware; and then for ever, either in heaven or hell, we must abide hereafter:
Oh then never be quiet until you see wihther you shall go, to eternal
bliss, or everlasting woe. Here the Devils triicke is to put it into men's
heads, How the devil deceives civil men.
that a civil life will serve the turn: but he deals with them as those
that take gold from infants, and give them counters and rattles: and thus he
would keep them from this consideration, persuading them of the latitude of
religion, and telling them that they are well enough, seeing they are troubled
for some sins, and do some duties, perhaps, in private, but this you may
do, and yet be dead still. If he cannot prevail this way, then he will labor
to hinder them by drawing them on in a voluptuous course of life, or with
worldly cares, and so draws them from themselves, and so makes them never to
consider what they are doing, nor whit^er they are going: and therefore is it
that in the Gospel of Saint Luke, chap. 16. the prodigal Son is said, to come
home to himself, when he once began to consider his estate: Although their
conscience tell them all is wrong, yet the tabrets of lusts and pleasures make
such a deane where they are, that they hear it not, and so never consider:
nay, if that Christ himself again, or the sons of Thunder should speak,
yet except Gods Spirit should inwardly work, it would not make men seriously
to consider their estates: It is the hardest thing in the world to make men
sensible of life and death. Let us therefore be moved in particular to
consider whether we are dead or alive.

If thou art quickened, Two signs of our quickening 1.
thou shall find, one time or other, these two things in thee:

First, Thou once had a deep and sensible consideration of thine estate by
nature, thou were deeply affected with it, so that thou saw what need thou
had of Christ: till thou have had this consideration, thou art a dead man. I
know God can save thee without this, he could come without the terrible voice,
as Christ could have come without John Baptist before him, but he will not,
neither ever does, because it is impossible for a man highly to esteem of
Christ till he is thus humbled; for he never will prefer him in particular
actions, and take him with all crosses and losses, till he fully see what need
he has of him, which he cannot until he is thus humbled.

Secondly, Consider if thou were ever changed from what thou formerly were;
neither is it a slight change that will serve, but it must be both constant
and general; it must not be for a month or a year, but daily and continually.
It must be such a change that all where thou live may see it; thou must
become a new soul in another body: Thy change must be so great that thou may
say, Ego non sum ego, I am not my self, I am quite another man: There must be
as great a change in thee, as there is in a white cloth when it is died black.
Such a change was in Paul, he was converted from a persecutor to a Preacher: So
thou must of a Lion be made a Lamb: there must as much difference be in us, as
is between winter and summer.

And now seeing the time of the Sacrament is at hand, An application to examine
our selves before we receive the Sacrament,
let us all examine our selves: we must not make excuses to keep from the
Sacrament, but as all, Nehem. 9. were to come to the Passover, else they were
to be cut off from their people, except they could show some good cause; so I
know no reason why it should not be so still for the Sacrament. But again, on
the other side, if we do come, and are dead men, we come unworthily, and eat
and drink our own damnation in not discerning the body of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.
29. which we do when we do not sufficiently esteem it, and conceive not
what right we have to, which was the Corinthians sin; for they knew well
enough that that did represent his body. Let us therefore take heed we come
preparedly; for as God struck Vzzah for touching the Arc with polluted hands,
and Nadab and Abihu for offering of strange fire, so if thou come unpreparedly
to the Sacrament, he will strike thee.

But to return to the point which was even now handled, That all men are dead
in trespasses and sins, because it is point which concerns all sorts of men,
we will a little further consider it, and in the next place speak of the
nature of dead men. The nature of dead men.


Dead men are either, 1. Such as are stark dead in sin, Two kinds of
spiritually dead men.
and do make no show at all of life; as are all open profane, and notoriously
wicked men. 2. Such as are dead indeed, and in truth, but yet make a show of
life, outwardly seem to have it; like the Angels, that have appeared many
times in assumed bodies, but yet have none of their own that is true and
substantial; and these are chiefly dissembling hypocrites, or men merely
civil.


First, This stark deadness, without any show at all of life, First, stark
deadness.
of which sort we have every where too too many; consists chiefly, 1. In the
privation of life. 2. In an active positive principle.


Now there are certain signs arising from both these, and they are 1.
Positive. 2. Privative.


1 The Positive signs of a dead man, Three positive signs of dead men.
are these three:

A careless neglect of goodness.
seek such things as are agreeable to preserve that life, and hate the
contrary: as a man that lives a natural life, looks for food, raiment, etc.
so in the life of grace, there is an aptness to cleave unto goodness, and
unto Christ, as iron does to the Loadstone: So a man that lives the life of
grace, his delight is in praying, hearing, reading, etc. but his lusts, they
are aegritudines animae, the souls sicknesses; they are as thorns to his
sides, and smoke to his eyes, and he is never well or at quiet, until they are
removed and gone: but a wicked man, one that is dead in sin, he is sick of
goodness (as the other is of wickedness) and weary of it; he is too
strait-laced in it, and therefore cannot brook it. A godly man has an inward
aptness and inclination to serve God, as fire naturally inclines to go
upward: indeed he may sometimes contract impurity, and have some corruptions,
yet they are but as mud in a clear and living fountain, they are soon washed
away; but wicked men are like ditches which are full of mudde at their best,
and there it lies and continues.

Secondly, another positive sign of this deadness, A lying still in any lust.
When a man lies in any living lust, or known sin: for as a mortal disease
and life cannot stand together, no more can a living lust and the life of
grace. That is a living lust, when although sometimes he may have fits of
resisting, A living lust, what it is.
yet he always gives over, and still yields to that lust, saying, It is their
nature, and they cannot choose but commit, it, they know not how to resist it;
when as if there was some present Judgment threatened thee, upon the commission
of it, then thou could forbear: This I call a living lust, and although it
be but one, yet if other lusts tempted thee as much as that, thou would
commit them also: if thou forsakest other sins, because they are sins, why
forsakest thou not this also? Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucified
the flesh, with the affections and lusts. There is in every man a body of lust;
if any member of that body be unmortified, he is yet a dead man. 1 Timothy 5. 6.
She which lives in pleasure, is dead while she is alive. Some may keep
themselves clean from some sins, but that will not serve; for if they live
in any known sin, they are dead.

An antipathy to God and godliness.
a third positive sign is, When a man has a secret antipathy against God and
godliness. Some beasts naturally hate some colors; so some men, out of a
natural inclination, cannot endure goodness it self, though they pretend
some cause. I call it an antipathy when a man's stomach rises against a thing,
and he knows not wherefore: so they hate goodness, merely out of a
natural abhorring of the thing it self, although they pretend some cause for
which they hate it. They distant holiness of life, and for no just cause: if
it be you distaste such men as profess an holy and pure conversation, only
because they do not conform (as some pretend,) why do you distant those also
that do conform? If you dislike the professors of an holy life because of the
hypocrisy they have found in them, as some have not stood to say, why do you
also dislike those that you are sure are no hypocrites? They cannot define the
holy man they hate, but have a secret natural hatred to them they cannot tell
why: but we know the reason well enough; it is because they live a contrary
life to them, and therefore cannot agree no more than fire and water: indeed
fire and water may agree in remiss degrees, but not in intense; so these men
can suffer those which are indifferently holy, but if they come to any
perfection and height of holiness, then they cannot endure them. Now the
Apostle says expressly, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. By this we know we are translated from
death to life, because we love the brethren: he that loves not his brother,
abides in death. So that it is an infallible sign of deadness not to love
the brethren: if thou hate the Saints; nay, if thou love them not; nay, if
thou love them not according to the measure of grace that is in them, and if
thou art not grieved for any of their sins, by which they may cause scandal,
or be disgraced, thou art yet a dead man. And so much for the positive signs.

2 The Privative signs of deadness follow, Five Privitive signs of dead men,
which are these five:

The first privitive sign of deadness, Privation of speech.
is want of Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, says Christ
in the Gospel, Matthew. 12. 14. When the mouth is speechless, the heart is
empty. Some that are dead in trespasses and sins may speak well sometimes;
but there is no living man but does speak well. Esa. 19. 18. Those that belong
to Canaan, will speak in the language of Canaan: Their language will show
whether they are Galileans or not: every man delights in operations agreeable
to their habits. Here you may learn to judge of your selves by your words; not
by some words that are spoken by fits, but by thy usual and customary speech,
that is a sign of that that is in you. The godly sometimes cannot speak
godlily and holily; as a Fountain sometimes is stopped up, so that it cannot
send forth pure streams, yet take away the rubbish that stopped it, and then
it will run clear again; even so it is with the godly; and therefore
consider your ordinary speeches, if they be not holy and good, it is a sign
that you are a dead man.

Privation of heat.
he grows cold; so is it with men dead in sin; they may pray, but it is
coldly; and so in all other holy duties they are very cold.

But some man will be ready to object and say, Object.
You tell us of coldness, but for any thing I can see, there is as much
coldness in the best men: for your godliest men are sometimes cold in their
prayers.

It is true; Answ.
but there is this difference between the coldness of a godly man, and a dead
man; If the means be used to a godly man, it does bring life to him again: if
he be rubbed and chafed with admonitions, or has the aquavitae of the Word, he
will recover his heat, because the inward principle of heat still remains
within him. But to a wicked man use never so many reproves, or admonitions,
he will still remain cold: Let this therefore be a certain trial, if after
all admonitions you still remain cold, you are dead.

The third privitive sign is Stiffenesse; a dead Stiffenesse,
and in what position his body is in when it is dead, in the same it will
remain, you cannot bendit; so is it with men spiritually dead, what course
they take, what opinions they hold, what company they keep, they will not be
changed from them. Rev. 22. 11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still:
that is, he will be filthy still, they will not be changed: If that they hold
to be Gods will, be Gods will, so it is, then they are right; but it is not
because it is Gods will, but because his pleasure fell on what they held. As a
rustie hand of a clock, Simile.
it turns not with the day, but stands still; but if the time of the day
chance to be such as it stands at, it is true; not because it moves with the
day (as it should) but because the day has fell jumpe with it: So these men,
if Gods will hit with theirs, they will do it; if not, they will cross it:
This is a sign of a dead man.

The fourth privitive sign is Senslesnesse; he Privation of sense.
is senseless: so it is with the spiritual death, there is no sense in it;
they can neither see, hear, nor taste.

I but some man will object and say, Object.
that is not true always; for even the wicked sometimes know m^tters of faith;
nay, and sometimes they relish them too.

To this I answer, Answ. Matthew, 13. 13. opened.
As it is said of the dead Idol, so may it be said of them: Mat. 13. 13. Eyes
they have and see not, ears and hear not.

First for seeing, they see not aright: Gods children see experimentally, the
wicked only by contemplation; and there is a great difference between them,
for as we see there is a great difference betwixt knowing fire to be hot, and
the feeling of it; so between a mere notionall knowledge of Gods will, and a
knowledge that does like and approve it.

Secondly for taste, they find no taste in Gods Word; or if they find any,
like a vitiated pallat, they account that which is most sweet to be very
bitter.

Thirdly for smelling, they smell no sweetness in Christ's name, whereas to his
Saints it is a sweet ointment poured out, that perfumeth all the room.

Fourthly for feeling, they feel not whether the Law or Gospel be applied to
them, rub over their skarres, and make them run down with blood, they are
notwithstanding all that senseless still: they may have a counterfeit feeling
arising from a natural conscience, but to have such a feeling as may drive
them to Christ, they cannot; and therefore still they are but dead men.

No sympathizing in the miseries of others.
A living member, if the body be in danger, will have a sympathizing and
feeling of the danger; as the hand will lift it self up to save the head, so
now if we hearing the case of Gods Church in what danger it is, if we take it
not to heart, or be not affected with it (especially now we are put in mind
thereof) it is a certain sign we are dead men: We should have the spirits
that Moses and Paul had, who even wished to be stroyed, so they might save the
Church. Moses, rather than that should perish, would have his name raced out of
the book of life: Paul, for the Churches sake would be anathema. It is a true
sign of a living member to be touched with others miseries; this was an
ecstasy of love, in which out of love to the Church, they forgate themselves.
This here we must know, that if the creature could destroy it self for God, it
could not but be well, because the good of the creature is more contained in
God than in it self, as the beam of the Sun is more contained in the Sun
than in it self. Now is the time of considering this, now is the time of more
than extraordinary fasting; now if you have any feeling, you will show it; if
you are living men, now you will show your selves; now the Church lies in
tents, and wallowes in blood, now the foundations thereof are shaken; never was
the face of Christendom in such danger as now it is. Do we think to stand
now others fall? If the fire be at one end of the building, shall we be safe
which are at the other end? (for all Gods house is but one building.) Are not
they our brethren, and sons of the same father? have they not the same
spirit? are they not of the same profession? shall we not then be ready to
help them? we cannot send arms over to them, but we may send up prayers
unto God for them: Christians are stronger than Politicians, and their prayers
are armies. Let us therefore do what we can, the storm is not yet quite
over. Two things to move us to consider the Churches misery.


Now there are two things that may move us to this: 1. The greatness of the
Judgment. 2. Our ability to help them.




It will prove the extinguishing of Gods Church and the Gospel, and when that
is once gone, what are all other things? It was a good saying of that Saint,
That brown bread and the Gospel was good cheer; what are all our houses,
lands, etc. if this Spiritual food be wanting?



We may do much by our prayers; he that knows not his strength, uses it
not: Did not one Moses, one Eliah stand in the gappe? They did not these things
as they were extraordinary men, but as they were Gods children: We may by our
prayers do as much; though one child may have better gifts than another, yet
commonly the father loves all alike; so God (although they had better gifts
than we) will grant our prayers as soon as he did theirs.

But some man will here be ready to make a question, Quest.
and askeme, what I would have him do for the Church now? he is but a
singleman, and therefore is unable to do much himself alone.

I answer, Answ. What we must do for the Church.
Though thou can not do much, yet these things thou may do; and
therefore,

Pray for it.
and acknowledge it, when we see him granting our desires. So that the
strength of a land lies in Christians, and their strength lies in their
prayers, as Sampsons strength did in his hair. Oftentimes prayer is more
available than fighting: Moses prayer in the mountain, did more than Ioshuahs
fighting in the valleys. If Noah, Daniel, and Job stood before me (says God,
Ezekiel. 14. 20.) they should not prevail: which shows, that if any thing could
have prevailed, their prayer would: So also Luther attributes all to prayer, as
may be seen in diverse of his Treatises. Now this prayer which I urge unto you,
must

1. Not only be small expressions of the mind, Our Prayers must be fervent.
but now God looks for strong cries, and long continuance in prayer. Moses
prayed all day: Christ, which had less need than we have, prayed all night;
Daniel three weeks: therefore we that have more wants and needs, ought to be
the more fervent.

2. Our prayers must be Spiritual, Spiritual.
not out of self-love; as to desire the safety of the Church, that so under it
we may lead a safe and quiet life; but out of mere respect to God, and love to
his Church.

3. It must be a prayer of faith; Of Faith.
so the Apostle says, Iam. 5. 15, 16. The prayer of faith shall save the
sick, etc. And a little after, The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous
man avails much: Now there is no man righteous without faith: so according to
their faith Christ still yielded to them.

4. Pray with constancy and fervency: With Constancy.
it is not for a snatch and away, that is pleasing to God; but a constant
performance of duty which he accepts.

5. It must be the prayer of a righteous man: Of righteousness.
Therefore, Micah 2. the Prophets sought unto God in the time of trouble, but
prevailed not, because they were not righteous: for it is said there, verse. 7.
Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly?

6. It must be with humility; With humility.
and that consists First, in confessing how unworthy we are to obtain any
thing at the hands of God.

Secondly, how unable to help our selves, and therefore to have our eyes only
toward God.

Be more ^ealous.
is, to be more zealous; seek unto God extraordinarily: The cause of the
destruction of a Land, is chiefly the sins of the godly. When they grow cold
and dead, and lose their first love, then God, as Rev. 2. will remove the
Candlestick from among them, and take away his Gospel. Indeed the carnalnesse
of dead men, their profaneness in contemning of Gods Saints and his Gospel,
etc. hasten Gods Judgments on a Land, but chiefly the Luke-warmnesse of
Professors do it: when Israel, as Hosea says, is as a cake half baked. Let
us therefore rectify our lives, renew our repentance, quicken our zeal, else
shall we be guilty of the destruction of Gods Church by our sins.

Stir up others
is, to stir up others to take to heart the miseries of the Church, to pray,
to renew their repentance. It would be good if Ministers would be as Beacons
to give warning to others, and to set them on fire. Thus the old Christians
did, as it were, make an army ( manu facta) against God, by joining together
in prayer. This is a blessed action to stir up others: thus they did in the
Prophet Malachies time, Mal.3.16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often
one unto another, (see the issue of all,) and the Lord harkened and heard it,
and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the
Lord, and thought upon his Name. So, Zach. 8. 21. there they did so; And the
Inhabitants of the City shall go one to another, saying, Let us go speedily
to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hoasts, I will go also. Let
us therefore, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 10. 24. consider one another to
provoke our selves to this good work of fasting and prayer for the Church; let
us mark who is a likely man to join with us, and not let him pass.

4 A fourth means to do good to the Church, Perform duties in due time.
to do it in due time: Jerusalem had a time to seek God; if then she would
have sought, she might have been saved: And Christ complains, Luke 19. 41,
42. saying, If thou had known, even thou in this thy day, the things which
belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. And so before
Christ, the Prophets of old complained of the people; as Ier. 8. 7. Yea, the
Storke in the heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people know
not the judgment of the Lord. The time to seek unto the Lord is now: Some
Judgments are sudden, and have no forerunners, as the Gunpowder-treason, in
such God looks not that we should meet him by repentance, because we know
them not: Others use lingering, such as send fear and rumors before them, as
are those mentioned by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 22. 30, 31. there God expects we
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before him, and so meet him with
repentance to stop the judgment.

5 The fifth means to do good to the Church, With Continuance.
is this, Let us do it with continuance: It may be while the news is fresh
we will be fervent in prayer; but often the news alters, and sometimes it
happens to be good, and then we leave off: But this must not be; we must be
constant in this duty, to the very uttermost end of all; there may be ebbs and
flowings, but it is the last issue which brings all: therefore let us continue
in this duty of fasting and praying, that we may try that last issue of al.
It is the common fashion to make the afflictions of the Church only a wonder
of nine days. This was the Jews fault, Ier. 34. 10, 11. When they heard of
their enemies, for a while they would pray. But although the news be good,
yet still continue as the importunate widow did to the Judge, and your
importunity will move God. Set therefore to it, and continue in it; Pray for
Jerusalem, let those prosper that love her peace, Psalm. 122. 6. Mourn apart,
every family apart: It is not enough to hear this, and to let the Ministers
voice be to you as one that sings with a pleasant voice: Thus were the
Prophets to the Jews, Ezekiel. 33. 32. Who heard his words, but did not do them:
and therefore God tells them that they shall be destroyed in the judgment. The
devil will suffer you to purpose and purpose to do this duty, The Devils
cunning to defer men from doing good Duties.
but keeps you from the execution of it, and present practice, which is that
only which may do the deed. Consider it therefore, and defer not the
present doing of this duty: what can you do better than to deliver Gods
Church, and you may do it, although you be poor and despised, yet being Gods
Saints, your prayers are in force with God; as in Eccles. 9. 14, 15. the poor
man delivered the city by his wisdom; he was poor and despised, yet it was
he that delivered it. Others may seem to do much, and stand vaunting on the
hatches, but it is the Saints that do it. If there be any consideration of
Christ in you, if any love, any grace, any well-wishing to the Church, pray for
it: this is that I fear, you will purpose to do it, but will defer it; but,
beloved, the doing only God regards. We, when we read how much Alexander,
Caesar, and the like, did, we admire them; why we may do more by our prayers,
performed in a right manner: if you do it, either the Church shall be
delivered, and you shall have comfort; or else you shall save your own souls.
Without you thus pray, you are guilty of the Churches destruction: The
horsemen, if they stand still, although they fight not against their own
army, yet are guilty of their destruction, because they should have fought
for them. The Praetor, if he let the enemies in the gate, he is the destroyer
of the City, because he should have kept them out: so the Saints, which should
stand in the breach, if they pray not, they destroy the land: So God says,
Ezekiel. 22. 30, 31. And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy
it: but I found none: therefore have I powered out again indignation upon them,
I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I
recompensed upon their heads, says the Lord God. Because he could not find a
man to stand in the gap, therefore he powered forth his indignation on the
land. Their not praying destroys the land: The Saints and holy Prophets are
the Chariots and horsemen of Israel; if then they stand still, they do what
in them lies to destroy the whole Nation: they are not only the Chariots, but
the horsemen also; they are the whole defense of Israel; and therefore if at
these times they be idle, they are guilty of the destruction of the whole
Church. Hence Solomon said, An idle man is brother to him that is a great
waster. As a Pilot, who for want of attention suffers a Ship to be
overthrown, or split against the rocks, is guilty of the loss thereof: So
the Prophet Samuel, notwithstanding the people had sinned a great sin in
forsaking God to be their King, says, 1 Samuel 12. 23. God forbid that I should
sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: and therefore it is a great
sin not to pray for Gods Church. The Jews in the captivity were commanded
to pray for the peace of Nabuchadnezzar, who was an heathen Prince; how much
more then ought we to pray for Christian Princes? And surely, if God should
take away from you this Prince, and give you such an one as Queen Mary, you
would then know what it is to enjoy such a Prince, as now by Gods mercy we
do. Therefore stir up your selves to the duty by fasting and praying, much
may you do this way. Ester delivered all the Jews by this means: it was not
Esters word that did it; for what made the King not to sleep that night? how
came he to call for the book of the Chronicle? how light he on that place of
Mordecay? They had first turned God by fasting and prayer, and then he thus
prepared the King for Ester to speak. Thus then, and by these means we may
releeve the Church in distress: And therefore if we be true living members,
let us manifest our endeavor to releeve them by these means. And thus much for
the signs of men which are stark dead.

Now follow signs of distinction between such as seem to live, and such as
live indeed: and these may be resembled to such spirits as assume bodies to
themselves, and seem to inform them; and they are chiefly all Civil men. Now
they are discerned by these and the like signs;

The first sign is this; Signs of civil men that seem to have life, but have
none indeed.
As the Angels in their assumed bodies seemed to eat and drink, but manifested
not any effect of it, for they did not grow by it: so these man, they seem to
hear the They do not Grow.
but they make no progress in it: they may seem to feed on the Sacraments,
but they grow by none of these means, they still go on in their old tract.
They are not unlike some men which eat as much, or more than others, but are
never the fatter, but as lean as ever they were: even so the Ministers of the
Gospel now deliver the Spiritual food of the Word, in as great abundance as
ever, yet where is the fruit? who grows any fatter, any better liking than
before? We, (beloved) desire not to have again the fruit of our teaching in
your understanding only (although that be good) but in your practice: Like
sheepheards which would not have their hay again of their sheep in hay, but
in the milk and wool. And hence it is that the Apostle Peter exhorts them, 1
Pet. 2. 2. As newborn babes to desire the sincere milk of the Word: and why?
that they may grow thereby. Though thou be never so weak at the first, yet
if thou growest stronger, it is a sign of life; but if thou have gotten no
strength in grace, nor no victory over your lusts, notwithstanding all the
means of grace you have had, yet whatsoever you seem, you are still but dead
men.

They are moved by an outward Principle.
As the Angels, though they were moved, yet it was from no inward, but from an
outward principle; so these Civil men, and all hypocrites may be moved, and
do all that good men can do, but it is not from an inward principle, but from
some outward and by-respect. They are like Clockes and Watches, which are moved
by some spring, and therefore when the weights or spring is down, they move no
longer: when that false end which made them take in hand the show of Religion
is gone, then they will be no more Religious. Thus Ioash was Religious, but
for some by-end; viz. while Iehoiada lived; and therefore after his death,
Ioash forsook God. Thus many will be good whilst they are in good families,
under good Governors, but being removed from them, they turn with the swine to
the tumbling in the mire. Some again, good exhortations and counsel will make
them live well, and they will continue so, while they are in that good mood:
Others will be good while a storm of ficknesse indures, but when the
sunshine of prosperity shall begin to appear, they return to their old
courses: they are like a Bullrush, which hangs down his head till the storm
is over it, but as soon as the Sun shines it lifts it up again. Some may
hold out longer than others, yet at the last all will give over, because they
are not moved from some inward principle.

The third is this; As the Angels assumed those They do it but in some places
and company.
and places, and occasions, and afterward laid them aside again; so will your
hypocrites do in some places and companies at some times, they will take on
them the bodies of living men, and so have a name to live, but indeed are dead:
But come they in other places or companies, they will lay aside their bodies,
and then will be as profane as any. I confess, a godly man may be the worse
for being in an ill company; they may be myrie and dirtie, but yet they still
remain sheep: as a pibble and a pearl foiled with the same mire can scarce
be distinguished till they be washed; so the godly, do but wash them, and then
you shall discern them to be pearls; but these Wolves, the wicked, which
only takes sheep clothing on them, coming amongst Wolves, cast off that
clothing and become as much Wolves as any.

The fourth sign is this: As Angels or devils They speak from the teeth, not
from the heart.
cannot speak heartily as living men, but have an artificial framed voice,
which is from the teeth outward, not heart; so where there is no true grace but
seeming, it may be discerned from the speeches, not in the matter, but in the
manner; an hypocrite may often babble more than the true Christian, as a
blazing Star shines as bright, if not brighter than the true Star; but there
is abroad difference betwixt them; the one speaks but from the head, and the
other from the heart: for a true living man does speak heartily and feelingly.
That the manner of speaking does much affect others, Iunius converted by a
country-mans hearty speaking.
it is plain: Hence is that that Iunius reports of himself, that he lighting
into a Country man's house, which was wholly illiterate and unlearned, he
confesses that his hearty speaking of faith and repentance, etc. did so move
him, that he thought that there was something more in it than mere knowledge,
and so wrought on him, that by Gods grace it converted him; so that the manner
of speaking does often affect where the matter does not; which an hypocrite
cannot have. And thus much for the signs of seeming living, but indeed dead
men.

Now having showed that all are dead, it follows that we should show the
means of getting life, which are also comprehended in my text, Two means to
get life.
and they are these two:

1. To labor to see that ye are dead, ( You that were dead in trespasses and
sins, etc.) as all men are by nature.

2. To go to Christ for life, he it is only that can give it; so says my
Text ( he has quickened you:) It is the property of God alone to give life.
Now we cannot go to him but by Christ, and we must go to Christ by faith,
therefore is faith called a living faith, because it unites Christ and the
soul together. Now the difficulty is in this, that men will not come to
Christ and take him: some come not for him at all, others take him, but not in
good earnest; as grafts put into a stock, but not so ingrafted as to grow
thereby: but when a man is once soundly humbled, then will he come to Christ,
and not before; for till then he does not hunger and thirst after him: but the
extreme hungry will be satisfied with naught but meat: as Sampson said, Give
me drink or else I dye. Now life consists in the union betwixt Christ and thy
soul: This union is by Luther compared to fire and iron united, which causes
the iron to have all the properties of fire, as burn, scorch, etc. so an
humble Saint, united to Christ, has all his proprieties, though not in the
same measure and degree.

The Doctrine of Humiliation.
Now these must be handled distinctly: and therefore the first means of life,
is to see our selves children of wrath, and that we are dead in trespasses and
sins: The point that hence arises, is,

That whosoever would be translated from death to life, must first apprehend
himself to be a child of wrath: Doct. No translation to life, without
apprehension of Gods wrath due to sin.
that is, he must see the face of God, as of an angry Judge, so far forth as
it may drive him to Christ. So that a man cannot be saved until he has not
only a touch or two, but a true sense of sin, a deep apprehension of his
sins, of death, and of damnation; for only to such are all the promises
made, Christ is only sent to bind up the broken hearted: Christ came to call
all that were heavy laden, and those only, those he will ease: Peace must be
preached to none but those that moume in Sion. Therefore the Apostle says,
Gal. 4. 21. Tell me, ye that are under the Law, do ye not desire to hear the
Law? Yea, the Law is said to be a Schoolmaster to drive men to Christ: that is,
first there must be the Law before Christ can be had; for else, although we
should Preach the Gospel, it would be contemned: therefore Christ in his time
gained only the poor; The poor receive the Gospel: that is, the poor in
spirit. God will have his jewels of life and salvation to be esteemed, which we
will never do until we see our misery, how that we are in the estate of
death. As the deliverance out of Egypt would never have been so sweet, had
they not been in extreme slavery and bondage first. God deals with us, as
Princes do with their malefactors; first they bring their necks to the
block, and then give them a pardon, for then they apprehending death, the
pardon is the sweeter and more welcome and acceptable to them. Indeed if the
question were made, what God could do in his absolute power; I know that God
might convert us and not humble us if he would; he might say as he did in the
Creation, Let it be, and it must be: he might come in a still voice only,
without sending before a voice rending the rocks: he might use lightning and
no thunder, but we speak of his ordinary course, wherein he will not; for
none are saved but such as have not only a sight, but also a deep
apprehension of their sins.

For the better understanding of this point, Things considerable.
we must consider these things:

1 That there are three things which keep a Three things keep a man from
Christ: 1. Unbelief.


First, Unbelief: when men will not believe that he which was borne of the
Virgin Mary was Christ and God; therefore about the proving of this, the
Apostles did spend most time, because then it was hard to believe.

Secondly, Not caring for Christ: 2. Neglect of him.
as those that came not to the Kings feast, they believed that there was a King
and a feast, but cared not for it, they regarded more their Oxen, etc.

Thirdly, Not willingness to part with all for Christ; 3. Unwillingness to
part with other things for him
they will not take him upon all conditions: they see some need they have of
Christ, but not much; and so they will forsake some things for him, but not
all: they are loath to part with their master sin; like the young man in the
Gospel, he had done a great deal, yet he would not part with his possessions.
Three things to be set against these, to bring us to Christ.
But to these three things must be opposed three other things to bring us to
Christ: 1. Faith to believe he is God. 2. A slight humiliation to bring us in
love with Christ. 3. Sound humiliation, to be willing to part with all for his
sake.


The first is received amongst all Christians, although it is to be feared that
many do believe it but confusedly. The second is a sleighter manner of
apprehending of Christ, and that a little sorrow will do, a little
humiliation. But the third (which we must have before we can be saved) to be
willing to forsake all, to leave every sin for Christ his sake: and that we
will not do until we be thoroughly humbled, The necessity of a deep
humiliation.
and are fully broken hearted: therefore first a deep humiliation is necessary
for salvation.

Secondly, If we have not such an humiliation, then either: 1. We will not come
to Christ. 2. Or we will not stay with him. 3. Or else we will not do or
suffer any thing for him.


And if we want any of these we cannot be saved.

First, If we be not truly humbled, we can never Without sound humiliation we
will not come to Christ.
nor regard him: we may preach Christ long enough, and no body will regard him,
except they be soundly humbled for their sins: as in the Law no body did care
for the City of refuge, but he that had slain a man; to him only whom the
revenger of blood pursues, is the City of refuge sweet: when the fiery
Serpent had stung a man, then he looked to the Brazen-serpent, and nevertill
then: so when we see our sins and misery thereby, then, J say, and never
till then is Christ welcome. The prodigal Son never thought of returning
home to his Father until he saw that he must else starve; when he saw he could
no longer subsist, then he returned. So, when we are so humbled for our sins
that we see we shall indeed be damned without Christ, then, and never until
then we care for him.

Secondly, We will not stay with him.
Although we do come to Christ, which represented four sorts of hearers,
Humiliation compared to the sout sorts of ground,
Mat. 13. Matthew. 13.
The first were not humbled at all, ( It fell by the ways side, and presently
the Fowls of the air devoured it, verse 4) The second was humbled a little,
but not so much as to suffer for him, ( The Sun parched them for lack of
rooting, verse. 6.) The third sort were so far humbled for sin, that they
suffered some persecutions, but would not part with all for Christ, the world
they esteemed more; The thorns choked them, verse. 7.) But the fourth ground
was fully humbled; that is, they were so humbled in a sight of their sin,
that they saw that they had more need of Christ, than of any thing in the
world, and so would part with all for him, and suffer any thing; and therefore
they are said to bring forth fruit with patience. Others may stay a while with
Christ, but when that comes that they prefer before Christ, then they leave
Christ; for until a man can bring his heart to that pass, that he can prize
Christ above all things, undergo all persecutions for his sake, he is not
soundly humbled, but is like the second and third ground.

We will not suffer or do any thing for him.
yet except we be thus humbled, we shall neither suffer nor do any thing for
Christ. If Christ had bidden Paul, (before he was humbled) to have done so much
for him as he did, he would never have done it; but when he was humbled, then,
Lord, what would thou have me do?

And the reason of this is apparent, if we consider these things:

First, Reas. 1.
There are many lusts that do encumber us whilst our hearts are unbroken; so
that there is such a baseness on the outside of Religion, that except we be
humbled we will never like it, but shall be offended at it; and like proud
servants, say our wages are too little, our fellow servants too base: but on
the contrary, he that has once been soundly humbled, thinks all too good
for him.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
There be such strong lusts to be mortified, which cannot be done without
humiliation, that we care not for Christ: our lusts indeed may for a while
sleep, but when once they are awaked, like Sampson, they crack a two all the
bonds of good purposes and vows; they are never slain until we be soundly
humbled.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
there are such contrary laws to be delighted in, that we can never frame
our nature unto, until we hunger and thirst after Christ, and ^^en his laws
will be meat and drink unto us: for before we delighted in the Law of the
flesh, but now if we be truly humbled, we must delight in the law of the Spirit.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
There are so many strong lusts to be parted from, so many Isaacks, which every
man at some time or other will be called upon to offer up, the which if he
does not do, he will damn his own soul; yet until he is humbled, and
shown what damnation is, he will not buy salvation so dear.

For these causes is Humiliation necessary in the first place: Therefore in the
Scripture this method is always used, The Doctrine of Humiliation must go
before Sanctification.
by the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, they preached ever repentance
and humiliation before sanctification and justification: This was Christ order,
as you may see, Luke 4. Thus did Nathan with David, he labored to humble him,
before he told him God had forgiven him. Thus did Jonas; Yet forty days and
Nineveh shallbe destroyed, Ion. 3. Thus also God dealt with Adam in Paradise,
he intended to reveal unto him the promises of the Gospel, and yet at the
first he strikes him down with terror that made him hide himself, then he
told him of his sins, and after all reveals the Gospel unto him, ( The seed
of the woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.) Thus dealt Peter with his
auditors, Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent and be baptized every one of you, etc.

Thus you see that Humiliation is so necessary, that without it there is no
salvation: Let us come in the next place to make some Use of it.

Therefore (my brethren) seeing this is so, Use.
content not your selves with morality and civility, except you have more in
you than nature can give you; nay, except you be all new, not patched up; as 2
Cor. 5. Except you be wholly changed and cast into a new mould, being first
broken by humiliation, you cannot be saved. Try therefore whether now you do
that that others will not do; wherein else does the power of Religion consist?
Try whether you have denied your selves, and thoroughly mortified your dearest
lust, and what soever the flesh desires? and whether you be sick of sin?
regard not what the world prizeth, labor you to h^ve your hearts broken, else
you may pray, be charitable and loving to others, and with Herod, make a
conscience of many things, yet all will stand you in no stead, because it
comes not from an humble heart: for be it never so holy a duty, never so
constantly performed, except it comes from a broken heart, God accepts it not:
So the Prophet David says, Psalm. 51. 16, 17. God cares not for Sacrifices,
(and yet they were his ordinances as well as our prayers,) only a broken heart
was pleasing unto him; and therefore whatsoever you have done from a broken
heart, is accepted of God. But here Satan deceives men, with gilded things,
namely, formal performance of holy (...) which when they need them (as in the
day of (...) or trouble) stand them in no stead. As often he coozeneth Witches,
in giving them money to do some murders, they laying up the money, and when
they have need of it, going to fetch it, have found nothing but dry leaves;
Even thus will all the holy duties we have performed from an unbroken heart
fail us. They are like Glowormes, they glister greatly in the dark, Simile.
but when once the Sun comes, their light is nothing. So Paul, before he was
humbled, he accounted himself a godly man, and none better than he; but
afterward, he was not worthy (as he said) to be counted an Apostle. Therefore
deceive not your selves any longer, for nothing is more dangerous than an
unsound heart, therefore take heed it deceive you not: if you never have been
humbled, now labor to be humbled; for it was that that made the Publican to be
justified rather than the Pharisie, because he was humbled and the Pharisie
was not: and indeed none are further from salvation than those that content
themselves with outward formalities.

Now in Humiliation, for our fuller understanding of it, Three questions.
I will explain these three questions: 1 Wherein Humiliation does consist. 2
What kind of sorrow is required in this Humiliation. 3 How we shall know
whether our sorrows are true or not.


The first question is, Quest. 1.
Wherein consists this true Humiliation?

I answer, Answ.
In three things:

1. In seeing your life to abound with acutall sins, True humiliation consists
then in looking into your heart and nature, In seeing our lives abound in
sin.
and the root of all evil, and where your corruption is strongest, as fire in
the root. Many labor to excuse their sins from their nature, because that
that is prone unto it; but that makes their cause the worse, it increases
their vildnesse; for, why have thou such a nature, and do not curb it?
Besides, their natures are odious to God, though they never should break out;
as a Serpent is odious unto us, though he never hurt us. Further, consider,
have thou not made thy nature worse? Every sin thou have committed makes it
worse; for actual sin does more increase the custom and habit of sin; so
that besides Adams sin, thou thy self art guilty of corrupting thine own
nature.

2. In considering that there is nothing in thee In considering that there is
nothing good in thee.
so the Apostle says, Romans 7. 18. For I know that in me dwells no good
thing: and, Gal. 3. 22. The Scripture has concluded all (not only men, but
things) under sin. Men think well of themselves, because they have much good
in them; but consider with thy self thou have nothing good in thee at all: Can
good fruit proceed from an ill tree?

3. In smiting thy heart with an apprehension In smiting the heart with a^
apprehension of Gods curs^
hell, and misery, due to thy sin; then will thou find thy self in a
miserable estate, and can not choose but be humbled, when in consideration of
these things, thy heart smites thee, as Belchazzars did him. And so much for
the first question.

The second question is, Quest. 2.
What kind of sorrow is required in this Humiliation?

I answer; Answ.
Not those violent flashings of sorrow, which for a while amaze like a
land-stood, What sorrow is required to true humiliation.
but it must be this:

When thy judgment is enlightened to see thy estate, and the judgments of God
hanging over thee; and after this convincing, then thy affections are stirred
to mourn for thy sin. If the judgment be fully convinced, the affections
will follow: therefore in Scripture, when any is said to be humbled, in those
places is showed that their affections were stirred; as we may see, Acts 16. in
the Jailer: and of Peter, it is said of his conversion, He went out and wept
bitterly: So also of those, Acts 2. it is said, They were pricked in their
hearts: for the ground of their sorrow is the convincing of the judgment,
which works upon the affections; therefore Christ says, The Spirit shall come
to convince the world of sin, etc. Ioh. 16. 8. The other sorrow not arising
from this convincing of the judgment, is but a passion, and so is straight
gone; this is an affection, and so is more permanent although it is stiller, as
the deepest water; are ever stillest. And so much for the second question.

The third question is, Quest. 3.
How shall he know whether these sorrows of his be true or no?

To this I answer, Answ.
There is an Humiliation not deep enough, How to know true sorrow.
a slight Humiliation; and there is another too deep, which so drownes us in
sorrow that it takes away all hope of salvation, and brings despair, such was
the sorrow of Judas and Achitophel: but the third and true, is an indifferent
between both: sometimes there may be an humiliation and no grace, as there may
be a plowing and no sowing. How true Humiliation differs from other sorrow.
But true humiliation differs from other sorrows thus:

First, In the rice of it: both a godly man and an In the rise.
first, be wounded with Gods wrath: secondly, desire freedom from hell; but
into the godly God does instill gracious seeds, whereby he is humbled for
sin as well as hell, and desires grace as well as mercy: But the hypocrite
only desires mercy and freedom from these torments, and therefore when the
terror cease his holiness and desire of goodness cease, and so being
eased from the torments, he cares for no more; but the godly he desires to be
joined to Christ, and to have his lusts mortified.

Secondly, in the continuance of it: hypocritical In the continuance.
but it is never constant, Bousion Cons. 299.
it does vanish; but true humiliation does last all the life long. Simile.
The humiliation of hypocrites is like iron, which while it is hot in the fire
you may fashion it which way you will, but when it is once out, it is presently
stiff again: So Pharaoh as long as Gods hand was on him, he would let the
people go, but as soon as the fire of affliction was removed, his heart was
hardened, so was Ahab and Saul. But in true humiliation God takes away the iron
heart, and gives an heart of flesh, so that although it may be brawnie a
little, yet still it is flesh: Hypocrites so long only as they are under the
judgment are soft, but the heart of the godly is always soft.

Thirdly, By the signs and effects.
by the signs of brokennesse of heart: Contrition of heart.
Now brokennesse of heart

1. Heales our sins. First, the beloved, the master sin, 1. Heales our
Sins.
and then all the rest: other humiliation skin over, but cures not; it stops
the stream for a while, but it breaks out again: it may cause you to make
many purposes to leave the sin; yea, and to leave it awhile, but you will
return to them again; whereas if one be truly humbled he is stronger against
that beloved sin than against any other; not but that he has strong
inclinations to that sin, but he is more shye of it, and shunnes the
occasions of that sin, because he has fully felt the smart of it, and has
by his humiliation seen that sin more than any other. Now after the beloved
sin is once healed, then the other sins will soon be healed; Simile.
as in a cloth by washing out a deeper stain, the same labor does wash out
lesser stains.

2. It causes love of Christ: 2. It causes love to Christ:
So Mary Magdalen, because she was humbled much, and saw that Christ had
forgiven her much, therefore she loved much. So Paul, who was much humbled,
ever expressed a servent love to Christ, as we may see, Acts 21. 13. where he
says, having been persuaded by his friends not to go to Jerusalem, I am
ready not to be bound, but also to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus: as who
should say, I fear nothing, because I care for nothing but Christ, So also, 2
Cor. 5. 14. he says, The love of Christ constrains me: and therefore when
by humiliation we see what Christ has done for us, we think we can never do
enough for him.

Now you may know if you love Christ or not, Signs to know whether we love
Christ or no.
by these signs:

The first sign to know the love of Christ, 1. Obedience.
is obedience; He that loves Christ, keeps his Commandments, and they are
not grievous unto him.

The second sign is this; 2. Affection toward him.
If you love him, you shall find in your heart that you love him, your heart
will be carried toward him; as I can tell if I love a man, for then my heart
is carried toward him.

The third sign to know the love of Christ, 3. The light prizing of spiritual
things.
is this; It causes me to esteem of spiritual things, to prize them at an
high rate, and other things little worth: for when a man is soundly humbled,
ask him then what he desires most, he will answer Christ and Grace, and that
his corruptions may cease in him; as for outward things, he passes not for
them: as a man that sees he must dye, he cares for no outward wealth, take you
that, give him only the pardon of his sins.

The fourth sign of the love of Christ, is this; It makes him content with
the meanest condition. 4. Contentedness with the meanest condition.
The prodigal Son, when he was humbled, so he might be in his fathers house
he was content; he liked the meanest condition, even to be a servant; I am
unworthy to be thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants, Luke 15. 21.
So Paul, after he was humbled, thought himself unworthy for the Saints
company, and that not for a fit only, but even ever after he still cries out,
I am unworthy to be an Apostle. Thus Naomi, returning home to her Country,
said, she went out full, and yet had nothing but her self, sons, and
husband; she accounted any thing too much for her. If a man once come to be
verily persuaded that he is worthy to be destroyed, he can with patience bear
any losses and crosses; for these are nothing to death, which he knows he has
deserved; therefore what impatience soever thou have, so much art thou short of
true humiliation.

The fifth sign to know we love Christ, 5. Fear of offending God.
is this; It makes us fearful of offending God: tenderness of conscience is
ever according to the measure of true humiliation; for by how much the more we
are humbled, by so much do we fear to offend God, and labor to walk
obediently unto him. Esaias 66. 2. the Lord says, To him will I look that is
poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word: If thou art of a
contrite heart, thou will tremble at his words; that is, at his Commandments;
such an one fears to break any Commandment, he is sensible of the least
sin: Hence it is, that Prove. 28. 14. fear is opposed to hardness of heart;
Happy is the man that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart shall fall
into mischief: Now the opposite to hardness, is brokennesse of heart, but
fear is opposed to it because it is a sign of brokennesse of heart. Now this
fearfulness stands in two things:

1. In a facility to be convicted of any sin; for he that is not thus broken
in heart, stands out with God, and will not yield unto him.

2. In a fear to offend God; for when he is once convinced, he labors to do
according to his knowledge; and then is afraid to displease God, either*

1 In committing the least sin; as Moses would not leave the least hoof
behind him; and as Job feared lest his sons should have sinned in heart, Job
1. 4. He was so truly humbled, that he would not sacrifice for own sins
only, but even for his sons also, and that the least, the thoughts of their
hearts.

2 In omitting the least good duty, or doing it formally; which thing the
hypocrite cannot do, because he has not this tenderness of conscience.

The sixth sign of the love of Christ, 6. The finding of sweetness in the
word of God.
is this; It makes Gods Word sweet unto us; as it was to David, Sweeter than
the honey and the home-combe: Crummes are sweet to an hungry man; so if a man
hunger after the Gospel, it will be sweet unto him. Indeed if the Word be
sweetened with humane Eloquence, it may be sweet to one that is carnal (for
so it is pleasing to nature,) but if the purer it is, and the more it is
separated from those gaudy flowers; if the more piercing it is, the sweeter it
is to us, then it is a sign of a broken heart; for it is a reproach to those
that have not a broken heart, and so it cannot be sweet: as we may see, Ier 6
10. where the Lord says, Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot
hearken: behold, the Word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, they have no
delight mit. And again, the Prophet says, Ier. 15. 16. Thy words were found,
and I did eat them, and thy Word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine
heart: It is joy and rejoicing to those that have a broken heart, as the
Prophet had: nay, the sharper it is, the more they delight in it.

The seventh sign of our love to Christ, 7. Meekness of spirit.
is this; It causes meekness of spirit. The spirit that dwellethin us (before
we are humbled) lusts after envy, Iam. 4. 5. now every natural man is so;
but he that is of a broken heart envieth not, he spends his ^nger on himself,
and looks to his own offenses so much, that he regards not others.

But some man will here be ready to object and say, Object.
My nature is hasty, and I cannot suppress it.

To this I answer, Answ.
It is true, every one by nature is a Lion; Humiliation changes our nature.
but grace when that comes, it tur^s us into Lambs and meek Sheep. Luke 3. 4.
John cries in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, etc. but how? by
Humility: Every high mountain and hill shall be dug down, and the crooked
shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth: Humility,
which prepares for Christ, diggeth down those high mountains, and makes
plain those rough ways. I deny not but that sometimes Gods child may have a
passion of anger; yet the peace of God rules in his heart, although that
sometimes breaks out as a rebel, but it dwells not in him: Christ is meek,
and so are all his. And so much for the third question.

Now to proceed further in the explication of Humiliation, and come to the
fourth question, which is this,

Whether this Humiliation must be in all men, Quest. 4.
as well in those which are well educated, and have fallen into no gross
sins, as in others?

I answer, Answ.
yes; it must be in all, even this great Humiliation here spoken of, else let
them go never so far, they will in the end fall away: and that is the very
reason why so many Professors, that have given up their names to follow Christ,
fall away, because they were never humbled soundly for sin.

Yet there is this difference betwixt the humiliation of one brought up well,
The differen^ of humiliation in one well educated and a gross sinner.
and a gross sinner:

1. The filth of sin is not so suddenly revealed

2. The Joy is not so sudden, nor flashing, nor killed, so that he saw no
means of life; if one, a friend of his, on the sudden should step forth and
help him, he would be more sensible of it, than such an one as knowing before
he shall be robbed, gets company to go with him, and so escapes the danger.
And so much for the fourth question.

The fifth question is this; Quest. 5.
What is the least degree of Humiliation that must be in one that will be saved?

I answer, it is so much as will bring us home to Christ; Answ.
that is, so much as will make us apprehend sin to be the greatest evil in
the world, The least degree of humiliation will make us count sin the greatest
cuill, Christ the greatest good
and Christ to be the greatest good; so much as will enable us to make sin
our chiefest sorrow, and Christ our chiefest joy: when we do so, then
whatsoever is offered we neglect for Christ, and prefer him. Thence is it
that the Churches are said to rejoice in Christ with joy unspeakeable and
glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. For when we apprehend sin to be the greatest evil,
and by Christ to beefreed from it, A man's conversion consists in three things.
we must needs rejoice unspeakably. For we are to know that our conversion
consists in threethings:

1. In being soundly humbled, so that we see sin to be the greatest evil in
the world.

2. In steadfastly laying hold of Christ, and believing in him, so that we will
not part with him for any thing in the world.

3. In a newness of life, walking in obedience to all his Commandments: and
therefore Christ says, John 16. He will send the Comforter to convince the
world of sin, and righteousness: first, to humble for sin: and in this
also there are degrees; for here one may be humbled more than another, and so
thirst after Christ more; but the more we are humbled, the better we are
humbled; it is a sign God has a greater work to do by us, when we are thus
humbled: It is a great fault in us that we are prone to think that we are
humbled enough, and that our humiliation at our first conversion was enough; no
(beloved) our humiliation must not be like a land-flood, that runs but for a
little time, but like a spring running continually; for all degrees in grace,
depending on God, mortification of our lusts, etc. depends on the degrees of
our humiliation; and he that is the most humbled, would be much more if he saw
himself to be the better. And so much for the fifth question.

The sixth question is this, Quest. 6.
How shall we come to be thus humbled?

I answer, Answ.
By the Law; for though the whole act of our humiliation is wrought by the Law
and the Gospel, The Law the only means of humiliation
Romans 6. yet that humiliation which I now urge, is that legal humiliation
which is wrought by the Law: by the Law, I mean not only the ten
Commandments, but the rectitude of our persons to the whole Scripture, which
is the exposition of them: First, consider therefore how much perfection Gods
word requires, then how short you come of that perfection; this is one means.

I but some man will be ready to say, Object.
I have done what I could, and yet I am not humbled.

To this I answer, Answ.
it is not the Law alone that must humble us, but it must be joined with the
spirit of bondage; for as to make the Gospel effectual there is required the
spirit of consolation, and a faith to believe it; so to make the Law effectual
there is required the spirit of bondage, and faith proportionable. The spirit
of bondage, what and why required to humiliation.
The spirit of bondage is that which enlightneth us to see the bondage wherein
we are by reason of our sins, and then is required a faith to believe the
threats against those sins; for faith is required to believe Gods threats as
well as his promises; faith in the general being nothing but a lifting us up
to see what nature cannot: for when the unclean person is threatened he is not
moved because he believes not.

But here some man will be ready to object and say, Object.
Afflictions often humbleus, therefore it is not the Law that does it.

To this I answer, Answ.
Afflictions, as the plow, make way, How afflictions and the Law concur to
humiliation
but it is the seed of the Law sown in our hearts that must humble us: indeed
those notions, which they had before, are in afflictions made to seem otherwise
then before: but we must take heed that afflictions cause not worldly sorrow,
for that is the applying of the corrosive to a whole place.

Now you must know that there is an extraordinary humiliation which God at some
times works in some men; we urge not to that, (God works that in whom he
pleases, and intends to make extraordinary,) we urge to the ordinary
humiliation. Now the means to attain that, are these five:

The first means to aftaine humiliation, Five means to humiliatio^.
is, To enter into a serious consideration of our estate, as the prodigal
Son did; 1. Means, to consider our estates.
he is said, Luke 15. to come to himself, and consider that his father had
enough, and he starved. So every one of us should do: consider

First, the greatness of thy sins in particular,

And then secondly, let our actual sins lead Deuteronomy. 8. 2. where it is said,
God led them forty years in the wilderness, to humble them, and to prove
them, and to know what was in their hearts, etc. He himself knew it well
enough, but by their sins he would make it known to themselves and others.
So also God dealt with Hezekias, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. Where it is said, God left
him, to try him, and to know all that was in his heart. Hezekiah had a proud
heart, and God left him to himself, not that God might know what was in his
heart, but that he himself might know. So God tells the Israelites, Ezekiel. 36.
31. Ye shall remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquity, etc.

Thirdly, Having thus considered your sins, wrath of a King is the messenger
of death, what then is the wrath of almighty God? even as the power of God is
more than the power of man, so is his wrath also: as long as he lives, so long
will he punish thee in hell. The consideration of this made Moses break out,
Psalm. 90. and say, Who knows the power of his wrath? Paul is in great
heaviness for the Jews, Romans 9. And as God showed his almighty power in
making of man, so will he in destroying and punishing. And this wrath of his
shall fall upon the most sensible part of man, viz. the soul, which as it is
capable of the greatest measure of joy, so is it capable of the greatest
measure of grief. What is God but infinite? what is his wrath but infinite?
under it thou shall most wish for death, which now thou most fear.

The second means to obtain Humiliation, 1. Means, to suffer sorrow to abide
on us
is, to stay a great while on this consideration, to suffer sorrow to abide on
our hearts; for it is the often and serious consideration that effects this: and
therefore we may learn something from Satan, when he would drive a man to
despair, he often puts thoughts of Gods wrath due unto our sins into our
minds, he holds the object close unto our minds, and so lets us think of
nothing else. It is the frequent and seirous consideration of these things that
humbles us: This was that that humbled David, Psalm. 51. My sin was always
before me: so Iam. 4. 8. cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts
ye double minded: How is that done? verse. 9. be afflicted and mourn: all
waveringnesse and instability comes from the corruption of the heart, and
therefore cleanse that; and the way to cleanse that is to be humbled; and the
way to be humbled is to sequester your self from all carnal mirth (though
else lawful) and stay on these considerations.

The third means is this; If you cannot see sin in it self, 3. Means see
sin in (...) effects.
labor to see it in his effects. All miseries which you feel in your self,
or know in others, are the fruits of it; and this will make you say, it is a
bitter thing to sin; so Peter in his second Epistle and second chapter, by
this effect aggravates sin, where he shows it was for sin that the Angels
were thrown down into hell, that the old world was drowned, that Sodom and
Gomorrah were destroyed.

The fourth means to attain humiliation is, 4. Means, to make these
evilspresent by faith.
to make these evils present before you by faith: as in an opticke glass,
those things that are a far off will seem near to those that look in it; so
these by faith should seem at the very door: it may be the not considering
them as present makes them not affect you; for what is a far off, although it
be in it self fearful, yet is not feared, as death, etc. therefore set hell
before your eyes, and see it as present before you.

Make present unto you these two things: Two things ought to be present before
us.


1 All sins past: a thing that is past us will seem small unto us, though it
be as great as ever it was before, and so do our sins to us: we usually do
as men that leave something behind them, when they are far gone they think it
is but a little, and therefore they will not return for it; so we being far
off from our sins, they seem little unto us, but we must remember the day of
our iniquity. Let us therefore make them our sins present, God he esteems
them as great as ever they were, let us do so therefore, let them seem
abominable to us: thus did Job possess the sins of his youth.

2. Things future: as Gods judgments, which are near at hand, and lie at the
door, as God says to Cain, although they seem to us a far off: But this is
Satan's cunning to deceive us; he is as a Painter, who by the collusion of
colors makes things seem far off which are nigh; so he makes Gods wrath which
lies at our door, seem a far off, when as it may be it will light on us
the next day.

The fifth means to attain Humiliation, 5. Means. To take heed of shifts;
is, To take heed of all such false shifts whereby you may seem to keep off
the blow of Gods law from lighting on you: we are never moved with these
considerations until all shifts are removed; so that we see nothing but
death, and then we tremble.

The shifts by which men think to keep off the blow of Gods judgments, Eight
shifts, whereby men think to keep off judgments
and so withold themselves from being humbled, are these eight:

1 Civilitie; 1. Civility.
this Gloworme of civility so glittereth in the dark, that we think it to
be a true spark of grace, but where the spirit shines we shall find it
false: and as the Devil deludeth Witches, in giving them leaves instead of
silver and gold, so does he deal with thee here; for except there be a
supernatural frame of thy hear^, there is not cause of comfort notwithstanding
all thy civility: and therefore thou must be sure to have something in thee
more than nature, for civility will not bring to heaven.

2 Formal performance of holy duties; 2. Formal performance of holy duties.
as praying, reading, etc. that puffes men up, and keeps them from humiliation.
If you either omitted them altogether, then your conscience would check you;
or performed them well, then your heart would be bettered, and you would be
humbled: but this formal doing of them keeps the heart dead and senseless.
Remember therefore that no sacrifice is acceptable to God, but that that comes
from a Broken heart, Psalm. 51.

3 The badnesse of your nature; 3. Badn^sse of nature.
you would do better, but your nature is so bad that you cannot. But remember,
Two cautions
first, That that aggravates your sin, and God likes you the worse for that,
and Adam a good nature, but you have lost it, and since by many sins have
made it worse by far.

4 Gods mercy: 4. Gods mercy
he is merciful, therefore you will not fear: but what if he be merciful,
he calls not thee, thou art not burdened with thy sins, he calls only such,
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. What have thou
to do with mercy, which see not thy misery? thou have no part in it, as Iehu
said to Iezabell.

5 The making conscience of many things; 5. The making conscience of many
things.
so Herod did many things after John's preaching; so the Gentiles did by nature
the things contained in the Law, yet were without God, Rom 2. but there is no
example like unto that of Amazia, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. he did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord for a long time, but not with a perfect heart. One may
make conscience of praying in private, and of doing many good duties, and yet
have no true grace, but do all out of a natural conscience for fear of
punishment.

6. Because Judgments come not swiftly, 6. The delay of executing of judgment
and are not speedily executed, Ministers threaten but they feel nothing: But
we must know, that the less afflictions we have had, the more are behind; and
I know not a more miserable condition than this is; it is a most dangerous
sign thou art ordained to death, when thou art thus let alone unpunished: As we
use to say, when men are frequently sick there is no danger of death, Simile.
but when they never have been sick, and at length fall into it, it is very
dangerous; so it is to be feared, that when once God begins with thee, he
will make an end, as he threatened to Hophnie and Phincas; he will so strike,
that he will not strike twice: so that nothing can be worse, than for a sinner
to go on without trouble.

7. Men judge their estates and sins in a false balance of opinion: 7. A
false opinion of their estates,
none (say they) think ill of them, but a few that are more precise than wise.
But consider:

1 That Ministers are only the men by whom ye believe, Three cautions.
not whom ye should believe: take our words but so far forth as they are
proved unto

2 Consider whether that latitude of Religion

3. Consider that it is the part of holy men, and

Men think that it concerns only some to be holy, 8. An opinion that some
should be holy and not all.
as Ministers, etc. and not all. I will answer such with the saying of
Wisdom, The way of godliness is too high for a fool: If thou were wise,
thou would think it concerned thee also.

Now I beseech you (brethren) humble your selves, Use.
and so much the rather, because now the time and necessity of the Church
requires it, now while she is thus in her mourning gown seek not after your
profits and pleasures, drink not Wine in bowls, use not now the liberties
that otherwise lawfully you might. Remember that saying of Vriah, 2 Samuel 11.
11. The Arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the
servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields, shall I then go into my
house to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? etc. And do as Daniel
did, chap. 9. Now practice all the parts of Humiliation, now Gods Church
needs it; although you your selves were free, yet humble your selves for the
sins of others; continually pray to God for them. Remember what God
threatens to those, Esa. 22. 12. that when he called to mourning, they
followed their pleasure; he says, He will not forget it to the death: so Esa.
66. 4. God is angry with all that neglect this duty, and will not be stirred
up to perform it; but those that do call on him he will hear. The
unrighteous Judge, Luke 18. was overcome by importunity, and then much more
will God: if we humble our selves, as Mordecay, Ester 4. 14. concluded
excellently, Their deliverance shall arise from another place; so may we; then
certainly the Church shall stand, and Antichrist shall fall, as a millstone
into the sea, never to rise up again. I grant he may rage very far, he has
raged far already, and how far more he shall rage, God only knows; yet in
the end, certain it is he shall fall, and the Church shall stand. Let us all
therefore be humbled, you which have not yet begun this humiliation, now
begin; and ye which have begun, be steadfast therein, knowing that your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Mercy to be found in Christ.
The next thing to be showed after this doctrine that we are dead in sin, is
the means of recovering our life, and that is by Christ, as it is in the Text
(you has he quickened that were dead, etc.) He, that is, Chist has done it.
Hence learn this doctrine of comfort, as a refreshing cordial next after the
bitter potion of humiliation. That:

Whosoever will come to Christ, Doctr. 3.
may come and find mercy, Rev. 22. 17. Whosever will, 3 Things in the doctrine,
let him taste of the waters of life freely. Here I will show:

1 What is meant by will (whosoever will) that is, 1 Taking of Christ.
he that will receive Christ with all his conditions, to be his Lord and his
Ruler, etc. Whosoever will thus take Christ he may: if we would take Christ
before we were humbled we might, but till we be humbled we will not take him.
It is Christ that gives life, but till we be hungry we will not take him and eat
him: the Sun enlighteneth, Simile.
but the window lets it in; Christ gives life, but our hungring after him makes
us eat him, which we will not do until we be humbled.

2 May come to Christ] that is, 2 Laying hold of him.
receive him, and believe in him; it is but laying hold of him when he sees he
must perish, Simile.
as a man that is falling into the sea, casts himself on a rock, and there
will lie and rest; so we seeing we must perish without him; we clap hold on
him, and will not leave him for any persecution or pleasure.

3 Whosoever will] It is generally propounded; 3 All may come and take him.
for Christ is a common fountain, he that will, may come; As John 7. 3, 7. If
any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: he that believes in me, as
says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow living waters: and again,
Job. 3. 16. God gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him,
should not perish, but have everlasting life. As the old Adam was a common root
of sin and damnation; so is Christ the second Adam, of grace and salvation:
as at the year of Iubilee, when the trumpet sounded, whosoever would might go
free, but if any would be sollavish as to serve, they might; so now to Christ,
now he calls, whosoever will, may go free and be delivered; but if there be
any so flavish minded as to stay, they may.

The grounds of this Doctrine why I thus generally deliver it, The grounds of
the Doctrine generally.
are these:

1 Because else there were no ground of our faith; 1 Otherwise no ground of our
faith.
faith must have a ground of Scripture, and the Scripture makes no particular
promise to any man; it says not, thou Thomas, or thou John, shall be saved,
but it faith, Whosoever will, let him come, and drink freely of the water of
life: Then we say, but I will; therefore on this ground is the strength of
faith, that whosoever will, may come.

2 Because faith is about things that are; 2. Faith is about things that are.
faith presupposes his object: God gives the general promise, Whosoever will
believe, shall be saved: This is the object of faith, this premised the faith
follows; and is the the cause of all the consequences, as that Christ is
mine, I am sanctified, justified, etc. these follow faith, but the object is
before, viz. that whosoever will come to Christ, may: as, if I believe the world
is created, then it must first be created; so if I believe, I shall be saved,
if I go to Christ, then I must first have this, for to believe, that whosoever
will come to Christ, may come.

To exhort so many as are humbled for sin, Use.
and see what need they have of Christ, to come to him to be quickened; the
fountain is opened, so that, be thy sins never so many, or great however,
committed of knowledge after many vows or covenants, yet if thou art so
touched and humbled for thy sins, that thou truly thirstest after Christ, if
thou will take him, thou may. To those only that are humbled is this wide
door of comfort opened; art thou but humbled, let thy sin be never so great,
suppose it be of murder, uncleanness, etc. let them be aggravated with all
the circumstances, yet if thou can be but humbled, and then lay hold on
Christ thou may, Read 1 Cor. 6. 9. See what great sins those were, how can
you name greater? Neither fornicator, nor idolater, nor adulter, nor
effeminate, now abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, not extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. And such were some of you: But ye are washed but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified, etc. Nay, suppose you have not one jot of holiness, nor of
godly sorrow, yet do but take Christ, and he is thine. To look for sorrow
and holiness before thou take Christ, is to look for life before the soul.
Therefore do but take him and he is thine: for,

1 The promise is free without any condition; If godly sorrow and grace were
required, it were not free; godly sorrow and grace follows faith, but are not
required before it.

2 The promise is general, Mark. 16. 16. Go ye unto all the world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature: If therefore there be any poor soul
touched with his sins, so as he will do or suffer any thing for Christ, to
him I speak comfort, to him Christ does belong, thou may have CHRIST if
thou will.

But some man will here be ready to object and say, Object.
Then every one will take him.

To this I answer, Answer.
Every one would take him for a Savior, Every one would take Christ as a
Savior, but not as a Lord.
but there be conditions following after, though not going before faith: if you
believe he is your Savior, you must believe he is your Lord, you must serve
him in all his commands, and leave all your sins, which none will do, until
they see that without him they cannot but perish: and none but they will take
him, whom, when they have taken him, he descends into them, and quickens
them, and animates them, and makes them like himself. As fire does iron,
Simile.
to have the same qualities which fire has, although not the same degrees.
Thus when a man, humbled for sin, longs after Christ, and receives him,
Christ enters into him, Christ gives whom he quickens a threefold life
and gives him a threefold life: 1 The life of guiltlesnesse, by which we are
free from the guilt of sin. 2 The life of grace. 3 The life of joy. Thus he
quickens those which are dead in trespasses and sins. Hitherto of the first
verse, we come now to the second.

Continuance in SIN DANGEROUS.
EPHESIANS. 2. VERSE. 2. Wherein in times past ye walked according to the course of
this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that
now rules in the children of disobedience, etc.
AFter the Apostle had proved these Ephesians, to whom he writes, to be dead
in trespasses and sins; here in the next verse he proceeds to confirm his
Dorctrine, by proving them to be dead men from the signs of death, which are
three: That they walked: 1 According to the course of the world: 2 According to
the Prince of the air: 3 In the lusts of the flesh.


These are the guides by whom they were led, the world, the flesh and the
devil: where such guides lead a man, he is like to run a good course.

Now the point of Doctrine that arises from the first of these, is:

That whosoever walks in any course of sin, Doctr. 1.
is a dead man, and the child of wrath: that is, if there be any ruling lust in
a man, so that he follows it, and it commands him, that man is in the
estate of condemnation.

This is plain, The Doctrine prooved Scripture.
Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. If there be no condemnation to
those which walk after the spirit; then certainly there is condemnation to
those which walk after the flesh: So likewise, Romans 6. 14. Sin has no
dominion over you, for you are not under the law, but under grace; that is, if
sin has but dominion over you, then were you in the estate of death: if but
any lust has dominion over you, so that you must yield obedience to it, you
are not in the estate of grace, but of damnation: and the reason hereof is
verse. 18. because, you are the servants of sin, (for his servants you are
whom you obey.) Suppose you have but any one predominant sin, it is enough to
damme thee. There are some that can deny the sin of lusts, but for to leave
their company, that they cannot do: Again, some can leave their company, but
by no means will part with the sin of lust; some can part with both: but for
their riches, they will not part with a penny; and so for other particulars,
many will be content to part with some of their sins, but one is so sweet, that
they will not part with it. But let all such know, that if they have but any
one sin to rule and reign so in them, that they must needs obey it; if it be
so sweet unto them, that they cannot leave it, they are in the estate of
condemnation: yea, if they continue but in any one known sin, for there is
but one way to heaven, but by-waies a thousand: now, if thou take but one
by-way, it will lead thee from heaven as well as if twenty; for the right way
to hit the mark, is but one, but there are many by-waies wherein we may miss.

I added, Whosoever walks in any known sin. Indeed, a man may sometimes by
chance slip out of the way into some sin; but I mean not such a man, but him
that makes some sin his continual walk.

But every one will be ready to say; This is a hard saying, By reason.
and who can endure it? I will therefore show you some reasons for it.

The first reason is, Reason. 1.
because, that whosoever walks in any known sin, He that walks in sin
is overcome of sin.
is overcome of sin, and whosoever is overcome of sin cannot be saved.
Indeed, a godly man may oftentimes be foiled, but never is overcome, and at the
last gets the victory: But when a man assimulates himself to sin, and
without any reluctation is overcome of it, striving no more against it, as fire
when it is overcome by water, that man is certainly in the estate of
condemnation. This is the meaning of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 9. While they
promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption, for of
whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in bondage: If any sin
overcome thee, thou art in the estate of damnation. It will not serve our
turn, to use those weak excuses, which commonly is our plea; to say, we
cannot leave them, because we are flesh and blood, and they are naturally in us.

The second reason is, Reason. 2.
because, whosoev^r walks in any known sin, In him sin has the chiefest
command, and God no place.
in him sin is predominant, and has the chief command, and where that has
the chief command and rules, God has no place; for the motion follows the
predominant element; if godliness be predominant, that moves us and rules us;
if sin be predominant in us, that rules us. As a man speaks out of the
abundance that is in his heart, so also he works out of the abundance that is
in his heart. This is plain, for when Christ would show their hearts to be
bad, he bids them consider their speech; and if he could gather the
naughtiness of their hearts by their speech, then certainly much more by their
actions and works.

I, Object.
but some may say, I have a secret sin in my heart, yet it breaks not
forth; I keep it in, and will not suffer it to come out, and so long it is not
predominant, neither does it bear rule, neither does he walk after it, but
covers it.

I answer, Answ.
they have so, and though they do not walk after them, yet they are not the
better for that, for God judges according to the inward heart, he judges
according to the heaven we aim at in our own hearts, he feeth the secret bent
of the heart which way it is; it may seem contrary to the eyes of men, but he
judges not according to the outward appearance, but he judges with righteous
judgment.

The third reason is, Reas. 3.
because, that whosoever lies in any known sin, He is an hypocrite.
is an hypocrite, and no hypocrite can be saved, though he does other things
never so well; for such an one hangs not like the sprigge, but like a bough
that is almost rent off the olive tree, which can never prosper. If he did but
a little, and yet did it in sincerity, it would be accepted, whereas, while he
does much, God has respect unto small things with sincerity, more than many
great things with hypocrisy.
yet in hypocrisy, God regards it not. This I find by comparing these two
places together. 2 Cron. 25. 2. And 2 Cron. 15. 17. In the first place it is
said, that Amazia did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not
with a perfect heart, and therefore God rejected him: the meaning is, that he
was not throughout perfect, but had some secret sin in him, therefore God
rejected him.

Now, in the other place, It is said, The hears of Asa was perfect all his
days; yet as we may read, he had many infirmities: as 1 He put not away the
high places: 2 He relied upon the King of Egypt: 3 He trusted on the
Physicians: 4 He put the Prophet into prison. Yet notwithstanding all these
infirmities, it is said, his heart was perfect, because that these did not rule
in him: For, where there is found humiliation wrought in any man, he, though
these through infirmity may be in him, yet he walks not after them; and then
only humiliation is good, when a man is desirous to be rid of his sins; and
this the hypocrite wants, because there is rottenness at the core, and his
heart is not truly sound.

The fourth reason is, Reason 4,
because that he that walks but in any one known sin, He is ready to
run into other sins upon occasion.
if he had but tentation unto other sins, he would run into them also.
Thence is that of the Apostle James 2. 10, 11. Whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all; his meaning is, that if
such a man had but as strong tentations unto other sins, he would commit them
also; for if a man does any duty out of sincerity, he would do all, because
that God commands all, as it follows in the same place: For he that said,
Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill: Now, if thou commit not
adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the whole Law.
For, look what sin soever thou art tempted unto, the same thou will commit,
and if a hundred tentations should as much beset thee, thou would yield to
them all as well as to one.

For the better meaning of the point, Quest.
here it may be demanded, what this walking is. What this walking is.


To this I answer, Answ.
It is a metaphor taken from the manner of men in their most usual and
ordinary carriage of themselves; Right walking is known
and therefore it needs some explanation, 1 By the choice of the way.
because it is a figurative speech. Now it is discerned by these four things.

First, See what way a man chooses to walk in; If a man by accident happens
to fall into some by-path, where lies not his journey, that way is not of his
choosing, he is not said to walk in that way: Psalm. 119. 30. There David
says, I have chosen the way of truth, thy judgments have I laid before me.
His meaning is, when he did wholly consider what journie to take, then he
fell into Gods path, and went in his ways; this was his resolution. If then
after consideration thou have a full purpose and inward resolution to go in the
paths of righteousness, thou walk right.

2 See what way thou go forward in, 2 By the progress therein.
for that way thou walk in; if a man choose a way, and go not on in that
way, it is nothing: David, Psalm. 119. 32. says, I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. But many are here deceived,
they think they have chosen the ways of God, and yet go on in the ways of
sin; if they would walk aright, they must hold on the paths of goodness.

3 See what companions and guides you choose for your journie; 3 By companions
and guides.
if thou profess thou have chosen the ways of God, and yet do delight in
the same sinful pleasures thou did desire, thou may say what thou will,
but certain it is, that thou art the same man thou were: for David's resolution,
when he walked in this path, was quite contrary, he says, Away from me ye
that work iniquity, for I will now keep the commandments of my God. And
this is laid down in the Text: if therefore we follow the same guides, the
world, the flesh and the devil, we still go wrong, and are not yet in the
right way.

4 See what provision thou make for the place before thou come thither; 4 By
the provision we make.
See whether thou seek God or the devil. A man that is to travel into
Italy, or any other country to traffic there, will be sure to provide before
hand for his journie; do thou likewise, see for what country thou bring
exchange for; if thou laist out all here for heaven, it is a sign thou art
traveling thither; but if we will make shipwreck of a good conscience, and
all our care is to gain here, it is a plain sign we walk not aright; and
that we mind nothing less than heaven. Now, thus much for the meaning of
walking.

The uses follow: Use. 1.
1 This should be a trial for us to examine ourselves, For trial to see
whether we walk in the right way or no.
whether we be living men or no; for if we be living, then we walk, and if
we walk, then we are to see whether we walk in the right way or not; for,
this is the scope of the Aposte here. Now, this we may know by that place, Romans
8. 1. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit: his meaning is, by this ye shall know,
whether ye are in Christ Jesus or not, if ye are in Christ, ye walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. This is a sure place of trial, and a true
touchstone. And this trial is very necessary for us; because, that men live
in the Church as corn lies in the barn, after it is thresht in the floor. It
is called corn from the more worthy part, and that rightly; yet there is more
chafe than corn in the heap, and therefore it is necessary that the fan
should come and discern the chafe from the true corn: so in the Church,
there is need of the fan also, to winnow the good corn from the chafe. Let
men therefore by these two rules examine themselves: Two rules to try whether
we walk aright.
1 See if it be a known sin. 2 See if you continue in any sin. 1 To see
whether it be a known sin.



1 See if it be a known sin. A good man may continue in sin, and yet be
perfect before God, if he know it not to be a sin; as the Patriarchs lay in
polygamie, yet it was not acounted of before God, because they knew it not to
be a sin: There were many good Kings continued in it, but if they had known
it to be a sin, they would have forsaken it, and therefore, for all that they
are said to serve God: Simile.
As for example, a good subject may be said to be obedient to his Prince, when
it may be he does not that which at that time is his Princes will; because,
that if he knew what were his Princes will, he would do it: but if a man
willingly commits treason, he cannot be said to be a faithful subject; so he
that sins against knowledge, cannot be a good man.

2 See if thy sin be continued in. To see if thy sin be continued in.


It is the continuance in sin that makes thee the in estate of condemnation: if
it be a known sin a man falls into, yet if he continue not therein, this is no
argument against him, for the godliest man upon occasion may fall, but such a
man is not himself. Hence is that saying, He was not himself when he did it:
But as for those that make a common trade of sinning, they cannot say, but that
they are themselves in the committing thereof. In the godly, as Paul said, Romans
7. 17. Now, then, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.
It is not they, but sin that still remains in them: yet the sin, though
it be in them after their regeneration, yet it has no possession as it had
before. Take heed therefore, that although thou have the same occasions offered
thee as before thou had, yet thou do not continue in it, but totally
abstain therefrom, for a wicked man may a great while, even, a whole year,
abstain from some sin, and yet be said to lie in it, because, that if he had
the same occasions offered as before he had, he would have committed the same
sin as before he did. Let every man therefore look back unto his own
heart, and consider with himself, whether he is not the same man he was; some
had their delight in covetousness, some in pleasure, some in preferment, some
in credit, examine now your selves, and see whether thou do not delight in the
same things still; see if thou do not continue still in them, and c^omit them
usually, and so judge of it accordingly.

But here men may make many evasions, and find many doubts, that it is no
known sin, that they lie not in it, and the like. Therefore, to the end I may
make it plain, I will reduce all to these five heads:

The first question shall be this, Quest.
when it is a known sin, I. When sin is a known sin.
for the hypocrite will be ready to find an evasion about this; as for the
breaking of the Sabbath, for covetousness and the like, they will say they are
no sins, how shall they know they are sins?

To this I answer, Answ.
the sparks of conscience will glow in the midst of this darkness, Every man's
conscience will tell him what is a known sin
that will grudge at that sin, and then be sure it is a known sin, though it
do but whisper against it. If therefore thy conscience tells thee, that such
and such things are naught, and to be avoided, (although it may be for a time
thou may keep down thy conscience, and suffer it not to speak out for
the noise thy lusts make) yet, when thou shall come to lie upon thy deathbed,
and at the last day, when thou shall appear before God in judgment, then for
certain shall thou find these to be sins, and that to thy cost: Thou now wilt
be ready to say some thing, and put away thy sin from thee, but that will not
serve the turn; harken therefore now to thy conscience, and see whether that
does not tell thee, such and such things are sinful.

Here it may be demanded; Object.
A godly man sometimes may have a scruple in conscience, whether he is to do
such or such things; now therefore wherein lies the difference between the
scruple of the godly, and ignorance of the wicked.

To this I answer, Answ.
Indeed there is a great difference between the scruple of the godly, and the
ignorance that is in the wicked, Differences between the accusing of a guilty
conscience, and the scruples of the godly.
and the murmuring and accusing of a guilty conscience. There are three signs
whereby they may be discerned:

1 For the guilty conscience; when he lies in a known sin, Differ. 1.
and his conscience tells him it is a sin, he makes no inquiry after it, The
wicked after knowledge lie in it, but the godly forsake it.
but he finds such a sweetness in it, that his heart is engaged to it, he
cannot speak against it, nay, he resolves to sin, yea, and whenever he is
reproved for it, he is very angry. But on the contrary side, for him that has
a scruple in conscience might he but be informed of it that it were a sin,
he would fain know it, and with all his heart leave it. Therefore he does but
inquire and labor by all means to know if it be a sin, and no sooner does he
know it to be a sin, but he forsakes it.

2 Differ. 2.
Thou may discern of it by the subject matter of their scruple: In the
subject matter.
if it be a hard knot and question, then it may be in a good man, and such an
one should gather the soundest and best reasons, and see what side is most
probable, and that he must follow. But on the contrary side, if it be an easy
matter of morality, then thou art the more to be suspected, for the moral law
is ingrafted into our hearts. For an instance, if it be about the neglect of
the Sabbath, or about company keeping, and the like, the conscience that is a
virgin, and never will be corrupted, that will tell thee these things, and
persuade thee of them: Indeed, sometimes thou may have a seared conscience,
past feeling, and then, when once thy conscience has done telling of thee,
then thou art in a pitiful case.

3 Differ. 3.
Thou may discern of them by the rest of their actions; In the rest of
their actions.
if they have a good conscience, they will be troubled about that, and the rest
of their life will be good: but thou may quickly gather whether it be a
raging sin or no, for then they will do all things on the other side, and one
known sin draws on another, and the falsenesse of their hearts will be
discerned in other things also; for one reigning sin is like to a disease that
weakneth all the faculties of the body: for even so that weakneth all the
faculties of the soul. And so much of the first question.

The second question is this, Quest.
he that is a carnal man may say, I do many good things as well as others,
and although I do sometime sin, yet I allow not my self therein; and what can
a godly man do or say more?

To this I answer: Answ.
Godly men and wicked may go far together, Wherein a godly man and a wicked
may be said to agree and differ.
but in themselves they differ much. Therefore first, I will show how far
they may be said to agree and differ, and secondly, how they may be discerned.

1. 1 They agree in the way and differ in the end of their journey.
In these things they agree and differ.

First, both may agree in the way, and yet differ in the end, their journeies
end may be 2. several places: for the end of all that a godly man does, is the
glory of God; but the good which a wicked man does, is either out of some
present fear, or hope, or flashes of conscience, or for some by-respects, so
that in all he aims most at his own profit; it proceeds not from the inward
man, a new regenerated heart, as it does in the godly: Simile.
for example, suppose a man traveling, and by chance fall into London road,
because it is coincident with his way, and not because his journey lies to
London, but only for that is his readiest and perhaps cleanest way; now we
cannot say, that man tends to London for all that, because here the
denomination is taken from the utmost end of his journey.

2. They both disagree and differ in the disapproving of evil.
They both agree and differ for the disapproving of evil: I know that this may
be in the wicked a disapproving of evil, as well as in the godly: wherefore we
are to know that there is a twofold disapproving of evil.

1. That that arises from a principle nature, Disapproving of evil twofold.
in conscience.

2. From a true principle of regeneration.

If thy disallowing of sin does but arise from a natural conscience, that is
nothing. But if it be from a principle of regeneration, that is, from a new
disposition that is wrought in us, if from it we disallow sin, our case is good.

But now the signs whereby we shall discern between these two, Three s^gnes
to distinguish between a natural dislike of evil and a regenerate.
are three:

The first sign is this; if thou do disallow thy self in sin from a new
principle of regeneration, thou will abstain from sin with delight, A
delightful absteining from sin.
and settle upon goodness, as a stone, or any other heavy thing rests in its
center, for working with a habit, is working with delight, when a man sets
himself against sin with all might and maine, then it is a true sign. But now
for the natural conscience, let him be but out of his old company he is out of
his element whatsoever good thing he does, lie does it not with the whole bent
of his spirit, but it seems tedious unto him.

The second sign whereby you may discern the natural conscience, A change and
rising of the heart both against old sins and the doers of them.
is sin; if he loves those that continue in such sins as he does; if he be a
drunkard, he does delight in drunkards, if a gamester, he does delight in
gamesters: for he never comes to the contrary grace, but has pleasure in them
that commit the same sins But the regenerate man, he that has a heart
changed, his heart rises against such men. Therefore, Romans 1. 32. it is said,
Who knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such things, are
worthy of death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do
them. If this is reckoned as one of the sins of the Gentiles, not only to
commit sins themselves, but also to take pleasure in those that commit the same
sins. When therefore a man hates them that love goodness, and favors and
delights in those that are evil, its a great sign the heart is not changed;
for the Scripture makes that a less sign of a dead man, to do evil, than to
favor them that do it. On the contrary side, for a man to favor good men and
goodness and hate sin, it is a great sign of a regenerated man; when, as the
wise man says, Prove. 29. 10. The unjust man is an abomination to the just.

The third sign whereby you may discern it, A change of the whole m^a*
is this, if thy disallowance of sinen arise from a true principle of
regeneration, Simile.
it will transform the whole man; as a sprig being once ingrafted into the
stock, will change the whole nature of the stock. For look what the will is
set upon, that will change the whole man, and draw that after it; see therefore
now what thy speeches and delights are, if thy disallowance of sin arise from
a good principle, they are true. On the contrary side, the natural conscience
that does not transform the whole man, but only in some few things; though it
disallow of sin, yet it will go on in sin; and such men hold, or as the word
in the original is, ( Romans 1. 18.) They imprison the truth in
unrighteousness. Their consciences beinlightned, they keep it, and imprison
it in that faculty; The conscience that tells us what to do, and yet there
is no general amendment in us. And this is a great sign we are not inwardly
changed. And so much for the second question.

The third question is this; Quest. 3.
godly men oftentimes relapse and go back again and again, and often fall
into the same sin, and they know it to be a sin: how therefore shall I
distinguish between this relapsing and lying in sin?

To this I answer: Answ.
You shall distinguish it by these 3. signs:

The first sign is this, Distinction bewixt a godly man's relapsing and lying
in sin.
a godly man never relapses into purposes of sinning, he does not before hand
premeditate and think of the pleasantness and sweetness thereof: and after
this manner is it said, He has no purpose to sin
he that is borne of God cannot sin; for he is overcome of sin but upon some
occasion. But the wicked man after he has committed sin, does purpose to do
it again; so that he cannot be properly said to fall into sin again, because
in purpose he never left it.

The second sign is this; He favors not his sin
Look what sin a carnal man lies in, that is his beloved sin, he
favors it most, and would not be crossed in it, he cannot abide to be told
and admonished of that sin. Now it is otherwise with the godly man, he
favors not himself herein, but that sin which he is most ready to fall
into, he is gladdest to hear that condemned, he is very willing to hear the
Preacher speak against that. As for the wicked man he must not be touched,
he is like a lame man which cannot endure to be stirred, so he cannot abide
that his beloved sin should be spoken against.

3. There is a great difference in these two things. He falls not into the same
sin.


1. The godly man falls not into it so often as he did before. 2. He falls not
into it after the same manner.
1. He falls not so often as he did before. So often as before.


He does greatly resist it, the being and essence of sin is not still in him,
though it may be in part; if the same occasions be set before him, yet he is
not drawn away as he was before. As for the wicked man, he is the same he
was, and upon every slight occasion he will be drawn away; he cannot abstain
from sinning, because that sin is not weakend, but is full still in him.

2 For the manner:

Although he does sometimes slip, After the same manner.
yet it is with great grief and reluctation, he is more sorry for it always,
and every time gets ground of it, and strength against it. But as for the
wicked man it is nothing so, he does it with as much joy as ever he did, he
finds as much sweetness in it as ever he did before. So then we see there is
a plain difference between the relapses of the godly, and the wickeds lying in
sin. And so much for the third question.

The fourth question, Quest. 4.
or rather an objection, is this: No body can do all things, the best of us
are sinners, we are but flesh and blood, which is frail, the best have some
imperfections; and therefore, who is it that sins not?

To this I answer, Answ.
It is true that all men are sinners, the godly offend as well as the wicked,
yea, the godly offend often, and much; A double difference between the sins of
the godly and the wicked.
but yet there is a double difference between the offenses of the godly and the
wicked.

1 The hypocrite has always some predominant and ruling sin in him, In the
wicked some sin is ever predominant.
wherein he favors himself, so that all he does must have respect to it,
and where religion crosses that it must give place, and there must be a
bawlking of good duties, if it be against it. But as for the godly, in them
there is no predominant sin, it may be now one infirmity starts up, then
another, but down they go again, none can get the victory over him. The
hypocrite has some dominering sin, in which he will be favored, but as for
the godly man, he desires none to spare him.

2 There is a great difference in the manner; The wicked commit sin as a
proper work.
a wicked man does it as his proper work, his delight and his glory, he acts
himself in it. But the godly man, he acts not himself in committing such a
sin, it is not he that sins, but something that is in him, and he is very
sorry afterward that he was so foolishly overtaken therewith. Simile.
One man may wear a chain for an ornament, another for a fetter, and would
with all his heart be rid of it: so it is with the godly man, his sin is a
burden unto him, and he would be very glad to be rid of it, but to the wicked
man it is no burden, but he rejoices in it, he accounts it all his
pleasure, he reckons it a loss to be hindered in his way, or to leave it. The
godly man he esteems it as very hurtful, he knows it hinders him, so that
he cannot do that he would. The godly man, he entertaines sin as a thief, but
the wicked man as a welcome guest. And so much for the fourth question.

The fifth and last question is this, Quest. 5.
How shall we distinguish between the purposes of the wicked and of the
godly, because that often times both seem to be good; and there be many men that
have good purposes, and do but very little.

To this I answer, Answ. The purposes of the wicked are weak and fruitless,
but of the godly strong and effectual.
the purposes of the hypocrite are weak, and bring nothing to pass, but as
they rise, so they presently vanish again, But the godly man's, they are well
rooted in the soul, and bring the thing to pass that they labor to effect. A
good man will use all the means he can to abstain from sin, he will shun all
the occasions: but the wicked man, he will not abstain from the occasions, he
knows his nature will be ready to take hold of sin, and yet he will not
avoid the occasions and allurements thereto; surely therefore this man has no
purpose to leave sin; for if his purpose be not put in practice, he had as good
never purpose, for it has no effect. The godly man, he will use all good
means to further his intent, by fasting and prayer, and all other good duties.
Again, a godly man, if he has a lust in sin, he will resist it with all
his might, and never give over, though he does slip, yet he presently rises
again, and never cease, and therefore it shall not be imputed to him; but if
a man has flitting purposes in his brain, that is nothing, though he falls
no into the same sin so often. Thus much for the first use of trial.

The second use serves for comfort. Use. 2. To comfort al those that do not
continue sin.
For if this be a sign of deadness, to walk in sin; Then is it a matter of
comfort to all those, who, although they often times slip into sin, yet are
sincere hearted, and do not continue in known sins. You had therefore no
need to cry out against us, that our words are cruel words, for this is a
doctrine full sweet; you must at the first give us leave to open the wound,
though it be painful, yet after, you shall find the ease and sweetness.
Simile.
The bone-setter, that because he would not deal roughly, sets not the
bone aright, but puts in the sore joint only a little, and does not set it
thoroughly; it may be at first thou shall be called a good bone setter, because
the person ill affected, for the present, feels no pain, yet afterward when
the joint is not seated, will be railed against: or the Surgeon that will not
search the wound, to the bottom, for paining the patient, at the first may be
pleasing; but afterward in the end he shall have little thank for his
labor: in like manner should the doctrine be harsh at first, because it
fearcheth the sore to the quick, yet the end of it is comfort. The end of
Christ's speaking to the people in Saint John's Gospel, was at the last comfort
and joy. Labor therefore all of you to make this use of this doctrine; you
that have sincere hearts, take it home to your selves, if you do walk in no
known sins: but if ye have walked formerly in any known sins, now
begin to rectify your lives, that so you may have cause to take this
Doctrine unto your own souls. Break the bands of Satan, and forget all his
fair allurements, you must part with all your sweetest sins for it, and give
all you have to purchase this Jewel. Comfort you may have, and all our desire
is, to make your hearts perfect, that so you may find comfort. Comforts in a
perfect heart.
If your hearts be perfect, you shall find these four comforts:

1 You shall find more comfort in easiness and contentedness to forbear
that lust we most delighted in, Contentedness to forsake lust.
than ever we did in yielding to it.

2 You shall find your selves able to rest, Ability ^^ prayer.
to pray, to hear, and to sanctify the Sabbath; make your hearts good, and
you shall do these things with delight: for, Simile.
as when a man's hand is out of joint he cannot work; so if the soul be out of
frame it cannot pray, etc.

3 You shall find your selves able to bear afflictions; Ability to beat
afflictions.
before you can bear nothing, but every thing is as a burden unto you: A man
having a shoulder that is out of joint, cannot bear any thing; so, if sin be
mingled with affliction, it makes that bitter: but after you have purged your
selves from sin, you shall be able to bear them; but when there is no
strength within, how shall we bear them?

4 When you hearts are perfect, Sound pea^^ and lasting.
the wound will presently be healed and grow well. The peace of the wicked is
but like a wound that is skinned over, at the last it will break out again,
he may make a show for a while, but there is a secret disease in him; and the
later end of that man will be worse than the beginning; their pain will be
worse hereafter, the pain that he shall endure when death comes, when Gods
insupportable wrath begins to charge his sin upon his conscience, that will be
worse than all he endured before. And thus you see this Doctrine is most sweet
to all those that have perfect hearts, but to the other, that remain still in
their sins, most dangerous.

A PROFITABLE SERMON PREACHED AT LINCOLNESINNE, ON
GENESIS XXII. XIV. As it is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall
be seen.
THe occasion of these words, The occasion of the words*
was that famous history of Abraham's offering his Son Isaac: now that so
great a passage of Gods providence, and so great a trial of Abraham's faith
might not pass away, but be remembered, the Lord delivers it in a proverb,
As it is said unto this day; because we are apt to forget, and proverbs are
short and pithy, and so the better remembered, and therefore the Lord sets
this mark upon it: Observe.
whence by the way we observe, That special passages of Gods providence should
not be forgotten.

And therefore it is the manner of the Lord in such passages of his providence,
to make songs of them: and so has it been likewise the practice of the Lords
people to turn such things into songs, which they would not forget, as we see
at the Red Sea, Judge. 5. Deuteronomy. 31. 19.
and in the time of Dehora; and so did Moses, when he would have some things to
be remembered of the children of Israel, he left them a song: so did David
likewise, who for the remembrance of the Lords goodness, made many Psalms of
thanksgiving.

Now a proverb is much of the same nature; but it is short, and makes a
greater impression, and therefore this great matter here set forth by it, is
the dispensation of the Lords providence.

Wherein note we in the first place, That the Lord will be seen: Two things
observable in the Text.
why, what strange thing is that? the Lord is seen every where of us, and
makes himself continually visible unto us. I, but this is another kind of
sight, which is not in a general manner to be beheld, but in his special
providence to his servants in their afflictions.

The second thing is, The time when he will be seen; that is, In the mount:
that is, when things are brought to an extremity, when we think there is no
more help nor hope, that is the time when the Lord will be seen.

Now the scope of this place is, The scope of the place against discouragements.
to help us against discouragements, when we see it go hard with the Church
that there is no hope for them, for then we are not to distrust, Because in the
mount will the Lord be seen, in distress will the Lord show himself; and
therefore you are to take heed of discouragements that you leave not your hope,
for then you take away endeavor, and so Gods causes fall to the ground, and
thereby the Lord is forsaken of us; for it is our hope that sets all aworke,
and the want of hope makes us turn our backs; yea, foil and give over the
Lords Battles; and therefore we should still maintain our hope in all
extremities whatsoever, for when the Lord sends any afflictions on the Church
or our selves, we ought not to despise or make light of them, because they are
the messengers of the Lord, to humble us: so we must not on the other side have
the sinews of our souls loosened by them; for as we are not to despise the
Chastening of the Lord, so are we not to faint when we are rebuked of him;
for in the Mount will the Lord be seen: that is, it is a thing that the Lord
will usually do, not at this time when thou would have him, but even when
Abraham was fetching the blow, then to stay his hand: And it is his usual
course so to do; and therefore it is turned into a proverb, because it is
ordinary.

Secondly, For ordinary use.
we have ordinary use of it, and therefore likewise it is put into a proverb;
for the Lord usually brings us into extremities; and that it might be the
better remembered of us, it is put into a proverb, for that is the use of short
sentences to be easily carried in the memory; and therefore the Lord has thus
turned it: As men do by their Silver, Simile.
they change it into Gold that it may with the more ease be carried.

Now to cometo the words; out of which we may learn, Doct. 1.
That it is Gods usual manner to bring his children to extremities. The
examples are so many in Scriptures, and in our daily experience of this, that
we need not insist on the proof of it, but proceed to show the reasons thereof.

And the first cause why the Lord does so usually do it, Reas. 1. To make it
an affliction.
is, When he brings afflictions on his children, he lets it run along till
they may think there is no more help, nor hope, that so it may be an
affliction to them; for it would not be an affliction, except it did run on
to the uttermost point; for if there were any door for us to get out, we were
not compassed about, but when a man has no gap to go out at, that is it that
makes the spirit of a man to sink. Simile.
If a man were in a smoky house, and had a door open, it were no difficulty
for him to shift himself out of it; but when we are shut up, that is it which
makes it difficult; and that it might be so, the Lord suffers it to come to an
extremity.

Secondly, Reas. 2. Because the Lord might be sought unto.
The Lord brings us to an extremity because the Lord might be sought to; for so
long as the Creatures can do us any good, we will go no further; but when
they fail us, we are ready to look up to the Lord: Simile.
As it is with men which are on the Seas, when they are in an extremity, those
that will not pray at any other time, will pray now, and be ready to say with
these in the Prophet Hosea 6. 1. Come and let us return unto the Lord; for ^^
has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up: and
the reason is, because where the Creature ends, the Lord must begin,
otherwise there can be no help at all. And hence it is that at the time of
death, when a man once sees that, and has no deliverance, it quaileth the
stoutest spirits that are: as Saul, when he could see nothing but death before
him, then he sanke down to the ground, and till then the Lord is not sought
to; but in their afflictions they will seek me, says the Lord; because then
they can go no where else. Therefore when a man is brought to say, vain is
the help of man, then he will look to the Lord for his help; but till then,
man is subject to look round on every side to see if there be any that will
help: but when there is none, then he seeks unto the Lord and is delivered.

Thirdly, Reas. 3. Because God may be known to be the helper.
The Lord does it, because that hereby it comes to pass that the Lord may be
known to be the helper; that when we are delivered, he may have all the
praise; for otherwise if there be but a little help in the Creature, we are
ready many times to ascribe it all to it, or at least to divide the praise; and
therefore the Lord said to Gideon, Judge. 7. 2. The people that are with thee,
are too many: though indeed they were but few in comparison of the multitude
which they were to go against, yet they were too many for Gideon, to have
acknowledged the hand of the Lord in it, if he should have had the victory
with them. But the Lord will not divide his glory with another, and therefore
he will bring a man to the straight to be without all hope, that so he may
have all the praise; for when other means concur with his help, then it is
divided; but without that, his arm lies naked, as it were, and therefore that
it might be known, he brings them to extremity.

Fourthly, The Lord does it, because all that we have, Reas. 4. Because we
might receive it as a new gift
we might have as a new gift: Therefore the Lord suffers us, as it were, to
forfeit our Leases, that he may renew them; otherwise we should think our
selves to be Freeholders. But when we come to see all gone, our health,
wealth, and credit to fail us, and in that extremity the Lord to give it us,
it is as a thing given on a new gift, and then we take our life as given again
of the Lord: and so in any other straight, when there is no help of man left,
then we take it wholly from the Lord; and then we give it to him again.

Fifthly, Reas. 5. Because we may know the Lord. Quest.
The Lord does it, because he may teach us by Experience to know him.

But here some man will be ready to say, Why cannot that be without these
extremities?

To this I answer, Answ. God is never known well but by experience.
You must know when a man goes on in a course, without any troubles, or
changes, his experience is to no purpose; for he has no great experience of
the Lord: But when a man is in tribulation, that brings experience; and
experience, ^^pe; for it is another kind of experience that is so learned,
than that which comes without it: and indeed nothing is well learned till it
be learned by experience. And therefore our Savior Christ himself that had
all knowledge that could be had without this, would have this also of
experience likewise; for when a man is in ex^^emity, then shall he have
experience of the Lord: And therefore it is said of Manasses, when he was in
affliction, and had prayed to the Lord, humbling himself, and was restored,
that he knew the Lord was God, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13. Why, did he not know that
before? No, not as now he did; for now he knew the Lord by experience: and
the want of this is the cause why many fear not God; for because they have no
changes, they know him not by experience, and therefore they fear him not. God
manifefleth himself ever upon some great change.
And for this cause, when the Lord did ever manifest himself in any special
manner to any of his people, ye shall see it always to be upon some great
change that befell them: As when Jacob was forced to leave his fathers house,
to fly from his brother Esau, then did the Lord in a special manner manifest
himself unto him; and so likewise at his returning home again, when his
brother Esau came against him with four hundred men to destroy him, which was
a great change, then the Lord appeared to him again: so still upon the great
changes of his people does the Lord appear unto them; and as he did to them
in former days, so he does to us now; he does appear unto us sometimes by
^^erience of his goodness; which that he may do, he brings us to extremities.

Lastly, Reas. 6.
The Lord does it for proof and trial, for so it is said in the beginning of
this Chapter, God did prove Abraham; and therefore said unto him, Take now
thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and offer him up on one of the
mountains which I shall show thee: Now seeing the Lords intent was to prove
him whether he would part with his son Isaac for his sake, therefore he
lets him go to the very place and utmost period of offering his son; for if
the Lord had taken this trial of him before he had brought him to the very
utmost, he had not beenetryed; but when the knife was as it were going to the
throat of his son, then was heefully tried: And like unto this do we deal
with friends one toward another; for when you will try how another will trust
unto you, you will let him alone till there be none else to help; for if there
be any other for him to go to, it is no trial; but if it is come to this that
you must do it, or none will, then have you tried him and not before: in like
manner did the Lord prove Abraham in this place.

The Use of it is, Use. Not to be discouraged whatever our case be.
That we might searne never to be discouraged; whatsoever our case is, let us
never suffer our hearts to be cast down in us; for as we are very prone to let
go our hold upon all occasions, so is it a very great fault so to do. We see
how David does recollect himself together when h^^ soul was disquieted within
him, Psalm. 43. 5.
asking himself why it was so? which he would not have done, if the other had
not been a fault in him; and therefore why do we so cast down our souls?
If we say, Object.
it is because it will be long before the Lord will come and undertake our
help: Answ.
I answer, no, it will not, for as soon as he does see thee fit for help, he
will give it; for when things are most desperate, then his help is nearest:
for as he is able then to do it, so is he most willing to do it then. And to
this purpose is that place, Hos. 14. 4, 5, 6. I will heal their backesliding,
I will love them freely, Hosea 14. 4, 5, 6. opened.
for mine anger is turned away from them. I will be as the dew to Israel, he
shall grow as the Lilly and cast forth his roots as Lebanon: his branches shall
spread, his beauty shall be as this Olive, and his smell as Lebanon. When
Israel was fallen into a very low condition, and had taken to him words, and
repented of their sins, then the Lord healed their backsliding, which was
the cause of their misery: and then though they were outwardly miserable, yet
he will be as the dew unto them; that though they be as the Lillies in winter
which has neither color, scent, nor beauty, yet consider in the spring time
what I do unto them, and learn to know me by the works of nature; for if I
do but send a little dew, such as is in the time of spring, it shall grow
again, yea and bring forth such a flower, whose beauty shall exceed Solomon in
all his Royalty: and if the Lord can do so in nature to the herbs of the
field, do you not think he is able (...) do it to you in the ordinary
passages of his providence? If he shall but shine on you with the light of his
Countenance, yea though you were as the Lilly in the Winter, yet shall you
spring again as the Lilly in the Spring: that is, you shall spring quickly. I
but you will say, and quickly wither again: No, says the Lord, you shall be
confirmed and established in your estate, for he will fasten your roots as the
trees of Lebanon, and they were faster than the trees in other places; for
though they be tall, and so their boughs might be moved, yet the bodies of
the trees hold their own, because they were well rooted: and in Lebanon they
were faster than in other places, because it was a firmer ground: so that if
the Lord list to plant you, you shall be sure to remain firm. I but what
shall I be good for? I know not how to be useful neither for God nor man, but
to be laid aside as a thing for which there is no more use. Nay, says the
Lord, I will not only make you beautiful as the Lillies, and rooted as the
Cedars, but I will make you as the Olivetrees which are fit for use. And put
the case thy name and credit be lost, yet your smell shall be as the smell of
Lebanon, that is, as Lebanon had many sweet blossoms and sweet smells, so shall
it be with you, whatsoever your condition be.

This place then is a place of comfort aganst discouragements, Examples.
which you may see exemplified in diverse examples: Job.
As in the example of Job: you know in what a case he was, he lost all he
had, that he had not a friend left him; no, not his wife nor servants that
would stick unto him, but was brought to the very Mount, to an extremity that
could not go further, for he was at the very brim of the hill: yet when Job
was fit for mercy, when he had humbled himself, you see what a change the
Lord made, how his beauty did return again, and how all his health,
prosperity, and friends did return unto him, in so much as he was in all
things as before, yea and beyond it. So in the fourth of Daniel 26.
Nebuchadnezzar,
who would have thought it possible for Nebuchadnezzar ever to have been
restored, that had lost his kingdom and wits too, which is the only means to
bring a man in again; yea, he had lost all his beauty, for he was a beast of
the field, yet the Lord made a change with him: now a man would wonder how this
should be brought to pass that he should have his kingdom again and be made
known to his Nobles; why the Text says, He looked up to heaven, verse. 34. and
then his Nobles and Princes sought unto him: for the disposition of all people
is to have the right heir to rule the kingdom; and therefore he had as much
glory and honor as ever before. The like you shall see in Mordecayes time,
(...) ^ewes in Mordicaes time.
when the Church was in extremity; for you see how far Haman went, the blow
was as it were in the giving, the knife was in his hand to cut the throat of
the whole Church of the Jews, yet when they had humbled themselves by fasting
and prayer to the Lord, that made work in heaven; and when there was a change
in heaven, you see how quickly the Church was changed, and brought even from
the lowest degree to the highest that could be, or ever was in the time of
their trials. And therefore let us never give over our hopes, and despair not,
for because the Lord is ever ready to show mercy, for mercy pleases him: A man
when he corrects his child, Simile.
he does it unwillingly; but when he is fit for mercy, he is glad to show
that: why so it is with the Lord, he being willing to do it, and exceeding
able, for he is a Physician that is able to heal the most dangerous diseases,
and shall we then doubt of the accomplishment? It is a common fault amongst us
to measure the Lord according to our selves; and so when we see man cannot
help us, we think that God cannot; but he that can turn Winter into a
Summer, can speedily turn our estates when we are fit for it: As a Physician
that administers hard potions to his Patient, Simile.
it is not because he cannot or will not give him pleasant things, but it is
because his Patient is not fit for it; for as soon as he is fit for Cordials,
he most willingly gives them unto him: And as the Husbandman, Simile.
he is willing enough to sow his seed in the earth, and would be glad if the
time were come; I but he knows if he so we it on the wild waste ground it
would be lost, and therefore he plowes it first, and again too, yea thrice if
it be needful, and then having well fitted it, he sowes his seed; Even so it
is with the Lord, he first plowes the ground, he digges deep into the hearts
of men if it be needful so to do, but if a little plowing will serve, he
never takes a deeper; and if one will serve, he never gives a second; and
therefore when we are fit to receive the seed, mercy shall come in amain
amongst us, even as that which goes with wind and tide; yea, it shall come as
fast as our misery did, which though it comes headlong upon us as it did upon
Nebuchadnezzar, yet how quickly did the Lord deliver him again? and so shall
it, be with us, because the Lord is delighted with mercy, therefore the Lord
does usually help in extremities, and not before; for in the Mount will the
Lord be seen.

And as the first Doctrine is drawn naturally from these words, That it is
Gods usual manner to bring his children into the Mount; so in the second
place, then and there will he be seen: Therefore it follows, That

In the time of extremities will the Lord be seen, Doct. 2. Reasons why God
will not be seen till extremities are.
and not before: But then he will appear in his special providence, for the
comfort of his Children, though not before.

And why so? To exercise the graces of your God by.
First, because the Lord knows many graces, and good duties, which otherwise
would be without use: As for example; When Jacob had made his brother Esau his
enemy by his hasty getting of the blessing, whereas if he had stayed the Lords
time, he might have had it without any sorrows with it; but because he will
have it a wrong way, it is accompanied with many sorrows both in him and
Rebecca likewise: Now if the Lord had presently made reconciliation betwixt him
and his brother, as he could have done, though he did not, but made it long
first, that made Jacob exceeding fruitful; for he being caused to to fly, as
his mother counseled him to do, in his necessity became acquainted with the
Lord, and knew him better than ever otherwise he should have known him; yea,
he knew himself better too, and therefore vowed to give the Lord the tenth of
all that he had, and that the Lord should be his God for ever if he would give
him food and Clothing, of which he felt the want at that time; and this
brought his heart to the Lord: So likewise when Esau came against him at his
returning home again; if it at the first it had been told Jacob that his
brother had been friends with him, he had never wrestled with the Lord as he
did; and so should he have missed of that great blessing which he received in
being called Israel. And therefore we se^ the Lord by this does draw many
great fruits from them, of which otherwise the Lord should lose the glory, and
we the benefit, if it were not so with us. So likewise the Angel was sent to
Daniel when he began to pray; I but if the message had then been delivered to
him, his heart had not been so well molded in the frame of grace, therefore
the Lord lets him alone; though he had given the Angel charge to deliver the
message to him, yet till he had done his work, and was made fit for it, the
message of their full deliverance was not made known unto him.

A second reason why the Lord deferres, and will stay till the very extremity
comes, is, Reas. 2. To give time of repentance*
Because he would give a time to men to repent and meet him in, which is good
for his Children, otherwise we should not seek unto the Lord: and for such as
do not seek him, it is to leave them without excuse: as in 2 Chronicles. 11. 12.
Chapters, you shall find that Roboam sought the Lord for three years
together, and then departed from him, yet Shisacke was not sent against him
till the fifth year of his reign: Whence this is to be observed, that though
he had forsaken the Lord, who therefore had resolved to bring judgment upon
him, yet he gives him two years liberty to see if he would return. So when
Nebuchadnezzar was like a flourishing tree, when he had dreamed his dream, and
that made known unto him, that he should be cut down to the very root, like
the lilly in winter, nothing should be left but the stumpes, yet you shall
find it twelve months after before the Lord struck him. So in the
destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, the Lord was oftentimes offering to
strike it, yet called back his hand again that they might humble themselves
and seek his face: but as it is said of Iezabel in the second of the
Revelations verse 12. he gave her time to repent, but she repented not.

Thirdly, Reas. 3. To let us know the vanity of the creature.
the Lord does not deliver till the time of extremity, that we may know the
vanity of the creature. And see that they are but as reeds that are empty: as
for example, when a man is brought to some great straight, and sees that men
will forsake him in it, as the Lord will cause them to do when he will bring a
man to a straight indeed, for then he will show him that there is no help in
man; as when a man that is sick, Simile.
and so far gone that no physic will do him good, but all Physicians have
left him; or when a man has some great business in hand, and nothing that he
has will effect it; and so likewise a man at Sea, when he is in such a
tempest that neither rowing nor any thing else will do him good, then when men
are in such cases, they come to see the vanity of the creature, and that all
outward means will start aside like a broken bow; for a broken bow being
drawn but a little, will hold; but if it be drawn up to the head, then it
breaks in the hand of him that handles it: Even so, when the creature is put
to it, then the vanity of them is seen, and that they are but as hollow reeds
that are empty, and so not be trusted to.

Now we must add to this, Though God defer till extremity, yet then he will
surely help.
that as the Lord will not deliver till then, yet then he will do it; and of
that you must make no doubt, because the Lord will make good his promises and
be just, for he is abundant in truth, he will make good all that he has said,
and that in abundance. Now if the Lord will help, and yet not till a man come
to extremity, why then he must help or not at all, and so he should fail
them that trust unto him, when as one man will not fail another that trusts
him, for that were treachery so to do; why then much less will the Lord fail
thee, if thou rely upon him, if thy heart can tell thee thou do entirely rest
upon him, it is impossible he should fail thee: And therefore he must help
thee at the last cast, or else not at all; and until thou art so far gone,
thou art not come unto the Mount; for Abraham was three days in going the
journey, and the Lord might have revealed it before if he would, but he did
not till he came to the mount: And therefore do not say, now is the extremity,
and yet the Lord does not help me, when thou art but in the way, for thou art
not yet come to the brow of the hill, thou art not at the utmost part of the
Mount.

The Use of it is, Use. To teach us not to make too much have for deliverance.
to teach us not to make too much haste for deliverance in the time of
distress, but to wait upon the Lord, yea depend upon his providence when we
seem to be without help: If we look upon the Creature, yet then are we to
depend upon the Lord, so as never to say there is no help; but on the
contrary, to say, I will trust in him though he kill me; for so did Abraham
here, he was to kill his Son, and yet he had hope: So let us, though there
were a thing that would be our utter undoing if it should come on us, yet if
it do come thou ought to hope, because it is the Lords manner to bring his
people to extremities, as here to Abraham: and the like he did to Peter when
he came to him on the waters; for he might have helped him before he began to
sink if he would, but he did first let him sink a little and then he help
him: So when the people were at the Red Sea, and had no gap to go out at, then
the Lord help them, by making a way through the Sea: In like manner he did to
Jacob when he was returning home from his father in law Laban, he, suffered
Esau to come out against him with four hundred men, before he help him; and
who would have thought that Esau's mind should have been so suddenly turned?
But when Jacob was brought to a straight, then the Lord turned all another way.
And the like he did with David in the time of his distress, he let him alone
till the waters were like to go over him: but when his feet had almost slipped,
in regard of his outward and inward troubles, for he was at the very going
down to the grave, then the Lord brought his feet out of the Net, and set him
at liberty, and took him out of the waters that he was not drowned* and
therefore still trust in the Lord, and labor that thy faith fail thee not
whatsoever thy straights be; for that was Peter's fault when he was on the
water, for if he had sunk, being he had the Lords word, he should have been
safe enough, and therefore had no cause to doubt; and so we should learn to
do, in all our streights still to believe; which if we do, we shall find
the Lord very exceeding ready to help beyond all that we can be able to ask
or think.

See this in an example or two, how the Lord comes betwixt the cup and the lip
as it were, betwixt the very lifting up of the hand to the stroke; and as in
the Text, so also when the Shunamite had by the command of the Prophet left her
land, because of the Famine that was to come when the seven years were done;
for she trusted the Prophet, and therefore did not say, Alas, what shall I do
for my lands again? but did go; and when she returned, and was gone to the
King for her lands again, at that very instant was the King talking with
Elishaes servant about the great works of the Prophet, who then told the King
of this woman and her son, confirming that which Gehezi had said, and Gehezi
being present to help to speak for the woman; and then she had not only her
lands restored her, but the fruits of it also for the whole time of her
absence. So likewise when Mordecayes destruction was plotted by Haman, and so
near brought to pass, that there could be no hope of help on any side, yet
then when Mordecay was asleep in the night, and had made no plots at all for
his safety, then the Lord brought it to pass; Ester 6. 1.
for that night the King could not sleep; then he must needs call for a
book, and then that above all other books, that should be brought, and in
that book that very place to be turned to of the treason against the King,
and Mordecayes truth and faithfulness in discovering the same; and that this
should be done at the very extremity, when a day or two after would have done
him no good, it is worth the considering: therefore never doubt, fear not, but
trust to the Lord in any straight; for though he does not work miracles now,
yet he works wonders, and is able to do as great things as ever he was, yea,
and does so too when there is the like occasion: In like manner, when our
Savior Christ was brought to the very brow of the hill by the people to be
cast down from it, why then he went a way through the midst of them; so is the
Lord able to do with us, and will also if there be the like need; and
therefore let us learn to trust in the Lord, and in all things to depend upon
him. One would have thought it impossible when forty men had secretly vowed
neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, for that to be revealed,
and Paul to be delivered, when so many that were able enough to destroy a poor
prisoner had conspired against him, yet we see the Lord delivered him from that
great straight; and therefore let us wait still upon the Lord, for it is but
the staying till the time be out, and then he that can save, will save, and
will not tarry. And so much for the second thing.

The last point observable from these (...)

That godly men's extremities are but trials, Doct. 3. Godly men's extremities
are trials, not punishments.
sent for their good; and not punishments, sent for their hurt and ruin.

The Lord did this but to prove Abraham, he meant him to hurt at all in it:
And so the Lord does by afflicting others of his own people, he does not mean
to hurt them by it. And therefore when you see an affliction to be so great as
if it would undo those on whom it is, yet you shall see in the issue it was
but like an evil; for when Abraham was bid to take his only Son Isaac whom
he loved, and offer him in a Sacrifice to the Lord, and was suffered to be the
three days in the trial, yet the Lord meant him no hurt; here was indeed a
great apprehension of evil, yet it was no evil; but it might as much work
upon him as the evil it self: Even so is it with us in our afflictions, they
are not evils, but mere trials, and therefore we are not much to be dismayed
for the greatest afflictions that can befall us in the world, because they are
but trials, that do befall thee from God.

I, Object. Answ.
but will some say, what shall I get by it? Why, so much that there is so
little cause to be sorry for it, that thou have cause to rejoice, if thou
woudest believe; as it is said in the first of James 2. My Brethren, count it
great joy when you fall into diverse trials: It is a very fit Text for the
purpose, for the Lord said he would prove Abraham; and all is no more but to
try us, and not to do us any hurt: and this is a good reason why it is so, in
that we are bid to rejoice in it; now we have no cause to rejoice in that
which will hurt us, neither will the Lord lay any unreasonable command upon us.

I, Object. Answ.
but what if the trials be many? Yet he bids us rejoice, though they be of
diverse kinds; when we are not only afflicted in the loss of goods, and our
friends forsake us, in which we might have some comfort, if our healths and
liberty might be enjoyed; or if all the outward man were afflicted, yet if the
spirit were whole it would bear out infirmity. I, but what if that be
wounded too? Why, if there be trials of all sorts, and you fall into them all,
and that of a sudden too, as a fall of waves, one coming upon the neck of
another as they did upon Job, yet we are bid to rejoice: Why one would think
it were enough for a man to be patient in that case; yet (says the Apostle)
you must rejoice in it; yea, count it exceeding joy: that is, as your trials
are greater, so let your joy be greater.

Why, Object. Answ. We ought to rejoice in trials, because the greater the
trial is, the more will be the good.
that is a strange command you will say: I but though you see not the reason of
Gods Commandments, yet there is a great reason in them, which if you saw, you
would keep them most willingly. And the reason of this Command is, the greater
the trial is, the more will be the good, and therefore the more cause of joy;
for if the most painful be the most gainefull, then they that have them,
have the greatest cause to rejoice in them: It was a trial for Abraham to go
from his own land, and to cast out his son Ismael; I but this was the
greatest, and this brought him the greatest fruit that ever he had.

I, Object. Answ. The good that comes of trials, is,
but what is that good? Why this; first, it shall increase grace in your
hearts; for as the gold when it is tried loses nothing but dross, and so is
made the better thereby; so it is with our afflictions, for the trial of our
faith, Increase of grace.
says the Apostle, brings forth patience: so the greater thy trial is, the
more it strengthens thy faith, and so increases comfort: for when the
afflictions of the Apostle abounded, his Consolation abounded also. And hence
it is, that our Savior Christ says, You shall receive an hundred fold with
persecutions; that is, when the trial does abound, the comfort shall abound.

Again, Increase of reward.
you shall have the greater wages; for when a man has a friend that has be
one employed about any great thing for him, why the greater the trouble was
which he did undergo for him, the more will he be beholding to him, and the
greater reward will he bestow upon him; even so the greater the trials are
from the Lord, the greater benefit will come to us by them; and therefore when
you see the greatest trials befall the Church and people of God, be assured by
this which has been said, that some great benefit is coming to them; for do
you not think this is a useful doctrine; it may be it concerns some of you
now at this present; if not, it may do, and therefore lay it up beforehand;
and let us not think of our afflictions as of things that will undo us, but
as trials that will bring us profit. For as the Spies that went to Canaan were
of two sorts, and looked upon the Giants that were in it with a double eye; and
so some of them said, O the land is a very good land, and encouraged the people
to go up into it; and others that were afraid, they said, nay but the land
eats up the Inhabitants thereof, and discouraged the people to go up into it:
Even so it is with many amongst us, when they see afflictions befall the Church
and people of God, O they presently are afraid, and therefore they say, Who
would be as these men? let me be of such as be in prosperity and have friends,
and some that will provide for me: but what is the reason of this? Why they
send forth wrong spies, and therefore they bring back a false report: but if
thou would send forth thy faith and spiritual wisdom which ought to be in
thy heart, then thou should see it were no such matter. And therefore let
this be our practice concerning the estate and condition of the Church at this
time, and needful it is we should so do; for do you not see the dangers
that they and we are in, and the confusion that is almost throughout all
Europe? yet God has not forgotten us, neither will he leave us, if we can but
rest upon him: what though there should be a sudden change, so that all things
were with us as it was in Hesters time? yet could the Lord bring forth some
good thing out of it that should tend much to his glory and our good: Put the
case all were turned upside down, as it was in the confused Chaos, wherein
heaven and earth was mingled together, and the waters overcomming all the rest,
Simile.
yet as then when the spirit of the Lord did but move upon the waters, many
beautiful creatures were brought forth, and the Sea divided from the rest,
that those waters that seemed then to spoil all, serves now to water all, and
without it we cannot be: Even so, were the Church in never so confused a
condition, yet the Lord shall so order the things that seem to undo us, that
they shall bring forth something of special use; that is, something to water
and make fruitful the house and people of God: and therefore be not out of
hope whatsoever befalls thee, only be humbled; for there is great cause so to
be, and the Lord calls thee to it by his Ministers, and we are his messengers
to declare his will unto you; and as we must be humbled and take to heart the
cause of the Church, so we must consider the time, that we may be thoroughly
affected thereby; for it was Ephraims fault not to do it: and thou must see
this distress, so as it may bring thee into the Mount; for it is not an
extremity simply that will cause the Lord to help thee; but when thy soul is
plowed up therewith, and then the Lord will cast in the seed and water it, so
as thy soul shall spring again; and therefore let us still maintain our hope
in all conditions whatsoever. And for this end did I fall upon this Text at
this time, That in the Mount will the Lord be seen.

FINIS.

