THE SAINTS DAILY EXERCISE.

A Treatise concerning the whole duty of prayer.

Delivered In five Sermons upon 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.

By the late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON, Dr.
in Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel College
in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

JAMES 5. 16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.
PSALM. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my
prayer. LONDON, Printed by W. I. and are to be sold by Nicholas Bourne, at the
South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1629.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader.
TO discourse largely of the necessity and use of this piece of spiritual
armor, after so many learned and useful Treatises, upon this subject, may
seem super fluous, especially considering that there is much spoken to this
purpose, for thy satisfaction, in the ensuing Treatise; wherein, besides the
unfolding of the nature of this duty, (which is the Saints daily exercise) and
strong inforcement to it, there is an endeavor to give satisfaction in the
most incident cases, want of clearing whereof is usually an hindrance to the
cheerful, and ready performance thereof. In all which, what has been done
by this Reverend and worthy man, we had rather should appear in the Treatise
it self, to thy indifferent judgment, then to be much in setting down our
own opinion. This we doubt not of, that, by reason of the spiritual, and
convincing manner of handling this Argument, it will win acceptance with
many, especially considering, that it is of that nature, wherein, though much
have been spoken, yet much more may be said with good relish to those that
have any spiritual sense: for it is the most spiritual action, wherein we
have nearer communion with God, then in any other holy performance, and
whereby it pleases God to conveigh all good to us, to the performance whereof
Christians find most backwardness, and indisposedness, and from thence most
deiection of spirit; which also in these times, is most necessary, wherein,
unless we fetch help from heaven, this way, we see the Church and Cause of
God like to be trampled under feet. Only, remember that we let these Sermons
pass forth as they were delivered by himself, in public, without taking
that liberty of adding or detracting, which, perhaps, some would have thought
meet: for we thought it best that his own meaning should be expressed in his
own words and manner, especially considering there is little which perhaps may
seem superfluous ^o some, but may, by Gods blessing, be useful to others. It
would be a good prevention of many inconveniences, in this kind, if able men
would be persuaded to publish their own works in their life time, yet we
think it a good service to the Church, when that defect is supplied by giving
some life to those things, which otherwise would have died of themselves. The
blessing of these labors of his we commend unto God, and the benefit of them
unto thee, resting

Thine in our Lord Jesus Christ, RICHARD SIEES. JOHN DAVENPORT.

THE SAINTS DAILY EXERCISE.
THE FIRST SERMON.
1. THESE. 5. 17. Pray continually.
THe Apostle here, in the latter end of this Epistle, heape^ up many precepts
together, and therefore, we shall not need to seek out the dependence of these
words upon those that go before, or those that follow after. Rejoice evermore
(^aith he) Pray (...), in all things gi^ thanks: for this is the will of God
in Christ Jesus to you wards.

We are (...) this Text* (...) this duty of of prayer (...) co^ ended to us,
and it is a commend from God himself delivered (...) to be with our any great
premises* and reasons, and indeed, having therefore the more authority in it.

Pray Continually.

IN the handling of which we will do these three things. 3 Things considerable,
for opening of the words.


First, we will show you what Prayer is.

Secondly, why the Lord requires this at our hands; for a man might object, The
Lord knows my wants well enough, he knows my mind, and how I am affected* I,
but yet the Lord will have us to pray, and to ask before he will bestow it
upon us.

And lastly, what it is to pray continually.

For the first. If we should define prayer in general to you, I would give you
no more but this (...) What prayer is (...) In general:
description of it. It is an expression of the mind to the Lord; Sometimes by
words, sometimes without words, but yet there must (...), and some opening of
the will to him; I (...) is the general.

But now to know what a rig^ (...) is, what such a prayer is, as God accepts;
(...) have another (...) In special:
(...) which must have (...) ingredient^ into (...), and so, Prayer is, nothing
else but an (...), (...) ^ering of th^se holy, ^d good dispositions to God,
that ^rise (...)* (...) spirit; (...) the ^generate part, in the (...) of (...)
Christ* Where you are to observe this; That the prayers, that we Division of
prayers into 2: (...).
make, a^e divided into one of these two sorts:

First: Some are such prayers (...) are the expression 1
of our own spirits, the voice of our own spirits, and there i^ nothing but
flesh in them; such prayers as any natural m^n may make to the Lord. And these
the Lord regards not, he Note* Rom: 8: 27:
knows not the meaning of them, that is he does not accept them.

Secondly, There are prayers that are the voice 2
of Gods own Spirit, that is, such as arise from the regenerate part which is
within us, which is quickened and enlarged to pray from the immediate help of
the holy Ghost; These prayers are only accepted; And of these it is said, he
knows the meaning of the Spirit* That is, he so knows it, and sees it, that
also he accepts it. Therefore you shall see in Hosea 7. 14. when they prayed,
and Hosca* 7. 14:
prayed earnestly, yea they set a day a part for prayer, they called a solemn
Assembly. And kept a fast, yet, says the Lord plainly, ye did not call upon
me when you howled upon your bedd^; for (says he you assembled your selves for
corn, and for mine, which any natural man may do; And therefore, (says he)
^t is but a ^wling. It is the voice of beasts to seek for wine, and oil, and
(...), but he says plainly, you called not upon ^e; when, notwithstanding,
they spent a whole day in prayer: But the meaning is; that the Lord regard^
this as no prayer a^ all.

And therefore ^o open a little this description The (...) of the description
opened.
unto you: for it is one (...) we have to do, in the handling of this Text,
to describe to you the meaning of this precept what the nature of prayer is,
that you may know what kind of prayer it is, that prevails with God. I say, it
is an expre^ of holy and good (...). 1 Why ^ee uses the word disposition^)
rather, then desires
I use that expression, rather of dispositions then desores, because the^e is
some part of prayer that stands in thanksgiving when you desire nothing at Gods
hands, but give thanks for that you have received; mark, first, that they must
be holy, and good the desires and dispositions must be good: for that i^ (...)
rule; all the affections and desire^ are good, or When the de^ (...) dis^ of
(...) good
evil, according (...) their objects (...) these that (...) fixed upon good
(...)* (...) good desires.

(...)* what are the good things (...) the desi^s, and dispositions of the
(...) good: Que^.


They are temporal things and spiritual both. A man may pray for temporal
things in a spiritual A^s. (...) temporal rhings may be desired i^ a (...),
and (...) things i^ a spi^ (...) how.
manner, and the desire may be good; And (...) he may pray for spiritual
things in a carnal manner, and the desire may be naught. Therefore that must
be observed withal, that it is not simply the object, but there is a certain
manner of (...). For example, if a man pray for (...) things, for o^ (...)
comforts, (...) things (...) belong to the present (...) of his body (...): If
he pray for them with these condi tions, that he prays for that which is
convenient for him, he prays for such a measure a^ God se^ to be (...) (...)*
(...) with (...) Prove. 31. (...) Tim. 6 9.
(...) for me, This prayer is good. Bu^ (if a^ 1. Tim. 6. If any (...) will be
rich) it is an inordinate desire when men will have excess of these outward
things, and more then is (...) for them. And again, if you desire that which is
conveient, and spend it upon your (...); If you desire health* and long life,
that you may live more pleasantly; If you desire wealth, that you may live more
deliciously, and not simply that which the creature may desire, and ^o the and
that you may he the more enabled to se^e the Lord in these things, your desire
is not good. So I say, first it must be for that which is convenient;
secondly, you must not spend (...) upon your (...), but in Gods service.

And lastly, we must pray for them in a right method, First the Kingdom of
God, and (...) other things, that is, set a price on them, as you ought, not
too high a price, but value them aright. We should so pray for outward things
as our prayers may be spiritual. On the other side, a man may pray for
spiritual things in a carnal manner, as for temporal things in a spiritual
manner. A natural man may pray ^rnestly for says and for grace, and
repentance, not out of any beauty that he sees in them, not out of any taste
and relish* that he has of them, but because he thinks them a bridge to
lead him to heaven and that he cannot come thither with out them: when he
considers in his heart that he cannot be ^ved without these things, I say,
then he may desire them, and desire t^em (...). It was the (...), who cried so
earnestly for grace, that he might have but a d^p of it, because he could not
be saved without it, be gives the reason himself, he said withal, he saw no
excellency in it, he desired it not for it self; and therefore he thought his
prayers should not be heard. Thus you see that prayer is an expression of holy
and good desires, and it is an offering them up to the Lord. To God.


I will not stand upon that (you are well enough instructed in it) that
whatsoever petition is made to the creature, it is not a prayer, they must
(...) be offered up to the Lord.

Then I add, they a^ such as (...) are so from the regenerate part, this is,
look how much there is of the (...) part in a prayer, look how much Arising
from the spirit or regenerate part
(...) holy Spirit has to do in it, look how much (...) from that which is
called the (...) (...); so (...) as it is sanctified, so far that prayer is
accepted and no further. But, that we may open this a little more fully, we
will show you it by some other expressions of prayer, that we find in the
Scriptures.

It is called a l^ft (...) of the ^eart to God, a po^ring forth of the soul to
the Lord, 1. Sam. 1. 15. A (...) of him i^ spirit, so Paul calls it. Now if
we open these p^rases unto you a little, you shall 1 Samuel: 15: 1:
know more fully wherein the nature of right praying to God co^s. That phrase
the Apostle ^seth, who^ (...) i^ my spirit (it is the same (...) the original
that (...) for fasting and (...)) A^t: 13* 2:
Now what i^ that to pray to God in the spirit; for a man may say, (...) cannot
make a prayer, but there is an act o^ hi^ mind goes to it, (and every man what
service soever he perform, his spirit must needs have a hand in it, so it
cannot be performed without the mind.

I take this to be the meaning of it, the Apostle his scope, is to distinguish
the true and holy services of God from those that are but shadows, and
counterfeit, that are but the body and carcass of right service. Therefore,
when he says. I serve the Lord in my spirit, or I pray in the spirit. The
meaning is this, when the prayer of a man is not only that which the
understanding dictates to him, but when the whole soul, the will and
affection^ go together with his petition, and whatsoever the petition is, a
man's heart is affected accordingly. As, for example, if a man come to confess
his sins, and yet sleights them inwardly in his heart; If a man pray for
reconciliation with God, and yet have no longing and sighing in his heart after
it, if he earnestly ask grace, and the ^ortification of sinful lusts, when
the heart does not inwardly seek it, now he prays not in the spirit. To pray
in the spirit is as that in John 4. 24. He will be worshipped in spirit and in
truth. The m^ning is, so to pray, that the heart John 4. 14
go together with our petition, also, this is the meaning of that (...)
^owreth forth his soul before the Lord. So (...) says of her self; I am a
woman troubled, etc. And po^re ^t my soul before the Lord. That is when a man
delivers to God that which the understanding and mind ha^ devised (for prayer
is not a work of (...), or of memory,) but when a man powteth forth his whole
soul (that is) his will, and affections, when they go together, when there is
no reservation in his mind; but when all within him is opened and explicate,
and exposed to the view of the Lord, not as (...) says of himself, when he
came to pray for the mortifying of his lusts, says he, I had a secret inward
desire that it should not be done. Therefore when the soul is po^red ^rth,
the meaning is, that all ^e opened to him; so that when a man wi^ make an
acceptable prayer, he must make this account, he must then call in all (...)
thoughts and affections, and ^collect them together (...), o^ (...) the s^ne
Si^le.
(...), and that makes prayer (...); whereas otherwise, it is but (...) thing
that has no strength (...) it.

Now with all, this you must know, that when we say the whole soul must go
together with the petition, the meaning (...), that not only the will, and
affections be employed ((...) i^ (...) natural man, in his desire of health,
when he is sick, or with assistance, ^d guidance in difficult cases, not
only the understanding, but the will and affections are (...) ^gh, it is
likely) and therefore we add (...), that (...) which is called the spirit,
which is (...) in the whole (...), that (...) be s^ a work in the performance
of this (...), whenever we seek to him in prayer.

For this you know, that there are two things in a regenerate man (for that you
must take for granted by the way that no natural man is able to make a prayer
acceptable to God, seeing there is no spirit in him, but in the regenerate man)
there is I say flesh and spirit, now when we come to power forth our hearts to
the Lord, that which lies uppermost will be ready to be powered forth first; and
that which is spiritual, it may be, lies in the bottom, and that is kept in,
and so a man may make a carnal prayer, though he be a holy man; that is, when
the flesh has gotten the upper hand; as in some fits it may, when the mind is
filled with worldly sorrow and wordly rejoicing, and worldly desires, and these
would be expressed to the Lord; it is a prayer that the Lord regards not,
though the man be holy, from whence it comes, but right prayer is this, when
the regenerate part is acted and stirred up, and the flesh that hinders, is
remooved. For you must know this, that wheresoever there is a regenerate part
in any man, there is a regenerate aptness in that to call upon God; and it
cannot be disioyned from it, but that is not always in act. As we see a
fountain, it has always an aptnes Simile.
to power forth water, it is ready to break into a current, but, if it be
stopped with stones and mud, and other impediments, it cannot break out, so he
that is a regenerate man, that has a holy part in him, there is an aptness to
prayer. Which is that which our Savior says, Math. 26. 41. The spirit is
willing, that is, there is always a willing Mat^ 26. 41.
nesse that follows the spirit, or the regenerate part in a holy man, but
says he, The flesh is backward, that is, it stops this fountain, and
therefore Romans 8. 27. The spirit is said there to help our infirmities, Romans
8: 27.
and to make requests for us; that is, even as a man remooues stones from a
^ountaine with his hands, and when he has done that, it breaks out into a
current, so the holy Ghost removes this flesh, that stops up the current, the
spirit takes away those carnal impediments that are in us. And not only so,
but stirs up the regenerate part, and when that is done, we are able to make
a spiritual prayer to God in Christ Jesus; So that is the thing, that you are
now to observe, That the spirit must h^lpe our infirmities, when we come to
call upon God, and our prayers be so far acceptable as they be the fruits
of the regenerate part; now we want but one thing to add in the definition.
They are such prayers as are offered to God in the name of Jesus Christ.


This is a thing that you all know, that those Offered up in the name of Jesus
Christ:
prayers that are not offered up in Christ, are not acceptable, because the
person is not regarded. It was the sin of Vzzi^ in the 2. Chron. 26. he 2 Chronicles: 26.
would go to the Temple himself being a King on the throne, and he would
offer incense without a Priest. We do the very selfsame thing, whenever
we go to offer up any prayer to God without Christ Jesus* In the old (...) men
might bring their sacrifices, but still the Priest must off^ them; so must w^e
here* and the reason is given, Reu. 8. because the prayers that come from Rev.
8:
us ^auour of the flesh, from which they come, and the Angel of the Covenant
mingleth much incense with them, and makes them sweet and acceptable to God,
with much incense, that is, as the flesh is more, so there needs more incense,
that they may be made acceptable to God the Father. So that we have indeed a
double intercessour: one is, the spirit that helps our infirmities, that
helps us to make our petitions, that quickens, and enlarges our hearts to
prayer: The other is the intercessor to make them acceptable to God, that he
may receive them, and not refuse and reject them. So much shall serve for the
first thing, to show you what the duty is, what a right, true, and acceptable
prayer is.

Now for the second, Why we must pray (for 2 Why the Lord* will have us to pray.
that obi^ction a man may make) the Lord knows my mind well enough, and what
needs such an expression of it by prayer? The reasons briefly why the Lord
will have us to pray are taken:

Partly from himself.

And partly from us.

1. From himself, though he be willing to bestow 1 In respect of himself.
mercies upon us, yet he will have us ask his leave before he does it. As, you
know* fathers do with their children, though they intend to 1. Simile.
bestow such things upon them, as are needful, yet they will have their
children to ask it; and as it is a common thing among men, though they be
willing a man should pass through their ground 2. Simile.
yet they will have leave asked, because by that means the property is
acknowledged, otherwise it would be taken as a common high way, so the Lord
will have his servants come and ask, that they may acknowledge the property
he has in those gifts he bestows upon them: Indeed, otherwise we would
forgetin what tenure we hold these blessings we enjoy, and what service we
owe to the Lord, as you know, there is a homage 3. Simile.
due to the Lord, that the Lord might be acknowledged; so the Lord will have
this duty of prayer performed that we may acknowledge him, that we hold a^l of
him, and that we might remember the service that we ought to do to him, to
rise and go at his command, that is, to do his service, which we would be
ready to forget, if we were not accustomed to the duty of calling on him.

Likewise he will have it done for his honors sake, he will haven en call
upon him, that they 2*
may learn to reverence him, and likewise that oothers might be s^irred up to
reverence him, and to honor him, and to fear him. The servants of a Prince
doing honor and reverence to their Simile.
Lord, they stir up those that are lookers on: And as the Schoolmen say of
glory. Glory is Glory what.
properly this, not when a man has an excellency in him, (for that he may
have and yet be without glory) but glory is an ostentation, a showing out of
that excellency. It is the phrase that is used in the Sacrament; you shall
celebrate the Sacrament, that you may show forth the Lords death; so the Lord
will have us come and call upon his name to show forth the duty of prayer, and
that we may show forth his glory. This is for the Lord himself.

Now for our selves, we are to do it, partly, (...) In respect of our selves.
that the graces of his spirit may be increased in us: for prayer exercises
our graces; every grace 1
is exercised in prayer, and they being exercised are increased. See an
excellent place for this in Jude 20. That you beloved edify your selves in the
Jude 20.
holy faith praying in the holy Ghost, as if he should say, The way to edify
your selves, and build up your selves is to pray in the holy Ghost; that is,
spiritual prayer made through the power, and assistance, and strength of the
holy Ghost. Every such prayer it builds us up, it increases. Every grace in
us, faith, and repentance, and love, and obedience, and fear, all are
increased by prayer.

Partly, because they are exercised and set a 2
work in prayer: for the very exercise increases them.

And partly also, because prayer brings us to Communion with God. Now, if good
company 3
increase grace, how much more will Communion with the Lord himself quicken
and increase it.

Moreover, this duty is required, that we may 4
be acquainted with God: for there is a strangene, between the Lord and us,
when we do not call upon his name. It is the command which you sh^l find i^
Job 22. 21. Acquaint thy self with the Job 22. 2^.
Lord (...) the ma^st have peace with him, and thou shall have prosperity.
Now, you know how acq^intance grows amongst men; it is by conversing together,
by speaking one to another. On Simil^*
the other side; we say when that is broken off, when they salute not, when
they speak not together, a strangenes growe^; so it is in this: when we come
to the Lord; and are frequent, and ^ervent in this du^y of calling upon him, we
grow acquainted with him, and without it we grow strangers, and the Lord
dwells a^arre off, we are not able to behold him, except we be accustomed to
it, and the more we come into his presence, the more we are acquainted with
hi^. Therefore that is another reason why we should use this, that we may get
acquaintance with the Lord.

Likewise, that we may learn to be thankful to him for those ^ercies we
have received from 5
hi^; for, if (...) should bestow mercies upon us, vna^ked, we would forget
them, his hand would not be acknowledged in them, and we would not see his
providence in disposing those blessings that we do enjoy, but when we come
to ask every thing before him, we are then ready to see his hand more, and
to prize it more, and we are disposed to more thankfulness. So that it is a
^ure rule commonly* what vv^e win Note.
with prayer, that we vve^re with thankfulness, and that which we get
without prayer, we spend, and use without any lifting up of the heart to
God, in praising him, and acknowledging (...) hand, in b^wing it upon us, ^o
you see what (...) duty is. And,

Secondly, why the Lord will have this duty performed.

Now, thirdly (in a word) what is it to pray 3. What it is to pray
contin^ally.
continually, The word in the original signifies, such a performance of this
duty, that you do not cease to do it, at such times as God requires (...).
it at your hands. Compare this with that in 2. Tim. 1. 3. The Apostle says
there, that he 2 Timothy 1^3.
has him in continual remembrance, praying for him night and day, whence the
same word is used that is here. Now we cannot think that the Apostle had
Timot^y in continual remembrance, that he was never out of his thought, but
the meaning is, when he did call upon God, from day to day, he still remembered
him. So that to pray continually, is to pray very much, to pray at those times
when God requires us to pray. For it is the definition that Philosophers give
of idleness. a Idleness, what.
man is then said to be idle when he does not that which he^ ought, in the
time when it is required of him. He is an idle man that works not, when he
ought to work; So he is said not to pray continually that prays not when
he ought to pray. So that I conceive this to be the meaning of the Apostle,
R^ioyce ^rmore (says he) but when he comes to this exhortation of prayer,
he contents not himself to say pray very often, but pray continually, as we
use (...) express ourselves when we would have a thing frequently done, we
say, see that you be always doing of this. So the (...) is to show that it
should be exceeding often, and that it should be very much done. Hence we
gather this by the way, that we are bound to keep Obs. A constant course of
prayer, at least twice a day as a duty:
our constant course of calling upon God; at the least twice a day, whatsoever
we do more.

But you will say what ground have you for that, why do you instance in that
twice a day. Quest


The ground of it is this, when the Apostle bids us pray continually, do it
exceeding much, Answ. The grounds of it.
do it very often, the least we can do it is twice a day, we may do it
oftener, but that, I say, is the 1 From the text
least. When we have such a command (...) this, when we have such a precept as
this, Pray continually, and this rule illustrated by such examples as we true
in the scriptures, why is it recorded, if it 2 From examples:
be not true of every example in that kind that is said of the general
example, 1 Cor. 10. They are written for our learning? when it is said that
David prayed often, and Daniel expressly in the 6. Dan. 3. He prayed three times a
day, that was his constant Dan. 6: 3.
course. I say, we may think we are bound to do it at the least twice a day.
Consider a little, the reason of it why we are bound to do it. In the (Temple,
you know, the Lord was worshipped twice 3 From reasons
a day, there was (...), (...) sacrifice. What was the ground of that
commandement^ there was no reason of it, but that the Lord might be worshipped,
and that was the (...) it done (...) a day, morning and evening: but besides
that, it was not only that the Lord might be worshipped, (wherein we should
follow that example of worshipping him morning and evening.) But likewise our
occasions are such, that that is the least we can do to 2
call upon him constantly morning and evening: for there is no day but we use
many blessings, and we take many of his creatures. Now we may not take any
of them without his leave; so that thou art bound to ask for them before thou
take them, and pray for a blessing upon them; or else thou have no right to
them, thou have no lawful use of them, that place is plain, 1. Tim. 4. Every
1 Timothy: 4:
Creature of God is good, and ought not to be refused, if it be received with
thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by prayer. So that, if you take common
blessings every day, and do not seek them at the Lords hands before you take
them, they are not sanctified unto you, you have not a lawful use of them, you
have no right unto them.

Besides, my beloved, It is that which the Lord commands in every thing, Make
your requests 3
known in every thing, that is, whensoever you need any thing, make your
requests known; so in every thing give thanks. And therefore the least we can
do when we have received, and do need so many mercies, is to give thanks,
and to seek to him so often, from day to day.

Moreover, do not our hearts need it, are they not ready to go out of order,
are they not ready to contract hardness, are they not ready to go from the
Lord, and to be hardened from Gods fear. Therefore this duty is needful, in
that regard, to compose them, and bring them back again into order.

More over, do not the sins we commit daily, put a necessity upon us, of
doing this, that they 5
may be forgiven, and done away, and that we may be reconciled to God again?
Therefore do not think that it is an arbitrary thing to call upon God twice a
day, because there is no particular express command; for, if you consider
these places that I have named, and the reasons, we shall see there is a
necessity lies upon us to do it. So much shall serve for that, I come now to
make some use of this that has been delivered.

First, in that such prayers, as the Lord accepts, are an expression of holy
desires, such desires as rise Use 1.
from the regenerate part of a man; Hence then we see that all natural men are
in a miserable condition, when times of extreamitie come; and when the day of
death comes, when there is no help in the world, but seeking to the Lord, when
all the creatures forsake them, and are not able to help them; and there is no
way to go to the Lord but by prayer; if prayer be an effect, and fruit of the
regenerate part of a man, a carnal man is not able to help himself, he is in
a miserable condition. Therefore let men consider this that put all off to
times of extreamitie. Put the case, thou have warning enough, at such a time.
Put the case thou have the use of thy understanding, yet thou art not able to
do any good without this: For, if there be not grace in the heart, thou art
not able to make a spiritual prayer to the Lord, that the Lord accepts.
Therefore take heed of deferring, and putting off. Labor to be regenerate,
to have your hearts renewed, while you have time, and if thou be not able to
call upon God in the time of health, how will thou do it when thy wits, and
thy spirit are spent, and lost, and in the times of sickness and extremity:
therefore let that be considered, which we do but touch by the way briefly.

Secondly, if the Lord command this, if it be the command of God: Pray
continually: Then Use 2.
take heed of neglecting this duty, rather be exhorted to be frequent and
servent in it, to continue therein, and watch there to with all perseverance.
Ephesians. 6:
It is a common fault amongst us, either we are ready to omit it, or to come
to it unwillingly, or Motives to prayer:
else we perform it in a careless, and negligent manner, not considering,
what a command lies upon the sons of men to perform it constantly and
conscionably. I beseech you consider this, that it is a privilege purchased by
the blood of Jesus Christ, Christ dyed for this end, it cost him the shedding
of his blood, That we through him, Mot. 1.
might have entrance to the throne of grace, and will you let such a privilege
as this lie still? If you do, so far as is in you, you cause his blood to be
shed in vain: for, if you neglect the privileges gotten by that blood, so
far you neglect the blood, that procured them; but to neglect this duty is to
neglect that. Besides, if we ask you Mot. 2.
the reason; why you abstain from other sins, why you steal not, why you
commit not adultery, and murder; The reason that you give, i^, because the
Lord has commanded you. Has not the Lord commanded you to pray constantly, at
all times?

If you make conscience of one commandment, why do you not of another?
consider Daniel in Dan: 6:
this case, Dan. 6. he would not omit a constant course of prayer, he did it
3. times a days, and that was his ordinary custom. If he would not omit it to
spare his life, if he would not omit it in such a case of danger as that, why
will you omit it for business, for a little advantage, for a little gain, for
a little wealth or pelie, or pomp or pleasure, or whatsoever may draw you from
that duty? do but consider what an unreasonable, and how unequal a thing it
is, that when the Lord gives us meat and drink, and clothes, from day to
day, when he gives us sleep, every night, when he prouides for us such
comforts, as we have need of (as there is not the least creature that does us
any service, but as far as he sets it a work to do that service) for us to
forget him, and not to give him thanks, and not to ask these things at his
hands, not to seek unto him, but to live as without God in the world, as we
do, when we neglect this duty. I say, it is a profession Ephesians: 2:
of living without God in the world; we are strangers to him, it is open
rebellion against him. Therefore take heed of omitting it, take heed of
neglecting it.

Besides all this, we should do it for our 3. Mot.
own sakes, if we consider what use we have of this duty for our selves. Is
it not the key that opens all Gods treasures? when heaven was shut up, was
not this the key that opened? when the wombes were shut up, was not this it
that opened? you know, Eliah prayed for rain, so we may say for every other
blessing. All Gods treasures are locked up, to those that do not call upon his
name, this opens the door to them all, whatsoever they be that we have
occasion to use, this is effectual; it does it better then any thing besides.
If a man be sick, I will be bold to say it, a faithful prayer is more able to
heal his disease then the best medicine, The prayer of faith shall heal the
sick. Iam 5. you know, the woman that James 5:
had the bloody issue, when she had spent al upon Physicians, and could do no
good; Then she comes to Christ, and offered faithful prayer to him, that did
it, when so many years physic could not do it, beloved, if there be a Prince
or a great man, whose mindwe would have turned toward us, a faithful prayer
will do it sooner then the best friends. So it was with Nehemiah; you know
Nehem:: 12:
his request, That the Lord would give him favor in the fight of the man, if we
be in any strait, as it was in Joseph's case, if we have any difficult matter to
bring to pass, this prayer and seeking to the Lord will expedite, and set us
at liberty sooner, it will find a way to bring it about more then all the
wits in the world; because it set^ God on work. You have no power to do any
Certainly a praying Christian that is prevalent and potent with God (that
seeks to him) he is able to do more then all the riches in the world, they
set the devil a work; but prayer sets God a work, it sets him a work to do
us good; and to heal us, and to deliver us out of extremities, and therefore,
I say for our own sakes, even out or self. love; and for common comforts, you
have need to use this. Certainly, if these things were believed (but you hear
them, you give us the hearing for the time; but if they were believed,) many
would be more frequent in this duty, they would not be so negligent in it, or
come in so careless a manner to it.

Besides this, I beseech you to consider this, every 4 Mot.
man desires joy, and comfort, and commonly one thing that keeps us off from
this duty, is sports and pleasures, one thing or other, that we take delight
in, which dampe and hinder us in these things, in spiritual performances,
Prayer is the best way of al other to fill thy heart with joy, as we see in Ioh.
16. 24. he says there, In my name John ^6: 24:
you have asked nothing hitherto, but now ask that your joy may be full. This
is one motive that Christ uses to exhort us to be frequent in this duty, that
our joy may be full: that I take to be the meaning of that of James the 5. If
any be sad, let him James 5, 13:
pray; not only because prayer is ^eable to such a disposition, but likewise
it will cheer him up, it is the way to get comfort, if any be sad, let him
pray. So it is in the 4th to the (...). (...) Phil: 4: 6:
make your requests known: and the peace of God (...) keep you in the
Communion of Jesus Christ. That is it, that brings peace, and quietness; and
therefore there is much reason, why we should be constant in this duty, it is
that which quickens us, it is that which fills us with joy, and comfort, and
with peace, which is that that every one desires.

Moreover, consider it is thy buckler, prayer is the helmet that keeps thee
safe: when a man neglects 5. Mot.
it, when he cease to go to God by prayer, when he once shows himself to be
a stranger to the Lord by neglecting this duty, then he is out of the pales of
his protection, like the conies that go out of their burrowes: for so is the
Lord to those that pray, The Lord is a protection to those that call upon his
name. The very calling upon his name is a running under Gods wings, as it were,
that is a putting our selves under his shadow, but when thou neglectest that,
thou wandrest abroad from him. Now do we not need protection from outward
dangers, from day to day? do we not need to be kept from the inward danger of
sin and temptation? surely prayer is one part of the spiritual Armor, as we
see in the 6. of the Ephesians. In the complete armor of God, prayer is reckoned
up Ephesians: 6:
the last, as that that buckles up all the rest, says the Apostle, Continue in
prayer, and watch to it with perseverance. And you have the more reason to do
it, because it is not only a part of this armor, but it inables you to use all
the rest, To use the word, and to use faith: for prayer stirs them up all. What
is it to have Armor, and not to have it ready? now prayer makes it ready.
Therefore you see Christ prescribes the same rule in the 26. (...) 4. Pray that
ye enter not into tentation, as if that were the way to secure us, and to
shelter us, and Mat: 26: 4^:
to keep us safe from falling in to temptation. It is a thing I would advise
you to, to pray and to seek to the Lord continually. Therefore, if we should
use only this reason to you, to be constant in this duty, because it is for
your safety, it were sufficient. You know when a man is as a City whose walls
are broken down, when he lies exposed to temptation, he is in a dangerous
case. So I may use this Dilema, to you if you have a good disposition, if you
think thus I hope I am well enough; I hope my heart is in a temper good
enough, I am not now exposed to any temptation, I fear nothing, make this
argument against thy self; why do I neglect so good a gale, if my heart be so
well disposed to pray, why Note this.
do I then omit it? Again, if there be an indisposition in me, why do I
hazard my self? what if Satan should set upon thee, what if the world should
set upon thee, what if a suitable temptation agreeable to thy lusts be offered,
art thou not in danger? and therefore a constant course should be kept in it,
we should take heed of being negligent in it. And will a man now profess that
he hopes he is the servant of God, and in a good estate, although he do not
pray so much as others, (we speak not of frequency simply, but of such a
performance as is required) I say, to profess that thou art a servant of
Christ, and that thou love (...), and that he is thy husband, and that thou
art his servant, and yet thou call not upon him from day to day, this is an
idle thing, it is impossible; if thou did love him, thou would express thy
self in calling upon his name. Shall a friend that is but an acquaintance to us,
in whom we delight come to us, and we are willing to spend many hours with
him, and shall we profess our selves to be friends of God, and him to be a
friend to us, and that we delight in him, and yet neglect this duty? this is a
common thing amongst you, when you see a man that meditates all his matters
himself, or, if he do open his mind, and tell them to somebody else, it must
be such a one as professes to be a friend to him, now if this friend should
never hear from him, nor he should never speak to him, or if he do, it is
in such a negligent manner, as it may appear, he does not trust him, he does
not regard what he can do for him, and he does it so shortly, that he can
scarsely tell what the business is, I say, in such a case, would you not
reckon his profession of friendship to be an idle, and empty profession? now
apply it to thy self, those that say they have communion with God, and they
hope their estate is good enough, they stand in good terms with him, but yet,
if they ^e in any necessity, for all the matters and occasions that fall out
from day to day, either they think of them in themselves, or they are apt
enough to declare them to man, or if they go to God, they do it negligently,
they post over the matter, so as they have scarce leisure to express
themselves and their doings; do you think he will take such for friends? and
do you think, that this is a true sound and hearty profession? Therefore (to
end this) I beseech you consider it, and take heed of being remiss, and
negligent in it, you see it is a command from the Lord, Pray continually.

And so much for this time.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON.
1. THESE. 5. 17. Pray continually.
NOt to repeat what has been delivered, but to press this point on us a
little further (for what is more necessary, then that we should keep a
constant course in this duty, since the very life of Religion consists in it?)
I add this to all I pressed in the morning, 6. Mot. The omission of it does
disadvantage men:
that if you do neglect it, it exposes you to great disadvantage, both for
the outward man, and for the inward man, and there are but these two that you
need to care for.

For the outward man, it deprives you of the blessing; put the case, you have
never so good 1 In the outward man.
success in your enterprises; put the case you have outward comforts in
abundance, yet still the blessing is wanting, and not only so, but it vncovers
the roof, as it were, and the curse is rayned down upon your tables, upon
your meat and drink, upon all the endeavors, and all the enterprises you take
in hand. We consider not what we do, when we neglect this duty, what dangers
we expose our selves unto from day to day: for it is one thing to have outward
comforts, and another thing to have the blessing with them.

Besides, consider what loss you suffer in the inward man, when you neglect
this duty at any 2 In the inward man.
time: for that is ready to be distempered; and to go out of order, it is
ready to contract hardness, to contract soil, spiritual grace is ready to
decay. It falls out with man's heart, as it does with a garden that is
neglected; it will quickly be overcome with weeds, if you look not diligently
Simile.
to it, and the way to look to it is constancy in this duty. That is a notable
place: Job 154. when Eliphaz observed some diste^per in Jobs affections (as he
apprehended it) he tells him that Job ^5 (...)
the speech he used was not comely, but vain and sinful, and what then?
surely Job (says he) thou restrainest prayer from the Lord, as if he should
say, it is impossible, Job that thou should fall into these distempers, if
thou did de^ keep thy course constantly in this duty, therefore surely, says
he, thou restrainest prayer from the Lord; So it is with us, let us restrain
prayer from God, and distempers will arise quickly in our spirits, worldly
mindedness will be ready to grow upon us, we shall be apt to be carnal, we
shall forget God, and forget our selves, and forget the good purposes, and
desires we had; and therefore, that you may keep your hearts in order, you
must keep a constant course in this duty: for if you do (though your peace be
interrupted) this will repair it again, it will make up the breaches again;
though there be some distempered affections, that grow upon us, yet prayer
will compose all. As sleep composeth Simile.
drunkenness: so prayer will compose the affections, a man may pray himself
sober again, nothing does it sooner, nothing does it more effectually; and
this you shall find, that as you, either omit it, or slight it over; so you
shall find a proportionable weakness growing upon the inward man, as the body
feels, when it neglects either sleep, or diet, or exercise: therefore, to
end this exhortation, let us be constant in it.

Only remember this (when we exhort you thus to keep a constant course, for
which you heard so many reasons in the morning, I say, remember this caution)
that if it be performed in a No^.
formal, or in a customary, and overly manner, you were as good to omit it
altogether: for the Lord takes not our prayers by number, but by weight: when
it is an outward picture, a dead carcass of prayer, when there is no life, no
servencie in it, he regards it not, be not deceived in this, it is a very
usual deceit, it may be a man's conscience would be upon him, if he should
omit it altogether, and therefore when he does something, his heart is
satisfied, and so he grows worse and worse, therefore, consider, that the
very doing of the duty, is not that which the Lord heedes, but he will have
it so performed; that the end may be obtained, and that the thing may be
effected, for which you pray. If a man send his servant to go to such a place,
it is not his going to and fro that Simile.
he regards, but he would have him to dispatch the business; so in all other
works, he cares not for the formalitie of performance, but would have the
thing so done, that it may be of use to him; if you set a servant to make a
fire Simile.
for you, and he go, and lay some green wood together, and perhaps put a few
coals under, this is not to make a fire for you, but he must, either get dry
wood, or he must blow till it burn, and be fit for use; so when your hearts
are unfit, when they are like green wood, when you come to warm them, and to
quicken them by prayer to God, it may be, you post over this duty, and leave
your hearts as cold, and as distempered as they were before: My beloved, this
is not to perform this duty. The duty is effectually performed, when your
hearts are wrought upon by it, and when they are brought to a better tune, and
to a better temper then they were before. If you find sinful lusts, there
your business is to work them out by prayer, to reason the matter, to
expostulate the thing before the Lord, and not to glue over, till you have set
all the wheels of your soul right, till you have made your hearts perfect
with God; and if you find your hearts too much cleaving to the world, you must
wean them, and take them off; if you find a deadnes, and unaptness, and
indisposition in you, you must lift up your souls to the Lord, and not give
over till you be quickened, and this is to perform the duty in such a
manner, as the Lord accepts, otherwise it is an hypocritical performance: for
this is hypocrisy, when a man is not willing Hypocrisy what.
to let the duty go altogether, nor yet is willing to perform it serventlie,
and in a quick, and zealous manner: for he that omits it altogether is a
profane person; and he that performs it zealoussie, and to purpose is a holy
man: but an hypocrite goes between both, he would do something at it, but
he will not do it thoroughly. And therefore, if thou find thou hast^
^ubbered over this duty from day to day, that thou performest it in a
negligent manner, and perfunctorilie, know that it is an hypocritical
performance, and therefore when we spend so much time in exhorting you to a
constant course in this duty, still remember, that you must perform it in
such a manner, that it may have heat, and life in it, that it may be
acceptable to God, and do good to your own hearts, to bring them to a more
holy frame of grace, and to a better temper, then, it may be you found them
in, when you went about the duty.

And if you object now, I, but it will cost us 1 Object.
much time to do this?

Indeed, one common cause, amongst the rest, that keeps us off from the through
performance Answ. Threefold:
of this duty is this: but (to speak to that in a word) remember this, that
the time that is spent in calling upon God hinders you not in your business,
1. Ans.
though it seem to hinder you, and though it takes so much from the heap, yet
indeed it increases the heap, as it is said of tithes and offerings, bring
them in, and think not, that because you ^en the heap, that you are poorer
men, no, says the Lord, it will increase your store, I will open the windows
of heaven, and you shall Mal. 3.
have so much the more for it; so it is true in this case. In other things you
see it well enough. You know, the ba^ting of the horse, hinders not the
journey, and the oyling of the wheel, and the Simile.
whetting of the sith, though there be a stop in the work for a time, yet, as
our (...) saying is, a whet is no let, and the doing of this is no impediment.

Secondly, put the case it were, yet is it not the greater business? what is
it that you g^ by all 2. Answ.
your labors, and travails? if it be riches, it comes not into any
comparison with grace, and holiness, with that riches wherewith prayer makes
you rich. But, say it be some^ (...) noble then that, as learning, and
knowledge, yet, what is that to the renewing of Gods image in us? were it not
better to spend time to get grace to make us rich to God; to make us to get
strength in the inward man, to pass through all varieties of afflictions, in
getting that which is the chiefest excellency of all others: for is not that
the best excellency? When Adam was in Paradise, the having of Gods Image, you
know, it excelled all other excellencies in the world and so it does still, and
the more you pray, the more you get of this image: for a man of much prayer is
always a man of much grace, it much increases those spiritual gifts, which
are better then all the outward things you can get by your imploiment and
diligence in them: therefore, I say, though it do spend you much time; yet
know (as Christ said to Mary) he that prays much, though he be a great looser
in other things, yet he chooses the better part.

Last of all consider this, when thou come 3. Ans.
to offer sacrifice to God, would thou offer that which cost thee nothing?
if thy continuing in prayer, and spending much time in it should cost thee some
disadvantage in thy affairs, and should loose thee that which another gains,
that thou gettest not so much knowledge, as another man does, thou do not so
much in thy trade, in thy business, thou do not set things in order, as
thou might have done; yet know this, that it is great wisdom to make our
service to God costly to us; you know, David's choice: Shall I offer to the
Lord that which cost me nothing, and therefore he would needs give the worth to
(...) the lebusue for that which he bought, and therefore since it is to a good
master, that sees what you do, that knows what it costeth, and what loss you
are at, and withal, that is willing and able to recompense it, why should you
shorten this business, and post it over, because of other occasions, and other
business that you have to do?

Oh, but, a man will say further, I am willing Object. 1.
to do it, but I am unfit for it, and it may be the longer I strive, the more
unfit I grow.

To this I answer, first, in general, if thou do it as well as thou can,
though thou do it not so Answ. 1.
well as thou would, in this case, God accepts the will for the deed, when a
man puts his strength to it, when there is no indiligence in him, when there is
no laziness (for in that case he will not accept the will for the deed, but)
when a man does his utmost, as those that would have given more, and could not,
their will was accepted for the deed, in 2. Cor. 8. 12. I say, when thou do
what thou can, when thou sparest no labor to 2 Cor. 8: 12, 13
get thy heart upon the wing, to raise and quicken it, and to enlarge it in
this duty: there God accepts it. Ans. 2.


But again, I add further, there is an unskillfulness in going about this
duty: many times when we are not fit, we think to make our selves fitter, by
spending time in thoughts, and meditations before, which I deny not but they
may be profitable, but yet this I will propound to you that the best way to fit
our selves to this duty, How to fit a man's self to prayer.
when we find an indisposition unto it, is, not to stay till we have prepared
our selves by meditation, but to fall presently upon the duty, (I will give
you the reason of it) because, though a preparation is required for the
performance of eues rye spiritual duty, yet, the remote preparation is that
which is intended, and meant, when we say we must prepare: for, if we speak of
that which is immediate, the very doing of the duty is the first preparation
to it. For example, if a man were to run a race, if he were to do any bodily
Simile.
exercise, there must be strength of body, he must be fed well, that he may
have ability, but the use of the very exercise it self, the very particular
act, that is of the same kind with the exercise, is the best to fit him for it*
so in this duty of prayer, it is true, to be strong in the inward man, to have
much knowledge, to have much grace, makes a man able, and fit for the duty;
but, if you speak of the immediate preparation for it, I say, the best way to
prepare us, is the very duty it self; as all actions, of the same kind,
increase the habits, so prayer makes us fit for prayer; and that is a rule, the
way to godliness is in the compass Note.
of godliness it self, that is, the way to grow in any grace is the exercise
of that grace.

It is a point that Luther pressed, and he pressed it out of his own
experience, and this reason Note this expression of Luther.
he uses; in this case, says he, when a man goes about to fit himself, by
working on his own thoughts, now he goes about to overcome himself by his
own strength, and to contend with Satan alone, but when a man feels an
indisposition, and goes to God by prayer, and rests on God to fit him, he takes
Gods strength to oppose the indisposition, and deadnes of his flesh, and the
temptations of Satan, that hinder him, and resists him. Therefore you shall
find this to be the best way to fit your selves for prayer, namely, to perform
the duty. If you seek to expedite, and devolue your selves, out of your
unfitness, by the working of your own thoughts, commonly, you involue your
selves farther into those labyrinths, and are caught more and more. But this I
speak by the way concerning matters of unfitness. The maine answer to this
objection is that, which I gave you before, that if a man do what he can, and
do it faithfully, and in sincerity, that indisposition shall not hinder him,
but still remember, it must be done, it is not an excuse to us, at any time,
nor ought to be, that we should omit the duty wholly, under pretense of an
unfitness.

Thirdly, a man is ready to say again, but I 3 Object.
find many difficulties, how shall I do to remove them?

The best way hereunto, is the very naming of the difficulties to you, that you
may know them, Ans. 7 impediments of prayer, that makes it difficult.
and make account of them; therefore you must consider this in general, that,
indeed, it is not an easy thing to call upon God constantly: our misprision
of the duty, our reckoning of it, that it is a more facile, and easy thing,
then it is, makes us more to slight it, and causes us not to go about it with
that intention, which otherwise we would, but consider a little what 1 Note
that.
it is. The duty is very spiritual, and our hearts are carnal, and it is no
easy thing to bring spiritual duties, and carnal hearts together.

Besides, our natures are very backward to come into the Lords presence, partly
by reason of his 2
great glory, by reason of his Mty, who dwells in light (...), and our weak
eyes are apt to be dazzled with it, and partly out of an accustomednes, we are
not used to it, and therefore we are ready to fly from him, as beasts that
are wild, and are not tamed to our hands, are ready to fly Simile.
from us, so backward is our nature to come into his presence.

Again, the variety of occasions hinders us, every 3
thing keeps us back; if a man's heart be cheerful, it is apt to delight in
other things; if a man's heart be sad, on the other side; if it be a slight
sadness, men are ready to drive it away with company, and with sports, and with
doing other things, and if the sadness be great, we are swallowed up with
anguish of spirit, and then any thing is easier then to pray, as you may see by
Judas, it was easier for him to dispatch himself, then to go and call upon
God; so it is with men, when they have excessive grief, when their an guish of
heart is exceeding great: so that, whether a man has a cheerful disposition,
or a sad, whether the sadness be great or small, still you shall find a
difficulty. If we be idle, and have nothing to do, our hearts will be possessed
with vain thoughts, and, if we be full of business, that distracts us also,
and indisposeth us, on the other side: so still there are impediments.

But there is one great impediment, among the rest, and most common, which is
worldly cares, 4
and worldly-mindednes; worldly cares hinder spiritual prayer, and spiritual
conference, and the holy performance, almost, of every duty, and therefore, if
you find a difficulty in it, look narrowly, if that be not the cause.

Again, another great cause of this difficulty in prayer, of such
backwardness to it, of such indisposition 5
to it, is, because we do not well consider the nature of God, we want faith
in his power, and in his providence we do not consider, that he has that
disposing hand, which he has in every thing, that belongs to us, in health, in
sickness, in poverty, in riches, in good success, and ill success: for, if
we did see the providence of God, and acknowledge it more; we should be ready
to call upon him, but this want of faith in his providence, that the Lord is
not seen in his greatness, and in his mighty power, this causes men to be
backward to seek him, but very forward to seek to the creatures. When we have
any thing to do, of any consequence, we are ready to post from this man to
that man, and from this means to that means, but very backward, and negligent
to go to God, in prayer, to have the thing brought to pass, that we desire,
and this arises from want of faith, and from ignorance of God, and our not
consideration of him.

Besides, Satan hinders us exceedingly in this 6
duty: for he knows of what moment it is, and of what consequence, and
therefore he does as the Aramites did, he fights not against small nor great,
but against the King, he knows it is this duty 1 King. 22. 31.
which quickens every grace, it is the greatest enemy, which he has, and if he
can keep us from prayer, he has the upper hand of us, he has wrested the
weapon out of our hands, he has disarmed us, as it were, and then he may do
what he will with us.

Likewise the sins we commit, especially gross sins, they are a great
hinderance to this duty, 7
and keep from the spiritual, and cheerful performance of it: for sin
wounds the conscience, it disioynteth, and dismembers the soul, and a
disioynted member, you know, is unfit to do any business; yea, when the sin
is healed, and forgiven, yet there is a soreness left in the heart, though
some assurance of pardon should follow, upon the commission of a great sin, so
that, that is another impediment. I must not stand to reckon up many, we shall
find enough by continual experience.

Only this use we must make of it, that, if the Use.
impediments be so many, and the difficulties that keep us from a constant
course in prayer, What course is to be taken against these impediments.
and from the performance of it to purpose, so great, then we must put on a
resolution to break through all, and lay it, as an inviolable law upon our
selves, that we will not alter. Let us think with our selves that the thing is
difficult, and will cost all the care, and all the intention that may be; yea,
when thou have overcome the difficulties at one time, it may be, the next day,
thou shall meet with new conflicts, new distempers, new affections, new
strength of lust^, and a new dis position of mind will be on them, and
therefore he that will be constant in this duty, must put on a strong
resolution; as it was the saying of a holy man, one of the holiest men, that
these latter times had, that he never went to pray to God, Note this well.
but he found so many impediments, that except he bound himself by an
unalterable resolution, that he resolved not to break upon any occasion, he
could never have kept a constant course in it, or, if he had, he should never
have kept himself from a formal, customary performance of it. But I will add
no more, to press this upon you, there has been enough said, I beseech you
consider it.

Now that which I promised in the morning to do, which is, that, that does
exceedingly strengthen us to the performance of this duty of calling upon
(...), of praying continually (which we are here commanded to do) is to
remove certain objections, which are in the minds of men, that secretly
weaken the estimation of this truth, and insensible takes us off, when we mark
them not: for, beloved, when we are so negligent in it, surely there is
somethin^ that is the 4 Obiecti^ against prayer.
cause of it, and if we could find the cause, and remoove it, we could not
spend an hour better.

The objections, that are commonly in the hearts of men, are many, I will name
to you but these 4 briefly.

First, a man is ready to say, what need I spend 1 Object.
so much time, and be so large in the expression of my wants to God, when he
knows them? I cannot make them better known to him, he knows them well
enough already, and therefore what needs it?

To this I answer (in a word, because it is an objection Ans.
that has not much weight in it) that it is true; the Lord knows thy wants,
but withal, he will have thee to know them; because, otherwise, thou will not
seek to him, thou will not set a price upon the things, that he bestows on
thee, thou will not be thankful to him, when he has granted them, and
therefore you shall find, our Savior Christ uses this very argument, as a
means to quicken us to prayer, saying, Your heavenly Father knows what you
have Mat. 6.
need of, what then? shall we not therefore pray? yes, says he, therefore pray
ye the more earnestly, and the more importunately to him: for since he knows
your wants, he will be more ready to hear your requests.

I, but, it will be said again, that he does not only know them, but he also
means, and purposes 2 Object.
to bestow them: for he has made a promise to us, and his promise i^ firm,
and sure, and God is just, and ^ust keep his promise, and when he has fully
purposed it, what needs so much praying to bring it to pass?

I answer, the promises of God are to be understood Answ. 1.
with this secret condition annexed, I will do such and such a thing for you,
if you pray, though it be not expressed: and therefore, we see when God
promised things in particular, yet still they prayed, and prayed earnestly.
When he promised Elish that it should rain, yet, we see, he prayed and
contended much in his prayer, 1 Kin 18. 41, 42
when he made a promise to David, that he would make him a house, yet you know
David went 2 Samuel 7. 11. 2 Samuel 7. 18.
to the house of the Lord, and sat before him, and made earnest prayer, as is
recorded in the 2. of Sam. so Daniel had particular promise, and yet Dan 9.
he prayed, and prayed long. The example of our Savior Christ is without
exception, who had all the promises sure to him, yet, you see, he prayed, yea,
he spent whole nights in prayer, and therefore you must so understand it, that
though you have a promise made, though the thing be never so sure to you; yet
it is to be understood with that if you call upon God.

And why the Lord would have you do it. I showed you many reasons in the
morning, we Ans. 2.
will add this to it. What, if the Lord will have thee call upon him, though
he purpose to do the thing, even for this end, that thou may worship him*
for, what is it to worship the Lord? you shall find this usual in the old
Testament, The people ^owed themselves and worshipped, or, they (...) upon them
(...) and worshipped. The meaning To worship God, w^
is this, to worship God is nothing else, but to acknowledge the worthiness
that is in him. As when you do worship to a man, you do use so much outward
demeanor and observance to him, as may acknovvledge a vvorth in him above
another man: outvvard gesture, that is the outward worshipping of God, the
inward worship is inwardly to acknovvledge his attributes. Now, you shall
see, prayer gives an acknowledgment of his attributes most of any thing: for
he that prays to God, he does, in so doing, acknowledge his omnipresence, and
his omniscience; that he hears that, which the Idols of the Gentiles could not
do, that he knows the secrets of men's hearts, that neither men, nor Angels
can do:

Again, it acknowledges his Almighty power, that he is able to do any
thing; for that is presupposed, when we come, and seek to him.

Again, it acknowledges his mercy, and his goodness; that he is not only
able, but exceeding willing to help.

Again, it acknowledges his truth, that as he has promised, so, I make
account, he will perform it, when I go, and s^e to him, in a word, all the
attributes of God are acknowledged in prayer. Therefore therein you worship him
in a special manner, when you go, and seek to him, and pray to him, in so
doing, you acknowledge him, yea you acknowledge him to be a Lord, and a father,
as when we see a child run to a man, and ask him blessing, when we see him
ask him food, and raiment, we say, surely such a man is his father; so this
very praying to God, is a worshipping of him, because it acknowledges his
attributes, and his relation to us, and ours to him.

But again. Thirdly, it will be objected, I 3 Object.
but, al^s, what can the endeavors or the prai e^s of a weak man do? can
they change the purpose of Almighty God, if he do not intend ^o do this
thing for ^oe, shall I hope to alter him?

For answer to this, I say this, in bein ^e, Ans.
that when you do call upon God, he is not changed by your prayers, but the
change is wrought in you, as we have said to you heretofore, Simile.
when a Physiti^ is sought unto by his patient, the patient desires him
earnestl^e to give him such a cordial, and such (...) Physic, that is
pleasing to him; the Physician denies him long, yet in the end, he yields unto
it. Why? not because there is any change in the Physician, but because there
is a change in the patient, he is now fitted for this, before he was not: so
then the Physician yields now, whereas before he refused, and yet the change is
in the patient, and not in the physician, and therefore, beloved, when (...)
about to strive with God in prayer, when you contend, and wrestle with him (for
so we ought to do) when you use many reasons to persuade him, you alter not
him, but your selves (...) those arguments that you use, are not so much to
persuade him to be ^e you, as to persuade your hearts to more faith, to more
love, to more obedience, to more humility, and thankfulness, and that indeed
is the reason, why prayer prevails with God, not that the very sending up is
that, that prevails with him, but because a faithful, and a spiritual prayer
puts the heart in a better disposition, so that a man is now made ready to
receive a blessing at Gods hands, that before he was not. So that, when you
think you draw God to you, with your arguments, in truth, you draw Simile.
your selves nearer to him; as when a man in a ship pluckes a rock, it seems
as as if he plucked the rock nearer to the ship, when as the ship is
plucked nearer the rock: so, I say, we draw our selves nearer to the Lord,
and when we draw nearer to the Lord, in prayer, and there is a spiritual
disposition wrought in our hearts, by the exercise of this duty, then indeed
the Lord draws near to us, to send us help, and to grant our requests, that
we put up to him, and therefore that you should mark by the way, that any
prayer, as it has a higher pitch of holiness in affection, and as it has
stronger arguments in it; so it is a better prayer; not because this prayer
shall prevayle with God more, or, that the excellency of this prayer should
moove him, but because this pitch of holy affection, and strength of argument
works upon your hearts: for the strength of arguments mooues your
understanding, and the holiness of affection puts your will in a frame, and so
disposes your hearts, and fits you as the (...), we spoke of before, is (...)
when the Physician is willing to give the thing he desired.

But the last objection, which indeed is more then all the rest, is this.
Object. 4. Twofold.


A man is ready to say, we see there are many men, that do not call upon God,
and yet enjoy 1
many mercies: it may be, a man can say with himself, when he did not use to
pray, he had health, and sleep, and protection?

Again, on the other side, he has prayed for such and such things, and yet
they have not bin granted? so this objection has two parts, that a man has
obtained blessings, without prayer, and again he has prayed, and yet has not
obtained 2
the blessings he sought for, at the Lords hands.

For answer to the first, that men do obtain many blessings that do not pray
(as how many Ans.
young men are there, and old men too, that have health, and wealth, and peace,
and liberty, and abundance of all things, and yet, either they (...) not to
God, or, if they do, yet not in a holy and spiritual manner) and therefore
this objection had need to be answered, and therefore I answer briefly.

First, though they have these blessings, yet they have them (...), they have
no promise 1 Answ. to the first part of the objection.
of them, they cannot build upon them, whereas they are sure mercies to the
righteous man, he can build upon these blessings: for he Answ. 1.
has a father to go too, whose love he knows, and he has sure promises to
build on; the other, though he has them, yet he is in a slipperie place, when
he inioyes them; it is an accidental thing, he has them from the hand of an
enemy, and he knows not how long he shall enjoy them.

But I answer again (which is the chief answer Answ. 2.
to this objection) that there is a great deal of difference between having
blessings, through the providence of God, and between having Difference
between having of blessings through the providence of God, and from the love of
God.
them from the mercy of God, and by virtue of his promise, and out of his love
to us in Christ Jesus. A natural man may have many blessings of God, (so God
said that he made Jeroboam a King, he gave him a Kingdom, and many such
passages we shall find, when men come unjustly to them, as he did to the
Kingdom, yet God, says he, did it, that is, it was by his providence) and yet
he has them not in mercy: for if thou have these blessings, health, and
sleep, and success in the enterprises, from day to day, and yet thy heart
tells thee within, that thou have not sought them at the Lords hands, as thou
ought, I say to such a man (and mark it) it were better for him that he
should want them: for certainly, when he has them, in this manner, he has
them without a blessing; yea he has them with a curse, and so were better be
without them; as it had been better for Ab^b to have been without his vineyard,
and as it had been better for (...) to have gone without his reward, that he
had of N^^man the (...) (for you know he had the ^eprosie with it) it had
been better for the children of Israel to have gone without their (...): for
you know the curse that followed, death wet along with them; so when a man shall
have peace and prosperiti^, and abundance of all things, without seeking them
at the Lords hand^, from day to day, I say, he were better to have wanted them:
for there goes death together with them. It is said plainly, that case (...)
the (...) (that is to say) this very prosperity, this ^riuing (notwithstanding
a neglecting of prayer, and of holy duties) I say, it carries death along with
it, as the obtaining of the vineyard, brought death to Achab, the getting of
the Kingdom was the destruction of I^roboam; and therefore men have little
cause to comfort themselves with this, that they enjoy many blessings, and
never pray for them.

But, to answer this point more fully, I say many blessings are bestowed upon
men, not for 3. Ans.
their own sakes, but for the Churches sake. A man may have strength of body,
he may have great gifts of mind, he may have great success i^ using those
gifts, he may bring great enterprises to pass, so that you may truly say, the
hand of God is with him, all this may be done not for his sake, but for the
sake of the Church, and glory of God some other way, that he might do some
service; as you see, it is plain lie said of Cyrus, Isa. 45. 4. speaking there
of Cyrus, says the Isa. 45. 4.
Lord there, For (...) my servants sake, and for Israel mine elect sake I have
called thee by name, and have give (...) thee this great power, and all this
great success although then thy self have not known me. (Mark) Cyrus was a
most prosperous man, Gods hand was mighty with him, and yet all this was not
for his own sake, but for the Churches sake: so you may think it is, when men
prosper, many times, it is not for their own sakes, but to fulfill some other
end of Gods providence, and therefore, mark this and keep it for a rule, if
thou Note this.
prosper in thy enterprises, if thou enjoy wealth, and peace and abundance of
all things, and know that thou do not seek to God, from day to day, that
thou keep not thy heart right and strait, and perfect before him, thou do
not call upon him, in a holy, and spiritual manner, certainly it is for one
of those causes, thou have it without a blessing, and with a curse, thou have
it for other ends, and not for good to thy self; and therefore thou have it
very vncertainelie, it may be took from thee, thou know not how soon;
yea, and this thou shall be sure of, that it shall be taken from thee then,
when, of all other times, it will be unfittest for thee: as a thief comes at a
time when men least look for him; so destruction comes suddenly upon these
men; God cuts them as a man, when he would have trees to die, he Simile.
lops them in that season, that of all others is the unfittest, when the sappt
is in the tree, when the lopping will cause them to wither, so the Lord will
strike them in such a season. It is quite contrary with the Saints, he cuts
them in due season, he lopps them in due time that they may grow the better for
it, it is good for them.

But now for the other part of the objection it Answ: to 2. part of object.
may be, many among you now are ready to say, I have prayed for such and such
things, and I have been earnest, and yet the Lord has denied me: my Beloved,
if we can satisfy this objection, we shall then take this impediment away,
that we propound in this objection, that has these two parts. Therefore to
this I answer.

First, if thou have not been heard in thy prayer, Answ. 1. Our prayers often
times are amiss in one of these three respects.
consider, if thou have not prayed amiss; it is a common fault among us, when
we have spent much time in prayer, and, it may be, we have spent time in
fasting, and praying and the thing is not granted; we presently lay it upon the
Lord, that he has not heard, when many times, the cause is First, in respect
of the principle whence they ^ovv, when they are but natural desires.
our not praying, as we ought, it may be thou have been very earnest, and
therefore thou hopest thou have done very well: I tell thee, thou may be very
earnest, and importunate with the Lord, when it may be no more but a natural
desire, when a man has need ^o be directed in a difficult case, that much
concerns him; when he has need to be extricated, and taken out of such a
difficulty, and strait, wherein he is involved, when he has need of
success, in such an enterprise, or any thing of that nature; I say, a man may
be earnest with the Lord in such a case, and yet his prayer may be amiss, it
may not be a spiritual prayer, it may not be an expression of holy desires
to the Lord; for they only prevail with him, not that the natural are
excluded (that is not my meaning) for they may add vvindes to the sails,
though holiness may guide the rudder, and keep the course, and make the
sterage, yet natural desires may make us more importunate, and may add much
to it: therefore, I say, consider thy prayer.

Consider again, when thou have sought so earnestly to God, whether it be not
to bestow it upon thy lusts, as the Apostle speaks, Iam. 4. 3. when thou have
a business to be performed, it may be, thou Iam: 4. 3. Secondly, in respect of
the end, when they are for the satisfaction of our lusts.
art earnest with God, but have thou not an eye to thy own glory, to thine
own praise and credit in it? when thou wast earnest for health, was it not that
thou might live more deliciously? when thou desire wealth, and success
in thine enterprises, that tend to mend thy state, is it not out of some
ambition? you know, that desire is condemned, if any man will be rich: is it
not a desire of greatness? would you not be somebodie in your place, and set
up your house and family; such things indeed God bestows upon men, but to have
our desires pitched upon them; and to pray in that sense for them, is amiss;
and my rule for it is in the first to Timothy, the sixth chapter, the ninth
verse: If any man will 1 Timothy: 6. 9.
be rich, etc. that is, when a man desires excessiuely, when he desires more
then food, and raiment convenient for him; now the natural affection is
degenerate into a lust: for when any affection exceedes, it cease to be an
affection, and begins to be a lust, and therefore where it is said, If any man
will be rich etc. it is said after, it is a lust.

But, you will say, how shall a man know, when he prays to bestow that, which
he prays for, Quest.
upon his lusts?

I answer, if a man consult with his own heart, and deal impartially with
himself, he may know Ans.
what his ends are; but, if you cannot find it out, that way, you may know it
by the effect, you may know it by the bills you bring in. What is the expenc^
of the things God has bestowed on you, when he has put a price into your
hands; consider, how you bestow it. If a steward have a Simile.
great sum of money, that his master has trusted him with, and his bills be,
that he has bestowed so much in riot, so much in fine apparel, etc, but
there has been but so much bestowed for his masters advantage, it is an
argument he has spent it ill: so, when we see, there has been so much health
spent, so much time, and so much strength, in following our own plots, and our
own worldly business, without respect to God, not serving God, and men in
our calling, as we should do, and that there has been little time bestowed
in prayer, in reading, in making our hearts perfect with God, in taking pains
with them, from day to day, I say, if we look upon this bill of expenc^, and
consider how we have bestowed our time, our health, our strength, our wits,
from day to day; and our speech (for that is one price, that we have in our
hands, by which we may do good, it is as a bucket by which we may draw from
others, and likewise it is a spring, and fountain, wherewith we may feed
others, with the waters of life) consider, how we have laid out all these
things, and by that we may know, how we are disposed to use the blessings, we
seek for at Gods hands, whether we seek them to bestow them upon our lusts, or
to spend those gifts to our masters advantage; and, if we find we do it for
our own lusts, in this case, I say to you go and amend your prayers, and God
will amend your speeding. We must do in this case, as an angler does, when he
has thrown the bait into the river, if it stay long, and catch nothing, he
takes up the bait, and amends it, and when he Simile.
sees it is well, he then continues, and waits: so we must do in this case,
if thou pray, and pray long, and have not obtained the thing thou praiest
for, look diligently to thy prayers; see whether they be right or no, if they
be not, amend thy prayers, and God will amend his readiness to hear thee; if
thou find, they be sincere and hearty, mingled with holy desires, and not
with carnal, and corrupt affections, then, let the bait lie still, that is,
continue to pray, and to wait, and the Lord will come in due time.

But this is not all, though that be one thing, 2 In respect of the manner,
when they are uttered carelessly:
when thou art not heard, consider, if thou have not prayed amiss; it is a
common fault amongst us, when we succeed not in any thing, we attribute it to
many other things, but not to our remissness, and carelessness in seeking to
God: if a man want sleep, if he find sickness, and weakness, and distemper
of body, he thinks that he has eaten amiss, and considers not whether he
has prayed amiss; if a man have miscarried in his business, he begins to
think, whether he have not been improvident, whether he has not dealt
foolishly; whether he has not omitted such and such means, as he might have
used, he never thinks whether he have prayed amiss; and that indeed, is the
cause of our miscarrying, and not commonly the thing, which we attribute it
unto: for though God be not the immediate cause, you know he is the great
cause; There is no ill, that he has notdone; and that which moves him is always
grace, and sin; that which moves him to do us good, is our obedience to him,
that which moves him on the contrary, is neglect on our part.

But, to answer further, suppose thy prayers be right, yet, thou must
consider this, that, Answ. 2. God grants our prayers often times, yet,
when thou think thou art not heard, thou art often times deceived, and
therefore, you must rectify that misconceit. As for example, sometimes, when
we would have the thing in one fashion, God bestows the same thing upon us in
First, not in that manner as we desire
another; and therefore thou may be deceived in that: it may be a (...)
prays earnestly, that he may have a strong ^dy, to do God service withal, it
may be, that sickness of body makes him do him better service, because it
keeps him in more awe, it weanes him more from the world, and makes him more
heavenly minded: you know the case of Paul, he would feign have had that lust
taken away that is spoken of 2 Cor. 12. 9. and why? surely the thing he would
have had, 2 Cor: 12. 9.
was to have his heart in a holy, and right frame of grace; now, though Paul
had it not that way, that he looked for it, yet he had it another way, the
Lord increased in him the grace of humility by it; he saw his own weakness,
and the power of Christ the more; and when this was discovered unto him he was
content. It is all one, whether a man be preserved from the blow of an enemy,
or have a helmet given Simile.
him to keep it off; it may be a man prays for money, and for estate: if God
provide meat and drink, and clothes immediately, in stead of this, is it not
all one? It may be another would have a greater degree of conveniencie, for his
dwelling house, and many other things: if God give him a body able to endure
that, which is more course, all is one; as if he were provided for more
delicately: it is all one, whether a physician quench the thirst of his patient
by giving Simile.
him beer, and drink, that is comfortable unto him, or by giving him
barberries, or somewhat else, that will do the thing as well.

It is all one, whether the Lord keep an enemy from doing us hurt, (...) ^at
he gives us a strong helmet, a buckler, to keep off the injury from wounding
of vs^ I might give you more instances, though the Lord give thee not the thing
in the very manner that thou would have it, yet he will do it in
another manner.

Secondly, as we are deceived in the manner, 2. Not by those means, which we
prop^d.
so we are deceived in the means oft-times, in seeking to God. When a man
prays, he pitcheth upon such a particular means, and thinks verily that this
is the, way, or none; it may be, the Lord will find out another way, that
thou did never dream of; Paul prayed to have a prosperous journey to Rome,
he little thought, that when he was bound at Jerusalem, and posted up and
down from one prison to another, God was now sending him to Rome, yet he sent
him, and sent him very safe with a great company attending upon him, he sent
him it may be in a better manner then he himself would have gone, and yet it
was by such a means, as he could never dream of; also you know, (...) the
A^rian, he had pitched upon a particular means, he thought the Prophet would
have surely, come forth and have laid his hands upon him, but to go and wash
in (...), he thought his labor al lost, and the request which he made to the
Prophet to no purpose; for it was a thing that he never thought of, it was a
weak and poor means that he made no account of, yet that was the means
that God ^ded: so I say, we o^t deceive our selves, ^itch upon such particular
ways, and when these fail us, and when we have prayed, that these means
might be used, and God does not use them, we think presently, we are deceived.
Joseph thought verily Pharaohs steward should have been the means to bring
the promise to pass, and after that, Pharaohs butler, he used as a means, he
desired him to remember him, and yet all this was not the means, but another,
which he never thought of, which was a dream of Pharaohs: the like was in the
^se of Mordecai, deliverance came a strange way, a way that Mordecai never
imagined. Abraham thought verily, that Ismael had been the son of the
promise, but God tells him he was deceived, Isaac was the son, in whom he
would make good the promise. So the Israelites thought that Moses should have
delivered them; that it should have been presently true, that the yoke of
bondage should have presently been taken off from them, but we see, God went
another way to work, he sent Moses away, into a far Country, and the
bondage was exceedingly increased upon them. So that they thought they were
further off now then ever they were before; but, in truth, they were nearer:
for the increase of the bondage, increased Pharaohs sin, and made him ripe
for destruction: again, it increased the peoples humility, it made them to
pray harder, and to cry more servently to God for deliverance, and so it made
them more fit for it; and at the last, Moses was more fitted to be a deliverer,
after he was so long trained up, and was so much humbled; so that when God
seems to go a clean contrary way, yet it is the next way, to bring it to
pass. (...), it is a common thing with us, we pitch upon a certain particular
means, we thing such a man must do it, or such a course must do it, when the
Lord intends nothing less. And the reason often is, because, if we should have
deliverance, many times, by such means, by such men, and by such ways, we
would attribute too much to the means: therefore, we see, when (...) had a
great army, the Lord would not do it, it was too great for him, and therefore
we see to what a small number he brought it: so, often times, men think, oh if I
had such a man's help* or if I had such a means, it would do the thing, it
would bring the enterprise to pass: when we make too much account of it, the
Lord, it may be, casts away that, which seemed most probable, and (even as he
does most of his works, as he builds his own Kingdom by the most foolish,
and improbable means of all other, so) often he does our business by such
means, that we least dream of: therefore be not discouraged. Suppose we pray,
that such a great Prince should raise the Churches, that such a wa^e, that such
an enterprise, and project may do it; put the case the Lord will not do it
so; are we then presently undone? and is there no help, because such a
battle is overthrown, because such a King did not succeed, because such a
General had not success, acc^ng to our expectation? It may be, that is not
the way, the Lord will help the Church after another manner, that we dream
not of; and so for a man's self, he has business to be done, or he is in
distress, and would have deliverance, and he thinks, this is the way or
none, and therefore he is earnest to have it done: now it is good, in this
case, to leave it to the Lord, to make our requests known to him; and, when
we have done that, to be no further careful, but leave it to the Lord, to
do it his own way: he is skillful. Simile.


If you take a skillful workman, and say no more to him but thus: Sir, I pray
you, do me such a thing, if it were the bringing of water, or the setting up
of a building, it may be, he will go away to work, that thou know not
what it means, and yet thou will trust him: why then will thou not trust God,
and suffer him to go his own way? and, when thou art crossed in that thing,
wherein, it may be, of all others, thou would not be crossed, it may be,
it is the best way of all other to bring the thing to pass, that thou desire.

Again, as we are deceived in the manner, Thirdly, or not in our time.
and the means, so likewise we mistake the time: it may be the Lord is
willing to do the thing, but not in that time, that thou would have him:
when a man prays to be delivered from such a trouble, and such a distress,
and affliction, he thinks the time very long, and says, he^ is not heard,
because he is not delivered presently; we would all have the smarting
plaster presently took off: but the Lord is wiser then we, (as the physician
knows Simile.
what belongs to the patient better then himself,) though he do it not
presently, yet he will do it: therefore say not, thou art not heard, thou
must take heed of taking delays for denialls; the Lord will defer to do
the thing, yet he will do it, and do it in the best season: for this is a
general rule, Gods time is the best time. When thou come to pray for Note.
a thing, thou would have it done presently, and thou think it is the
best time, all the controversy between God, and thee is, which is the fittest
time to have it done; thou think, it may be, presently; God, it may be,
will do it a year hence, surely he is the best chooser, and we shall find
it so: and therefore be content to wait his leisure; he has many ends, in
deferring it, it may be, to try thy faith, (as he did the faith of the
Canaanite) and therefore he would not hear; it may be to increase thy
holiness, to put thy heart into a Note.
better temper, and therefore he deferres longer: he meant to do that for
Jacob, that he did, yet he suffered Jacob to wrestle all night, and yet he
would not do it, till the instant of the morning appeared: so it was with
Daniel, the answer went forth when he began to pray, yet he would (...) him
instant, and continue in prayer; so, I say, the Lord has many ends why he
deferres, let us be content to take his own time.

Last of all, consider this, when thou seek to 3. Ans.
the Lord, to have any thing done, it is possible, that it may cross some
other passage of his providence; and in this case thou should be content to
be denied.

But, you will say, why may not both be accommodated? Object.


I answer, so they shall, though thou se^ not Ans.
how; it is not with God, as it is with man: if a man do a good turn to one,
if two become petitioners, he must needs do an ill turn to another, but God
composeth all for the best. As for example, David desired much to build a
Temple, the Lord had another end, he had resolved in his providence, to make
Solomon the builder of it; indeed this was much better for David: for what
more had David gotten, if he had done it? the Lord gave him as full a reward,
as if he had done it: for he tells him, that for that purpose of building him
a house, he would build him a house: so^ David has his end, to the full,
though Solomon built the Temple. So for Israel, the Lord kept the Canaanites
among them, but it was for their profit: there are some passages of Gods
providence, that if we knew, we would yield to this, that it were better,
that it should be so, then otherwise, and therefore it is better, in some
case, that we should be denied. 'And so I conclude for this time.

FINIS
THE THIRD SERMON.
1. THESE. 5. 17. Pray continually.
Now we proceed to that which remains, something more we might add,
for the answering of this, for the time of Gods granting our petitions, and
for the measure, we touched it the last day a little.

For the time, we are deceived; in that we think, when God deferrs, he
denies; for many times God deferrs for special reasons, and yet he grants the
request, in the fittest time for us, as the physician knovveth the fittest time
to give the Simile.
patient physic of one kind or another; and in this we must yield to God; as
he does all his works in the fittest time, so he grants our petitions in the
fittest time; there is an appointed time for any deliverance to be granted, for
any blessing, for any comfort, that we need, and have at his hands. Now, if
our selves were judges, we would have things done for us in the most
convenient time, we would have the smarting plaster pulled off, before the
wound be healed, whereas it is i^ best for us to have it kept on: Bel^ved, you
shall find, that God divides between Satan, and us, in this case, as we see
Rev. 2. 10. Satan shall cast some of you into prison, and Rev: 2 10.
you shall be there for ten days: it was not so long as Satan would have had
it, it may be, he would have had it ten and ten too; nor again, it was not so
short, as they would have had it, but God sets down the time between them
both, and therefore we must rest upon him, and think that many times there is
great reason, why we should be deferred when we ask things at his hands, and
you shall find he deferres for one of these causes, for the most part,

Sometimes, for the trial of our faith; as, we see, he deferred to grant to
the woman of Canaan, Four Reasons of Gods deserring to grant our requests.
although he did mean to grant her request, yet he deferred long, that he
might put her to the trial; and, you see, she was no looser by it, but when
she held out in her prayers, she had her request granted to the full.

Sometimes, he deferres to grant it, that we 2
may be more humbled: as you know, Paul prayed earnestly, but God told him,
that he would defer him, because he needed more humility: so he deferred to
grant the request, that the men of Benjamin put up to him, when the cause was
just, and God intended to help them, yet they fell before their enemies twice,
though they fa^ed, and prayed, his end was, as we see in the text, that they
might be more humbled, that their hearts might be more broken, that they might
be more fitted to receive it.

Again, sometimes God deferrs, that we might 3
be more able to use those blessings that he means to bestow upon us: so he
deferred to raise Joseph to preferment: so he deferred to bring David to the
Kingdom, that those afflictions that they endured might the better fit them to
enjoy so great prosperity, as he had provided for them afterward.

And lastly, he deferrs that he might set a higher 4
price upon his blessings, that he might inhaunce the price of them; as the
fisher draws Simile.
away the bait, that the fish might follow it the more; so God withholds
blessings, that we might have a greater edge set upon our desires, that we
might pray harder for them, that we might prize them more, when we have
obtained them.

Now, as he does thus for the time, and as we are often deceived in the time,
in taking delays for denialls; so likewise we are often deceived Concerning
the measure, if God give us not so much as we ask.
in the measure; many times God grants the things that we would have, but,
because we have not so large a measure as we expect; therefore we think we
have not it at all, and that the Lord has denied us our prayers, when indeed
he has not: for a lesser measure, many times, may serve as well as a greater;
as God says to Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee; though the temptation
do abide upon us, if there be sufficient grace to keep us in a continual
conflict, and war against it, if there be sufficient grace to obtain pardon,
to uphold, and to comfort us in it, it is sufficient, it may bring us to
heaven, we have a deliverance from it, even when we seem not to be delivered;
though we have not so full a victory, as we would have, yet that grace may be
sufficient.

You shall see this almost in all the things we A less measure may serve as
well as a greater. Cleared in instances. 1. Wealth. Psalm: (...). 16.
have occasion to request, at Gods hands, that a lesser measure may serve as
well as a greater. Take it first in outward things.

A little wealth may serve, as well as great revenues: as in Psalm. 38. 16. A
little that the righteous has is as much as great revenues to the wicked;
because a little, when God shall fill it with his blessings, it shall serve the
turn as well; but, if a man has great revenues, and God blows upon them, and
leaves an emptiness in them; if a man have great revenues, if he have great
outward comforts, yet, if there be an emptiness, if there be a vanity in them,
if they be as the husk, without the grain, as the shell, without the kernel,
as they are often; though there be a great bulk, and they seem very fit to
comfort us, yet they will do us little good; whereas a little, on the other
side, will do much good: for in this case it is as it was with Manna, those
that had little, yet they had sufficient, and those that gathered over, yet
they had never a whit ^he more, that is, for their use and comfort; you know,
the little, that Daniel had, it nourished, and strengthened him, as much as the
great portion of the Kings meat, that others had; and therefore a little, in
this kind, may serve as well as much.

And so likewise, a little grace may be so used, 2. Instance in Grace.
and improved, that it may enable you to do much, it may preserve you from
sinning against God, as well as a great measure: for the confirmation of this
look to Rev. 3. 8. which is a notable Reu: 3 8.
place for this purpose, it is said there to the Church of Philladelphia, thou
have a little strength, they had but a little strength, and yet you see there
what that little strength did: thou have but a little strength, and yet thou
have kept my word, and have not denied my name: there were but two things for
them to do, to keep his word, and to be kept from running out to the denial
of his name, and other sins: now the little strength they had, was sufficient
for these ends: so that, we see, he finds no fault with that Church; other
Churches, that had more strength, it may be, they fell into greater sinne^:
but this is a rule which is true, you will find it true in all observation,
Note.
through the Scriptures, that, sometimes, those that have great grace, yet they
may fall into great sins, that they may be subject to some strong prevailing
lust; as David, you know, had great grace, and yet, we see, he was subject to
great sins together with it.

And again, a man may have but a little grace, and yet that little grace may
be so ordered, and husbanded, and improved, that that little grace may keep
him from sin, more then the other: this must be warily understood, not but
that Note in what sense this is to be taken.
great grace enables a man to do greater works, then the other; it enables a
man, in the ordinary course, to resist greater temptations, more then less
grace, but yet, (I say for our comfort, that) though a man have but a little
strength, yet, a^ it is said there in the same place, Rev. 3. in that Rev: 3.
little strength, I have set a door open to thee, it opened the door of
heaven wide enough, so that no man could shut it.

And as we say for grace, so like wise for gifts, smaller gifts, meaner gifts
may serve the turn, 3 Instance in gifts.
many times, as well as greater gifts: for, you know, a little finger, a small
hand may serve to thread a needle, as well as a greater, and, it may Simile.
be, will do it better; for, in the Church there are varieties of operations,
and variety of functions, and meaner gifts may serve for the discharge of some
operations, of some services for the Church, as well as greater. And therefore,
as there are variety of functions, so there are variety of members, some
stronger, some weaker, and the weaker may serve, in some cases, as well as the
stronger; a little bark may do better in a small river, then a greater ship;
so a man that Simile.
has but mean gifts may serve mean capacities, as well as greater, and
better: and therefore think not that things are denied. when the thing is
granted, not in such a measure. And lastly, to be faithful in a little gift
will bring as great a reward, as to be faithful in greater: thou have been
faithful in little, may make a man ruler over much, and may bring a great
increase of the talents after. Therefore let not a man be discouraged, if he
have not so great a measure as others have: so likewise if a man desire
patience, and strength to go through all variety of conditions, 4 Instance, in
crosses, and afflictions.
through all the troubles he meets with: sometimes the Lord lays a great
burden. upon a man's shoulders, and gives him great strength to bear it;
sometimes again he gives but a little Simile.
strength, but then he proportions the burden to it; and is it not all one,
whether the burden be great, and the strength answerable, or the burden be
less, and the strength little? sometimes he takes away calamity, sometimes he
lays it upon a man, and gives him as much strength as will bear it, and that
is as good, as if it were removed; else, what is the meaning of that, you shall
have an hundred fold with persecution, but that you shall have so much joy, and
strength in persecution, that it shall be all one as if you wanted it? so we
see Heb. 5. 7. when Christ Heb: 5. 7.
prayed for deliverance, in that great hour of trial, the text says, he was
heard in the things he feared, and yet, we see, the cup did not pass from
him, because he was strengthened to bear it, and so it is in this case; and
so much shall serve for a full answer to that, that we be not mistaken in
judging our prayers not to be heard when they are heard.

And now, Beloved, what remains, but that we set out selves to the duty, to
do that we are exhorted unto here, namely, to pray continually, that is, to
pray very much, to keep, at least, a Dangers by omitting, or neglecting prayer.
constant course in it; for, if we do neglect it, we do but ^ob God of his
mercies, we take them without his leave. 1


Again, we are guilty of the sin of unthankfulness: for we ought to give
thanks in all things: 2
again, we neglect his worship; for you know prayer is a part of his worship,
and the neglect 3
of it from day to day, or at any time, when we omit it, is a neglect of that
worship, and service we owe unto him.

Again, we suffer sin ^o lie vnforgiven, which is very dangerous, we deprive
our selves o^ blessings, 4
and bring a curse upon our selves, and we 5
suffer our hearts to grow hard, and to be distempered: 6
for, from our neglect of prayer comes that deadness of spirit, that
worldly-mindednesse, and vnapt^esse to pray, to hear the word, and ^o keep
the sabbath; what else is the reason of it, why those that have be me forward,
and zealous professors, in former times, have lost their light, and are fallen
from their place; I say what is the reason of it, when they were sometime
servent in spirit serving the Lord? That fire was not kept alive with the fuel
of prayer; and when they declined from that pitch, from that degree of faith,
which they had obtained, you shall find it commonly to arise from remissness
in this duty: therefore we say to such, repent and amend, and do your first
works; that is, use your former diligence, renew that, and that will renew
grace, and strength again: therefore take Benefit of frequency and diligence
in prayer. A stock will be laid up.
heed of being negligent, and remiss in this duty. We have great cause to be
encouraged to it, for there is not a faithful prayer that we make shall be
lost, but they come up into remembrance; and therefore you must consider with
your selves, not only what you do for the present, but what stock of prayers
you have laid up; you know a man may have much, in bills, and bonds, as well as
in present money; so there is a certain Simile.
stock of prayer, a certain treasure laid up, that shall not be forgotten.
The husbandman looks not only upon the grain that he has in his Simile.
garner, but he looks upon that which is sown, though it be out of his hands,
yea he reckons that the better of the two; so those prayers that have been
sowed, it may be, many years ago, are such as will bring in a sure increase:
therefore let us be exhorted to be constant in this duty, to be frequent
therein, to continue in it, watching thereto with perseverance.

And now we have dispatched this, we will come to answer some cases of
conscience that fall out in the performance of this duty, which are diverse.

First, this is one; what shall a man judge of Case 1
his prayers, when they are accompanied with About wandering thoughts in prayer.
wandering thoughts, whether those prayers are such as God wholly refuses, or
what he is to do in such a case, when he is subject to wandering thoughts, to
vanity of mind, and distemper in the performance of that duty?

To this I answer, that we must distinguish Ans.
of the cause whence these wandering thoughts a rise.

Sometimetimes they arise, not so much from our own neglect, as from
weakness, from temptation: 1 The cause of them is weakness.
and in such a case, God lays them not so much to our charge: as, for example,
one that aims at a mark, and does his best to hit the Simile.
mark, yet, if he has a hand, or an arm, that has the palsy in it, or if
one iogg him while he is about it, the fault was not so much in him, it was not
want of good will to do it, nor want of diligence; but, either it is his
weakness, or it is an impediment cast in by another: so it is in this case,
this wandering of mind proceeds from a natural infirmity, and imbecility that
hangs upon the nature of man, which is not so able to keep it self close to
such a spiritual business; and thy God considers: for he is wise, and kno^es
that we are but flesh. When a weak servant goes Simile.
about a business, though he do it not so well as a stronger, yet a man is
wise to consider, that the servant is but weak: the Lord considers the
natural weakness that we are subject unto; and he deals mercifully with us,
in such a case: for herein a man is as one that has a bow in his Simile.
hand, but he has a palsy arm, and therefore he cannot keep it steady,
though he have a min^ to do it.

But the other case is, when he is iogged in his 2. Temptation.
shooting by another, that is, when Satan interrupts him, when he is diligent
to hinder him in such a duty; in this case, God charge it not upon him, and
does not cast us off, nor reject our pray ers, because of that: but, on the
other side, when this wandering of mind shall rise from mere negligence, on
our part, from profanesse, from 3. Negligence
want of reverence, because we do not intend holy duties as we ought, we come
not to them with that conscionablenesse, with that carfulness as we should
do; in this case now, it is a great sin, this moves the Lord to anger, when
we perform the duty in that manner, when we do not so much as set our selves
about it with our strength, but suffer our minds to wander without any
resistance.

Or secondly, when we our selves be the cause 4. Voluntary admitting vain
thoughts
of it by admitting of loose thoughts, by suffering our selves to be worldly
minded, by suffering an indisposition to grow upon us, and not laboring to
resist it, and cast it off again. You know, when an instrument is out of tune,
if the lesson Simile.
be never so good, that is played upon it, yet it is unpleasant because the
instrument is out of tune; and whose fault is that? so, when thou come to
God, and suffer thy heart to be distempered before and do not look to
keep it in order; that i^ thy sinno, as well as thy profanes, and neglect in
the very time of the performance: and, by this you may (...), how to judge of
wandering thoughts in the performance of this duty, and likewise you may see how
to prevent How to prevent wandering thoughts in p^ayer.
them: the way to prevent them, is to keep our hearts in tune before, to have
them ready, as, the wise man has his heart at his right hand, that is, he has
it ready when he has it to use. When a Simile.
man is to use his horse, he does not suffer him to run up and down in the
pastures wildly, but will have him under bridle; so we should keep our hearts
in frame, that they may be ready to do us service in such a holy duty, when
we have need of them.

Secondly, we must be diligent, when we come to perform the duty, that, though
our minds do wander, yet we may be ready to recall them presently, to set our
selves to it with all diligence: so much for answering of this first case.

The second case is, what a man is to do, when he finds a great
indisposition to prayer, Case 2 About indisposednesse, and dullness, and
vnap^nesse to prayer.
such a dullness, and deadness in him, that he knows not how to go about
the duty, and he thinks, if he do it, it were as good be undone.

To this I answer briefly, that in all such cases, Answ. 1.
a man is bound notwithstanding to perform it, let his heart be never so much
out of temper, let there be never so great a dullness, and deadness of spirit
upon him, yet he is bound to do it.

But you will say, why, but I am altogether unfit. Object.


I answer, that a man by setting himself upon the work, shall gather a
fitness, though he were Answ.
unfit at the first: you know, members, that are Simile.
benumbed, yet by using them, they get life, and heat, and come, in the end,
to be nimble enough; so it is with the heart, in this case, when it is
benumbed, the very using of it makes it fit for the duty: You know, wood,
though it be Simile.
green, yet, if it be long blowed, at the length, it will be dry, and take
fire; so it is with the heart, a man may be long about getting it on the wing,
yet, with much ado, he may do it, and therefore he ought to do this duty in
such a case; yea, so much the rather, because there is never more need of
calling upon God, then at such a time: for then a man lies most exposed to
temptation, then, if any sin come, he is ready to be overtaken with it, he
is unfit for any thing; and therefore, Note.
if ever he have need to call upon God it is at that time.

But you will say, it may be, God will not accept it? Object.


I answer briefly, if a man's heart be so indisposed, Answ. 2.
that, when he has done all he can, yet he can get no life, he can get no
heat in the performance of such a duty, yet God may accept that prayer, as
well as that which is most servent: And that you may understand this aright,
you must take it with this distinction:

This dullness, and deadness in prayer, it comes from one of these two causes.
Causes of dullness.


One is, when God withdrawes his own spirit, 1. Desertion.
that is, withdrawes not his spirit altogether; 2. When there is some neglect
on our part.
(for there may be a help, when we perceive it not), but when he withdrawes
the liveliness, and quickness of his spirit, and in this case, if we do our
duty, if we do the best we can, the Lord does accept it, though he has
not vouchsafed such enlargement of our hearts, though he have not powered out
his spirit upon us, in the performance of the duty, as at other times, but he
gives a secret help, that perhaps we feel not, nor perhaps is so great as at
other times; yet I say, when it arises from his own withdrawing of that
fitness, and we are not negligent, but we do our best, in this case, God
accepts the will for the (...), as we have often said to you: that rule always
holds good, when the impediment is such as we cannot remove, when the dullness
of spirit is such as it is not in our power to remove, when we have used our
utmost diligence, in that case it is no hindrance: and therefore it is a great
comfort unto us, that we have used our diligence in this duty, when we have
used our best to quicken our hearts, though it be not done, yet God accepts our
prayers, as well as if they were performed in a more lively and fervent manner.

The next case is what a man is to do after* he has committed some great
sin, after he has Case. 3. About praying after a man has committed some
gross^ sin.
wounded his conscience, whether then, not withstanding, he must come, and keep
his constant course in prayer, morning, and evening, whether he shall be so
bold, as to come into Gods presence afte^ he has so exceedingly offended him.

To this I answer, that a man is bound, (notwithstanding Ans. In this case
prayer is not to be neglected.
any sin that he has committed, be it what it will be) to keep his course
constantly in prayer, and not to omit it, not to keep off, not to defer it.
And my ground for it is, because this is a duty, it is a charge that God has
laid upon all, to pray continually; that is, at the least twice a day, as we
showed before, to keep a constant course in it: now, it is certain, our
failing in one thing, must not excuse us in another. Note.
When the dute lies on us, we have no dispensation to be negligent in it; and
therefore we are bound to do it.

Again, consider this, that a particular offense does not offend so much, as
if we grow strangers 2. Reas.
to God: as if we grow to a general rebellion against him. As, put the case, a
child commits a great offense against his father, yet, if he run Simile.
away from his fathers house, and grow a stranger to him, that is more then the
particular offense: for a general rebellion must needs be more then the
particular, and to give over calling upon God, to break off that course, to
grow a stranger to him, to run away from his house, and (as it were) to be
ready to give over all his ordinances, and a constant course of obedience to
him, this is a general rebellion, and is worse then the particular; yea such
carriage, after sin committed, moves God to anger more then the sin it self;
as, many times, the contemptuous, negligent, rebellious carriage, after an
offense, moves a mast^r, a husband, or a parent more, then the particular
failing though it were exceeding great.

Besides, consider, when a man commits a great finne, he makes a great gap in
his conscience, he Reas. 3.
makes a great breach there, and will you have that breach lie open? is not
that very dangerous? is not that the way to bring in more ^in, and to suffer
those good things that are in the heart to steal out? I will give you but one
instance for this: You see, St. Peter, when he had committed a great sin, in
denying his master, and forswearing of him too, yet, because he came in
presently, and repented, and sought pardon, (as you know he did) you see, he
was preserved from running into further arrerages: for he made up the gappe,
he made up the breach.

We see, on the other side, when David had committed that sin with Batb^eba,
and did not come unto God, as he should have done, to keep his constant course
in sacrificing unto him, in repenting, and renewing his repentance, and praying
to him, you know, how many sins he fell into: and likewise, that was the case
of Solomon, you know, to what a height he grew, by not coming unto God, at
his first failing: and therefore, I say, there is reason, that we should do
it, though the sin be great, we ought to come in, and to keep our course
constantly.

But may I not stay till I be more fitted, till my heart be more softened,
and more humbled? Quest.


Beloved, to st^y in this case is dangero^; for Ans.
the heart commonly grows more hard in continuance; the conscience is more
tender, immediately after the sin is committed, then it is afterward; and
when thou stayest for more humility, thou find less; and therefore, while
the wound is green, and when the fire has taken newly hold, it is then best
to quench it, before the wound be festered, before it has continued long; for
the heart will grow worse, and worse, as it is Heb: 3. 12. Take heed that you
be not hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; the Heb: 3 12.
meaning is this, when thou committest a sin, you think, if you stay a
week, or a fortnight, or a month, you shall come in as well as at the first;
no, says the Apostle, while it is to day, come in, that is, do it presently,
for sin will deceive you, it will harden your heart before you be aware, it
will make a distance between God, and you, it will take you off from him, it
will lead you further on; and therefore take heed, that your hearts be not
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, that sin do not deceive you,
and it will do it before you think of it: and therefore in this case you
should do as you Simile.
do with waters, when waters break out a little, it is best to stop them
presently; if you suffer them, they will make the breach greater, till at
length, you be unable to stop them; so in this case, when you have committed a
great sin, come in speedily.

But you will say, what shall a man come into Gods presence, who is most holy,
after he has defiled Object.
himself with some great sin, is not this an vnreuerent thing?

I answer briefly, it is very true, if thou be bold Answ.
to come into Gods presence with the same d^sposition, wherewith the sin was
committed, with a mind so fashioned, and so framed, in that case thou do
exceedingly provoke him, this is a very high degree of pro^unesse: and
therefore, when we say, thou must come in, and keep a constant course in
prayer notwithstanding, the meaning is, you must come in with a disposition
turned aside from your sins, and brought home to God, with a mind to abhor
that which is evil, and to cleave to that which is good; there must be this
conversation of the mind to him, thou must not come in with the same
disposition, that must be altered. So much shall serve sor the answer to this
case.

Another case is whether we may use a set Case 4. About a set form of prayer.
form of prayer? and likewise whether it be sufficient?

I need not say much to you; for I think there is none here that doubt of it,
but that a set form Answ.
of prayer may be used: you know, Christ prescribed a form, you know, there
were certain Psalms that were prayers that were used constantly; and
therefore there is no doubt but that* a set for me may be used, we have that
example for it: And in the Church, at all times, in the primative times of the
Church, and all along to the beginning of the reformed ti^es, to Luther, and
Calvin's (...), ^till, in all times, the Church had set forms they used, and I
know no objection against it of weight. One maine objection is this:

That in stinted prayer the spirit is straightened, Object.
when a man is tied to a form, then he shall have his spirit, as it were,
bounden, and limited, that he cannot go beyond that, which is prescribed; and
therefore, say they, it is reason a man should be left to more liberty, (as he
is in conceived prayers) and not tied to a strict form?

To this I answer, even those men, that are against Answ. 1.
this, and that use this reason, they do the same thing daily in the
congregation: for when another prays, that is a set form to him, that hears
it, I say, it is a form to him: for put that case, that he that is a hearer,
that hears another pray, suppose that his spirit be more enlarged, it is a
straightning to him, he has no liberty to go out: he is bound to keep his
mind intent upon it; and therefore, if that were a sufficient reason, that a
man might not use a set form, because the spirit is straightened, a man should
not hear another pray, (though it be a conceived prayer) because, in that
case, his spirit is limited, it may be, the hearer has a larger heart, a great
deal, then he that speaks and prays; so that there is a bounding, and
streightning, and a limiting of the spirit. And therefore that reason cannot be
good.

Again, I answer, though the spirit be limited, at that time, yet he ha^h a
liberty, at other Answ. 2.
times, to pray as freely a^ he will in private; and therefor he is not so
tied, but, though, at that time, he be, yet it is no general tie; at another
time, or immediately after, he may be as free as he will in secret.

Aga^ne, I answer, it is not a tie, and a restraint of the spirit, because
there is a tie of Answ. 3.
words; for the largeness of the heart stands not so much in the multitude and
variety of expressions, as in the extent of the affection: now then the heart
may be very large, for all that; though he be tied in words, yet there is not a
tie upon the affection, that may be extended more, in putting up the same
petition, when another man's is more streightened; therefore there i^ no tie,
and limit upon that. And this is enough to satisfy that, that a set for me of
prayer must be used.

But now, if you ask; whether that be sufficient? whether a man may think, if
he have Quest.
been present at public prayer, (which is a commendable thing to use it
constantly) I say, whether that be sufficient?

My Beloved, this is a matter of some moment, to consider what we ought to do
in this case; Answ. Public prayer not sufficient.
for we may be deceived in it, and I answer plainly, it is not sufficient: a
man that i^ diligent in public prayers, that keeps them morning and evening;
if he thinks now he has discharged his duty, he is in a very great error:
and this is the reason, because they are not sufficient. Indeed, they are to be
used; for God is worshipped in them, and it is a more publ^que worship; and
when God is honored before many, as a man, Simile.
when there are many spectators, more honor is done to him, it is a greater
honor; so it is when men join in this worship. And many other reasons there
be, but that is not the thing, I am now upon, to commend it to you; but, I say,
it is not sufficient, although it ought to be done, 1. Reas.
because there are many particular sins, which cannot be confessed in
public prayer, there are many particular wants, which in public prayer you
cannot unfold, and open, and express unto the Lord.

Again, the end of a set form of prayer is to be a help for the private,
(for the public it is 2. Reas.
another case) a help that one may use that is yet exceeding weak: a child,
that cannot go, may have such a proppe, but we must not always be children, we
must not always use that help.

Besides, we must consider this, that there is no man, that has any work of
grace in his heart, 3. Reas.
but he is enabled in some measure to pray, without a set form of prayer, he
is able to express his desires to God in private, one way, or another: there
was never any man, in any extreme want, but he knew how to express himself,
where he had liberty to speak: so it is in this case.

Besides, the spirit of a man has greater liberty in private; there a man may
power forth 4. Reas.
his soul to the Lord, as Ha^a says, 1 Samuel 1. which 1 Samuel 1.
in public, he cannot do freely: there are many particular mercies, which he
has cause to be thankful to God for.

Besides, there is a particular pains that a man is to take with his heart,
from day to day, which, ^eas. 5.
in the public common petitions, he is not able to do: for, Beloved, know
this, that the prayer, that is required from day to day, is not so much the
performance of the duty, the doing of the task, but the end is to keep the
heart in order; for, if sinful lust grow upon it, and (...), and worldly
mindedness, the end of this duty is to work them out again, to renew
repentance again; and, when there is a forgetfulness of the covenant, when
grace grows weak, when good desires begin to languish, to renew, and recover
them, to put fuel to them: and this is not done by the performance of the
publ^ke only; and therefore, I say, though you perform it in your families,
and meet in the congregation, you must not think that this is enough, you are
bound to a private performance of this duty.

Again, this is another case, what a man is to do in the private performance
of this duty, whether Case 5. About using the voice, and about the ge^ture in
secret prayer.
he be bound always to use his voice? whether he be bound always to use such
a kind of gesture?

I answer this briefly, (for there is no great difficulty in these things, and
therefore I p^sse them Ans.
over) for the gesture in public, there is more heed to be taken of that;
because it is a public and open worship of God; and therefore in public the
g^ture is always to be reverent. You know how often it is repeated, (in the old
testament especially) that they bowed down, and worshipped still, Christ
looked up to heaven, Paul kneeled down, and the rest with him, and prayed; and
many such like expressions you have mentioned in the Scriptures: where you have
prayer mentioned in public, still you shall find an expression of some
reverend gesture, and when we appear before the Lord in the public
performance of this duty, especial care must be taken hereunto in the
private, the case is different; there variety of gestures may be used. I do
not see, but all variety of gestures may be used; there are many examples for
walking, and lying, and sitting; only this is to be taken heed to, that, even
in private, as far as may be, the gesture be such, as may both express the
inward reverence in the heart, and of the outward man; but there i^ a liberty
in that: I think this is the best rule in private, that the gesture be used,
that does Note.
most quicken, and does help the duty most. Some gesture may bring a dullness,
and in disposition, when another may quicken the body, and make it more ^it for
prayer: sometimes lying is inconvenient, and sometimes more convenient; and
therefore, in this case, the best rule is, to use that ge^ure, which quickens
most, which helps most the duty: some gesture may breed a weariness in the
body, some may breed a dullness, some are painful to the body, all this is a
hindrance to the duty, when the change of it may quicken and help.

Now for the voice, I say, for that (as for the sture) it is not simply
required: for God is a spirit, and he will be worshipped in spirit: men, that
John 4. 24.
have ears, and bodies, they must have men speak to them, but God, that is a
spirit, delights in that, which is like himself; and therefore all his eye is
upon the inward behavior of the spirit. Besides, the spirit may speak to God,
when the voice does not; as, you know, the Angels speak to God, and they
speak one to another. The Schoolmen have great disputes about the speech of
Angels, but this they agree in, that one Angel speaks to another after this
manner; when any one has a conceit, in his mind, of any thing, with a will
that another should understand it, and that God should understand it, that is
enough for the expression of it; so it is with the spirit of a man, when he
has such a petition in his heart, in his mind, and there is a desire in his
will, that God should understand that petition; that is an offering it up to
the Lord, it is as true a speaking to the Lord, as when you deliver it by an
outward voice: for the spirit agrees with the Angels; as it is a speech, and as
they speak one to another, and to the Lord; so does the spirit of man; though,
indeed, the tongue be to be used, as it is Iam. 3. 9. there with bless (...)
God; and therewith should we pray among others, and before others; and speak
before others: but when there is any cause to use the voice, in private, it is
this, as far as it may quicken the heart, (as I said of gesture) and as far
as thereby we may keep our thoughts from wandering. If the voice were not
used, perhaps, thoughts would be subject to more wandering, and we should not be
ready to take notice of them; but they would slip before we are aware; and
therefore, when the voice is used, it must be to keep in the thoughts. In some
cases, to omit the voice, is more convenient when it may draw any other
inconvenience, but that is left to every man's particular case; as (...) shall
find the use of it to ^inder him, or further him. And so much shall serve for
this Case.

FINIS
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
1. THRS. 5. 17. Pray continually.
ANother case of Conscience (in the business of prayer, is) wha^ a Case 6
About want of leisure to pray by reason of present businesses to be speedily
dispatched.
man is to do, when he is in straight of time; by reason of some w^ighty
b^nesse, that requires a (...) and sudden dispatch, and gives him not the
leisure and liberty, that otherwise he might have had?

To this I answer, you shall find, that i^ Scriptures, Answ.
the prayers of Saints have been sometimes larger, and sometimes shorter. Our
Savior Christ, you know, sometimes spent a whole night in prayer; Surely he
did not take so much time always, and, no doubt, we have liberty sometimes
to be larger, sometimes shorter, according as our occasions will permit. But
yet this you must remember, that though the business Note.
be great, yet that business, that concerns the salvation of ou^ souls, and
the worship of God, is greater: And therefore, except it be a true strait,
this is still to be preferred; for it is a business of greater moment; and
therefore you must give a just weight to your business, and not to suffer
every small business that* comes in to thrust out this duty: for here you
keep not the due proportion, but neglect the greater, and take the less.

Besides, do you not say, when you have great business in hand, that a man
must have a dining time, and a sleeping time, etc? Why may we not say as wel^?
A man must have a praying time; is it not as necessary? You know what Job
says* you know the course that ^e kept in reading the word, (for that is
clearly meant in that place) It was more precious ^o him then his appointed
food: that is, he had rather omit his vsual^ meale^, (for that he means by his
appointed food) then to omit a constant course in performing those holy duties:
Therefore, I say, it ought carefully to be took heed of, that we omit it not,
except it be a very great straight; if it be, we may be short in it, ^od ties
us not so exactly: you see therein are not rules set down in the Scriptures,
wherein we are tied precisely to such an hour, to such a time, but God, in
mercy, and in wisdom, has left it to our liberty: only, you see, this is
the command, Pray continually, do it exceeding much, at the least, keep a
constant course in it, as we heard before, but you may be shorter in it.

Now let these four Cautions be observed.

First, take heed that this straightning come Cautions about shortness of
prayer in such straits.
not from your ill husbandry, that is, from your ill husbanding of time; For,
if a man were careful to redeem time before, it may be, he need 1 Caution.
not be put to such a strait, as he is at that time, when he is to perform
this duty: suppose you have a journey to go, that requires so much time, and
you must be gone early, you may so husband the time before, that you may get
time for your journey. And for the performance of this duty, and so for other
business, as I said in the morning, when you should sequester your selves to
perform this duty of prayer, take heed that you be good steward of your time,
that you husband it well.

And likewise, this is another part of husbanding your time, that you let not
that, which is very precious, go for things of small moment, for that is ill
husbandry. You should redeem the time, and buy it with the loss of something.
You have time to bestow in the weighty business of your calling, in things
that belong to the good of man, much more should you in this that belongs to
the worship of God: And therefore, if it may be, redeem it with some loss; so
you ought to husband it, otherwise you redeem not time as you ought. This is
the first Caution that ought to be observed, to husband and redeem the time
well.

The second is, if we be straightened at any time, 2 Caution.
recompense it an another time: for if it be not a feigned excuse and pretense,
if you be straightened, when you have liberty, you will be careful to spend
mo^e time in it; by that you shall know your sincerity in it, that it is true,
and that it is not an excuse, and a putting off.

Moreover, another Caution to be observed is, that you take not too much
business upon you: 3 Caution.
if you be straightened with business, and therefore cannot be so large in the
performance of this duty, as otherwise you would, if you take not too much upon
you, your selves are the cause of it: And therefore, he that takes less, he
that spends more time in the things that belong to salvation, he has made the
better choice; As Mary made a better choice then Martha, though her employment
were good.

Likewise, as you must not pester your selves with too much business, so
likewise you must 4 Caution.
take care, that your minds be not too much intent upon them; for too much
intention of mind upon business, causes distraction in prayer, and causes us
post over over the duty, as well as too much business: when a man's mind
shootes it self too far in business, when it is too much occupied about it,
when it is too much intent, when the soul cleaues too fast upon the business,
and cannot loose it self to the performance of spiritual duties, which
require freedom.

The last Caution is, that the strait rise not 5 Caution.
from diffidence in God, and confidence in the use of the means; for, it falls
out often times when we have business of moment in hand, there is a turning,
and posting from one creature to another, from the use of one means to
another, that we cannot get time in prayer, not so much for want of time
simply, but because we mind the means too much, we intend them too much, we
do not trust God enough with the business, if we did, we might spend less
time in them, and more in seeking to him. So much for that case.

Another case of Conscience in this business of calling upon God is, what a
man is to do Case 7 About use of the means.
for the use of the means, for when we are bid to pray and seek to God, that
is the ordinary question; But may we not use the means too?

To this I answer, That prayer is so far from excluding the means, that it
includes Answ. Reasons why means must be used.
them; for, if the desire be servent, when we desire any things at Gods hands,
it will make us diligent in the use of the means, to use a convenient 1
diligence; as it will make you earnest in seeking to God, and in putting up
your requests to him: for, if a man shall pray, and be negligent in the use of
the means, I will be bold to say it, it is but like the desire of the
sluggard, that is a languishing, ^ting desire: He desires, but his soul has
nothing; he desires, but he putts his hand into his bosom; The desires,
which you express, when you pray, they are not servent, they are not earnest,
if you be remiss in the use of the means. He that desires grace, desires
strength, against sinful lusts, and temptations, and yet is remiss in the use
of the means, by which grace should be increased, and strength gained, to
resist those corruptions, and temptations; Certainly those desires are but
vain desires.

Besides, it is an an argument that we trust 2. Reas.
not in God, That we make not account of our prayers, except we be diligent
in the use of the means; therefore we are far from excluding them: for, if
you seek to God, and trust to your prayers, and think that they will prevail
with him, it will work this effect, That you will be careful to use such
means, as God has ordained to bring the thing to pass. Even as, if a man
seek to a Physician, to such a Physician, that he trust* Simile.
to, into whose hands he would put his life; When this Physician prescribes
such a course, such a diet, and such a thing to be taken at such a time, the
more he rests upon the Physician, the more careful he will be to observe
his prescription, and rules: And so, in this case, the more you rest on God,
the more careful you will be to use such means, as he has appointed, when
he has said, these, and these means are to be used. In this case, I say, it
is a sign your prayers are more to purpose, when you are diligent in the use
of them, when you dare not slight nor neglect them.

Again, you must consider this, that, when we pray, at any time, we do not
pray to have 3. Reas.
any thing done without means, but we pray to have a blessing upon the means,
but we pray, to have a blessing upon the means, and, if we pray for a blessing
upon the means, our mind is not that they should be omitted; for, you see,
God does all things by second causes, he saues us not without our selves, that
is, he uses us as instruments, he does every thing by men, and by creatures,
and by means, and the end of our prayers is, not to have them done without
means, but to have a blessing upon them. But that that is chiefly to be
observed to clear this point to you is this; That prayer is not the only
means, it is but part of the means to bring any things to pass.

There are two things to effect a business, that 4. Reas.
is, prayer and means both: we do not say prayer is the only means;
indeed, then the other were excluded, but since it is but a part, and the other
makes up the total means of bringing any thing to pass, it does not exclude
them, but they may be both joined together, prayer, and the use of the means.
This is enough to show that we may use means, we may pray, and lay our hand on
the plowe, we may seek to God, and be diligent, and as diligent (...) body
else; But now these three Cautions are to be Cautions about the use of means
observed..

The first is, That, if we do use means, we use those that are right; for,
if you trust God, and 1 Caution.
depend upon him, you will not step out to any inordinate means, nor use
lawful means in an inordinate manner: If you do so, it is an argument your
prayers are of no value in your own esteem, you do not rest on God; for, if
you did, you would not use other means, then he has appointed.

Secondly, though you use the means, and 2 Caution.
pray both, yet you must so use the means, that your confidence be in your
prayers: for it is one thing to use the means, and it is another thing to have
confidence in them. And therefore we say to you in this case, that you must
do as he Simile.
that uses the light of the Sun; he so uses the light, that he has an eye
upon the Sun from whom that light co^nes; for, he knows, that if the Sun
were set, the light would be gone. Or as he that takes water in a Cesterne, or
River, he Simile.
so takes it, as that he has an eye to the fountain, he knows if the
fountain were stopped, the River would be quickly dried up: So you should
think with your selves, if I use any means, any creature, any instrument to
bring things to pass, mine eye must be upon God: for all the help that we
have from the creature, it is but as a beam to the help that comes from God
himself. And therefore you must do, in this case, as Physicians are wont to
do, they put many Simile.
ingredients into a thing, but it is one principal ingredient, amongst the
rest, that he makes account will cure the disease: So do, in this case, make
use, both of the prayer, and of the means, yet you must know, that prayer is
the principal effecter of the thing, and the principal means, it is that,
wherein your confidence is to be: for, indeed, it is God that does bring
every thing to pass: There is no good in the City, nor no evil, but he does
it; you know he takes all to himself. All the means, by which Good, and Ill
is conveyed to you, they do not do the thing, they are but the v^ls, they are
but the Instruments, as the beer, and the wine, wherein the ph^sicke is taken,
but it Simile.
is the physic, the medicine that cures: So all the means cannot do it, it
is the help, and the power of God, the efficacy, that comes from him, that
brings things to pass; therefore, that must be remembered, use the means,
that you use, with dependence upon God, with an eye upon him, that your hearts
rest not upon them: for, if they do, it is an inordinate use of them.

Lastly, you must take heed of sticking in any particular means; for, if you
do, it is a sign 3 Caution.
trust not God, as you ought to do. It is a fault commonly, we pitch upon such
a particular way, and we think that must do it, or nothing: Now, if God be
trusted to, he has more ways to the wood then one, he has more means to
bring a thing to pass then one: And therefore we must leave it to him, who
often does it best by another means, then we dreamed of. As for example, David
had a promise of the Kingdom; Now, when he had the Kingdom of Judah, yet you
know, the Kingdom of Israel stood out: for Ishbosheth had the Kingdom, and
Abner was his chief Captain: besides, in his coming into his Kingdom of
Judah, we see how God wrought the business, without device, by a means, that
he never thought of, in that battle, when Saul was killed, and so many of his
sons, there was so much way made for him, when himself used no means to
bring it to pass. Afterward when the Kingdom of Israel was kept from him, and
he had only Judah, we see, God caused a division between Ishbosheth, and Abner
his chief Captain; upon that comes Abner, and offers to David the whole
Kingdom, but yet he was but a reconciled enemy; and what Abner might have
done, he knew not. Therefore, God by his providence, though Ioab sinned in it,
caused Abner to be taken away by Ioab; when this was done, yet Ishbosheth was
alive still; then were there two men set by the providence of God, (though it
were a great sin in them) to take away his head, and so the Kingdom came
wholly to David: for, there were but two sons, Mephibosheth, that was lame of
his seete, and Ishbosheth, that was lame in his mind, a weak man unable to
manage so great, and weighty a business, to purpose: So God brought the
business to pass by a way, that David thought not off. Therefore, though we
may use means, yet, after the use of them, we must depend upon God, and leave
it to God to take one means, or other. We must do, in this case, as we do
when we go to a man, that is very Simile.
skillful to do a work for us: If we go to a Carpenter, and tell him we have
such a thing to be done; or, if we go to those that we call (...), that bring
water from place to place, we tell him, this is our desire, but how he will
work, and which way he will bring it to pass, we know not, and yet we trust
such a one: for, we say, he is an honest man of his word, and if he have
undertaken it, it is enough. Why will you not trust God, that goes so much
beyond us, that has an infinite wisdom, and an infinite power? And therefore
we should so use the means, that withal we keep our dependence upon him, that
we leave it to him to use this, or that means, as it pleases him. For
sometimes, it may be, he ta^s away that which we are about, sometimes he leaves
us partly destitute, and findes^ way of his own, that we might trust to him,
and consider his power, and his wisdom, what he is able to do. So much
likewise shall serve for this Case.

Another Case is, what it is to pray in faith? You know that is required. Now
there is a common Case 8 About praying in faith, when a man wants a particular
promise, that the thing which he asks shall be granted.
error in this point: for a man may say, if I pray for the salvation of
another, I ^ue no promise, how can I pray in faith? when a man prays to be
guided in such a business, to have* such an enterprise to be brought to
p^sse, to have (...) from suc^ a tro^ble, facts (...) nesse, from such a
calamity, that he lies under, he finds no particular promise, and, for ought
he knows, it shall never be granted: How can he be said to pray in faith?
for to pray in faith, is to believe, that the thing shall be done.

I answer, that to pray in faith is to go as far as the promise goes. Now
no particular Answ.
man has any particular promise, that he shall have such a deliverance, that
he shall have such a particular mercy granted him; and therefore it is not
required to believe that particular thing should be done.

But you will say; what faith is it then that is Object. What faith is, required
required?

I say, it is enough to believe that God is a father, that he is ready to
hear, and not Ans.
only that he is ready to hear, but that he is ready to do that which is
best for me, in such a particular: for both are required, that you believe him
to be well affected toward you, as a father, as one that tenders your good,
and not only so, but that he will do that, in that particular, that shall
be most for his own glory, and for your good: and, if you do so, you pray in
faith; though, for the particular, you know not, whether it shall be granted,
or no. Indeed, if we had a particular promise, as Elias had that it should not
rain, etc. in that case, we were bound to believe in particular, but not
having that, we are not tied unto it: for the promise is the object of faith,
and the habit is not to work beyond the object; for the object is the rule,
and the limit of the habit; therefore you may pray in faith, when yet you have
no ground to believe, and to think, that that particular thing should be
granted. For example, if a father pray, that his son may have grace wrought
in his heart, that his soul may be saved, it may be the Lord will never do
it; or, if one friend pray for another to the same purpose, though the thing be
not done, yet the prayer returns into his bosom, he is no looser by it,
there is a reward belongs to him, for seeking to God in sincerity, it is his
duty, that he should do so. The like I may say for every particular case. And
this encouragement you may have, that there is never any particular prayer put
up, wherein you seek things, that are not granted, but you mistake in it: for,
if you believe thus far, as I said to you, be sure, that your prayers are
accepted, God will do that, which is best for you, and your prayers shall not
be lost. So much also for that.

The last case is, how shall a man know whether Case 9. About a man^ knowledge
that his prayer is heard.
his prayer be heard, or not.

For answer to this we will give you this one rule, (and that is as far as
we can go) that those prayers that are made by the ^ssistance of Ans.
Gods holy spirit, it is certain, they are always heard. If you find, that
at any time, you need make no question, but that God hears it, and will do
the thing, observing the Cautions, that we have gives you ^ofore, that is, for
the means, the manner, the time, and the measure: for it cannot be, but that,
when the heart is enlarged by Gods own spirit, that the prayer is an
expression of holy desires, the Lord always hears: that place is clear for
it, Romans 8. 27. that he Rom: 8. 27.
knows the meaning of the spirit, that is, he so knows it, that he
hearkeneth to it, that he always accepts of it; and therefore, when you come
in such a case, at any time, that your hearts are enlarged in a special
manner: Mark, I say, when your hearts are enlarged in a special manner, and
that, with holy desires, certainly, then God means to grant our requests: he
would not send his spirit to be an intercessor in your hearts, if he did not
mean to do it: for, in that case, he withholds his spirit, he gives us not
that enlargement of heart: only this distinction must be carefully remembered;
you may be sometime very earnest, (the Parent may be very earnest Note.
for his child, as David was for his, And Moses, for ought we see, was earnest
to have gone into the land of Canaan, they were things that they desired) and
yet that may be an expression of natural desires.

In that case, a man may be very earnest, and yet he cannot build upon it, to
say, my heart is much enlarged in prayer, and therefore I shall be heard; but
take in this, when the heart is enlarged with holy desires, and that in a
special manner, somewhat more then ordinary, as that, you see, it is the work
of the spirit of God, quickening your heart, opening it wide, strengthening, and
enlarging it, and sh^pening grace, and holiness in you, in those requests, you
put up to (...), in this case, build upon it, your prayers are heard from that
ground, we have given you, be knows the meaning of the Spirit. So much shall
serve for those cases of Conscience in this spiritual duty of calling upon God.

Now the last thing we propounded was this. What the qualification is that is
required in our Qualifications or conditions required inthat prayer that shall
be accepted.
prayers: for, now we have said so much of prayer, it is a necessary thing,
that we know, what conditions are required, that it may be acceptable.

And the first (we will commend to you, that 1 Condition That the person be
right
which is the ground and first in order before all the rest) is, that the
person be right. The prayer of the righteous prevails much, James 5. 16. James
5, 16


The ground of it is this, A man must first have Christ, before he can have any
thing else, be has given us all things else with Christ. if (...) have all
things else, if we have not him, it is nothing. All the promises, you know, are
Yea, (...) Amen, but it is in him; so that we must (...) have him. And
besides, the general Covenant must go before the particular: for the ground
o^ all prayer i^this, or that particular promise, but you, (...) fir^ be (...)
the Covenant, you (...) have the general Covenant belonging to you, before you
can have the particular branches or it; and therfoe a man must be within the
Covenant, his person must be first righteous, and be (...), and therefore
(...), in this (...), to think thus with himself, he hopes his heart is
sincere, and his prayer is right, and his ends are good: for, though all this
were true, yet if his person be not right, God regards it not. You know, Simile.
the blood of a sheep, and the blood of a swine, they are both alike, it may
be; the blood of the swine is better then the other; yet the blood of the swine
was not to be offered, because it was the blood of a swine. So, in this case,
the prayer of an unregenerate man may be as well framed, for the petitions, for
every thing that is required immediately to a prayer, but the heart, from
whence it comes, the person, from whence it proceeds, that is it that makes the
difference, and therefore that must be observed. See the person be right. And
therefore you shall find Psalm 4. 3. David makes that the ground, why his
prayer should be heard, Psalm, 4, 3
says he, be ye sure that God has chosen for himself the godly man. And
when I call upon him, I shall be heard: for that is the ground that he takes
to himself, that he shall be heard, that God has chosen to himself, the
godly man. As if he should say, I am of the number; and therefore, you that are
my enemies, and think to prevail against me, I fear you not: for I pray to a
God that will d^nd me, I am a godly man, and, upon that ground I believe that
my prayer is heard: beloved, otherwise, though we pray, and pray hard, yet out
^anes c^y louder, then our prayers, they ^y down (...)* prayers, they make a
greater noise then the (...): that the noise that our (...) make is like ant
noise of a Thunder, when the noise of our prayers is but like the cr^ckling of
thorns, that it cannot be heard for the noise that sin makes in the ears of
the Lord. Thus it is, in this case, when we come before God in our sins, when
a man comes into his presence, in his vnregeneracie.

But this is not all, be likewise, a man that is within the Convenant, may
have a particular sin, (as you heard heretofore) that may intercept his
prayers, and that may hinder the blessing So that, that sin must be removed
before his prayers can be heard. It is true, the son abides in the house for
ever, but yet the son may commit such (...) offense, that his father may use
him as a servant, he may deny his requests, and refuse them, when he comes to
seeks any thing at his hands. And therefore, there must be a particular
reconciliation, a particular repentance, that sin must be removed, and done
away, that stands in the way. And therefore, this Method the Saints have kept
in calling upon God: See in Denel, and Ear, all of them. for the most part,
when they make any complete prayer, we see, still they begin with humil^tion,
and confession of sins. And the reason of it is, that their persons might be
clear, and innocent, that those (...) might be removed, which would st^d in
their way, and likewise, that is a ground of that in the (...) Tim. (...), 8.
says the Apostle there, I will, the pr^ers b^ (...) Tim. (...). 8.
made in all places, that you life up p^ (...) without (...) and (...): The
meaning i^ this, not only, that a man be within the Co^, b^ that he be cleansed
from all particular sins, that might cleave to him, and hang upon him. As,
for example, when thou would be accepted of God, if there be any particular
sin hang on thee, that musty be removed by renewing thy repentance, and besides
that, see what the Scripture takes notice of, when a man comes to pray, his
heart must be cleansed from pride, (for God resists the proud) his heart must
be brought to an humble disposition; likewise it must be cleansed from wrath,
he must list up pure hands without wrath; this is often required. Matthew. 5.
Leave thine offering, Mat: 5. 23. 24
and go and make peace with thy brother. So likewise from unthankfulness; our
prayers are not accepted, except we be thankful for mercies received. The like
we may say of every particular case: we must be careful to cleanse our
selves from all sinful lusts, and corrupt affections, that they have not
dominion in our hearts; but that we lift up pure hearts, and innocent hands,
and that is the first thing that is required; that the person be right, that
is, not only that he be within the Covenant, but likewise that those
particular sins be removed, that may be an impediment to his prayers.

The second thing required is faith; List up 2 Requisite or condition is faith
James 1. 5, 6
pure hands without wrath and doubting. You know that in James, Let him ask of
God, let him ask in faith and waver not. So that, though prayer be Simile.
the key to open Gods treasures, yet faith is the hand, that turns the key,
without which it will do no good.

Now the Lord requires faith; partly, for his Why the Lord requires faith in
prayer.
own sake, he would not otherwise be acknow ledged, if you did not trust him,
when you come to seek him, if you did not rest upon him. Besides, 1
he should loose his glory: for in this we glorify him, when we trust him,
and we dishonor him, when we distrust him; when we come, and seek to him,
and do not rest upon him, we dishonor him.

Besides in regard of us he requires says, and will not hear us without it;
because, as it is, 2
James 1. 6. in the same place, where faith is required, James 1: 6.
there is good reason why it is required; for, says the Apostle there, he
that believes not, or be that wavers, he is like the wave of the Sea: that is,
sometimes in his prayer, he is very earnest as a wave that swells high,
sometimes again, he will be nothing at all; yea, says the Apostle, he is not
only uneven in the business in prayer, sometimes earnest and forward, and
sometimes giving over again, off and on, but such a man is unstable in all his
ways; for he that trusts in God, will be careful, not only in prayer, but to
keep all his ways right, but he that trusts him not, wavers in every thing;
he is (it may be) diligent in prayer, he will look to his ways for a time,
but he rests not upon God, he rests upon other things; He is like a wave, he is
not constant, and therefore faith is required Now, when I say, faith is
required, know this, that there is a double faith required in our prayers to
God. Atwofold faith required in our prayers.


The one is a faith in the providence of God, the other is a faith in his
promise.

First, I say, faith in the providence, which is a thing of much moment, and we
are apt to forget it. We see it clearly, Psalm. 146. Blessed is he that trusts
in the God of Jacob, etc. who made heaven, and Psalm: 146. 5. 6.
earth, and the sea, who keeps Covenant, and mercy for ever; you see faith
there required in the providence, he made heaven and earth, and the Sea, is he
such a God, who is able to bring any thing to pass; for he made heaven, and
earth; and is he not able to do any thing besides?

Secondly, there must be a faith in the promises, as is expressed in the other
words, he keeps Covenant for ever. So likewise, to express the defect of
it: You see when Martha, and Marie came to Christ to raise Lazirus, they
believed he was ready enough to do it, (there was faith in his willingness)
but they wanted faith in his providence: for Martha comes to him, and tells him,
Lord says she, he has been in the grave four days; as if she had said,
surely now it cannot be done, if thou had come sooner, it might have been
brought to pass; so she believed him to be willing, but there wanted faith in
the providence.

Again, as here faith in the providence was wanting, so, we see, in the leper,
there was faith in the providence, (it may be, the other was wanting, but that
is not expressed, it is more probable he had both) Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me whole. Here was an evidence of faith in the providence, he
acknowledges his power, if thou will, thou caust make me whole; but because
Christ did answer him, it is likely he had faith in the promise too; So, I
say, there must be a faith, first, in the providence; secondly, there must be a
faith also in the promise of God: you have ground enough for that, you have his
sure word for it, he has said, ask and ye shall have, seek and you shall
find, knock, and it shall be opened to you; and whatsoever you ask, if it be
according M^t: 7. 7
to his will, is shall be done to you So that is the thing we are chiefliy to
look unto, to consider this faith in Gods promise; for men are ready to say, I
doubt not but God is able, but all the question is, whether he be willing or
no: And therefore, if we will have our prayers strong, and prevalent, we must
be careful to strengthen our faith in his promise: for, as that is strong, so
our prayers do more prevail with God. It is a matter of much moment, and
therefore we will show briefly how your faith may be strengthened, and
likewise how you may know it.

First, you shall strengthen your faith, if you consider the nature of God.
Beloved, this is a How says may be strengthened in prayer. From Gods
Attributes. Which are of two sorts 1 Absolute:
great cause why we believe not the promise of God, and his readiness to
help us in difficult cases; because we are ignorant of the nature of God, of
the Attributes of God, or, at least, we do not consider them. For example,
(that I may open it to you a little, and show you the way of making use of the
Attributes of God, in calling upon him, and strengthening our faith from them)
consider, first, the Justice of God, (I will give you examples, how the Saints
have still strengthened their faith from Gods Attributes) David used this
Argument, Lord, thou art Just, I am Innocent; when 1 Justice:
he tells God of his Justice, and withal expresses his own innocence, it
is a strong Argument. David, you see, uses it often, (I need not to name
particulars. Lord reward me according to mine Innocence, etc.) thou know I
am righteous, and mine enemies have done me thus, and thus much wrong, and
thou art Just: God cannot deny this; for it is a strong argument, that is
taken from such an attribute.

So again, the goodness of God; Lord thou art 2 May
full of mercy; on the other side, I am full of misery: and when these are
put together, it is a great means to strengthen our faith. And therefore, we
see, David often expresses his own calamity, his disease, how he was
oppressed by enemies, and slandered, etc. and Gods mercy, that is the ground
of it, God is full of compassion; as if he should say, thou art full of
goodness, and I am in calamity, and misery, at this time, and that was an
argument whereby he strengthened his faith.

So again, another Attribute of God is, his 3 Glory
glory; when we make the Argument thus, Lord, thou hah an eye to thy glory,
and I aim at thy glory: In such a request, it is a strong prevailing argument
with him. You know, Moses prevailed with him, when he sought the saving of the
whole people of Israel, Lord, says he, thy name will be polluted, what will
the Heathen say? and since I aim at thy glory in it, deny me not. And likewise
Ezekias, and David, they use the same Argu^nt to God, shall the ^st praise
thee? shall any glory be given thee in the grave* shall we be able to do any
thing for thy honor, when we are dead? So that the Arguments that are taken
from Gods glory, and our aim at his glory, is another means to strengthen
our faith.

Moreover, the power of God, that is another Attribute, whereby we may
conceive the same 4. Power.
Argument, as before, when we go to God, and express our weakness, and his
power; Lord, we are weak, we are able to do nothing, Lord, thou art almighty,
thou made heaven and earth, it is (...) strong argument to prevail with him.
So, we see, Asa prevailed with God, 2 Cron. 14. Oh Lord, 2 Chronicles: 14. 11
says he, it is all one with thee to help with many or few, and we rest upon
thee: as if he should say, we are exceeding few, we are exceeding weak, we
are able to do nothing, but thou art able to do it, with a few, as well as
with a great multitude: there he puts them together. And the like we have of
Iehosaph^t, Lord, we have no strength, to 2 Chronicles. 10. 12
stand before our enemies, but our eyes are to thee. As if he should say, thou
have strength, and power enough, thou art able to do it, though we are unable.
This is another Argument taken from the power of God.

Again, the vnchangeable^esse of God. When 5. Vnchangeable^esse.
one comes to the Lord, and shall say to him, Lord, thou have done thus, and
thus in former times for thy servants, Lord, thou have done thus, and t^ for
me, in another case; and thou art unchangeable, thou art the same ^od: this i^
a great means to strengthen our faith: as, you know, it is in your Law suits;
when you have a president, it adds strength to the cause, and when we have
presidents for this, it will add strength to us, and that strength is taken
from Gods unchangeableness: if we put them together, Lord, thou art
unchangeable, Lord, thou have done it to other men, in the like case, thou have
done it to me also in the like case, it is a strong argument, and an argument,
that David uses: You see ho^ he is stayed by it, Psalm. 22. 4. Lord, our
fathers trusted in thee, an^ were delivered, they Psalm. 22. 4.
trust^d in thee, and were not confounded. As if he should say, Lord, thou art
unchangeable, thou heardest them in the same case, when they trusted in thee;
now, it is my case, and therefore I beseech thee to help me in my distress.

Again, the faithfulness of God, the fidelity of 6. Faithfulness
God, that is another of his attributes: and when we make our argument thus,
Lord, thou art faithful, and I trust in thee, it is a strong argument, you
know, it is an argument that prevails much with men. A man is ready to say,
he trusts me, I must not deceive him: Now the Lord keeps Covenant, and mercy
for ever. When we come, and use this to him, Lord, thou art faithful, thou
have said, thou will keep Covenant, and mercy for ever, thou can not do
otherwise, it is thy nature, thou can not deny thy self, and I rest on thee,
I depend on thee, in such a case, it cannot be, that the Lord should fail us;
I^ a man will not fail one that trusts in him, certainly the Lord will not,
and that is an argument that is used often, thou never failest them that trust
thee.

Then, besides the absolute attributes of God, consider his relative
attributes: he is a father, and a Master: it is a strong argument, that is
taken from these. If we go to the Lord, and say, Lord, thou art a father, thou
art a Master, thou art a husband, whither should the children go, but to their
father? whither should the wife go, but to their father? whither should the
wife go, but to her husband? whither should the servants go, but to their
Master, to their Lord? Lord, thou have commanded us to provide for our own,
and he is worse then an Infidel that provides not for his own. Lord, we
belong to thee, we are thine. We see, David uses this Argument, that God has
made him. You have it often in the Psalms, that God has made him, not only his
Creature, but had made him again, he was his servant, I am thy Servant, he
often uses this Relative, that God was his God, and that he was Gods servant,
one that did belong to him, and that did depend upon him. And surely (my
Beloved) dependence, and seeking to God, is a great means to win him to us.
When we see an other depend upon us, one that is our^, that is an effectual
motive with men: the same is as prevalent with God, and therefore may
strengthen our faith. Now, when I say these Arguments prevail with God, the
meaning is indeed, that they prevail with us, they strengthen our faith, they
enable us to believe, that God is ready to help us, and, when we believe it,
and trust upon him, then indeed God is ready to second it; because, then we
are prepared, weo can then put up our desires in the prayer of faith;
otherwise, they are put up with doubting, and that makes them unacceptable to
God, and ineffectual. And now, as I have showed you the way, so likewise, in a
word, we will show you, when we How we may know that we pray in faith.
do pray in faith, (for, that is a thing that is very useful) you shall know
it by this (for I add that, because I see the Scripture requires it, as such a
maine condition, without which a man cannot be accepted, be it done to thee
according to thy faith, it is every where inculcated) you shall know it by the
quietness of your mind, and your security. When a man calls upon God, and
his mind is quiet in it, it is a sign that he believes, and trusts in him,
it is a prayer of faith. (...), you know, in that case, she looked no more sad,
because she trusted in God; she believed the thing should be done: and
therefore, if you find solicitude, and perplexity in your minds, it is a
sign that your prayers want so much faith; for if you did rest upon God, you
would be quiet, and secure in him.

Secondly, if you do believe, you will continue 2
in prayer. You know, it was an argument of the faith of the woman of Canaan,
that she continued, that she would take no denial; though the Lord denied her,
and put her off, yet she held out: and what was the reason of it? because she
believed that he was the son of David, that he was merciful, and that he
would hear in the end. So that continuance in prayer, is an argument we do
believe the Lord. As a man that believes, that such a man is within the house
whom Simile.
he desires to speak with, he is content to wait long. Or one, that has a
suite, and he knows that he shall have an end of it, at this time, he will
never give over: So it is in this case, if we believe, we will be content to
wait, ^e that believes, will (...) make ^ste; because he trusts in God, and
depends upon him.

Likewise, an argument of faith is a diligent use of those means, that God
has prescribed, and 3
no other. And so, we have showed you, two things, that are required in
prayer: That the person must be righteous, and within the Covenant; Secondly,
faith is required, and likewise, how this faith is wrought, both in his
providence, and in his promises, and likewise how we shall know, whether our
prayers, be the prayers of faith, or no.

FINIS
THE FIFTH SERMON.
1. TH^S. 5. 17. Pray continually.
THE next condition required in 3. Condition required in prayer is fervencie.
James 5. 16.
prayer is feruency; you know the place, the prayer of the righteous prevails
much, if it be fervent. The Lord requires this qualification in prayer;
because it puts the heart into a holy, and spiritual disposition: for it is
not simply the making of the request, that God looks for at our hands, but
such a working upon our hearts by prayer, such a bringing of them to a good
frame of grace, by that duty, that thereby we are more fitted to receive the
mercy, that before we were not. When a man is servent in prayer, it sets all
the wheels of the soul the right way, it puts the heart into a holy, and
spiritual disposition, and temper; so that the Lord sees it now fit to bestow
mercy upon such a man that before was unfit, by reason of his untowardness,
and stubbornness of heart, by reason of that unclean and unholy disposition,
that he saw in him. And therefore he will have prayer servent, not so much,
because the very fervencie of prayer it self i^ ^espected, but because, by
virtue of tha^ fe^vencie, the (...) is made better: when a man comes to God
with a request, like the request of the patient to the physician; it may be the
physician denies long, when the patient a ^es Simile.
things that are pleasant, and agreeable to him; not because he is unwilling to
giu^ them, but because his body must be brought into another temper; he must
take a vomi^, o^ a purge, that perhaps is grievous to him, but this must be
done before he be fit to receive such cordialls: so the Lord does with his
servants, though be be willing to bestow such mercies on them, yet, because
they are not fitted, he (...) continuance in prayer, and fervencie in it.
Therefore, we say, in prayer all the graces of Gods spirit are set on work^,
and the more servent the prayer is, the more they are intended, the more they
are acted, the more they are increased, and therefore the Lord is moved by this
fervencie, to bestow a mercy on us, that otherwise he would not do. But,
now, all the question i^ what thi^ fervency is? Object.


You shall find it usually expressed in the Scriptures Answ. When a man is said
to be ser vent.
by such metaphor^ as these, crying to the Lord, wrestling with the Lord,
striving with him, and giving him no rest, wherein these two things are to be
marked.

First, a man is said then to be servent, when 1
he puts all his strength to prayer, when he is very earnest, and importunate
with the Lord, when he strives, and contends with him, though he find many
difficulties, and impediments, yet he breaks through all, this is to be
fervent in prayer, to be Importunate with the Lord. For example, when a man
comes to pray, and finds many discouragements, and finds himself guilty of
many sins, and finds little holiness, he has but feeble faith to his own
sense, he finds much deadness of spirit, yet he continues instant
notwithstanding, and when likewise he does, not only find these impediments
in himself, but he finds the Lord exceeding backward to the thing, either
giving no answer, turning the deaf ear to him, or, it may be, giving a
contrary answer, as to the woman of Canaan.

As for example, when a man comes to pray for Mat: (...).
health, it may be, his sickness increases upon him more: when he praye^ to
overcome such a lust or temptation, it may be, it is doubled upon him; when
he prays for such a deliverance, it may be, the oppression grows more, and
more, as it was upon the Israelites, when they sought for deliverance, the
oppression grew greater: now to hold out, notwithstanding this, and to
continue in prayer, and to (...) God i^ it, though ^e see^e backward to the
request, this is to be fervent in prayer.

Secondly, fervencie is, not only loud praying, but continual knocking, when
a men is not only 2
importu^e with the Lord, but ^ee continues long, he will not give over, till
he have got the ble^ing. You know, (...) fervency w^ seen in that, that he
(...) all night, he wrestled (...) the Lord. What was the reason that he
wrestled? Gen: (...).
he would not let him go, till he had got the blessing, till he had obtained
the thing he sought for. So, I say, this earnestness, and continuance in
prayer, the breaking through all difficulties, this is to wrestle with the
Lord: for all wrestling, and striving, you know, supposes some opposition on
the other part. Indeed, if there were no opposition, it were a small thing;
but, I say, when the Lord is most backward, when the thing is most improbable,
when there is much difficulty, that you know not how it should be brought to
pass, yet you continue (...), and give the Lord no rest, you will not give
over, this i^ fervency in prayer, and this i^ a condition that the Lord
requires. Only these two (...) must be remembered, that we mistake not this
fervencie. Cautio^ about fervency.


First, remember, fervencie, if it be right, it must be a fruit of faith: for
there is a fervencie, 1 That it be a fruit of faith.
that co^es not from faith, but from a (...) fear of (...), when a (...) i^
indeed (...) ^wine Simile.
that is pin^ed, which, you know, will cry exceeding loud, not because it
looks for help, but because it is pinched: so any creature, or man naturally
will use importunity, when he wants any thing, he will be earnest in his
requests; such fervencie the Lord regards not, because there is no more but a
mere expression of natural desires, there is no holiness in it, there is no
fire of the spirit, but, when this is added to it, that there is, not only a
sense of the thing we want, but also a hope of mercy, a ground to believe that
I shall have the thing granted, and, out of this ground, I am earnest and
importunate; now earnestness is a fruit of faith. When Jesus Christ lived upon
earth, when men came and cried earnestly unto him, and were exceeding
importunate, some to be healed of their diseases, some to have devils cast out,
etc. we see, his answer was still to them, be it to thee, (how?) not according
to their importunity, and fervencie, but according to their faith: as if he
should say, I heed not, I regard not all this clamor, and earnestness, if
they be only expressions of such wants, if they be only in the sense of such
need, and no more; but if they proceed from faith, and that faith set you a
work to call upon me, Be it unto the according to that. For indeed, these
two things make up fervencie in prayer, sense of need, and hope of mercy,
when a man has faith, and hope to increase his fervency; and it arises from
that ground, as well as out of the other, (not that I exclude the other, for it
is a very great help, and that which puts sticks on the fire, as it were, to
make our fervencie the more) I say from sense of our need, when we consider
seriously what want we have, and then add this hope, and faith, when these two
shall set you a work, this fervencie is a fruit of faith. This is one caution
that must be remembered.

Another caution is this, that your fervencie 2 Caution. That it be mingled
with sincerity.
be joined with sincerity; for a man may be fervent to obt^ine such, and such
blessings, as he may beg at ^ds hand, very earnestly, he may as^e credit, he
may ask to have guidance in such a business, he may ask wisdom to bring
such an enterprise to pass, he may ask health, and continuance of life, but
to what end? if it be that he may bestow it upon his lusts, if it be that he
may live more deliciously, that he may be some body more in the world, that he
may have outward conveniences, such as his flesh desires, if this be all, here
this fervencie is ^ot regarded: not, that these things are excluded, for the
Lord gives us leave to seek out own comforts, and Note.
you may be earne^, and (...), even for the comfort it self, but yet all
these, if they be not capable of a further use, if that be not intended, but
the abuse of them, and an intent to use the^ another way, the Lord (...), it is
no tr^e fervency: and therefore (...). 12. 1^. Romans 12. ^1.
it is the exhortation of the Apo^e, be fer^ i^ spirit serving the Lord: when
we many (...) i^ may be, are fervent in spirit ^ving our sel^ we (...) such and
(...) of ends of our own, as, when a man desires able gifts, high gifts, to
get glory, and to get wealth to himself, and not to serve his master, this is
to ask the talent, not for the masters use, but for his own use: do you
think the Lord will hear such prayers? can you expect it at his hands? You
shall see t^ contrary disposition in the Saints; when they were earnest with
the Lord for any thing, sti^l they express that to him, and say, Lord, we
desire not thi^ for our selves, but for thy glory, that we may use it, for
some good purpose, etc. David, when he was earnest for life, when he was in
sickness, and doubted of his recoverie, what argument does he use? Lord, says
he, shall thou have glory from the grave? As if he should say, if thou give me
life, I will give it thee again, I will improve it, and husband it, to thy
advantage, and not to mine own. And so Hannah, when she was earnest for a
son, she makes this promise to the Lord, that he shall be for him, and his
advantage; she would dedicate him to his use, and consecrate him to his
service. So Jacob, when he was earnest with the Lord to give him meat,
drink, and clothes, etc. Lord, says he, if thou do, I will give the tenth
part to thee again. I say, when the heart is thus disposed, in our fervencie,
in our importunity, when we ask any thing at the Lords hands, that our
conscience tells us within, that if we had it, we would bestow it upon the
Lord, we would not abuse it, we would not spend it on our lusts, it should not
be to serve our selves, but to serve the Lord withal; then our (...) is
rightly ordered.

The next condition required, is humility, as 4. Condition required in prayer
is humility. lames 4. 2 Chronicles: 7. 14.
lames 4. The Lord gives grace to the humble: and 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people
humble themselves, and call upon my name, then will I hear in heaven, and
grant their requests. And throughout the Scriptures, you see, that, that is a
condition that the Lord puts in every where: he has respect to the low
estate, Is^ 66. 2. says the Lord, all these things Isa 66. 2.
have my hands made, looking upon all the creatures, the whole frame of them,
they are al good, and I have respect unto them, but, says he, I regard not all
these in comparison of an humble heart, to him will I look, that is of an
humble, and contritespirit; when the Lord looks upon our prayers, if they come
not from a broken heart, they want that condition, that he looks for: for he
gives grace to the humble; because such a man is Reasons why humility is
required in prayer.
little in his own eyes, and fit to be exalted, fit to receive a mercy at
Gods hands.

You know, it is a rule, that the Lord keeps for those that are humble and
low, such he exalts; 1
those that exalt themselves he puts down. Now when a man is little in his
own eyes, that parvity, that sense of his own unworthiness is a prevailing
argument with him; and therefore Genesis 32. Jacob uses that argument, when he
comes to put up that petition, to be delivered Genesis 32. 10.
from Esa^: Lord, I am less then all thy merties* that is, take any of thy
mercies, and put them in one end of the balance, and p^t me in the other, and
I am less then it, and (...) then it, taken the worth that is in me, it is not
heavy enough for the least mercio. Now, when he was thus humbled, and little,
and vile in his own eyes, the Lord bestowed that mercy on him, he was now
fit to receive it. For, David, when the Lord sends him word by Natha^, that he
would build him a house for ever, (you see how he expressed 1 Sa^ 7.
himself) he went into the house of the Lord, and sat before him, and said,
Lord, what am I, and what is my fathers house? As if he should say, I was taken
out of the dust, I was one of the meanest men of Israel, and a man of no
account, of no worth, and yet thou have had respect unto ^e, thus far, not
only to make me King over thy people, but to build my Kingdom, and my house,
to make me a constant house for ever. I say, this sense of our own
unworthiness, it makes us more fit to receive the mercy, to be exalted by
receiving such a request, as we put up to the Lord, and therefore he regards
the prayer of the humble.

Moreover, God gives grace to the humble, that is, 2
he shows favor to them, when they come and ask any thing at his hands,
because an humble man will be ready to do whatsoever he will: it is an
expression used of David, in Acts 2. 22. he Acts 2. 22.
will do whatsoever I will: that may be said of every humble man, he is
exceeding pliable to the Lords will, he is ready to do whatsoever he knows
to be his pleasure, he resists him in nothing. Now, when a man will do
whatsoever God will, the Lord will be ready to do whatsoever be will, he will
be ready to say to him, as he did to the (...), Oh woman, be it to thee as
Mat. 22.
thou wills. When a man, on the other side, refists the Lord, (as every proud
man does says the text) the Lord resists him the Lord resists the proud and
gives grace to the humble. A refisting spirit causes the Lord to resist our
prayers, and therefore it is, that the Lord is ready to the humble man, because
he yields to the Lord in all things, and when a man yields to the Lord, (take
that for a rule) in obeying Goas commandments, God Note.
will yield to vsin granting our petitions.

Besides, when the heart is humbled, and broken, and contrite, it is an
acceptable sacrifice to 3
the Lord, which winnes it at his hands: he smells a sweet savor from such a
sacrifice above all other; yea it is that which sets a high price upon every
sacrifice, that we offer; the best prayers, the best works, that proceed not
from an humble heart, he regards them not: as Psalm. 51. Lord, says he, if
(...) sacrifice, then will not regard it, Psalm. 51.
but the sacrifices of a contrite, and humble spirit, those thou regardest, and
those sactifices that proceed from it; when we come to make a petition to the
Lord, (it was the manner in the old law not to come empty handed) a proud
person comes empty-handed, but an humble person comes with a sacrifice, and the
best sacrifice; because he facrificeth himself, and his own will, that is, he
empties himself of himself, he opens a d^re to the Lord (...) come, and dwell
in him, when a proud man (...) him out, such a sacrifice the Lord is well
pleased with, and such a sacrifice speaks for one, it makes way for his
requests, and therefore the Lord hearkens to it.

Lastly, the Lord is ready to hear those that 4.
are humble; because, whatsoever they receive, they take it as of grace, and
not as debt: whereas a proud man, a man that has a good conceit of himself, a
man that is list up in his own opinion, thinks it to be due, he thinks there
is some correspondence between his works, and the wages. You know what is said
of the Pharise, that the publican went away instified, rather then he. Why Luke
18.
so? Because the Publican thought himself worthy of nothing. And therefore
Ezekiel. 36. 31. when Ezck. 36. 31.
the Lord promises those great mercies to his people, he requires this
condition of them, that they should acknowledge themselves worthy to be
destroyed. When a man has a sense of his own unworthiness, and so comes to
the Lord, and asks it as of mere grace and mercy; that is a great motive to
prevail with him: for he is very careful of that; you know, in Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
how Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
wary the Lord was in giving this rule to them; take beede when thou come
into that good land, think not to say with thy self, the Lord has done this
for my own righteousness: no, says he, I have not done it for that, but for
my Covenant which I made with Abraham, Isaac, and laceh, that is, for my own
names sake, for my mercies sake, for the covenant, that I confirmed with them,
that is the covenant in Jesus Christ, therefore I have done it, and not for
your own righteousness. So you see, that this is a condition the Lord will have
observed in our calling upon him, that our hearts be humbled, that a man be
little, and vile in his own eyes, that he come with a broken, and contrite
heart, pliable to him in all things, ready to obey him; when the heart is so
disposed, he gives grace, that is, he shows favor, he is ready to grant our
requests.

The next condition, required in prayer, is that we sanctify the Lord in our
hearts. You know, 5. Condition required in prayer, is, to sanctify the Lord in
our hearts.
when Nadab, and Abih^ drew near unto him with a common fire, (when they
should have brought such fire as came from heaven, holy fire) the Lord
destroyed them, and he gives this reason; for I will be sanctified (...) that
draw ^eere to me. When we come to call upon the Lord, we know, then we come
near to him, and in such dra^ing near, (...) must sanctify him in our
^earts, that is, we must conceive him ^o be, as he is, most holy: now, if the
Lord be mo^ holy, if he that is unclean and impure, and unholy shall come
near him, he sanctif not the Lord God, (that is) he comes not to him as to a
mo^ holy God, but he looks upon him, (...) if he were a common person; and
therefore whenever they came to offer a sacrifice, in the old law, they were
first purified; if any man were ^cleane, and should off^ a sacrifice, he was to
be cut off from his people. Therefore, to sanctify the Lord in our hear^, is
to come with holy hearts, as in the first of T^. 2. 8. i^ is the charge that
the Apo^ 1 Timothy 2. (...).
gives the^, (...) p^re (...) w^ (...) or doubting; lift up pure hearts, and
innocent hands, without wrath, or doubting.

You will say unto me what is this holiness? Quest.


Beloved, it is nothing but a sequestring, or seperating Answ. Holiness what.
of any thing from a common use, and appropriating it to God alone, that is
holiness. You know, whatsoever was holy to the Lord, in the Temple, or
otherwise, whether it were holy vessels, or holy men, as the Priests, it was
separated from all other uses, and made particular to him, and to his service.
Now, the heart of a man is holy then, when it is withdrawn from all things
else, and particular to the Lord alone. As a chaste wife is to her husband,
whose affections are Simile.
bestowed upon him, and no other person else; so when the heart is to the Lord
alone, when all the affections are intent upon him, and bestowed upon him, and
upon none else, this is to have the heart holy to him. So that, now he that
will have an eye upon credit, upon vain glory, upon wealth, upon his lusts,
upon any thing besides the Lord, that the heart is wedded to it, that he
bestows any part of that conjugal affection upon it, that should be wholly
the Lords, this man is an unholy man, his heart is not holy: ^or it is not
sequestered from other things, and consecrated to him alone: for that is to be
holy.

And as the heart must be holy, so must the prayer be holy. When a man prays
to the Lord with respect unto him, and has an eye upon him, and nothing else
comes in to take away part of this prayer; if by respect, and worldly, and
carnal thoughts come in, and set you on work to pray, now, these have a
portion, and interest in your prayers, they make your prayers pro^e, and
common, they are not peculiar to the Lord, they are unholy. So that is the
holiness then, in seeking the Lord, when we are knit, and wedded to him, when
one takes this resolution to him self, I am the Lords servant, and him will I
serve, I am not the servant of man, nor of any creature, I am married to the
Lord, and his, will I be alone, I will withdraw my heart from all things else.
So likewise when a man prays, so that his soul is intent upon the Lord, and
upon nothing besides, when the whole stream of his affections are carried to
him, this is to seek to him i^ holiness, this is to sanctify the Lord in our
hearts.

And lastly, if there be any conscience of (...), (that phrase I find used in
Heb. 10) that is, if Heb. 10.
there be an evil conscience, if a man be conscious to himself, of any sin,
that is unrepented of, such a man cannot pray, that makes him unholy; if there
be any sinful lust yet living in him, that is, unmortified in him, which is
not washed away, such a man is unholy: yea, my Beloved, the Saints themselves,
when they sin against God, as you heard heretofore, they are suspended from the
covenant: though they be within the covenant, yet they are suspended from
receiving the benefit by it, that otherwise they might have: till that sin be
washed away, they are not holy. A priest, or one that was holy, if he touched
any unclean thing, he remained unholy, till he was washed, though otherwise he
were holy habitualy, wholy dedicated to Gods service; so it may be with those,
that are within the covenant, though thou be a holy ^an, yet, if thou touch
pitch, that is, if thy heart be polluted with any sin, of one kind or other,
as long as that remains, thou art unholy. If thou come now, and seek to the
Lord, you know wha^ the judgment was in the old law, such a one was to be cut
off from his people. And therefore, you shall find, this was the constant
practice of the Saints; when they sought the Lord for any special mercy, they
began with taking pains with their own hearts, with humbling themselves for
their own sins, and the sins of the people: as, we know, Daniel, and Ezra,
and Davia, in their prayers, (I need not stand to give you instances) and
indeed so should we always, when we come with any request, and petition to the
Lord.

First, let a man examine his heart and his life diligently, look back to all
his former ways, consider, and go through all the particulars; see if there
be any thing amiss, if there be any tincture of uncleanness yet lying upon
him, that is not yet washed away, if there be any pollution, any defilement of
flesh, or spirit, and let him know that it is but labor lost, it is but a
provoking of the Lord, to come as a man unprepared, to draw near to him,
except he be cleansed.

But you will say, how shall we be cleansed?

I answer, you are cleansed by renewing your Ans. 2. Means of clensing a man's
self.
repentance, and sprinkling the blood of Christ: when a man humbles himself
for his sin, and enters into covenant with God, not to return unto it, when
he makes his heart perfect, and 1
sincere with the Lord in that particular.

And secondly, when he shall w^thall believe, that it i^ forgiven through
Christ, when he is 2
sprinkled in his blood to wash ^t away* though thy sin be great, yet this
will make thee pure, now thou art washed, as it is in the 1 Cor. 6. 9. 1 Cor.
6. 9.
Now you are washed, now you are sanctified, now you are justified: therefore
let a man not be d^scouraged in this case: for, I confess, there is nothing
that gives such a check to our prayers, that gives so many stabb^o them (as it
were) that hinders us in that duty, as the conscience of sin, when a man
remembers such, and such a sin he has committed: yet be not discouraged; for
the blood of Jesus Christ is able to wash them away. Though a man's face be very
foul, yet, you know, a basen of clear water will wash it clean, and all the
filth is gone: now the blood of Christ is more effectual to rench thy
conscience, and to purge it from dead works, to take away, both the guilt of
sin, and likewise the power, and stain of it. And therefore, if thou have
any sin, labor to be washed from that, that then thou may come to the
Lord, having thy heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and thy body washed
in pure water, as it is Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near, says the Apostle, Heb.
10. 22.
in assurance of faith: but how? having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience: as if he should say, otherwise your drawing near will be to no
purpose, you shall but provoke the Lord in dravving near, except you be thus
sprinkled, and thus washed, and thus purified.

I, but you will say to me, if this be required, Object.
who shall be heard in his prayers? for who can say his heart is pure, and his
hands are innocent? and if this be required, that we must lift up holy, and
pure hearts, or else we shall not be accepted; what comfort shall we have in
calling upon the Lord, at any time?

To this I answer, that to have a pure heart, Ans What is i^ to have a pure
heart.
is not to be free from sin, and from da^y failings, (for so indeed none should
have a pure heart) but pureness of heart, holiness of heart is, to have our
hearts sprinkled from ^n evil conscience, and to have our bo^tes wash^d with
pure water, that is, to be purified before the Lord, is nothing else, but to
have such an habitual disposition, which makes a man ready to wash himself
still, though he be still spotted with sin. So that this is, the disposition
of a holy man, if a man that draws near to the Lord with a pure heart; though
he be still spotted, and polluted, and defiled, yet he has an habitual
disposition, he has a principle within, he has a new nature within, that is
still working out that impurity, and washing it away; though still he he^e
opposed, and assaulted, and tempted, and sometimes foiled, yet still he
resists it, and fights against it; as the Israelites had a charge never to make
peace with Amalek; such a disposition is in such a man, he never makes peace
with any sin; though he be led captive sometimes by it, yet he yields not to
that captivity. This is to have a pure heart, though his heart be defiled
sometimes, as a vessel will be foul, yet he washes, and renseth his heart,
he never suffers it to continue muddy, and unclean, and in a filthy
disposition, but he has a fountain, a spring of grace within, that will work
out all impurity, as a spring works out mudde: he that thus purifies himself
still, though the fountain be muddy, though there be many iniections, many
temptations, many lusts, and sins, yet, if he be purified himself, that he
will suffer no sin to mingle with his heart (as it were) to rest there, and
to abide, and dwell there, to lie, and continue there, such a man has a pure
heart. We say that is pure, that is full of it self, and will have no
heterogenea, no other thing mingled with it, such a thing is pure, as pure oil
is nothing else but oil. Now he that has a pure heart, is not he that has
simply nothing else, that has no sin mingled, that has no dross mingled
with his wine, but he that suffers it not to rest there; but as oil and
water, when you iumble them together, (as you Simile.
know, when they are shaken together, they mingle) yet the oil works out, and
puifies it self, it will not suffer it self to abide with the water: a man,
that is regenerate, a man that is borne of God, has a seed remaining in him,
though he do sin, yet, says the Apostle, he cannot sin, that is, he does not
agree, he does not mingle with that sin, it has no rest in his heart, but
he works it out, in a passion; when he is shaken (as it were) when he is
transported, when he is not himself, there may be a mixture, and the
fountain, and the spring may be made muddy, yet let him come to himself,
still he works it out; that is to have a pure heart. So that a man thus
affected may come with boldness to the throne of grace, and not be
discouraged; what though thy sins be many, and very great, and often
repeated? yet, if thou find in thy self such a disposition of pureness, and
holiness, still to cleanse thy self, though thou be still polluted and
defiled, I can assure thee, thy heart is pure, thou may go with confidence to
the throne of grace.

But now you will say this to me, (that may be Object.
objected) why? but may not any carnal man say as much, he sins against
God, and comes and asks mercy, he comes, and cries for forgiveness, and says,
he will sin no more; and yet he sins again the next day, and adds
drunkenness to thirst; that is, his sin and his repentance, they run in a
circle, as drunkenness, and thirst? how shall we distinguish then between
these two, that purifying disposition in the Saints, and those vanishing
purposes, that carnal men may have, that never had experience of the work of
grace, of that purity of heart, that we speak of.

To this I answer briefly, you shall know the Answ.
difference by this, (...) godly man, when he falls Difference between the
godly and others in falling into sin.
into sin, and is defiled with it, he washes himself from day to day; you
shall find always this, that he gets ground of the sin, of the lust, that
manifests it self in any actual transgression, still it loses by it, it
gathers not strength, but loses strength: in a carnal man it is quite
contrary, his sin still increases, and intends the habit, and the lust
grows stronger and stronger, it gets ground of him, and those good things that
he has, they are more and more worn out, and so they grow worse and worse
from day to day, and that is the property of an evil man, of vnregeneracie
wheresoever, it is apt to grow worse and worse, and the more fal^s they have,
the more sin gets ground, and the more they lose; but it is not so with a
holy man, the more he falls, the more strength he gathers, he is the more
holy by it, the more wary and watchful, and the more he is emptied of
himself, and draws nearer to the Lord, and is the more inflamed with love to
him, he is strengthened in faith, and repentance, and in every grace: so that
here the rule now hold^ not true, that acts increase habits, but the contrary,
acts lessen the habits, which is a paradox i^ philosophy, but here it is so.

If you ask how it can be? Quest.


I (...), in its own nature every act intends Answ.
(...) habit, as well in (...) ^odly (...), (...) man, but it comes to pass by
accident, as (...) say, because ^he grace in him (...) stirred up* (...) those
foiles, and slipps, and those falls, and infirmities, to which he is subject: I
say, grace is stirred up in him more and more, and more, and receives more
vigor, and strength. As we say of true valor, it is increased more by
opposition; so it comes to pass, that the more the child of God falls into
sin, the more grace is intended, Satan gets less ground, as Hez^kiah, when
he fell into pride, the pride of his heart was lessened more by it, then when
he showed his treasure to the Ambassador of the King of Babell, he knew not
before the pride of his heart, that sin, that fall did manifest his
corruption, which he did not see before. So that, when the heart is sincere,
when it is pure, when there is a right principle within* grace is set more on
work to resist sin. So David, when he had numbered the people, that made him
more humble, and therefore the Lord showed him more mercy afterward, then ever
he did before, he showed him where the Temple should be built, and used him
in that work, and never showed him such mercy, and kindness before. (I
cannot stand to express particulars) so it is with all the Saints; their
hearts are never better, nor in more holy temper, nor more fearful to offend,
and in a more gracious disposition, then after their falls; and therefore
consider that, that thou be not deceived, that thou may distinguish between
this falling into sin, and washing your selves, and that relapse to which
evil men are subject; and keep that for a rule, that wheresoever there is
true grace, still it stirs it self more and more, as it finds more
resistance, even as the wind Note.
and the water, and the fire does, you know, the water, when it finds a stop,
it grows more vio Simile.
lent, and so the wind: of the same nature is grace, where it finds a stop,
and finds resistance, it grows more strong, and intent. The heathen had a
little glimpse of this truth, when they said of virtue, that it grows more
fresh and vigrous by being wounded; that is, true of grace and holiness, the
true virtue, the more it is opposed, the more it grows: even as you see in
opposition in the disputes of scholars, and all Simile.
kind of contentions in law, or any thing else; the stronger the ob^ection is,
where there is ability in the party, it produces new notions, and new
answers, and puts them more to it; so these assaults, and temptations, when
there is truth of heart within, it draws out more holiness to God, and more
strength, it multiplies the graces of God within: so that the graces receive
increase, the more they are exercised, and intended, and sinful lusts
decrease, the mind is more emptied forth; the ch^e that is in v^ and the
dross is more wi^nowed out, and the heart is more cleansed from it. So much
(...) serve for this, that whosoever will come to the Lord in prayer must
sanctify him in his heart, that is, he must come with a holy, and with a pure
heart. We have showed what this holiness, and pureness is, where is it
consists, and likewise how the objection is answered, that might deceive us. So
much for that property.

I must add another, you shall find it Phil. 4. 6 6. Condition required in
prayer, is Thankfulness Phil. 4. 6.
whenever you come to make your requests to the Lord, this is another
condition, that he requires, to be thankful for the mercies you have received
received already: in all things, says he, let your requests be made known to
the Lord, with thanksgiving: as if he should say, take heed of this, that
whenever you come to put up any petition to the Lord, you forget not the duty
of thankfulness, but still, when you come to a^ke any thing, that you want,
remember, that you give thanks for that you have. Beloved, this condition must
not be omitted: you see the Lord himself puts it in very carefully, let your
requests be made known with prayer, and supplication, and with thanksgiving.
There is much reason why our petitions, and requests should be accompanied
with thanksgiving to the Lord: for is it not reason when you come to ask
somewhat for your selves, that you should do that also that is acceptable to
God? will a man serve himself altogether, to come merely to ask the thing
he wants? this a man man may do out of love to himself, out of respect to
himself; but you must remember to do something that is pl^asing and acceptable
to the Lord. And therefore you shall find in the old law, they were commanded
still to come with peace offerings, that is, ^fferings, wherein they expressed
thankfulness, whenever they had any special request to the Lord: you shall
find that was the manner in Levit. and other places, that such a man as came to
request any thing at the Lords hands, might not come empty ha^ded; and what
should he bring with him? a peace offering: what was that? thankfu^nesse for
that peace he had enjoyed, that was a peace offering: for peace is a general
word comprehending all kind of mercies. For what is our health, but the peace
of our humors within? what is our cheerfulness, and joy, but the peace of
conscience within? all the comfort we have in our name, and ^ate, it is peace
in the particular, etc, so I say, whenever thou com^est with a petition,
forget not to come with a peace offering, that is, forget not to come with
thanksgiving to the Lord, for that which thou have received: do somewhat that
is acceptable to him, as well as seek for that which is useful for thy self.
Beloved, there is much reason for it: because, if a man be poring on his wants
still, if it be (...) his mind, when he comes to call upon God, it wi^
indispose him, for (...) performance, it will beget murmuring, and low^enesse,
and discontent, it will imbitte^ his spirit: when as a man remembers many
mercie^, that he has received, when he makes a c^talogue of them, and
innumerates them, it sweeten^ (...) spirit, it makes him more gracious, it acts
those graces that are in him, it draws hi^ nearer to the Lord, it quickens
him, it makes him more content^d with his condition, that he is in: whereas, o^
the other side, forgetfulness of mercies, when a man is only intent upon his
petition to have the thing done, ^e ^kes in many times into that (...) of
Simile.
disposition, that we find in children, that, when they cannot have all that
they would, they throw away that which they have; so that is our fault many
times, when we come and seek to the Lord for any thing that we need, we are
so intent upon that, that we forget all the mercies we have received, as if
they were nothing: the Lord would not have it so, but will have us remember
what we receive, that we may be content to want, that our hea^ts may be
brought to pati ence and contentment, under the cross, and to want what it
shall please him, for a time, to deny us, as Job reasons, says he, I have
received good from the Lords hands, it is his answer to his wife, and shall I
not receive ^ll; so, if a good man be thankful for mercies, it will make him
ready to do so, it will make him content with that present want: for he looks
to that which he has had in hand. When a man says thus with him self, thus,
and thus much good I have received, at the Lords hands, what though I want such
a thing? what though I be pressed with such an affliction, and calamity? I will
be content to bear it, I say, the Lord looks for this, expostulating with
him, and murmuring against him, is not a meek manner of asking things at his
hands, but, when a man so asks that, withal he is content to be denied, if
his good pleasure be so. Now, thankfulness for mercy, makes us ready to be
so affected, to be willing to be denied, to be content to resign our selves to
the Lord, and therefore he will have thankfulness to go with it, whenever
we come to ask any thing at his hands. And therefore observe, that whenever
you come to seek the Lord, you be thankful for the mercies you have had,
remember them; for it is a great means to prevail in our requests.
Thankfulness is, as it were, the insense, that perfumes your petitions, that
makes them acceptable, and prevalent with the Lord, so much the sooner. Prayer
goes up without incense, when we offer up our petitions without thankfulness;
because that is a sacrifice, as you know it is called the cal^s of our lips,
and ever, when you join thankfulness with your petitions, it is like a
sacrifice mingled with it, that helps to prevail for you.

The next condition is, and it must not be forgotten, of all the rest, that we
come to the Lord, 7. Condition required in prayer, is, to come in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ.
in the name of Jesus Christ. This is a thing commonly known, you will say,
who knows not that, except we come in the name of Christ, no petition can be
acceptable? Beloved, I say to you in that case, a^ the Apostle James spea^,
Ia^. Iam: 4.
4. where he gives this rule that we should say, if the Lord will we will
do such and such a thing to morrow, etc. and when the answer would be ready,
who knows not this? says he, if you know the will of the Lord, and do it
not, your judgment shall be greater; so I say, if any do not practice this,
(and it is a thing we are exceeding ready to forget, or we are ready to do it
in a for^ll, and in a (...), but to do it in good (...), (...) ought to do
it, therein commonly we come short) you know how great a sin it was, in the
old law, to offer without a Priest; in the 17 of Leviticus it is Levit: 17.
said there, if any man brought his sacrifice, though it were the best
sacrifice and the choice, yet, says the text, ^f he did not bring it to the
priest, and to the Altar, but ^ay his sacrifice else where, without a Priest,
such a man was guilty of blood, and was to be cut off from his people; that is,
he was to be cut off by the Priest, by excommunication, and after, by the
civil Magistrate. You know, it was Vzziahs fault to offer incense, when it was
proper to the Priest to do it? the same sin we commit when we come to the
Lord, and think, because we have repented, and prayed fervently, because, we
think, our hearts and spirits are in a good disposition, because we know no
sin, of which we are conscious, for this cause we think that we shall be
heard. It is true, the Lord requires these quallifications, in the party, when
he prays, but take heed of thinking to be heard for this, this is to offer
without a Priest. You must come thus to the Lord, and say unto him, Lord, I
confess (notwithstanding all this) I am vnvnworthy, I have nothing in me, why
thou should regard me, it cannot be, that either I, or my prayer should be
acceptable, but I beseech thee, take them at the hands of Christ, our High
Priest, he, that is entered into the veil, he, that takes the prayers of the
Saints, and mingles them (...) when a (...) can really do this, wit^
dependence upon Christ, and come boldly in his name, that is to offer a
sacrifice to him, and this we must carefully remember; and therefore we see an
excellent expression of this in Levit. 5. where this is made clear to you,
that it is not any excellency in the person, Levit 5. 11.
not any fervencie in the prayer, not any pureness, or holiness that is found
in him, nothing that come^ from man, that causes his prayer to to be
acceptable, but it is the priest, in that place from verse (...). to the 11.
you shall find there the law was, that he that came to sacrifice, must bring a
sheep, or a she goat, but if he were not so rich as to do so, he was able
enough to bring two ^tle doves; if yet he were not able to do that, the^,
says the text, he shall bring the tenth part of an Epha of fine flower, (a
very small thing) and, says he, let him give this to the priest, and he shall
make an atonement for him, and his sin shall be forgiven. Whence I observe
this, that it is not the goodness of the sacrifice, the price, nor the (...),
nor the excellency of that, when they came with a thousand ^ammes, and so many
sheep, and bullocks, (as you read of many great sacrifices, that were offered
by the Kings) yet the tenth part of an Epha of fine flower, which was exceeding
little, this prevailed fully as much; it shows evidently, that it is not in
the sacrifice, but the poorest, and the (...), and the meanest sacrifice will
prev^ with God, as well as the richest, and the greatest. What is the reason?
for, says he, it is the priest, that must offer it, he makes it acceptable; so
in this case, let the sacrifice be never so mean, yet, if it be Christ, that
offers the sacrifice, if it be commended to the priest, and he offers it, the
Lord will accept it. You shall find that rule, Levit. 5. 11. He that brings a
sacrifice, (this caution was given) he must put no incense Levit. 5. 11.
(...) it, neither oil. But, should the sacrifice be offered without incense?
no, you shall find in Levit. 16. that, always the priest, when he entered
Levit. 16. 12, 13
into the holy of holies, he burnt incense, that the cloud of that incense
might cover the Mercy seat: the meaning is this, that when any man comes to
offer a prayer to the Lord, he can put no incense to it, the priest only he
must put in incense, that is, Jesus Christ only must offer the sacrifice,
wherein the Lord smells a savor of rest: for the Lord expresses himself in
this manner, as if he were disquieted for sin, and can take no rest; now,
when Jesus Christ offers a sacrifice, he smells a savor of rest; because it
comes from him, in whom he is well pleased: so, I say, we must be careful,
that we remember we come in the name of Christ.

But, you will say, every man does so, and how Object.
shall we know it?

You shall know it by this, if you have boldness, and confidence* that is an
argument that Answ.
you look not upon your selves, but upon Christ. When a man i^ so exce^ding
ti^erous, and doubting, and fearful, that (...) dares not come to the throne
of grace, or, if he do, yet he makes a great question, whether he shall be
heard or no, this is too much looking to himself, here the high priest is
forgotten. If thou come in his name, there is enough to carry that out, it will
breed boldness in thee, it will breed confidence: if thou come in the name
of Christ, and offer up thy prayers through him, it will cause thee, in every
petition thou put up, to think thy self so much beholding to Christ, that
thou will be ready to say, in thy heart, whenever any petition is granted
thee, I may thank Jesus Christ for this. When a man, I say, shall be so much
put upon his score, it will make him so much indebted to the Lord Jesus for his
sin that is remitted, and this petition that he has granted, that his heart
shall be more enlarged to thankfulness, when he is able to consider the
benefit of redemption, and is ready to say with himself, if Jesus Christ had
not died, if I had not had such an high Priest, that has entered into the very
heavens, as the Apostle says Hebr. 9. 1^ make Heb: 9.
intercession for me, I had lost this benefit, I had never come to have put up
a prayer to the Lord, or, if I had, it should not have been heard.

But, you will say to me, if we be heard for Christ, then, though a man be
sinful, and though Object.
he have none of the precedent conditions, though he have not that holiness
that is required, if the Priest make him acceptable, why may he not hope as
well as the most holy man.

I answer briefly, though the Priest give all acceptance Ans.
to the sacrifice, and our prayers are accepted through him, yet that is not
all, there are two things besides required, that the person, that brings the
sacrifice, be clean; no impure person was to bring a sacrifice: secondly, that
the sacrifice be without blemish, he that has a male, and bring^ a female, is
cursed: So this is required, that the person be righteous, and that the prayer
be servent, such as is indicted by the help of Gods spirit, that it may be a
sacrifice fit for the Lord. But now, that we have from Christ, is this, that
though the person be so, and the prayer thus qualified, and have those
forenoted conditions in it, yet it is not acceptable, without the Priest. And
therefore this should encourage you, when you consider the glorious God, his
holiness, that great distance between him and you, and your selves, on the
other side, how vile and sinful you are, and unfit to come and put up your
requests to him; now, when you think of a Mediator, of an high Priest, who is
entered into heaven, who is gone thither, and sits at the right ^and of Majesty,
making intercession for you, when you consider there is one high Priest, who is
able to prevail, not like the Priests in the law, but one, that i^ over the
house of God, one that is the very son, that is not entered in through the
blood of B^lls, and Goats, but with his own blood; when out of this you shall
receive confide (...), and come ^eere him with boldness, this is to ^ake use
of Christ, and to offer sacrifice in hi^. There is no more rem^ining now, but
(...), when you have considered all the conditions mentioned, and ^tted your
prayers according to the^, that you b^ confide^t, and expect much, that when
you have prayed, you may say thus, Lord, I expect now the granting of them,
thou can not now deny them, Lord, I will wait now. And this is our fault,
when we have prayed, and the thing comes not presently, we are ready to give
over, we are not willing to wait. Beloved, that is one thing specially to be
remembered, w^ must so far magnify our prayers, we must set a price upon them
so far and so esteem them, and think them of that worth, that they will
bring the thing to pass. If a man take a (...), or a medicine, or an herb,
and vs^ i^ (...) wound, or a disease, once, or twice, or thrice, and, if he see
it does no good, he will ^ay it aside, and take another medicine: for, says
he, I have tried it, and it will do m^ no good; so a (...) does with hi^
prayers, ^e says, I have sought to the Lord, I have prayed for this thing
twice, or thrice, and it is not granted ^e; and therefore he is ready to lay it
aside, as if it were not effectual, and to take another means, this neglect
of prayer is not to know the force of the medicine. You must know therefore, of
what efficacy prayer is, and trust i^, and not give over (f^ it is effectual
^o bring the thing to pass) and not make (...), but ^ay, and (...); it was
(...) (...) when (...) and she sought to the (...) for a (...), she made ^o
much (...) to give (...) to (...), when they should have stayed till the Lord
had do^ it, his own^ way* So Rebeccah, there was a promise, and no doubt,
Jacob, and she prayed for the fulfilling of that promise, but she made too
much have, she took a wrong way to get the blessing by lying, this was not
waiting, but a stepping out to another means; because they thought prayer, and
dependence upon God would not do it. So Saul would not wait upon God, but he
would offer sacrifice, this was to make have. And so it is, when a man is
discouraged; David, when the thing was not presently granted, he was ready to
give over, and falls to a desperate complaint, saying, one day I shall fall by
the hands of Saul. Take heed of this, and when we offer our prayers thus,
learn to know what they are, learn to trust them, and to depend, and wait
upon God, say certainly, I shall not be denied, the thing shall surely be
granted.

So much for this time, and this text*

FINIS

