Virtues due: or, A true model of the life of the right Honorable Katharine
Howard, late Countess of Nottingham, deceased.

By T. P. Gentleman.

Printed at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane, near
Smith-field. 1603.

To the right Honorable, Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham, Baron of
Effingham, Lord high Admiral of England, of her Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel, and of the Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
RIght Noble Lord, my resolve was advised, to make immoration upon the nicest
circumstances of your present hauiour, in plentiful and honorable sorrow,
whose animal motion might be admou'd to the violence hereof: This gave leave
to the greater observance which we owe to the deceased, (that is) in
protection and contestation: Besides that warrant of the antentique and
Censoriall rites, whose example I have here quoted for most Honorable
Heraldrie, in disposing her funeral torch by due reference, into your
suruiuing hand; neither infeebling the courtesy of the living* nor promising
mine own advantage upon your Noble and innated goodness, neither to actuate,
and ref^icate molestias, but in mine own affectation to be conformed with that
Roman solemnity of dedication,

And as she was, I write for president,
More of succession, than griefs argument.
Your Honors, in all the nerves of my ability, Thomas Powell.

To the Reader.
TO prepare ye to what is writ, I know, my smoothest composure would be too boy
sterous, upon the rigall nakedness of your impatience. A long preface were a
sick fether upon your winged Mercury. And yet, to expose me to vninstructed
censure, whose proof is too much in severity, I should release the bond of our
reco^ciliation, and seem to suspect approbation, to be more of fortunes alms,
than our own deserving. I imply to your freer spirits, all customary
requisites, and to my self reserve this only obiter of opinion: That I write
more of duty to the dead, than reputation of living Poesy. In both which, I am
wilfully confident, to be confidently willing.

T. P.

Resumptio.
-- Cum tonat Ocyus Ilex,
Sulphur discutitur sacro quam tuque domusque.
T. P.

Virtues due.
THe Sun but now began to gather fire,
And lay a sharper edge upon his beams,
Abated to the fullness of the year,
As fretted with the salt of Neptunes steames,
When black solemnity enuide anew,
And soyld his face with a more precious dew:
Dew'd with the most religion of affection,
Made soft in nature, and in Heraldry:
The one accusing fate for his election:
The other, weeping his severity.
Both from their Cyprus altars offering tears,
Ynowe to make him aged in young years.
It was not for the gods Arcadian theft,
When he drew dry their vdders milch-excesse,
Nor for his mother Pthias, when she wept
His rage, that earth malign'd his murrinesse.
But, lo, affections law of like for like:
It is our natures freedom to requite.
For he had luster on his infant rays,
To blandish out the glory of his Spring,
Reft from the falling Load-starre of our days,
Whose motion was the music which I sing;
The measure of consent to all her sphere:
Indeed she was the best in Cynthia's quiere.
She was, (and so are loosers still in leesing,
When they recount the worth of what is lost)
And is not. Cold remembrance ever freezin^*
When it shall read the story of what is past.
Yet as she was, repeat for president
More of succession, then griefs argument.
Was of her train. Eternities decreeing
Did dedicate her in her parentage,
Whose near alliance asked as near a being,
And gently sealed it on her virgin wax:
And so, for nature and election,
Would Cynthia's self endeere her as her own.
She gave her rank, respect, and full access,
Agnizing her affinity and merit
With favors, graces after graciousnesse;
Wherein she seemed as if she did inherit
The trust and dignities, which long before
Her Honorable Ancestors did store.
Her parents honors did she extraduce
Into her very disposition;
As if the general Carcy were infusde
And had no other forms of his division.
Their ancient unattained loyalty
Broad blow'ne, and flush upon her infancy.
Yet beauty was not only of her blood:
Her birthday Solstice height unto perfection.
The Cantharis enuies a verdant bud,
And birth does only counsel to prosection.
So learnd she with the change of every spring,
To save her blood with heedfull dyeting.
Her youth preserved it chaste with continence;
A virgin diet for the hot intention,
Which might vnglosse his color: add expe^ce,
Both of the length and breadth of their dime^sion,
But the example of her marriage bed,
Were Oratory to persuade to wed.
For after she had blessed so many moons,
As had Astrea, when she was transfixt;
With more austerity, than that which crowns
The Roman chastity, did she commixe
Her birth, her blood, Nobility and name,
To flow more lofty in as rich vein:
In Howards ample veins; a Family
Of eminence, deryu'd without distent,
From the first shield of all their Auncestry,
To this of Charles, the latest Eminent:
Whose faith and fortunes may they never expire,
But in a melting firmament of fire.
She wedded, yet she was a Votary,
To minister-in consecrated flame,
And wear Dianaes bow upon her thigh,
Till on a day of sanctified name,
To store each Nymph with shafts, the goddess bids,
To fill her quiuers all with Poplar twigs,
That grew upon a leuin, which the sea
Had seasoned thriftily within the shore:
There Neptune fell in love with (...),
That till this day never saw the Nymph before,
Never had his breast improou'd or softened,
But like the temper of his Coral bed:
From which he lately risse to lay her in,
And placed his Aggot wreath upon her brows,
Whose potent charms Diana pardoned him,
And gave her back the freedom of her vows;
So she might still be of her fayrie train,
He war with Saturnes sons upon the main.
And now, Eliza, with her wedlock fate,
Did wed her to a higher dignity.
She kept the chair that did suborne her state,
And graced it like the blue-eyde Cassiope:
She never surcharged ability with grace,
But still her own dimensions filled the place:
Wherein this noble Lady Katherine seemd
T'anticipate her Mistress bounteous hand,
As if her offices were but redeemd
From under meriting, and she did stand
Alone, and vnencountred in her worth;
One whom inheritance had called forth;
Or rather providence: for what she was,
She was to others, through her self intended:
Like to some interiected leaf of glass,
That breaks, yet heats, when nearer rays offended.
She was all Organs, even to the mind,
Whereby God did insinuate with mankind.
Her whole mortality had this extent.
She had affections of immortal sense:
For she would pity much, and much relent:
But the affect of greatest presidence
Over her nature, held no sin to this;
To leave apt good undone, or do it amiss.
The more they miss of her that are imbayd,
And fortune fixed for want of sea and scope,
Their burden with their sail being ouerlayd:
Unless they Anchor all their after-hope,
They miss: alas, I write of that too soon,
And lend her liuing-worth for grief to come.
Yet lived she to outliue that old report,
Which now again our new worlds forms approve:
That, there is no retireme^t in the court,
Where there is much variety to move,
And steal away. O, there is no life like hers,
That lived to bury her executers.
For softness never seyz'd her appetite.
A bloodlesse lyuor lives not on his heat:
Her resolution was Pr^p^nticke right,
And forward stem'd against the Moons retreat.
No change, no liberty, no ful-eyde pleasure
Could bring devotions music out of measure.
It was for her, the million of her sex,
And calling, do beside approve their kind;
Whose story often read, as often begets
Opinion, that the sex is so inclined,
And calling, so disposed unto good,
As well in Courtship, as in woman-hood.
She was a woman; yet, not one of those
Whose erogated heat conuerts to hate.
It was her honor to forgive her foes,
Even in their ebb, and full distent of state.
Alas, she would not take advantage than,
Lest she should trip the fraylty of his man.
She would not glory his humility,
Nor actuate her old aggreeuances
Over weak distress, and present misery:
Such conquest! O, it is base and honourlesse.
For when I do but second Fortunes stroke,
I wound a heart that is already broke.
She was a Courtier too; but as a Star
Vnfixt, and like Ori^^ in a stream;
As free as featherd Faulcons in the air,
Moved on no other line, but Cynthia's beam:
Her freer spirit never was put in frame,
Though she put on her self a Courtiers name.
For she did hospitable bounty too,
And ever kept her influence at home;
Which every Courtier uses not to do,
Why, she was nothing Courtier, nor her own:
Her light was made a Sea-marke to distress,
Where Fortunes wracks arryu'd their needines.
In Court, no study that would apprehend,
Or ask Religion of her duty more,
Than, what Eliza gave, might still commend
Her most magnificence, and fountain store:
She was not like a Conduit-pipe fast by,
To turn the stream, and leave the channel dry.
How many servants of that Royal train
Could the fresh image of her love excite,
To witness, she preferred Elizaes fame
Above her private reputations height!
She hated to be hyr'de to do them good,
Or begd to buy their merits, though she could.
And yet did her contentment stretch it self
More amply: Greatness was above her fear;
A faith beyond the curse that follows wealth,
Who evermore suspects eruptions near,
Whose change does change the state of their subjection,
And gives this duty to the next election.
Great and secure! Me thinks, it is wo^drous strange:
But gracious not enuyde! Impossible:
For discontent makes worth his Fret of change,
And not seruility it self speaks well
Of Honorable birth or betterment:
Respect, with him is fear; and fear, contempt.
I know not how respect came over all;
But the most humble did admire her most:
A branch of rank love turned to prodigal:
Such love is still exhaust, or ouerflowes.
I Will learn ye how she did divert their hate:
She made her self as humble as their state.
The list of all her virtues had a name
Of greater reverence, than had the rest.
Religion. It Is a sessions to arraigne,
Detect, and bring our actions to the test.
And where that list was stack, remiss, and loose,
Assure ye, it was frailty extraduc'de.
She had no other principles (God wot)
Whereby to level and conform her life:
All was not honest that was safely got:
She would not by injustice compass right;
Nor used to say, It Is Cas^r answers all;
So thou reserve to stand, may kingdoms fall.
Her life was but a model imitation,
Drawn with the freshest colors instance had
In holy writ, which gave it approbation;
They were her essence (therefore could not fade)
Like color laid in wine: her Lenten black
Did sit, like Nessus shirt upon her back.
At this perfection and maturity,
She stood in natures frail adoption here,
When heaven would vouchsafe her first to be
A mother, and her virtues to appear
In propagated noblesse of a son,
That laid his root as far as she begun.
That first, L. William was of Effingham,
A Barony, that field and Knighthood earnd
With sweating spurs, when heraldry deraignd
His hardiment. O, 'twere a sight to learn,
And put ambitious fire in any Swayne,
To see Nobility so dearly gaynd.
Heaven was delighted in his workmanship,
And now became more bou^tious of his breath,
Which sweld her womb to be more fruitful yet,
Derived a second labors where she left,
A second blessing, and a Charles beside;
For Honors lofty bed did open wide.
A third. Invention, give me back, my self
Divided. All my numbers keep consent,
And with my soul my styles ambition melt.
Each sinew of our duty be attent;
Forget the funeral state and majesty,
And prostitution wholly summon me.
Call her by any epithet expressed
In virtues Inuentory; nay discourse
Her mothers life: see with what liveliness
She does insert it, freely, and vnforc'd.
Be she the noble Countess of Kildare,
Or Cobhams Baroness; she is wondrous fair.
A next. The Lady (...): here I sho^^d
Confound my method with a plentious vain
Of great devotion, and of wyddowhood:
But my more free proposements are restraynd,
To show the lost, their last similitude,
To which the Lady Lus^^ much accrude.
Here, happiness did flo^te at all the line:
This day accounted for the greatest debt,
That grace and goodest Stars could her asaigne:
And till this day her circle never met;
Now was her happiness so satisfide,
She knew not what her wish might add beside.
Contentment crowned her straight beyond the may ne,
And roughest oppositions in her birth;
The weeping Crocodile, the Sirens strain,
And all the Delinitions that inuert
Our, Fie, what is it that we can call our own?
She past the seas, and shipwrackt here at home
Within the ha^en. Now, it was disposd
With heavenly wisdom, to the best of uses.
So, we are wise, to purchase from our foes,
To Enrich the sea with that which land abuses.
We do secure us in their feebled store.
Securenesse hurts least, when it is most poor.
The goodness of the Highest left her not*
For Neptune, conquering Argo vnarriu'd,
Must disimbark the golden Fleece she brought,
In her own haven to be stellifyde,
And seem above her weeping Marble sphere,
To swim as free in heaven, as she did here.
'Twas only in her wishes now to dye,
When as her fullness feared to be o're-ioyd;
Like those that surfeit of saciety,
And yet their surquedry is ever void:
These have their fullness so intemperate,
Nothing refreshes, till it suffocate.
She would not have her Su^mer beams to light
Upon the rank, and thrifty slyme beneath,
Where honors heat beget^ the parasite,
And other monstrous shapes, that will bequeath
Unto their Caesar, Jove's own heritance,
And swell his greatness into arrogance.
She feared that such should know her to be great.
She knew her greatness was superlatiue.
Nature, and grace, and stars their rest had set,
And every opposition left to strive.
She wanted nothing of felicity,
But free commission to desist and dye.
She prayed it, and prevented constant fate,
That would not her delight should see her sweat
Out of converse familiar, and innate.
Joy, longer then it is fresh, is not complete:
But like to Times own tunes, that ravish not,
Because they iygd it, when we were begot.
This burden would be feign delivered,
When she had reckoned to maturity,
Appealing from the Moon that followed,
The eight, which mortals call an enemy
Unto conception. Fate and she complyde,
And in a seuen-fold happiness she did.
The Offering.
THou that ow'st this breathles beauty,
Mistress of the days devotion,
And her blackest rites of duty,
Guyd'st her timeles, tuneles motion:
O! I would not leave thee yet,
Till I see thy Searements ^it.
Thou, that art complexion careless,
Let affections arms unfold,
After last imbracings durelesse,
And upon the hallowedst mold,
Left for monumentall use,
By thy just extensure choose.
If the earth deny thee rest,
Like the soul that lies so soft
In her groaning, grieved breast,
Shall thou there be buried often.
Earth affords no freer Toombe;
None so wide as sorrows womb.
There in stead of balmde confection,
Righteous tears, and seasoned sighing
Sprinkle over thy ^east complexion,
Till they seal thy searements plighting.
Grateful odours be about thee:
Truce within, and tears without thee.
Next, for Scuchio^^ over thy hearse.
I that truly would display thee,
Offer up this sacred verse,
With the greatest zeal that may be:
Though thy Herald, length they lack,
Yet our Scuchion staves are black.
Leaf by leaf, be open wide;
Speak to all that pass this way,
That they part not from thy side,
Till they read, and reading pray.
May this story never fade,
Till thy soul be quick conuayd.
Angels with their music charms
All unknown malignity;
Drown the midnights hye alarm,
When the sacring summons be:
Let not her unhallowed breath
Enter in thy house of death.
Spirits sanctifide secure thee^
All corruption quite be spent.
Let thy natures works assure thee
Consummation imminent.
Though thou left'st them all behind thee,
Yet their merits there refine thee.
Works and faith thy soul convey,
On a heauen-deuiding wing.
Let devotion read and pray.
Saints and ministering Angels sing.
All, with natures latest debt,
Wype away thy Marbles sweat.
FINIS.

