DIRECTION FOR SEARCH OF RECORDS Remaining in the CHANCERIE. TOWER. EXCHEQVER,
with the Limnes thereof: viz. The Kings Remembrancer. Lord Treasurers
Remembrancer. Clarke of the Extreats. Pipe. Auditors. First Fruits.
Augmentation of the Revenue. Kings Bench. Common Pleas. Records of Courts
Christian.



For the clearing of all such Titles, and Questions, as the same may concern.
With the accustomed Fees of Search: And diverse necessary Observations. Cui
Author THOMAS POWELL, Londino-Cambrensis.

-- Cum ^onat ocy^s Ilex
Sulphur discutitur sacro, quam tuque, (...).
LONDON, Printed by B. A. for Paul Man, and (...) to be sold at his Shop in
Chancerie Lane, at the Sign of the Bowl; or in Distaffe Lane, at the Sign of
the Dolphin 1622.

TO THE GREAT DEPVTIE OF THE GREATEST DEITY IN HEAVEN, THE CHVRCHES CHIEF
CONSERVER ON EARTH: JAMES, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND.
SVppose you see the Widow with her Mite,
Debating, whether better to proceed,
And lay it down in all the Peoples sight;
Or else, to put it up again with speed
Now she resolves to do it, And then she fears
Th'acceptance of it, and the Peoples gieres:
At last, she did conclude, and cast it in;
Then slinkt away, and hoped she was not seen.
Thus, with a very conscious cautious Eye,
Our Author weighs the Work which he presents;
Then viewes the Multitude that is standing by,
(Knowing too well their old accustomed bent:)
And now, no sooner does behold your Self,
But lays it at your foot; and then by stealth
Auoids; and hopes, the Giver is unknown:
Yet this small Gift speaks great affection.
Your Majesty's most faithful Subject, Th. Powell.

TO THE BEST BLESSED POVRTRAICT OF PATERNALL PERFECTIONS, CHARLES, The High and
Mighty Prince of WALES.
It Is only thy Acceptance may repute
What here I offer: Be but pleased to do it;
I wish more happiness may never succeed it,
But that I may report your self did read it.
Tibi prior morituras fatis, Quam tui sim miraturas satis, Tho. Powell.

A CONGRATVLATORIE TO THE SAFE RETVRNE of that sincere Servant of the State,
JAMES, Lord Viscount Doncaster.
THe King receives thee with an open Arm,
The Commons do accuse the fatal Storm
That did detain thee, to behold a Scene
Which might strike blood-shot every eye of Heaven*
Would know why we rejoice thy coming home*
We love Religions Friends, and thou art one,
Your Lordships to the most of his Nerve, Th. Powell.

TO THE HONORABLE SIR JAMES LEY KNIGHT, Lord chief Justice of England.
THat thou art such a Judge, so qualifi'de,
As Authors heretofore have all prescrib'de
A well elected Iusticer should be;
Each man perceiues the reasons pregnancy:
Custom of doing well in lower place,
Can with no spur of Honor change his pace:
Besides an other cause I think upon,
Thou will not blame the Kings election.
But why in stead of Justice, to these labors
Have thou afforded them so many favors?
I know no reason may induce thee to it,
But that it is thy goodness makes thee do it.
Your Lordships In all thankful acknowledgement T. P.

TO THAT LAW-ENOBLING GENTLEMAN SIR Thomas Couentry Knight, As Generous in all
Affayring, As General in Office of Attorney to his Majesty.
TO have a thankful mind, and not to show it,
Is to know much, and not let others know it;
I will not flatter for a benefit,
Yet better to acknowledge, then forget.
A farther liberty I do not ask;
That were to me (alas) too great a task:
For if the account be cast of what is due,
I owe the most of any man to you.
The more in your employment, and disposing, The more happy, Tho. Powell.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL IN FVLL RIGHT OF HIS OWN Worth, Sir Edward Powell,
Knight and Barronet, Master of his Majesty's Requests.
VVOrthie Sir (to tell you true)
Feign I would, but know not yet,
Whether your place were made for you,
Or whether you were made for it?
If Fear, to take the double Fee;
If giving Suitors expedition;
And to respect Conueniencie,
Above Reward in each Petition,
May make a Master of Request,
Though thou be last, thou art not the least.
The servant of your Name, and Family Tho. P.

TO THAT GREAT LIGHT OF LAW LEARNING, THE Right Worshipful William Noy
Esquire, of Lincolnes Inn, present Reader.
TO You how much this work of mine does owe,
My self must needs confess, and you do know.
To say (I thank you) is but poor amends;
For so the Fydler and the Beggar ends:
Their Thanks lives, only, while the Alms is giving,
But mine shall never die, while we are living.
Signa virtutum tuarum long, lateque ferens Tho. Powell.

TO THE READER.
Books, Medicines, and Laws should never be published, or prescribed, but as
Obiters, to meet with Evils imminent; ever applied, and ever complying with
the present necessity.

The necessity of this Subject complains it self in the Multiplicitie of
Suites, their expenses, and dependencies: which for want of their proper
Records, are brought into the Court in so many Fractions; that the Judge, (how
painful, or learned soever) can hardly reduce them into whole numbers. This
therefore have I out of my Collections of Twenty years Search of Record in
the path of my practice composed and digested by way of a Kallender, into a
summarie Index of Direction for that purpose: which (intended only to such as
shell make the good use thereof; and not arm and enable their purposes of
prying into men's estates) I have now, at the last resolved to publish: Desiring
your patience till a farther supplyance may give it, a more perfection: wherein
you are accustomed to be so favorable to others in matters of less
perplexity, That I know you cannot vary in me, who ever rest

As Jealous of your Love As you are curious of your liking Th. Powell.

TO THE READERS, MASTERS OF THIS MYSTERY.
YOu that are Masters of this Science,
I ask your aid, and free supplyance.
Caetera turba tuas Muscas venare; Ministro
Fulminis haec valido propria praeda: vale.
T. P.

DIRECTION FOR SEARCH OF RECORDS.
THE CHANCERIE.
THE Office of Records of Chancerie (commonly called the Rolls) has diverse
Records of diverse and sundry Natures, beginning with some part of King Richard
the third; and so from thence drawn downward to the present.

The Records of Chancerie are divided into these kinds, viz. 1. Patents. 2.
Close Rolls. 3. Bundles.


PATENTS.
In the Patent Rolls are contained all Grants made from the King to the
subject, which pass under the great Scale of England: that is to say, All
Perpetuities, fee Forms, fee Simples, etc. Leases for Life, Years, or at
Will. Grants of Liberties. Licenses, and Pardons of Alienation. Presentations.
Annuities. Special Liueries. Special, and General Pardons. Pardons of
Vtlarie. Licenses of all sorts, which pass the Great Seal.


And on the backside of the said Rolls (called Patent Rolls) are enrolled and
indorsed these things following: that is to say,

Commissions for the Peace.

Commissions for Jail Delivery.

Commissions for Oyer and Terminer.

Commissions to enquire post Mortem.

And all the special Commissions which pass the Great Seal.

CLOSE ROLLS.
The next sort of Records of Chancerie are called Close Rolls: In which are
contained these things following: that is to say,

1. All Indentures, which are acknowledged in Chancerie betwixt party and
party, Subjects. 2. All Recognizances, which are acknowledged in Chancerie
betwixt party and party, Subjects. 3. All Deeds whatsoever, acknowledged in
Chancerie betwixt parties, Subjects.
(The said Indentures, Recognizances, and Deeds being on the back of the Roll
indorsed: And diverse special Writs on the inside thereof.)

Besides these several kinds of Close Rolls, there be diverse other Rolls,
which because they can challenge no other, or rather more proper station, I
thought good to place here: viz.

The Foreigne Roll, called the French Roll, containing Treaties betwixt this
Kingdom and Foreigne Estates, and Treaties of Intercourse, etc.

The Roll, called the Lord Treasurers Roll, or (most commonly) the Fine Roll,
wherein are contained the Patents of all Escheators, Customers, Controllers,
Searchers, Vlnagers; and briefly, all such Patents as pass the Great Seal,
and are in the gift of the Lord Treasurer for the time being.

The Roll containing the confirmation of Liberties and Grants made from the
King.

The Parliament Roll, wherein should be written all Acts of Parliament.

The Roll called Watsons Roll, containing diverse Grants and other things
confusedly and promiscuously laid together; which one Watson (sometimes Clarke
of the Great Seal, that is to say, betwixt the thirtieth and fortieth years
of the late good Queen Elizabeth) did for six or seven years together keep
in his Chest, and upon his death they were found, and brought into the Chaple
of the Rolls.

There is likewise (or should be) a perfect Roll of the Creation of the
Nobility, in which all Creations might be enrolled: which I hold to be the
rather necessary, for that many Grants have been past to one man, some
whereof, under one Title, others under another, of Office, or Nobility (as the
party has been advanced:) which incertaintie of the Patentees Title, causes
more expense, and search, then otherwise would be, if this Roll were duly kept.

The Roll containing all Judgments, Decrees, and dismissions of Causes in the
Chancerie, with some other few Rolls, which I omit, as being of little use to
this present purpose.

BVNDLES.
The third sort of Records of Chancerie, are called Bundles: In which are
contained these things following, viz.

1. The Files of Bills and Answers in Chancerie.

2. The Files of Corpus cum causa, with the Bayles upon the same.

3. All Writs of Certiorare, with the Certificates upon the same.

4. All Attachments, Proclamations, and Commissions of Rebellion, and
Transcripts of Injunctions.

5. The Bundle, called the Scire facias Bundle, wherein are filed all Writs of
Scire facias, Audita querela, Ex graui querela, and their Transcripts.

6. Staple Bundle, wherein are filed all Certificates of Statutes of the
Staple, all Extents returned upon the said Statutes, and Liberatees upon the
same.

7. Stool Bundle, in which are contained all Transcripts of Supersedeas for
Peace, and Good behavior:

8. Gallows Bundle, wherein are filed all Certificates made from Bishops, for
the Writ called Excommunicato capiendo, and the Supersedeas upon the same.

9. The Horn Bundle, in which are contained all Bayles upon special Pardons.

10. The Pot Bundle, wherein are contained all Bills from the Exchequer, of the
Names of the Sherifes who have there put in Sureties: And all Warrants of
Attorney, for all Sherifes of Counties and Cities, who have Sherifes.

11. The File of Certiorare Bills, wherein are filed all Bills that are
exhibited in Chancerie for Certiorare:

12. The Arrow Bundle, wherein are filed all Letters Patents surrendered.

All Indentures of Deeds cancelled.

All Acts of Parliament, certified by Certiorare.

All Writs of Dedimus potestatem, to take knowledge of any Deed or Recognizance
to be enrolled, or cancelled.

All Writs of Dedimus potestatem, for the acknowledging of any Warrant of
Attorney upon Writs of Entry; as also for the taking of the Sherifes Oath.

All Writs de Coronatore, and viridiario elegendo.

All Writs of Dower, and such like, as are for the Prince.

13. The Escheators Bundle, wherein are contained all Inquisitions, taken
either by virtue of Writ, or by virtue of Office.

14. The Priuy-Seale Bundle, wherein are contained all Priuy-Seales, directed
to the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, for the passing under
the Great Seal of any Grant from the King, that has passed the Signet and
Priuy-Seale.

15. The Bundle of Bills signed, wherein are contained all Bills signed by the
King, which pass the Great Seal by the said immediate Warrant, without passing
the Priuy-Seale at all.

And there are likewise in the same Bundle all Warrants from the Court of
Wards, as special Liueries, general Liueries, etc.

16. The Treasurers Bundle, called the Purse Bundle, wherein are filed all
Warrants of Escheators, Customers, Controllers, Searchers, Vlnagers, and the
like.

17. The Cardinals Bundle, in which are contained all Inquisitions taken upon
the Survey of so many Religious Houses as are returned into that Office, which
are these following: that is to say,

Inquisitions of Abbeyes suppressed, and returned into the Chancerie, with the
Shires in which their Lands lie, viz.

1 Essex 1 Blackmore Priory. 2 London 3 Hereford 1 Norff. 2 Broomhill Priory. 2
Suff. 1 Sussex 3 Bradwell Priory. 2 Kanc. 1 Warw. 4 Canwell Priory. 2 Staff. 3
Leicest. 1 Buck. 5 Begham Priory. 2 Northamp. 1 Sussex 6 Calceto Priory. 1
Northamp. 7 Dauentree Priory. 1 Suffolk 8 Dodnes Priory. 1 Oxon 9 S. Friswid
in Oxford Priory. 2 Bark. 3 Buck. 1 Suffolk 10 Felixstow Priory. 1 Essex 11
Horkesley Priory. 1 Oxon 12 Litlemore Priory. 2 Bark. 1 Kanc. 13 Lisnes Abbey.
2 Suffolk 3 Essex 4 Surrey 5 London 1 Hartford 14 Pray Priory. 2 Buck. 1
Suffolk 15 S. Peter's in Ipswich. 1 Bark. 16 Poghley Priory. 1 Suffolk 17
Rumburgh Priory. 2 Norfolk 1 Buck. 18 Raueston Priory. 1 Buck. 19 Sandwell
Priory. 2 Stafford 1 Essex 20 Stansgate Priory. 1 Suffolk 21 Snape Priory. 1
Essex 22 Titre Priory. 1 Kanc. 23 Tunbridge Priory. 2 Cant. 3 Suffolk 4
Norfolk 5 Surrey 1 Essex 24 Thoby Priory. 1 Bark. 25 Tuckford Priory. 2 Warw.
1 Bark. 26 Wallingford Priory. 2 Oxon 3 Buck. 1 Essex 27 Wikes Priory.

OBSERVATIONS TO BE HAD in search of Chancery Records.
FIrst you shall understand, that there be some few Grants which were never
enrolled at all, but remain amongst the Bills signed: As that of 31. of Henry
the eight, to Thomas Lord Audley, Lord Chancellor of England, concerning
Sampkins Lands in Essex, with some others, which for the most part are
notwithstanding enrolled in the Exchequer.

Next note, you shall loose your labor, if you search in the Chaple of the
Rolls for any Grant from the King, which passed the Great Seal but within
four or five years last past: for they are not, or (at least) use not to be
brought over thither so speedily.

But in the mean time, are either with the Riding Clarke (who is one of the
six Clarks of the Chancerie, and takes his turn to do that service) for his
year (that is, to have the controlling of all Grants which pass the Great
Seal:) Or else (if they be past him) they are in the Office of the Petty
Bag: As are Inquisitions post Mortem, and diverse the like, till they can be
transmitted to the Chaple of the Rolls. And yet the Clerks of the Chaple can
as sufficiently make the said search for you, as any other, and for the like
Fee, etc.

Further observe, that there be diverse Inquisitions post Mortem, which are not
to be found in the Chancerie at all, by reason of some Omissions, and yet
notwithstanding, are to be found in the Exchequer, by reason of the
correspondencie betwixt those two Courts (as I shall show in his place
hereafter.)

And for such Omissions, ye may redress them, by transmitting the said
Records (by Certiorare) out of the Exchequer unto the Chancerie (as occasion
shall require.)

Further, if you have occasion to have a Copy of any Patent, Roll, or Bundle,
to plead or show in Evidence; you must either exemplify the same, or else (at
least) take a Copy of the whole Record, though there be many other things
contained in the same, which concern not your present purpose, or business;
and have the same exactly examined, that Oath thereof may be made, at the
pleading of the same: Besides that, it must be subscribed by a Clarke of the
said Office, upon such examination by him so made.

DIRECTIONS FOR THE exemplifying of any thing under the Great Seal.
EXEMPLIFICATION.
IF any Grant which has been past the Great Seal, be enrolled, and contain
more men's Estates then one; Which Original Grant can remain but in one man's
hands: Or in case where the Original is lost, you would exemplify the same:
you must first search in the Chaple of the Rolls for the Inrolment thereof;
which being found, any Clarke of the Office may engrosse the same: And when it
is engrossed, you must get it examined with the Inrolment, by two Masters of
Chancerie, who must testify their said Examination under their hands. And then
(it being ready for the Great Seal) you must bear the Docquet thereof unto
the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, to examine and peruse
the same: Which being by him allowed, it may pass the Great Seal, and be
exemplified.

Where note, that you may exemplify nothing of course, but what is enrolled,
though it be amongst the Bills signed, or by neglect or chance be omitted out
of the Inrolment: Neither can an Inrolment be altered, in case where the
Original and Inrolment agree not, though by the fault of the Clarke who
enrolled and engrossed the same; without extraordinary and most curious
examination of all the great Officers of the Chancerie at the least (if so) etc.

Fees of search in Chancery.

For search of any thing in the Index or Calendar -- xijd

For sight of every Record you call for by the Index or Calendar -- iiijd

For copying of any thing, you pay for every Sheet -- viijd

For the Hand of the Clarke to any thing you copy -- ijs

Fees of Exemplification.

For every Skin of Parchment which the Grant contains xxvjs viijd

For the two Masters of the Chancerie, their Hands to it -- iiij s

For the Seal to it -- xx s vj d

For delivering of the Docquet -- xijd

Out of the foresaid general Rule, I must except such things as are not in the
Calendar, as the Bundles, called Breuia Regis, Foreigne Rolls, and the like;
the search whereof is very uncertain, and intricate: For in those searches,
your Fee must answer the Clerks extraordinary pains, etc.

THE TOWER OF LONDON.
THE Office of Records of the Tower of London, is a Member or Limme of the
Office of the Rolls of Chancerie, and was made and ordained only, to receive
all the old Records from the Chaple of the Rolls of Chancerie, at such times as
the Master of the Rolls should think fit to disburden the Chaple, and send
such Rolls as whereof there is less use (by reason of their Antiquity) over
to the Office of the Tower.

The Records in the Office of the Tower begin with some part of King Richard
the third, and so extend backward toward the Conquest; howsoever, it has but
few Records more ancient, then of King John, and Henry the second.

The Records contained in the Office of the Tower, are the like generally, and
of those kinds, as are the Records formerly declared to be in the Rolls of the
Chancerie: viz. The like Patents, and Commissions. The like Close Rolls of all
sorts. The like Bundles of all sorts.


The Office of the Tower, by reason of the antiquity of Records contained in
it, has some Records, the like whereof are not in the Chaple of the Rolls: viz.

The Taxation of the Spirituality.

A Book of Taxation, taken upon the Survey of the Spiritualties of England, or
all the Spiritual Livings: Whereof there is one likewise remaining with the
Kings Remembrancer of the Exchequer.

Taxation of the Temporaltie.

A Book of Taxation, taken upon the Survey of the Temporalties of England, or
all Temporal Livings, divided into their several Denaries.

But whether this latter Book be a Record, or no, I make question; it being
brought thither of late times, by a Clark of that Office: and (as I hear)
likely to be carried away again, if not already gone.

There is also the ancient Perambulations of Forests.

Parliament Business.

There be likewise diverse Parliament Businesses, the like whereof are not in
the Chaple of the Rolls.

Foreigne Rolls.

There be likewise diverse Rolls of Foreigne Businesses, the like whereof are
not in the Chancerie.

The Observations concerning the Omissions, or not inrolling of some Offices,
and Patents, are the like as in the Chaple of the Rolls; and their remedies the
like.

The Correspondencie the like between this Office and the Exchequer.

And (to conclude) there be some Records in the Tower, which, because there is
no order taken for the reducing of them into Kalenders, and their distinct
Classes, can neither be by me, nor any other, here, or elsewhere demonstrated.
It were to be wished, that some course might be taken in time, for the
repayring of those Records which are worn out with their Antiquity, before it
be too late, and past remedy: It is the general Cause, therefore would have
the help of the general Purse in that behalf.

The Fees for search in the Tower.

For search of any thing by Calendar, or without -- xs

And if you have once paid the Fee of search, you may for the same Fee search
for the same thing so often and so long, as until you be reasonably well
satisfied, with some consideration to be had respectively first and last to the
Clerks pains.

In all other things, as

Copy. Hand. Exemplification.
And generally, as in the Rolls of Chancerie aforesaid.

THE EXCHEQVER.
THE Records of the Court of Exchequer are many; and they remain in the
custody of diverse several Officers of that Court (as appertains to their
several places.) And of the said several Officers, because some have but the
custody of Records transitorily, as they pass through their hands; and
others, by way of controlment and examination: I intend only to show what
Records the Clerks, (with whom the Records of the Exchequer are filed, or
rather fixed for ever) have in their custody: viz. The Kings Remembrancer. The
Lord Treasurers Remembrancer. The Clarke of the Pipe. The Auditors. The Clerks
on the Receipt side, under the Chamberlaines. The Office of the Pleas. And the
rest of the said Exchequer.


As for the rest of the Officers and Offices omitted, I pass them not over,
but imply them rather in these above named.

INDVCTION TO THE better understanding of the Records of the EXCHEQVER.
BEfore I enter into the distribution of these Records, first I must give you
to understand, that there was anciently devised an Extract of Chancerie, which
is at this day called the Original of Chaneerie.

This Original or Extract, transmitted yearly from the Chancerie to the
Exchequer, contains in it most of the businesses and matters belonging to the
Exchequer.

And by this Extract or Original grows the great germane affinity betwixt
the Exchequer and the Chancerie.

The Businesses of this Original or Extract, I now intend to distribute to the
several Officers and Offices before recited, as they do properly appertain
unto them, with such other matters of Record as they may peculiarly challenge
unto them; especially according to the order of Sir Richard Lister, sometime
Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, made the sixth of July, in the five and
twentieth year of the fortunate King Henry the eight, for reconcilement of
certain Differences then had betwixt the two Remembrancers: as follows.

THE KINGS REMEMBRANCER.
THE Records here are as ancient, as the beginning of King Henry the third; and
few more ancient.

In this Office of the Kings Remembrancer are contained, entered, and filed
these things: viz.

All Writs of Privilege for The Lord Treasurer The Chancellor The
Chamberlaines The Barons The Marshall All the great Officers
of this Court.

All Writs of Privilege for Clerks, and the lesser Officers -- of this Court.

All their servants attending in their said Offices.

All Informations upon all

Forfeitures. Penal Laws. Intrusions. Contempts, etc.
Also all Process made out by the Original, against all Customers --
Controllers -- Vlnagers -- The Ganger of London Collectors of all Taxes --
for their Accounts with all things belonging thereto.

Recognizances taken to the Kings use; as they be with the other Remembrancer
also.

All Process upon Recognizances for the King, for execution thereof by Scire
facias, or otherwise, till the Defendant be discharged.

All Evidences, Deeds, and Writings sealed, concerning the King, which are
requisite to be enrolled in the Exchequer; as they be with the other
Remembrancer also.

All Deeds concerning any other party but the King, requisite to be enrolled in
the Exchequer.

Writs of Mittimus out of Chancerie.

Writs directed out of Chancerie to the Barons of the Exchequer.

Priuy-Seales directed to the Barons.

All manner of Writs upon all manner of Commissions, for concealements of
Customs of Merchandises; with all Writs of Assistas in Auxilium, for
collecting of the same Concealements, and all other Writs which concern such
Businesses.

All Letters Patents (as they may be with the other Remembrancer, at the
pleasure of the Patentee.

Also all Bags of Parcels of Accounts of Escheators Commissioners Searchers
Stewards Baylifes Fermors Butler
whereof there is any Parcel made.

All Writs directed to the Exchequer, for search of any thing.

All Inquisitions sent by Mittimus to the Exchequer.

All Acts of Parliament sent by Mittimus to the Exchequer.

Likewise all Process against these, viz. The Treasurer The Coferer of the
Household The Butler of England The Mayor and Fraternity of the Staple The
Master of the Horse The Officers of the Mynt And other great Officers
for their Accounts

There are likewise, since the making of the foresaid Order of Sir Richard
Lister, by his appointment, some Records brought from the other Remembrancer to
this; the certain Titles whereof appear not in the said Order.

There is likewise a Press de rebus tangentibus Hiberniam.

There is likewise in this Office, the Red Book; which treats most
excellently of the ancient Ordination and Orders of the Exchequer.

As also the Book entitled, Liber Decretorum and Ordinationum Curiae
Augmentationis Coronae: Which was made, for the most part, in the time of King
Henry the eight, and is likewise in the Augmentation Court.

The Book of the Taxation of the Abbeyes.

Likewise some Leidger Books of Religious Houses.

Some Rentalls Surueyes Accounts Grants Contracts Leases Compositions
of Religious Houses, which (for the most part) were brought thither for some
especial service of the King, upon Trial or like occasions.

Some Allowances and Proprieties of Sacrists, Cellarists, and other Officers of
Religious Houses.

And I find in the Red Book, before mentioned, that there was in this Office a
Book called Tricollumpnus.

This Book (as the name imports) consisted of three Collumpnes.

1. The first, concerned the Church of England.

2. The second, the worthy Acts of King Henry the second.

3. The third, Negotiations public and familiar. But this Book is not to be
found any where.

And this shall suffice for the Kings Remembrancer.

As for the Observations to be had in search here, with the usual Fees
thereof; I shall take occasion to speak in the next place.

THE LORD TREASVRERS REMEMBRANCER.
IN the Office of the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer are contained, filed, and
entered these things following: viz.

The Original or Extract of Chancerie it self.

For though the Kings Remembrancer and the Clarke of the Pipe take out of the
same such things as concern their Offices respectively, yet the Original it
self does always remain here.

The Contents of the Original are these: viz.

1. The names of all Sherifes Escheators Customers Controllers Searchers
Fermors of Vlnage Fermors generally,
That they may be called unto Accounts.

2. All Liueries sued out of the Kings hands; that Process may be made
against the Kings Tenants, for doing of their Homage, and answering of their
Reliefes.

3. All manner of Patents, granted by the King to any person, wherein is
reserved or contained any Homage, or Fealty, or else any yearly Rent to his
Majesty, or whereby a Fee is granted.

4. All manner of Commissions to any Justices of Peace. Justices of Sewars.
Justices of all kinds.


That Process may be made against them for delivering of Recognizances Issues
Fines Amerciaments
Taken before them.

5. All manner of Commissions, directed to any person or persons, to enquire of
any Lands or Tenements of such as have been offenders to the King. In which
Commissions the Commissioners have authority to seize the said Lands or
Tenements to the Kings use; that Process may be made against the said
Commissioners, for the profits thereof.

6. All names of all Collectors of Subsidies Fifteenes Dismes Taxes generally
To call them to account.

7. There is likewise in the said Original (or at least should be) all Pardons
of course, granted of Grace, for Manslaughter; by which, though the Life be
pardoned, yet the Goods of the party so pardoned, be forfeited: So thereby
Process may go forth, to enquire what Goods or Chattels he had at the time
of the doing of the Offense.

8. Also under the Title of Diem claufit extremum, are all the names of such
persons, as after whose deaths the Escheator has found any Office or Title for
the King, by Knights Service, etc. And in how many Shires the said Office was
found, and before what Escheator: That in case one Office make no mention of
any Tenure for the King, whereby he should have a Right; yet then they may
examine all the other Shires, whether there be any Tenure for the King in them.

Also there are, or should be, all Recognizances forfeited to the King in
Chancerie, and Charters of Denization: And these be the Contents of the
Original for the most part; which though it were dis-vsed in the Lord
Chancellor Cromwels days, yet it was restored to his former use afterward.

Now I return to show what other Records, besides the Original, are with this
Remembrancer: viz.

All manner of Accounts of

With all process upon these Accounts. Sherifes. Escheators. Commissioners.
Searchers. Stewards. Baylifes of Franchises. Fermors. All Gaugers (London only
excepted) Accounts for Works, Buildings, and Reparations for the King. Pressed
Moneys. And what is not in the other Remembrancer.


Also here are all Extreats out of The Kings Bench. The Common Pleas. The
Clerks of the Market. Justices of Peace and Assise. Justices of Jail
Delivery. Justices of Sewars.
To be by him delivered to the Clarke of the Extreats.

All other Extreats or Penalties from any other the Kings Justices or
Ministers, other then what are formerly assigned to the other Remembrancer.

All Writs of Privilege, of such as have cause of Privilege here on this side.

All Recognizances of the Exchequer, as well as on the other side.

All Evidences, Deeds, and Writings, sealed concerning the King, which are to
be enrolled in the Exchequer (as well here as on the other side.)

All Letters Patents, as well here as on the other side, at the pleasure of the
Patentee.

All Process against Commissioners ad certificandum, and ad seisandum, etc.
other, then what concern Customs and Merchandises.

All Process upon Patents of Fermors, made and recorded here.

All Records of Vtlaries certified to the Barons; the Process whereupon, he
makes and delivers to the Escheators.

All Inquisitions, Offices, and Transcripts, other then what were formerly
assigned to the other Remembrancer, pass through his hands to the
Parcell-maker.

All Taxes of payment of the Accounts of Sherifes Escheators and Baylifes.
entered here.

All Amerciaments afferred in Court.

All Summons of Accomptants.

All Neglects of their Apparances.

All Amerciaments for mis-returne of Writs.

All Awards of Writs, according to their return, thereby to note the Defaults.

A Book made at every Terms end, of all Judgments of any Debts discharged,
to be by him delivered to the Clarke of the Pipe, for the parties discharge.

The Book, which is commonly called Nomina villarum, made about the ninth of
King Edward the second: Wherein is contained the Names of all the Hundreds and
Villages of England, with the Names of all the then Owners of them; excepting
some few Shires vncertified, or lost.

The Book of all Knights Fees.

The Book of the Aid of the Prince.

The Surueyes of diverse the Kings Lands, taken of late years.

There are with this Remembrancer, as with the other, diverse Records: viz.
Rentalls Leidgers Surueyes Accounts
of Religious Houses, brought thither upon special service of the King.

And lastly, here are the Accounts of Assessements, and other proceedings
touching Romish Recusants. But this Limne is taken away from this Remembrancer,
and made lately a several Office of it self.

OBSERVATION FOR search in the two Remembrancers.
FIrst, in regard their Records lie in several and differing places, there is
thereby great difference in the manner and charge of search of the same.

Next, you shall understand, that within the said several Remembrancers there
are several Clarks, who have peculiarly and properly the keeping of several
Records: And that the Records of these Offices are not as those in Chancery,
common to all the Clarks alike; especially for the Lord Treasurers
Remembrancer, who has under him diverse Secondaries and Clerks, appointed to
their several Records distinctly: But it shall suffice, that I bring you to
the Office, wherein you may promise your self to find these Records, paying
Fees for search as follows.

FEES OF SEARCH WITH the two Remembrancers.
At tho Exchequer, at Westminster.

For search of the Red Book on the Kings Remembrance side, as follows.

For opening the Chest -- ijs

For the Attorney, who shows it, if he go of purpose to Westminster to show
it -- iijs iiijd

Otherwise, it may be the Attorney will take less: viz. -- j s

For search on the Lord Treasurers side.

For search of any thing in the Tenure-house, their Liguli Inquisitionum, and
Gills Books -- vjs viijd

For search of all other things generally in the Office in London -- as in
Chancerie.

For search at Westminster generally, according to their pains in search -- no
certain Fee.

For search in Vacation time at Westminster, your Attorneyes Fee at least --
iijs iiijd

Besides the Vshers, for opening the doors.

And for more certainty, I refer you to their own Tables of diverse Fees,
which are or should be in their Offices, to be seen publicly: I having only
set down the Fees of mine own practice herein.

And this shall suffice for the two Remembrancers.

THE CLARKE OF THE EXTREATS.
WITH the Clarke of the Extreats are

All Extreats of the Green Wax upon

Fines, Amerciaments, Forfeited Recognizances, etc.
Whatsoever is extreated and directed to all the Sherifes of this Realm, of
all such sums of Money as be lost and forfeited within their several
Bayliwikes, to the intent that they should levy the same for the King.

And thus much shall suffice for the same Records which are here, and by
transference to be found elsewhere, vt supra.

THE PIPE.
THE Records here, are some as ancient as in the time of King Henry the second.

The Clarke of the Pipe, who by Office has the execution by Summons of the
Pipe, of all Debts determined upon all the Kings Debtors, of what kind soever;
has accordingly the Making, Entering, and Recording of

All Process of Summons Process of Extent
against all the Kings Debtors.

Also

The Book, called the Book of Judgments, which is said to be likewise with
the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer.

All Leases of any the Kings Lands, being but Quillets, under the Rent of five
pounds yearly, and past under the Exchequer Seal, and Custody.

For if they be above five pounds per annum Rent, Or under five pounds per
annum past in Reuersion, Or past with other things, which make the Book exceed
five pounds per annum: Then they pass under the Great Scale, and are to be
found in the Chancerie vt supra.

All Leases and Grants, wherein there is Homage or Fealty, or such like
service reserved to the King.

The Roll called the Great Roll, which he engrosseth.

And herein he conueyeth yearly all Vicouncels and Fermes and the arrerages
thereof.

And all Debts due to the King, are in the said Great Roll contained.

Also here are All such Awards as the Barons make upon any Examinations of any
charging or discharging them of Sherifes Escheators Stewards Baylifes


All sums of Money by him cast up, such as the foresaid Accomptants shall be
charged withal.

Either

By the Foreigne Opposer of Green Wax*

Or,

The Auditor for Foreigne Accounts.

Here are also

All Grants, wherein the King may have either

Reuersion,

or

Rent.

Which, with diverse other things, he takes out of the Original of Chancerie,
and enters the same, with most of his other Businesses, in the Roll called the
Great Roll, before mentioned.

Also here are

All Fines, for not acknowledging of Homage or Relief, Extracted from the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer.

All Amerciaments set upon Accomptants, for not keeping their days prefixed,
or for what cause soever.

All Debts recovered for the King, which he extracts from the Kings
Remembrancer, with the Fines and Amerciaments of any Accomptants there.

All Duties for Vacation of Bishoprics, and the like Debts.

And all other Fermes and Debts, for which Process are awarded by the Barons
of the Court.

All Allowances Petitions Charges Accounts Discharges
of Collectors and Accomptants generally, as the Court does award them.

All the Kings Household Expenses, and other Foreigne Accounts.

All Accounts of the Kings Revenues, etc.

These,

With some other Records of diverse natures, not so proper or native to this
Office as the former, being brought hither at some times for special service
of the King, are here likewise.

And briefly, hence issue as from a Pipe, all Process, whereby the King
recouereth or extracteth any thing due unto him, or discharges the same.

THE AVDITORS.
THE Auditors are of two sorts: and so accordingly are the Records remaining
with them, differing respectively.

1. The one, for the Kings Revenues. 2. The other, for the Pressed Accounts.
The Auditors for the Revenues are likewise of two sorts:

1. The one for his certain Shires.

Accounts proper and foreigne, of all Accomptants to the King.

Accounts referred unto him by the Barons.

2. The other selected by his Majesty's Commissioners, to be Clarke unto them,
when they have especial Commission for the letting, selling, and setting of
any his Majesty's Lands or Possessions; and he is called Auditor of the Rates.

AVDITOR OF THE REVENVE.
WIth the Auditor of the Revenue are these Records following: viz.

All the Accounts of the Revenue of All the Kings Honors Manors Lands
Tenements
in their several Circuits.

Showing 1. What Lands every Tenant holds. 2. What Rent every Tenant pays.
3. What Service the Tenant owes in some cases. 4. What the clear value of the
Lands held is. 5. What Reprisals, Perquisus, etc. 6. What Allowances and Fees
issuing.


Distinguishing 7. The Possessions and the Demesnes from the rest, etc. 8. The
Freehold from the Customarie.


Charging and discharging 9. The Tenants, who are to pay the Rent. 10. The
Receivers and Baylifes, who collect the same.


Next, are in his custody such Leases, as wherein there is reserved to his
Majesty either

Rent, or Service.

Next, are with him such Leases or Grants as whereby the King is to pay Fee to
the Leasee or Grantee, by the hands of his general Receiver of the County,
etc.

Next, here are the Accounts of All Customers. Escheators. Receivers, general
and particular. Formors.


Lastly, here are in this Office Diverse Rentalls, Leidgers, Surueyes, etc.
For Lands in their Shires at least.

And most of these last Records have come to their hands since the dissolution
of the Monastique Houses, and for the most part upon occasion of especial
service for the Crown, etc.

And diverse of the said Records no doubt have been carried from this Office,
by the Executors, Friends, and Clerks of Auditors deceased; of which, the King
and his subjects might have excellent use and benefit.

THE AVDITOR OF THE RATES.
WIth this Auditor of the Rates, are

1. The Grants of what is sold, let, or set by the Commissioners. 2. The Rates
of the same.
OBSERVATION.
SO that it is not sufficient for you, to search the proper Auditor for the
Shire, for discovery of any thing past; but you must further clear the search
with this Auditor of the Rates. And in some cases you shall not have full
satisfaction of the passing of some things, unless you search as low as with
the Clarke of the Papers of the Signet.

AVDITOR OF THE PRESSED.
THis last Auditor being for the Pressed Accounts, has and takes all Accounts
of All 1. Moneys given in Pressed 2. The Buildings 3. Maintaynings 4. Repairings
of his Majesty's Navy, Houses, etc.

5. With all Accounts appertaining thereunto.

6. All Accounts of the Household, and all the Officers of the same.

Fees of search with the Auditors.

At the Office as in the Rolls of Chancerie generally.

At Westminster as in the Remembrancers generally.

THE RECEIPT SIDE.
THE chief Records on this side, within the compass of my subject, proposed
only for the clearing of Titles and Estates, are in the custody of

1. The Chamberlaines, and their Deputies, and 2. The Clarke of the Pells.
Or at least, I may imply the rest within or under the Chamberlaines, and
Vnder-Chamberlaines.

CHAMBERLAINES.
THe Chamberlaines have the custody or passing of

1. All Tallies stricken, in receipt of all payments made to the King.

2. All Foyles Joined, or Vnioyned.


3. Old Records of the Exchequer Court, being more ancient then those in the
Remembrancers.

4. And Pleadings of the Common Pleas, till the end of Richard the second: And
of the Kings Bench, till the end of Henry the fifth; where their own proper
Treasuries begin, and are kept in the Treasury called the Round Treasury,
behind the Abbey at Westminster.

5. Some ancient Treaties with Foreigne Estates; being of more antiquity then
the Records of the proper Treasuries of the Kings Bench: And these are kept in
a Treasury adjoining to the foresaid Round Treasury, and are kept very
strictly under six Keys, belonging to so many several Officers of the
Exchequer.

6. Diverse Records; as Pleadings, and other things commixed, of the time of
King Edward the first, King Edward the second, and King Edward the third: And
these are kept in a Treasury near to the Records of the Augmentation Office,
because the other Treasuries cannot contain them.

The Chamberlaines have

7. The Book, called Institutio Scaccarij, purporting the Subject in the Title.

8. The Black Book, which is elsewhere recited.

9. Offices post mortem, with the Parcels upon them, which they deliver to the
Parcell-maker.

10. All Writs of Allowances, sent from the King, by Mittimus under the Great
Seal.

11. The Assignements of Auditors, in some cases to take Accounts.

12. A Book of some of the ancient Laws of S. Edward.

13. The Book, commonly called Doomes-day, made in the time of the Conqueror,
consisting of two Volumes: viz.

1. The one, containing Suffolk, and Norfolk. 2. The other, containing all
the rest of the Shires.
THE INSTITVTION OF this Book.
ANd this Book was made for the reducing of the Estates of all the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Bodies Politic and Civil, that then were to
hold immediately of the said Conqueror: and so consequently it contains as
follows.

THE CONTENTS OF Doomes-day Book.
1. THe ancient Demesne Lands of the Crown.

2. The Lands of the then Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Religious Houses,
Societies, Fraternities, Bodies Politic and Civil, etc. For the most part,
by the Yard, Hide, Oxe-gauge, Carucate, Selion, etc.

3. Their Fayres, Markets, Privileges, Liberties, and Customs, etc. With
diverse other things of like nature.

And you shall understand what a Yard-Land, and what a Hide contains, by the
same Author; and how many Hides were then in England: And consequently, how
many Knights Fees; and how they were in property of the Church, or
Temporaltie, appears by the same Book.

The Fees of search with the Chamberlaines, or their under Chamberlaines.

For search in the Round Treasury -- Treasury of the Old Treaties --
Treasury of the three first Edwards --
viijs ijd

For Copy of any thing in any of them, every sheet -- js

For search of Domes-day Book -- vjs viijd.

For Copy of any thing in it, to be written in the old Saxon Letter, every
Line -- iiijd

For search of the Ordinary Records, which belong unto them as Chamberlaines,
only concerning their Tallies, etc. -- as with the Remembrancers, at their
Office.

OBSERVATION.
Where note, that they have the keeping, or rather the conseruing of the old
Records of other Courts, and other things, as they are a part of the Kings
Treasury; and the Fees of Search and Copies are the greater, because they are
divided amongst many hands.

CLARKE OF THE PELLS, OR, CLERICVS PELLIVM.
WIth the Clarke of the Pells, are All Receipts Payments
To the King, for what cause soever, for or by who^soeuer paid.

The Fees of Search

At no certainty, but respectively to their pains.

And thus much for the Receipt Side.

NOW NEXT
THe Office of the First Fruits, and Augmentation of the Revenues, offer
themselves: For as for the Officers omitted, there is no Record with them,
which may not be found with some other of the Officers formerly mentioned.

The Controller of the Pipe has only the controlment of what is with the
Clarke of the Pipe.

The Foreigne Opposer makes up his Docquet, and delivers it to the Clarke of
the Pipe.

The Parcell-maker, who gathers together the Offices post Mortem, and makes
a Book of the Parcells; is but a Retayler of Records: and they are elsewhere,
as is formerly declared.

The Marshall has nothing peculiar to himself, which is matter of Record.

The Usher his Office consists more in knowing the number, then the nature of
the Records.

The Clarke of the Nihils only offers his empty Purse to the Clarke of the
Pipe.

And therefore I pass these over, and address my self to that which requires
the Remainder of my Lamp.

THE FIRST FRVITS OFFICE.
WITH the Remembrancer of the First Fruits, and Tenths, are

1. The Valuation of all Bishoprics, Denaries, and Ecclesiastical
Promotions, which ought to pay First Fruits, and Tenths.

2. All Bonds for security of the First Fruits, and Tenths, be here kept and
made.

3. All Process for the same.

4. All Lands belonging to most of the Religious Houses, certified into this
Office, though not by way of Survey, yet in very distinct and exact manner; for
the most part about the six and twentieth year of Henry the eight. Whereunto
(as it is said) the Governors of such Houses were led, being persuaded by the
Lord Cromwell, That what they brought in thither, should be restored, and
confirmed unto them, in auoydance of the Praemunire: And that what was omitted,
should be taken and reputed as concealed from the King.

FEES
For search of Valuations -- xijd

For view of either Book (the whole being deduced into two) which concern
Lands belonging to any Abbeyes -- iijs iiijd

THE COURT OF AVGMENTATION.
THIS Court contaynes all the Records of the Lands of all Religious Houses, as
well the greater, as the less, which at the time of their Dissolutions could
be brought into the Kings hands: As,

1. Accounts. 2. Surueyes. 3. Surueyes upon Accounts. 4. Leidger Books. 5.
Rentalls. 6. Leases. 7. All other particular Evidences. 8. The Pleadings,
Presentiments, and Proceeding in their Courts, before dissolution, with others
the like. 9. And lastly, the Surueyes taken upon the Accounts of most of the
said Lands, upon and after their said Dissolution.
The Fees of search in the Augmentation Court.

For Search and Copy, as in the Rolls of Chancerie, except it be out of Term
time; and then, as in time of Vacation with the Remembrancers.

THE KINGS BENCH.
THE Records of the Kings Bench are distinguished, according to the several
Limnes thereof.

The Limnes of the Kings Bench, be two.

The Records are accordingly of two sorts: viz.

Pleadings upon all Actions personal, and some mixed Actions.

Pleadings and Businesses of the Crown.

THE PROTHONOTORIES SIDE.
THe Records on this side, are Pleadings upon all manner of Actions personal.

Attaints. Appeals.
Inrolments of Purchases of Estates of Freehold purchased, which may be there
enrolled, as well as in the Chancerie, or other Courts, at the pleasure of the
Purchasers.

And in the Red Book in the Exchequer, you shall find, that the King used to
sit in person here, to entertain and answer Foreigne Negotiations.

Treaties and Controversies in Religion, and Civil Businesses.

But the more ancient of these, are with the Chamberlaines of the Exchequer.

And the latter are with the Keeper of the Kings Royal Paper (as I take it.)

The Records on this side, which are kept in the proper Treasury, are as
ancient as from the beginning of the harmless King Henry the sixth, till this
present: Of which, only the Records of one year and a half last past, are
unlocked up, and lie open to be searched, in the lower Treasury; and some few
years more in their upper Treasury.

Fees of Search in the Kings Bench.

For Search of every Term in the upper Treasury -- iij s iiij d

Besides the Keepers Fees of the Treasury, which are little more then those of
the Common Pleas Treasury -- as in Common Pleas.

For Search of every Term, of a year and a half past -- vj d,

THE CROWN OFFICE.
THE Crown Office, in which are contained the Pleas of the Crown, Businesses
of the Peace, and Good Behavior; Indictments, Presentiments, Attainders;
Recognizances of diverse sorts; Informations upon Penal Laws; and Vtlaries of
Offenders, and Malefactors, etc. I do advisedly pretermit.

THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS.
THE Records of the Common Pleas, are Pleadings upon all Actions whatsoever,
Real and Personal.

Which may be pleaded at the Common Law.

The Records kept in the Treasury of this Court, are as ancient as from the
beginning of King Henry the fourth, till this present.

Ten of the last years Records lie abroad.

The former years are shut up.

Before the four and twentieth year of our late Queen Elizabeth, the Real
Actions and the Personal went promiscuously together. But since that time,

The Kings Silver and Fines Assizes Formedons All Real Actions Deeds enrolled
Protections


All these were separated from the Personal Actions.

The Fees of Search in the Common Pleas.

For search of every Term, lying abroad -- iiij d

For search of every Term, locked up -- iiij s

For opening the Treasury Door -- iij s

To conclude, take direction from the Prothonotories Docquets, and
Remembrancers, to direct you in the Treasury for latter times.

RECORDS OF COURTS CHRISTIAN.
I Mean not to discourse every particular Court or Office in this kind; but
only to pursue my Scope, proposed in the Frontispice hereof, for clearing of
Titles: Within which limitation, these Records do especially offer themselves:
viz.

Testaments, and Administration of Goods, etc. Presentations, and
Confirmations. Immunities, Privileges, and other Rights of Prescription.
TESTAMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIONS.
ALL Wills and Testaments of the Defunct are proved, and recorded, either with
the Register of the 1. Prerogative. 2. The Proper Diocese. 3. The Peculiar, or
4. The Visitant for the present.


THE PREROGATIVE.
IN all cases where the Defunct has or had Goods, Chattels, Credits, or other
Personal Estate, to the value of five pounds, or upwards, at the time of his
Decease, out of the Diocese where he lived, and was resident, or died; the
Will of the Defunct is proved, and recorded in the Prerogative, for the whole
Estate.

The Records of the Prerogative are as ancient, as until Septimo Richardi
secundi, Anno Domini 1383. And it has none more ancient, as appears by their
Kalenders, (which are exceeding well made up, and disposed.)

For all such Wills as are of more antiquity, you shall search for them with
the general Register of the Archbishop, in whose Office both these Businesses
were carried, till the division of the same, made at the time aforesaid.

ADMINISTRATIONS.
THE same Rules and Observations are to be held in matter of Administration of
Goods, etc.

THE PROPER DIOCESE.
IN case where the whole Personal estate of the Defunct does, or did, at the
time of his Decease, remain or be within the Diocese where he lived, and
was resident, or died; so that the value of five pounds, or upwards, thereof is
not, or was not (at such time) in any other Diocese: the Will of such Defunct
is proved and recorded in the proper Diocese, with the Register of the
Archdeacon, or his Official of course, or the Commissarie.

And in the Bishops Visitation, with his Chancellor or Commissarie; with
reservation only to the peculiars, together with the benefit of general
Visitation.

Note, that by reason of the familiarity between the Bishops Commissarie, and
the Archdeacon, commonly you may find Wills, not being of Prerogative nature,
so soon (sometimes) with the one, as the other.

The like Rule is of Administrations in the Diocese.

Only note, That sometimes you shall find Wills proved, and Administration
granted in several Diocese (quoad) unto several parts or parcels of the
estate of the Defunct, lying and being at the time of his death so separate and
divided: And sometime those which of right are proved, or granted and recorded
in the Prerogative, to be likewise called to be proved or recorded in the
proper Diocese.

For such Wills as fall in time of Visitation, either of the Archbishop, or
the Bishop of the Diocese, you must search for them according to the Rule of
their times, and years of Visitation, wherein they are very certain.

And (as I take it) heretofore, when the Pope had power of Visitation in
England, he took likewise Probate of Wills, etc. Which may be very well now
missing inter alia.

OBSERVATION.
You shall note, that there be some Wills of the deceased, which cannot be
found with the Register of any Court Christian; and yet are extant in the
Chaple of the Rolls of Chancerie, or the Tower, in their Offices post mortem.

And lastly, some Wills, which cannot be found either with Register of Court
Christian, or in Chancerie, may (in case, inter alia, where the deceased has
devised any thing to any Society, or Body Politic) be found enrolled in
the House, College, Hospital, Hall, Abbey, etc. to whom such things were
devised; or amongst the Records of such Societies, dissolved; or amongst the
Evidences of such, as unto whom the same things so given, have sithence come,
if you pursue the same.

And this shall suffice for Wills and Testaments; wherein I only write mine
own Practice.

PRESENTATIONS, AND CONFIRMATIONS.
NEXT, there are with the Register of the Courts Christian,

Presentations and Confirmations To Spiritual Promotions, being either Proper
to the proper Patron, or Accidentarie, by Lapse.

1. For the proper Presentation, search with the Register of the Bishop, or of
the Deane and Chapter, in cases where they have the Property originally; and
the Record thereof is to be found with them respectively.

2. And with the Bishops Register only, in case the Presentation falls unto
him by Lapse.

3. But in case where any other private Patron does present in his own right,
in his due time; the best light for discovery thereof, is by the Induction,
and sometimes by the confirmation of such Grants.

4. Or in cases where the King presents by Lapse, or Omission in the Bishop;
search in the Chancerie: and generally, in most cases search in the First
Fruits.

CONFIRMATIONS.
COnfirmations are (for the most part) with the Bishop of the Diocese.

And you shall find, before the Dissolution of the Abbeyes, that Spiritual
Livings or Promotions were seldom given to any Religious House; but that the
Patron of the same House confirmed it, and kept Record thereof.

IMMVNITIES.
THERE are next with the Registers of Courts Christian, Records of Immunities
Privileges Rights of Prescription
granted to Bodies Politic or Private.

As,

For exemption from paying of Tithe at all.

For paying of a Rate Tithe.

For paying, or doing somewhat, in stead of Tithe.

For exemption from coming to the Parish Church.

For exemption from diverse other Duties; as Watch, Ward, and others, of diverse
other sorts.

For Peculiarities.

For Privileges of diverse kinds.

For Faculties of diverse natures.

And these, by custom and continuance, have attained to such reputation, that
notwithstanding the Records should be lost, yet the Remembrance or
Prescription of them holds his wonted force and validity.

And (which is most strange to me) that notwithstanding there be many times,
in many cases, Records to clear the Prescription in question: yet, in
pleading, they do often use no other argument, but the memory of Man, which
may err. And therefore I could wish, that the several Registers of all
Diocese, would collect all such Records; that thereof there might be a
perfect Volume digested, for Succession.

But alas, if most of these Immunities, Privileges, and Rights, were granted
at the first, and generally afterward confirmed by the Popes Visitant in
England: (as I partly know, and am otherwise induced to believe the same.)
Where may I then say, these Records are to be found, so perfect as at Rome?
Where (I have heard credibly) that they be very carefully preserved at this
hour; and would (if they might be had) clear many tedious and expensiue Suits
for matter of Prescription. And if they whom it chiefly concerns, would be at
the charge thereof; I durst undertake (with Gods assistance) to bring them all
exemplified faithfully into England within three years.

Thus omitting to speak of any Record concerning Matters of Matrimony, which
is Twynne with matter of Contract (having no other natural Mother then Court
Christian) because it is every man's Learning, I pass it over, with all other
their Records, which tend not to the enucleating of Title, and Estate. And if
any one answer, that the Confirmation, or Nullitie of Marriage, touches many
an ones Freehold and personal Estate very nearly, and therefore would not
be so slightly pretermitted: I reply, touching Marriages questionable upon
Propinquitie of Blood, Pre-contract, want of Age in either party, indirect
accomplishment, Disparitie, want of Consummation, or Disabilitie of the
Minister marrying the parties, with the like proceedings, tending to
Separation, or Nullitie; you shall search in the Proper Diocese generally; and
sometimes, with the Register of the High Commission. But the Misdemeanors
themselves in surreptitious Marriages, are (of later times) for the most part,
to be found in the Star Chamber. And for the Solemnization of the Marriage it
self, search the Parochial Register: Which, because it is sometimes
uncertain, in regard that the Marriage performed by Faculty of License, may
alter the place; it were not amiss, that all Churchwardens might be enjoined
to present (quarterly) every particular Marriage, celebrated in their Parishes
respectively.

THus having brought the execution and intention of these Labors into a
Circle; presuming, that you will not, in Title of Coppy-hold, require me to
open that, of which (for the most part) your Steward of the Manor, and
certain of the Coppy-holders keep the Keys: Neither to inform you in the
Customs, Liberties, or Privileges of Cities, and Towns Corporate; which your
Librarie-Keeper, or other Officer, who keeps the Treasury of all the same
Records in their common Guild Hall, can only show you, (especially for the
Customs of the City of London; whereupon old Dunthorne and their Liber Albus
do most excellently treat) I rest

Sub rostro Cyconi^.

FINIS.

