Prepositas his Practice, A Work very necessary to be used for the better
preservation of the Health of Man.

Wherein are not only most excellent and approved Medicines, Receiptes, and
Ointmentes of great virtue, but also most precious Waters, against many
infirmities of the body.

The way how to make every the said several Medicines, Receiptes, and
Ointments.

With a Table for the ready finding out of every the Diseases, and the Remedies
for the same.

Translated out of Latin into English by L. M.

fleur-de-lys with five-petalled flowers and a corn sheaf growing from it

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf for Edward White, dwelling at the little North
door of Paul's, at the Sign of the Gunne. 1588.

TO THE READER.
HEre have thou (gentle reader) a book for thy profit, such as in English I
know not the like, for hearein may thou readily find medicines for sundry
diseases, and how thy self may make the same, or cause them to be made: also
thou may here learn to know the virtue and operation, as well of diverse
herbs with their seeds and fruits, as also of gummes, spices, and other
Apothecaries stuff, and how thou may apply them for thy help, either
outwardly or inwardely. But as nothing can be of every man well liked: for
such a confusednes is there of opinions, that rightly it may be said: Quot
homines, tot sententia: and men in viewing of other men's books do for the
most part judge partially, or else enuiously. Homere found a cauelling Zoilus,
Cicero and Virgil wanted not such as found fault with their works, though most
excellent: much less may I look to have this book spared of all busy
bodies, and that it should pass without gainsaying: Some peradventure will
object that it is prejudicial unto physicians, Apothecaries, and such other,
that such manner books as this should be diuulged in the English tongue, and
that the secrets of physic ought not to be participated unto the common
sort, but only known of such as be professors of the art. Hereto may be
answered; that as to prefer the insatiable gain of a few, before the
commodity of the whole public weal, were a thing against nature most
injurious and odious; so for to pleasure a few men, to deprive all other of
such a benefit as concern their health; yea, and their life also, for want of
knowledge whereof many do perish daily, were not only great inhumanitie, but
most opposite and contrary to that which God in his law has enjoined us under
pain of damnation; that is, Love thy neighbor as thy self: and in deed many
of the heathen gave to be observed in general, this, Do unto others as thou
would be done unto. Neither can the learned physicians (as I suppose) be
hindered hereby: for as a man that has attained unto some insight and use of
learning, in what art soever, is carried with more delight and willing cheer
to seek for to get some more perfection therein, then he was when first he
begun rudely, and having no perseverance in the said art: so, no doubt, when
men or women shall, having read this book, see and understand how that there
are in herbs, plants, gummes etc. such several virtues, and that of them
diverse so wholesome conserues, confections, sirops and other like may be made,
which they have utterly been ignorant of until now, they will be the better
persuaded to like and esteem of physic then heretofore they have done, and
more ready to seek help and counsel of the learned physician, without whose
advise, if the unlearned would in difficult matters take upon them to deal as
physicians, they might in stead of helping the diseased, do him much hurt.
Hardly can the unlearned in physic judge rightly of his own disease, much
less of the diverse diseases of others: Only for some diseases ordinarily
known, for which some are not able, and some dare not to seek remedy at the
physician, no reason is that such yet should be utterly debarred of that
ordinary help which God has appointed. And if the learned in times past had
been so straitely bent to keep hidden their knowledge from participating to
others, or rather so envious of other men's weal, as many now a days are
injurious, not in hiding their own skill, but in seeking to bereave men of the
fruition of that good benefit of health, concerning which, sundry learned men
have given generally to be published; far to seek had all men now been of
that perfection that they are come unto. But, for that I hope the wise and
learned will gainesay nothing that is beneficial to the common weal; nor
esteem such a benefit, unto them a preiudise, but rather a pleasure: I not
waighing the unsavory speeches and contumelies of carping cauellers, will
leave to commend those things which being tried shall sufficiently praise them
selves.

Vale.
The signs of the waightes, which the Pothecaries use now a days.
A grain. is thus written. Gra. A scruple. is thus written.. A dram. is thus
written.. An ounce. is thus written.. A pound. is thus written. lib. A
quarter. is thus written. qr. Half a quarter. is thus written. s. A handful.
is thus written. m. Aureus. is thus written. aur.

Aureus does contain a dram and a half. Ana, signifies altogether, and
thus is written, An^.

A pound. does contain. twelve.. A quarter of a pound. does contain. three.
Half a quarter. does contain.. s. An ounce. does contain. eight. A dram.
does contain. three. A scruple. does contain. two ob. A half penny. does
contain. three siliques.

One grain of Siliqua is as much as six grains of Lentieles, the which
grain doubled six times, comes to xxxvi. and then they make a scruple,
three. makes a. viii. drammes makes a. xvi.. makes a lib. xx. wheat corns
makes a scruple also.

1. A very excellent medecin, taken out of Actuarius the Physician, which the
Apothecaries call Antidotum sincritum.
TAke of myrre xvii.. of opium, the juice of black popie xviii.. of ammomum
vi.. of parsely xv.. of the seed of smalage. xij. squinantum ix.. casia egyptia
four. white pepper four. black pepper xv.. of the best mustard xij.. of
storax six. siler montaine four. of the thickest part of the ointment called
hedicroy five. of honey clarified as much as will suffice in your judgment, the
quantity of this which shall be received at once, is one. take your storax with
honey, sprinkle or cast on the ointment dry, and seethe your opium with sweet
wine, and sodden to the third part, til it be as thick as honey.

This is good against a quartaine, long aches of the head, the turning sickness,
the falling evil, over much waking, francy, the pain of the eyes, the rumes,
the foothache, shortness of wind, sighing, old coughes from the lunges, the
pluresie, and superfluous humors about the lunges, it causes also the spittle
to be thick, and apt to avoid, taken with idromel, which is made of honey and
water sodden together, if a man do spit blood, then it must be taken with
assetum multum, which is made of vinegar and honey, or else it ought to be
received with vinegar mixed with water, or else with two. of the juice of knot
grass, or plantaine, how be it ye must add or diminish according to the
strength of the patient, it is also a present remedy for the stomach, for it
consumes superfluous humors, and causes a good appetite, it cures the
hycup, and stops vomiting, it auoydeth wind from the stomach and from the
lower parts, it helps the pain of the liver, the yelow iawndize, and all
diseases of melancoly, the grief and heuines of the spleen, it engenders
good choler, it purges downward fleame and choler, it does distribute the meat
digested into his parts, it provoke urine, and causes grauel in the reigns
and bladder to avoid, it cures ilica and colica passio, taken with drink, it
moves a man to the stool, and cures inflamacions in short time, it does
mitigate the gnawing and the pain of the belly, it does help and take away
the over much stretching forth of the matrice, and when it cannot be easily
taken in the mouth, then let it bs ministered with the juice of fenicrike at the
fundement, even so it will take away all the pain of the lower parts, it does
cure all diseases of the matrice, it asswageth the pain of women which labor
of child, it cures the mother and drawing up of the matrice, and the
stretching of it, it stops unnatural purgations, and purges fluxes of blood
from the matrice, if it be taken alone or else with wine hot, we may also use
this in the gout of the feet, and in arthritica passio, which is a weakness in
the joints of superfluous humors, a kind of the gout, in the beginning of
diseases, we may know best the virtue of this medicine, which does not only
remedy all inward griefs, but also the palsy and those members which be weak
and lose, if they be therewith anointed, it does also recover those which be
in danger of life.

2 The very wholesome medicine of Alexander the Physician, called of the
Pothecaries Aurea Alexandrina.
TAke of asara bacca, ye seed of balm, the seed of henbane, au^. which is
altogether two. s. of cloves, mirre, cypres, opium, which is in the juice of
the black popie, au^. two. the juice of balm, cinnamon, folium, indicum,
setwall, ginger, cost, curral, casia, fistula, the gunme of tragantum, spike,
wild fenel, frankencense, euphorbe, storax, calamite, cardamomum, siler
montan, mustard: saxifrage, dill, anniseede, au^.. ligny aloes, rhewbarberha,
the confection called alixta moscata, ye stones of ye otter, galanga, opoponax,
the fruit anacardine, masticke, brimstone vnslecked, pione, knee holme, roses,
time, gladian, penerial, both aristolochia, the long and the round gentian, the
outer rind of mandragora, germander, the berries of the bay tree, yelow
carrots, ammy, the root of valerian, long pepper, white pepper, the wood of
balm, called xylobalsamu^, carawaies, ammomum, parsely, louage, the seed of
rue, au^.. s. fine gold and silver, little perls, little fishes called of the
Pothecaries vnguis odoratus, the bone in the heart of the red dear, the
shauing of iuery, calamus aramaticus, pelliter of spain, au^. nine grains of
honey as much as your judgment mete.

This is good against rumes of the head, which come of cold, the moyster and
running of the eyes, the toothe ache, the head ache, if the head be therewith
anointed, it does also cure the falling evil, madness, turning sickness of the
head, and to conclude al manner of diseases which be about ye head, it helps
also those which be in a consumption, and those which be troubled with the
cough, or have superfluity in the breast of humors, the gnawing and griping of
the mouth of the stomach, which the Grecians call (...) the Latins
animideliquium, which is a fainting or sounding, it cures spitting of blood,
and sciatica passio, which is an ache in the hippes, or hoocull bone of humors,
it asswageth also the cholicke, and scoureth the reigns, it provoke urine,
and cures the strangurian, it breaks the stone coniealed in the reigns or
bladder, it takes away all diseases of the belly, it cures cotidians and
tercian agues, taken with the juice of sticados in the beginning of the extreme
fittes of the said agues.

3 An odoriferous and pleasant medicine of Roses, made of Doctor Gabriell,
called aromaticum Rosatum.
TAke red roses fifteen. licoras eight. liguialoes, sanders, au^. two.
cinamond five. mace, cloves au^. two. s. gummy arabic, tragantum, au^. two.
two. nutmegs, the greater cardamomu^, galanga au^.. spinard gray amber au^.
two. of musk, one. of sirup of roses as much as will suffice.

This helps the weakness of the stomach, and does comfort all the
principal, parts, it has been proved against superfluous humors of the
stomach, it refreshes the brain and the heart, it causes appetite and good
digestion, both to those which be sick, and also in health.

4 A pleasant medicine of Cloves made by Doctor Mesues, called Aromaticum
gariophilatum.
TAke of cloves seven. mace, setwall, galanga, yelow sanders, little balls of
roses called trochistes, diarodon, cinamond, ligny, aloes, spikenard, long
pepper, the less cardamomum, one. roses, grated licoras, the confection called
gallia moscata, folium indicum, cubebes au^. three. of amber one. of musk. s.
of the sirup of pomisitron, as much as you judge sufficient enough.

This cures the stomach and the heart, stops vomiting, it does also
consume the corrupt humors in the stomach, and nourishes all the principal
members, it causes heat and dissolueth wind.

5 A confection of musk made by Doctor Nicholas, called Alipta Moscata.
TAke of the best gum of lead, three. of storax, calamity, one. s. ligni
aloes, two. stacte or the fattest part of mirhe, one. of amber one. camphyre
one. s. of musk. s. of rose water as much as will suffice.

This does help children which be short winded, and the strains of the
breast, and for them that cannot keep their milk, of this we may make very
excellent perfume, which noble men be accustomed to use, it is also oftentimes
mixed with electuaries.

6 The making of Acacie.
TAke the plant or branch of the bulls tree, with the fruit, and lay it in a
vessel with water certain days, and so stand, then seethe it upon the fire,
and strain forth the liquor, when it is strained, seethe it again until it
be thick and keepit in fine vessels like shells, and so dry it.

7. The making of Amili.
TAke good wheat and beat it lightly, not to small, and put it into a vessel
of glass, and set it in water, so that the water be above it two or three
fingers, and so let it stand by the space of a night, in the morning press it
down well unto the substance, of the which ammily shall be made of, descending
to the bottom, afterward strain it with a sieve, and cast away the bran which
swimmeth above, then cast forth the water softly so that nothing remain, then
dry it with a little cotton, let this be done in summer, and also soon dride,
least it wax sour and so corrupt, and cover thy vessel with a fine cloth,
that nothing fall in afterward, and when it is dry, then reserve it in a
vessel with a strait mouth, so close stopped that nothing may enter in. If ye
will make this in winter, then ye must take heed that it be not sour, we must
also provide that it be soon dride in summer and in winter by the sun, or in
the wind, or nigh the fire, and thus ye may make amilum of rice,

8. Aqua Odorifera, a sweet water.
TAke of rose water four lib. benswine, storax calamity, cloves au^. one. of
musk and ciuet twenty grains, and of camphire two. some put unto this one.
of ligny aloes, let them be put into a vessel of glass, covered with a cover
having holes in it, and then let them boil in a vessel full of water, as it
were in balneo mary, which is a glass, or an other little vessel, set within
another, on the fire, this done, strain them with a fine linen cloth, and so
to be reserved in a vessel of glass, wherein shall be put fifteen grains of
musk, tempered with the same water, and set in the sun, the space of
fifteen days, and then it will prove a sweet and a odoriferous water.

A medicine called Benedicta of Doctor Nicholas.
TAke of best turbith, sugar au^. ten. diagridion v.. wild liles, roses, au^.
five. cloves, spikenarde, ginger, saffron, saxafrage, long pepper, ammum,
cardamomum, the seed of smallage, salgem, galanga, mace, carrawaies, fennel,
sperrage, kneeholme or bochers broom, gromell seed, au^. one. of honey as much
as will suffice.

This does cure the weakness of the joints of humors, which is a kind of the
gout in the feet of cold, it does also purge the reigns and the bladder.

A medicine called Balsamum, artificial, because it is made with great art and
cunning.
TAke turpentine twelve. gummi elomi, five. of rosen three. let them be melted
together, and when they be melted mingle these pouders following, of
aristolochia longa, two. of dragons blood, three. make these in great pieces.
This medicine does help both new and old wounds, and chiefly those that be
about the head.

C. 11. A sweet confection of Musk, made by Doctor Mesues.
TAke saffron, the sweet root of doronick, setwall, ligne aloes, mace, au^.
two. white perls, silk in powder, amber, red coral, au^. two. s. the
confection which is called galia, au^. two. s. galia moschata, basell au^. ij..
s. ye two roots of behen both white and red, spikenard, folium indicum,
cloves, au^. one. ginger. cubebes, long pepper au^. one. s. musk one. two.
make this with honey not clarified, the fourth part of the weight of all the
other.

This does cure the trembling of the heart, and diseases of melancholy, and
those men which be heavy without cause, it is a remedy also for diseases
about the brain, as the turning sickness, the falling evil, the wrything or
plucking of the mouth or neck on the one side, and all diseases of the lungs,
and shortness of wind.

12 A confection called Hamecke, made by Doctor Mesues.
TAke the four kinds of myrrobolance, four. rhubarbe. au^. two. agaricke,
coloquintida, polipodi of the oak. au^. eighteen. wormwood, time, seen, au^.
one.. violets, fifteen. the flower of the harder time, two. annisseede, roses,
fenell, au^. six. the juice of femitore one lib. prunes in number threescore,
of rasons, of currants ye stones taken out, six. toall these things pour in a
sufficient quantity of wheye, and put them into a vessel of glass, which has
a strait mouth, and stop the mouth the space of five days, afterward, let
them once boil again, and then strain them, and dissolve into the strayning
three. of casia fistula, and of the fruit of the wild date tree, called of
the Pothecaries, thamariud, five. of manna or wet dew two. break them with
your hands, and strain them, then cast on sugar one lib. s. stammony one. s.
sees them until they be as thick as honny, then cast on them the powder of
all the five kinds of myrrobolance, rheubarbe, the seed of fumytery, au^.
three. annisseede, spinard. au^. two.

This cures all diseases which come of salt fleame, choler, and chifely the
ringworme, scabs, lepre, cankers, and such other.

13 A confection for the stomach called, cerotum stomaticum, of Doctor Mesues.
TAke of red roses twenty. the leaves of wormwood fifteen. of mastike
twenty. spinarde ten. beat them small, then take of virgin wax four. the
oil of roses one lib. s. and make your confection.

There be some that do wash the oil and the wax, and then resolve them with
a gentle fire, and afterward mingle them with the other, and so it is judged
to be the better.

This does mittigate inflammations and hot impostumes which be in the stomach
and liver.

14 A confection for the eyes, called Collirum album, of Doctor Rhasis.
TAke of white lead washed ten. of ammyly, four. of gummi arabike, the gummi
tragantum, au^. two. of camphuri. s. make those in powder which be fit to be
made in powder, and dissolve them in rose water, and afterward make thereof
little balls.

15 A conserve of Buglosse.
TAke the leaves of buglosse, one lib. beat them in a mortar of stone, and
then cast upon them three lib. of sugar, make your conserve like to opiata,
which is a thin electuarie. This comfort the stomach, and helps
diseases which come of melancholy, and wounding and troubling of the heart, it
purges choler also.

16 A conserve of the flowers of Rosemarie.
TAke of the flowers of rosemarie, lib. s. of sugar one lib. s. make your
conserve.

This does comfort a moist brain, and helps hard or stiff members it
purges also melancholy and steame.

17 A conserve of Borage.
TAke of the flowers of borage four. of sugar twelve. make your conserve
according to the same.

This does remedy the trembling of the heart, and sounding it purges also
melancholy, and causes a man to be merry.

18 A conserve of Roses.
TAke of the leaves of roses one lib. beat them in a mortar of stone, then
cast upon them sugar three lib. make your conserve after the fashion of opiata.

This does comfort the stomach, the heart, and all the principal parts, it
does also mollify those parts which be hard, it purges melancholy,

19 A conserve of Violets.
TAke of the flowers of violets one lib. beat them in a mortar of stone, and
cast upon them three lib. of sugar, make your conserve according.

This does cure inflamacions of choler, it quenches thirst, and moves a man
to the stool.

20 A conserve of Maidenhaire.
TAke of maidenhaire one lib. beat it in a mortar, and put sugar unto it as in
the other.

This helpethe the pluresie, and diseases of the breast, the lungs, and all
diseases of melancholy, and red choler.

21 A conserve of gladian.
TAke of the roots of gladian one lib. sees it in water until it be well
sodden, afterward dry it, and search it through a seeue, and then set it on
the fire again, and put in three lib. of sugar unto it, make this conserve
like the electuarie opiata.

This remedieth diseases of the brain, and the sinnowes and fleame.

22 A conserve of Enulacampana.
TAke of the root of enulacampana two lib. sees it well, afterward dry it,
then search it through a seeue, and set it on the fire again, and put six
lib. of sugar unto it, and reserve it.

This does comfort the stomach and the principal members against fleame.

23 A conserve of Succory.
TAke of the flowers of succory, one lib. and beat it in a mortar of stone,
then cast upon them three lib. of sugar.

This purges melancholy, and also it purges well choler.

24 A conserve of Sorell.
TAke of sorel lib. s. and beat it as ye did the other, and cast then unto
them of sugar lib. s.

This is good to help cholerike persons.

25 A concoction of Quinces.
TAke of quinces as you shall think good, and sees them, take of the
decoction of them three lib. of sugar one lib. s. sees them well, and reserve
them: some Pothecaries put in the whites of eggs when they be clarified.

An other way of making this confection of Quinces.
TAke the seed or kirnels of quinces, four. temper them by the space of half
a day with three lib. of the juice of quinces, then boil them a little, and
strain them and cast upon two lib. of sugar, afterward sees them well, and
keep them in boxes,

26 A conserve of the substance of the apple of the quince.
TAke of quinces six lib. sees them, and when they be sodden, put unto them
four lib. of sugar, and sees them well, as you did before, and then keep
them in little boxes.

D. 27. A confection of Galanga of Doctor Mesues, called Dia Galanga.
TAke of galanga, lignum aloes, au^. six. of cloves, mace, louage, au^. three
ginger, long pepper, cinamond, white pepper one. s. of calamint dry, of dry
mint, au^. one. of cardamomum, the less, spikenard, the seed of smallage,
fennel, anuiseede, carawaies, au^. one. calamus aromaticus one. of the best
sugar ten. s. of honey clarified as much as will suffice.

This does cure diseases which comes of wind, and belching which seems to
be sharp in the mouth as vinegar, it is proved to cause good digestion, it
comfort the functions of the stomach, and the liver being cold.

28. A confection of Commin called Diacominum.
TAke of comin laid in vinegar, the space of a day, and afterward dride, eight.
one. of cinamond, cloves, au^. two. s. black pepper and ginger au^. two gra.
five, of galanga, sauery, calaminte, au^. one. two. ammy, louage au^. one.
xviij. gra. long pepper, one. spikenard, cardamomum, nutmegs, au^. two. s. of
honey as much as you shall think meet.

This helps the stomach, and the principal parts which be troubled with
wind, it causes good digestion, and brings heat to the stomach, and to the
principal parts.

29. A confection of Ambre called, Dia ambre.
Take of cinamond, adoronic, cloves, mace, nutmegs, the leaves of galinga
three. the greatest cardamomum and the lesser au^. one. ginger, sanders, ligni
aloes, long pepper, au^. two. of amber one. s. of musk. s. make it with the
sirup of roses, and with the water of roses.

This fortifieth the brain, the heart, the stomach, and all the principal
parts of the members, it causes good digestion, and makes a man merry, and
engenders heat in the principal parts, it is very comfortable for old men,
and to those which be cold of nature and of complexion, and to women it also
cures the diseases of the matrice.

30. A confection of Perles of Doctor Nicholas, Diamargaritum Calidum.
TAke of cloves, cinamond, spikenard, ligne aloes, galanga, licoras, little
balls of roses, called trokisti, diarodon, little balls of violets au^. one.
s. nutmegs, mace, the confection of musk, setwall, rhubarbe, storar calaminte
au^. one. perles, ginger, the bone in the heart of the red dear, the shauing
of iuery, little fishes, which the Pothecaries call vnguis odoratus au^.. s.
musk, amber, cardamomum, louage, the seed of basel au^. one two gra. of
camphire, six gra. of honey, rosatum, as much as will suffice.

This does cure the weakness of all the body, sounding, and fainting* both of
the stomach and the heart, it comfort the lively parts of those which be
pensiful and sad, sighing, or have the cough, or be in a consumption, it also
recouereth those which be weak of long sickness.

31. An other confection of Perles, called Diamargaritum Frigidum.
TAke of all the kinds of sanders, the flowers of roses, the flowers of
violets, the seed of millons, little bales of roses called trokysti, diarodon,
silk made in powder, au^. two-. the bone of the heart of the red dear,
spodie, dornonicke, the root of both behen, the white and the red, spikenard,
saffron, au^. two. perils, shauing of iuery, sapphire, flower gentle, iacinct,
emerode, seed of sorell, seed of endive, ligni aloes, a grain of amber,
au^.. s. of fine gold one. camphure one of musk two grains, mix them and make
thereof a powder.

32. A confection called Diacomeron.
TAke of ye gross lenis, ginger, au^. v.. one. sixteen grains, of cinamond, of
the best cloves, au^. three. one. sixteen grains, as much of the substance of
dates, galange, spikenard, set wall, cost, the pellitorie of spain, white
coral and red, of the gumbe tragantum, rha, spike, the fruit anacardim, the
stones of dates, the seed of balm, anniseed, juniper seed au^. one. two.
eight grains, shauing of gold, the bone of the heart of the red dear, au^.
two. s. shauing of iuery, of musk, au^. one. grain six of amber, one. of
bony, roset, as much as you shall think best, this confection is not made of
some Apothecaries, nor it is not greatly used, yet other some chiefly do
occupy it very much.

This will recover a man from danger of death unto life, it also helps those
which be short winded, or have any disease in the wind pipe, or the cough, or
be in consumption, it cures all diseases of the breast and stomach, the
dropsy, pain in the reigns, it brings mirth, and causes a man to be iustie
and fat.

33. A confection of Roses, called Diarodon Abbatis.
TAke of sanders red and white, au^. two. s. of gumbe, tragantum, gumbe
arabicke, spodie au^. two. asarabacca, masticke, cardamomum, saffron,
spikenard, the juice of licoras, cloves, musk, anniseed, fennel, cinamond,
rhubarbe, and basel seed, barberies, seed of wild succory, seed of purselin,
seed of white poppie, seed of goords, cowcumbers, millons, cytrons au^.. s.
perles, the bone of the heart in the red dear, au^.. s. sugar candy, roses,
au^. one. three. of camphyre eight grains, of musk one. gra. s. make this
with the sirup of rose water.

This does help the yelow iaundise, the weakness of the liver, consumptions,
and diseases about the heart, and those which be troubled with a heat about the
stomach, lunges, or the whole body, and also those which recover from long and
hot agues.

34 A confection of Calamintes, of Doctor Nicholas, Diacalamintes.
TAke calamintes, peniriall, hisope, black pepper, silar motan, parsely, au^.
three. two. of louage one. one. of smallage, ammy, time, dill, anniseed,
cinamond, ginger, au^. two. of honey as much as will suffice.

This does cure faults of the stomach which come of cold, and causes
digestion, and chiefly in old men, it takes away the cough which comes of
cold causes.

35 A confection of the three peppers, of Doctor Nicholas, called Diatrion
Pipereon.
TAke of the three peppers eight. s. ginger, time, anniseed au^. three.
spikenard, ammy, amomum, cinamond au^. aur. one casia fistula, siler montan,
enula campana, dry, au^. aur. s. make it with honey clarified.

This does engender heat in the stomach and the belly, it remedieth all pain
of flegmatike causes, it purges the stomach of raw humors, and helps
digestion.

36 A confection of horehound of D. Nicholas called Dia Prasium.
TAke of green horehound five. s. tragantum, piaples, sweet almonds of
fistici, which is a kind of nuttes, the substance of dates, moist figs,
raisons, of currants, the stones taken forth, au^. three. s. cinamond, cloves,
nutmegs, mace, galanga, ligny aloes, spinard, ginger, setwall, licoras, rha,
anacardin, storax, calaminte, galbalum, turpentine washed, of masticke, mirhe,
flowredeluce, aristolochia rotunda, the root of sipers, black pepper,
anniseed, dyll, fennel, seed of smallage, parsely, saxefrage, au^. two. wild
lylies, organy, woormewood, squinantum, cardamomum, white pepper, carawaies,
louage, daisie, au^. one. s. gra. two s. pelitary of spain, water mint,
peneriall, dittan toste, sauery, basil, piony, long pepper, ammomum, orobus,
au^. one. two gra. three. the wood of balm, casia fistula, coral, shauing of
iuery, seed of balm, yelow carrot, au^.. s. musk, amber, the bone in the
heart of the red dear, au^. xiij. gra. of honey clarified as much as shall be
sufficient, and make it after this form following: Put in four lib. of
clarified honey five. of green horehound beaten, and young piapilles pared,
put also unto them three. of the best old wine, and let them boil together,
with a soft fire, until the wine be consumed, let your dry figs be made
clean within and without, dress likewise your dates, and let your raisons be
picked, dress likewise your pineapples, your almonds, and your nuttes fistise,
dry every one of them by themselves, afterward beat them in a mortar wherein
they were before, and mingle them with these spices which we have spoken of
before.

This does cure the weakness of the stomach, and chiefly rumes, and the brain
of cold, the turning sickness, the eye sight, and the wind pipe which is
troubled with gross fleame, it does also mitigate the pain of the toothe ache.

37 A medicine of Floredeluice, called diaires Simpleisis.
TAke of the flowredeluce one. sugar candy, tragantum cold, which is a root,
au^. three. mingle them and make them in powder.

38 An other medicine of Flowredeluce, diaris Salomonis.
TAke of flowredeluce, one. peneriall, isope, licoras, au^. six. the gum
tragantum, almonds, pineapples, and cinamond, ginger, pepper, au^. three dry
figs, the substance of dates, raisons, of corants picked, au^. three. s.
storax red two. one. of honey as much as will be sufficient for your purpose.

This is good against the cough and shortness of wind, and it also restores
the speech lost.

39 A medicine of gum Tragantum, called Diatragacantha Calida.
TAke of the gum tragantum, and hisope, au^. four. pineapples, both the
kinds of almonds blanched, linseed, au^. six. the seed of fenikrike,
cinamond, au^.. s. licoras, and of the juice of it, ginger, au^. two. make a
powder of these.

This is ministered in the hardness and straitnes of the breast, which comes of
gross and cold causes.

40 A medicine of the root of Traganti, called Dia tragacantha Frigida.
TAke of the white tragantum two. gummy arabicke one. two. amili. s. of licoras
two. of penidis three. the four greater cold seeds, pared and picked au^.
two. of camphire,. s. of the sirup of violets as much as will suffice.

This does cure all diseases about the lunges, the breast, and chiefly those
which be in a consumption and ill liking, the pluresie, the cough, and those
which be hot and dry, the roughnes of the tongue and the throt, let the pacient
hold it in his mouth, and swallow it down when it is melted.

41 A confection of Mulberries, of D. M. called Diamoron Posno.
TAke of the juice of mulberries, lib. s. the juice of black berries, one lib.
of honey, lib. s. sodden in sweet wine to the third part of three. make it
after this form, let your juice boil with your honey and sweet wine, with a
soft fire, in a vessel of brass or tin, until it be well sodden, and to know
when it is well sodden, ye must take a drop of it and lay it upon a marble
stone, if it will bide upon the stone, and cleave like honey, the stone turned
vpside down, then it is well sodden, this done, strain it and keep it in a
vessel of tin.

This is good against sores in the throat, and all kinds of swelling.

42 A confection of black Poppie, Dia Codion.
TAke ten heads of black poppie, not too great nor too small, nor too moist
nor too dry, cast on them, two lib. s. of rain water, and if they have more
moisture then drines, let them lie in the water a day and a night, but if they
be drier, then let them lie longer, then after this, seethe them until half
the water be consumed, and so strain it.

This is ministered in all fluxes, and chiefly in the bloody flux, with the
decoction of rain water, in the which spodie has been sodden in, or with rose
water, it does also stop the flux of meat undigested, which the Physicians
call lienteria.

43 A confection of Poppie white, D.M. Dia Papauer.
TAke of white poppie, five and twenty. sweet almonds blanched, the grains or
kirnels of pineapple, and gum arabicke, gum tragantum, the juice of licoras,
au^. ten. of ammili four. the seed of purselin, the seed of lettise, kirnels
of quinces, au^. four. of saffron, one. of penides four. take of the sirup of
poppie as much as will be sufficient.

This helps those which be in a consumption, and those which cannot sleep.

44 A conffection of safron called, dia curcuma.
TAke of saffron asarabacca, parseley, yealow carrots, aniseede, the seed of
smallage, au^. four. rhubarbe, and wild fennill, spikenard, au^. six. cost,
the berries of myrtilltree, casia fistula, squinantum, the seed of balm,
madder, juice of wormwood, juice of egrimonie, juice of balm, au^. two.
calamus aromaticus, cinnamon, au^. one. s. wild garlike, ceterac, the juice of
licoras au^. two. s.. the gum tragantum, one. make it with clarified honny.

This cures old diseases, and the evil liking and deformity of the body,
when the meat being received, does not nourish but is corrupt in the body, it
also helps the dropsy, the diseases of the liver, and the spleen when they
be hard, or indurat, it purges the stomach of corrupt humors, cold and
windy, it purges and mitigateth pain in the raines and bladder, it provoke
urine.

45 A confection of the hear be Saturion, dia Saturion.
TAke the root of saturion which is like stones, the garden parsnip, the nut
of inde which is called of the Pothecaries, fisteci, stirwits, cloves au^.
twelve. ginger aniseed, roket, of birds tongue or stych worte, five. cinnamon,
the tails of small crocodilles in the river of Nylus of the same kind that
the crocodilles of the earth be on, crow garlike, two. s. of five gra. make it
after this form, put the root of saturion in so much clarified honny as will
suffice, let also your parsnips and stirwits be well beaten by themselves, then
put them into the same honny, and stir them well, and let it sees a certain
space, then mingle with them your principals, your nuts fistici, first well
stamped, when they have boiled a little while, then take them from the fire, and
put unto them the powder of the spices, and at the last put in your musk with
rose water.

This does restore and fortify the weakness of the raines of the bladder, it
provoke urine, and moves a man to venere.

46 A confection of prunes Do. N. dia prunes.
TAke a hundredth of damsons, and put them in a vessel of tin, with so much
water as will cover them well, and let them boil till they be soft, then take
them from the fire, then let them stand till the water be luke warm, then take
them out of the water, and put them into a seeue over a great vessel, and
chafe the prunes so long with your hands that nothing remain but the stones
and the skins, then put into the water the which the damsons were sodden in
before one. s. of violets, and boil them, and make a sirrop with two lib. of
sugar, into the which sirrop, put the substance of the prunes, and let them
sees until they be thick, then put into the same water one. of casia
fiistula washed, put also thereto one. of the frnite thamarinde dissolved and
strained into the water, remember also that you boil in the same water of
prunes, one. s. of violets, and sees them well, stirring them continually, and
when they be well sodden, then take them from the fire, and sprinkle on these
pouders following: saunders, spody, rhubarbes, roses, violets, the seed of
purselyn, the seed of succory, barberies, the juice of licorace, the gum
tragantum, au^. two. the four gileter cold seeds, au^. one. if you will make
it laxatiue, put unto every pound when it is taken from the fire,. s. of
stammony, dia prunes, not loosing, is ministered in hot and burning agues,
chiefly in sinocho which is a continual fever of corrupt humors, in this ague
it may safely be given in the beginning, increase, and at all times, and
without diagredion it may be given at all hours of the day, with diagridion,
in the morning, but circumspectly because it is very laxatiue.

47 A confection of dates, of D. M. dia phenicon.
TAke of dates infused in vinegar three days and three nights, six. two. of
penidis which be little writhes of sugar dissolved in a decoction of barley
three. one. of almonds blanched, fifteen. of turbith two. s. of stammony six.
ginger, long pepper, the flowers of rue dried, cinamond, mace, galanga au^.
one. grains fifteen, beat them well, and make them with clarified honney.

This does cure mixed agues of diverse humors, the chollike, and the pain in the
hellie, it also purges raw humors of cold.

48 A confection of garden Saffron, called dia cartamum.
TAke of the root of tragantum. s. the substance of quinces one. the thickest
of the chyues of saffron, four. of white ginger, two. dia gridion three. white
turbeth six. Manna or sweet dew, Melrosatum, which is a confection of Honey
and Roses strained, one. of Sugar, eight. wild lylies, four. and make a
lectuary putting unto it as much honey as will suffice.

This is good to purge choler and fleame.

49 A singular confection of corrall, called dia coralium magistralem.
TAke of the spices of the confection diarosdon abbatis, which we did speak of
before, four. of both corrals, little peeses of perls au^. s. beat them into
fine powder, and put unto them of sugar resolved in water of roses, seven. s.
and make them into small pieces.

This does comfort the heart, the stomach, and chiefly those that have been
long sick and cold.

50 A confection of Casia fistula for glisters.
TAke of the flowers of violets, the leaves of mallos, mercury, pariatory, au^.
m. of the common wormwood. m. s. take all these green and young, and make a
decoction thereof, with a sufficient quantity of water, then strain them and
press them with your hands, in the stirring you must dissolve one pound of
casia fistula, and one lib. s. of the best honny. This purges and moves a man
to the stool, it is very expedient for tender and delicate persons, because
it is gentle in operation.

51 A confection of Seen, of D. N. called dia Seen.
TAke of ligni aloes, cloves, galanga, notmegs, folium indicum, mace, cinnamon,
au^. two. the stone lazare, the stone armenicke au^. two. s. take of seen twice
so much as of all the other, of saffron one. of silk not dried nor colored,
but as it comes from the silk worms, made in powder, au^. two. of the
shauing of Iuory. spody, anacardine, the bone in the heart of the red Dear,
little fishes called vngnis odoratus, au^. two. wild lillies, one. the berries
of myrts gentian, the berries of the bay tree, elleborus, niger or bear foot,
au^. two. wallnuts made in powder, fifteen in number, of amber two. of honny
as much as will suffice: and to heal the lepre, some Physicians mingle with
these serpents, flesh.

This does remedy all diseases of melancholy, and madness, cardiaca passion
which is a gnawing and a gryping about the stomach, it takes away heaviness,
quartaines, and diseases of the spleen, this confection is not greatly used
among Physicians.

52 A confection for the breast, called decoctio pectoralis.
TAke of dry hysope, maidenhaire, figs, dates, sebesten, raisons, of corans,
barley, licorace, au^. equal parts, boil these together with a sufficient
quantity of water, then strain them and reserve them.

This does assuage all pains about the breast, it cures also the cough and
horsenesse.

53 A common decoction called decoctio communis.
TAke of prunes, wild dates, resons, of corance, violets, liquirice, barley,
au^ equal parts, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, so strain
them and keep them.

This is much used in hot agues and other hot diseases, and when the time is
hot, and to temper medicines which be received in such hot agues and times,
this decoction is changed according to the diversity of diseases, because
some be hoter than other.

E. 54 An electuarie which the Pothecaries call Catholicum.
TAke seen washed, casia fistula washed, thamarind, au^. eight. rhubarbe,
violets, polipodi, annisseed, au^. four. of lichoras scraped, peuidis,
sugercandie, au^. four. the four greater cold seeds, au^. one. take a pound
of polypodi, and beat it and sees it well in water, strain it, then make a
syrrope with eight. lib. of sugar, temper your casia fistula and the fruit of
the thamarind together, and when the decoction is almost made, put them in with
the other spices, and make an electuary thereof.

This is ministered in hot and burning agues, because it does mollify,
disperse, and comfort, it does also cure diseases of the liver and the spleen.

55 An electuary of the juice of roses of D. M.
TAke of sugar and the iuce of roses, au^. one lib. four. of ye three saunders
au^. six. of camphyre, one. temper it after the form of a lectuarie, with a
sirroppe made of the same sirroppe of roses.

This does purge choler easily, and heals hot diseases in the joints, the
headache, the turning sickness, the pain of the eyes, and it has been proved
against the yelow iaundis.

56 An electuarie of fliwort, which the Pothecaries call Psillum of D. N.
TAke of the juice of buglosse, both the garden and the wild, the juice of
endife, the juice of smallage sodden altogether and fined, au^. two lib. cast
upon them the seed of dodder, annisseed, the coddes of seen, au^.. s. of
maidenhaire, one m. the juice of fumitore three. of asarabacca four.
spiknarde, two. let them lie a day and a night, and then set them on the fire,
and suffer them once to boil, then cast upon them three. of violets green or
dry, four. of the harder time, two. boil them once again with a soft fire,
then strain them, and when they be strained, put unto them three. of fliwort,
and let them stand all a day and a night, but ye must stir them continually,
this done, press forth the slymy sap of them, and take four lib. of it, and
put unto it two lib. s. of fine sugar, of scamony roasted in an apple, three. s.
after this set it on the fire again, feeth it a little, and then put in little
balls of roses which the Pothecaries call trochisti diarodon, of little balls
of spody, and of rhubarbe, au^. one. balls of barberies. s. then make your
asarabacca into a gross powder, that it may be the more laxatiue, you may
also put unto this confection, green violets, and dry saunders.

This purges yelow choler, and it helps the turning sickness of the head,
which comes of a chollericke humor.

57 An electuarie of D. N. called Inde maioris.
TAke cinamom, cloves, spiknarde, roses, casia fistula, mace, cypress, au^.
four. yelow saunders, two. s. ligni aloes, nutinegs, au^. two. turbith, one.
of sugar, penidis, au^. twenty. galanga, cardamomum, asarabacca, masticke,
au^. one. s. of scammony, twelve. beat all these together with the oil of
almonds, then take of the juice of quinces, pomgranades, of the juice of
smallage, fennill au^. one lib. s. sees these iuces with clarified honny,
until they be thick, and then make the electuarie with the other spices.

This does purge superfluous humors, and chiefly flegmatike and corrupt humors
in the stomach, and in the other principal parts, it dissolueth wind, and
cures those diseases that come thereof, as the pain of the stomach and of
the inward parts: the chollicke and the pain in the raines, it does also
consume corrupt humors in the iointes.

58 An electuarie to comfort the stomach, called Electuarium comfortatiuum
stomachi.
TAke of the grains or the stones of the myrte tree broken finely, twelve. of
roses, spody, manna, which is the flower of frankincense, of ye three pepers,
of yelow saunders, the flowers of ye wildepomgranad, gum arabycke, au^. one.
s. the grains of the pomgranade made in powder seven. of coryander, infused in
vyneger, and made in powder, four. the seed of sorrel, plantan, the seed of
roses, au^. two. break them all well, and rub them with your hands, then put
them into the water of sorrel, and so make your electuary.

This does comfort the stomach and the inward parts, it stops the laske
which comes of too strong a purgation, it moves a man to meat.

59 An electuarie of precious stones, electuarium de gemmis.
TAke of white pearls two. little pieces of the saphyr, Iasynct, cornelyn,
pomgranade, emeraude, au^. one. s. setwall, the sweet root doronicke, the
rind of pomcitron, mace, the seed of basell, au^. two. read corrall, amber,
shauing of iuery, au^. one. two. the roots of both behenes, both the white and
read, ginger, long peper, spiknard, folium inditum, saffron, cardamomum, au^.
one. little balls of roses which the apothecaries call trochisti diarodon,
ligni aloes, au^. five. cinnamon galinga,. zurubeth a kind of setwall, au^. one.
s. time, peases of gold and silver, au^. aur. s. of gald musk. s. make your
electuary with honny of amblicorum, which is a fourth kind of myrrobolance, and
with roses strained with equal parts, as much as will suffice.

This helps cold diseases of the brain, the heart stomach, and the matrice,
it is a medecin provided against the trembling of the heart, and fainting and
souning: the weakness of the stomach, pensiveness, solitariness, kings and
noble men have used this for their great comfort, it causes them to be bold
spryted, the body to smell well, and engenders good color.

60 An emplaister which the Pothecaries call, Diachilum Album Commune.
TAke of fenigreeke, linseede, the root of holicke, press out of all these
the slimy sap, and take of it one part, and of litarge beaten well, and
cleansed from the dross, one part and a half, of old and clear oil, of oil.
parts: beat the litharge and the oil long in a mortar of stone, with a pestie
of iron, then boil them on the fire softly, stirring them until the litharge
run together, then take it from the fire and suffer it to cool, after this
take the slimy sap and boil it once, then cast by little and little the slimy
sap upon the litharge and the oil, and beating them well with a pestle til
they be mixed together, afterward seethe them on the fire till they be thick,
you may put unto this emplaister the fine powder of flowredeluce, and you may
use for your common oil which is sallet oil, the oil of flowredeluce, some
mingle with this of the slimy sap of melilote.

This emplaister is very good against impostumes and hardness of the liver, and
the spleen, the stomach, and swelling about the throat, and all hardness in
any place.

61 An emplaister which the Pothecaries call, Diachilum Paruum.
TAke of litharge six. of old and clear oil one lib. of stimy sap, of
fliwort four. the slimy sap of henbane, one. s. the slimy sap of linseed,
the slimy sap of the roots of malloes, au^. two. make your emplaister
accordingly.

This emplaister does resolve and ripe swellings which come of heat, and all
impostumes.

62 An emplaister which the Pothecaries call, Diachilum magnum.
TAke of litharge broken and sitted, twelve. oil of flowerdeluce, oil of
camomile, oil of dill, au^. eight. of the slimy sap of linseed, ye slimy sap
of fenigreeke, ye roots of holihock, ye slimy sap of moist figs, the slimy sap
of raisons, of corants, the juice of isope, the slimy fat of ye belly of the
great fishes, au^. twelve. s. turpentine three. the gum of the pineapple tree,
yelow wax, au^. two. make it after this fashiou, beat your litharge and the
oils which we did speak of before, in a mortar of stone, with a pestle of
iron, the space of half an hour, then let them boil with a soft fire,
stirring them continually till they be thick, then take it from the fire and
let it cool, afterward take the slimy sappes and the other and boil them
until they be hard, then take it off, and lay it upon a marble stone, and
make it in great pieces.

This emplaister is stronger in operation than the other, and better to ripe
and to resolve all hardness and inflammations.

63 An emplaister of slimy sappes, called Emplastrum, de Mucilaginibus.
TAke of the slimy sap of the seed of holihocke, linseede, of the inner
rind of an elm tree, of fenigreke, au^. four. s. of the oil of camomil, the
oil of lilies, oil of dill, au^. one. s. of ammoniacum, galbanum, oppopinax,
serapium, au^.. s. of new wax twenty. of saffron two. turpentine two. and make
your plaster accordingly.

This emplaister mollifieth all hardness.

64 An emplaister for the stomach and the liver.
TAke of ligni aloes, wormwood, gummi arabicke, masticke, cypres, cost,
ginger, au^.. s. calamus aromaticus, of the finest franckensence, aloes, au^.
three. three. cloves, mace, cinamond, spikenard, nutmegges, the confection
which the Pothecaries do call gallia moscata, sqinantum, au^. one three. s.
mingle all these together with the confection which the Pothecaries call myua
aromatica, which is made of quinces, pears, and such like binding things, lay
all these upon a cloth, and perfume them with the wood of aloes.

This emplaister does comfort the stomach, the liver, and increases heat.

65 An emplaister of Bayberries, of Doctor Mesues.
TAke of fine frankensence, and masticke, mirrhe, au^. one. the berries of the
bay tree two. of cipres, cost, au^.. s. take of clarifted honey as much as will
suffice to make it thick, then spread it upon a cloth and so lay it to the
sore.

This is a very excellent plaster against the dropsy, and to assuage all
swellings of wind, if ye will triple the quantity of cipres, and put it unto
the plaster, also a little quantity of cowes doong, or goats doong dride, does
also assuage all griefs which comes of cold, wind, and chiefly the pain of
the stomach and belly, the reins, matrice, and the bladder.

66 An Emplaister of Melilot.
TAke of melilot, six. the flowers of cammamile, the berries of the bay tree,
the root of holihock, woormewood, au^. four. the seed of smallage, wild
carawaies, flowerdeluce, cipres, spikenard, casia fistula, ammi, anniseede two.
s. margeram thee. ammonium ten. storax calamite, bdellium, au^. five.
turpentine one. s. moist figs in number twelve, the fat of a goat bucke,
rosen, au^. two. s. wax six. the oil of margeram, the oil of spikenard, as
much as will suffice to beat them in.

This emplaister does mollify all hardness of the stomach, the liver, the
spleen, and all the inward parts.

67 An emplaister of Wax, of D.N. called Emplastrum Ceroneum.
TAke of piche which is about ships, pressed or strained through some thing,
of wax, au^.. three. of serapinum, two. of ammoniacum, turpentine, dry pitch,
saffron, au^.. three. aloes, frankensence, mirhe, au^. one. oppoponax, storax
calamite, galbanum, masticke, allom, fenigreke, au^. three. of the dregs of
storax liquide, which the Pothecaries call stact, bdellium, au^. three. of
litharge, one. s. make it after this wise, first beat your serapinum, gathanum,
the gum oppoponax, ammoniacum a little, and temper them with wine, then boil
them until the wine be half consumed, then set it on the fire again in a
vessel of tin, and when it shall begin to boil, put unto it your pitch, and
stir it well until it be melted, and when it is melted, put wax unto it, and
that being molten, put in of dry pitch which the Pothecaries call colophonia,
then storax beaten small with a hot pestle, must be put thereunto, afterward
mastick, frankensence, mirhe, bdellium, and soon after these, put in
turpentine, allom, litharge, and last of all fenigreke, when it is sodden,
power it upon luke warm water, and incontinently take it forth again, and
press it with your hands till all the water be forth, this done make your
powder of aloes, soft mingled with the oil of laurel upon a marble stone,
take and make of all mingled together, balls or great pieces, with powder of
saffron, your hands to be nointed with the same oil of laurel.

This emplaister takes away all pain which caused in spitting, the grief of
the stomach which comes of cold, it does also disolue congealed humors in the
stomach, and the hardness of the splens, it heals the dropsy which comes of
the coldness of the liver, and also the coldness of the matrice if it be laid
upon it.

68 An Emplaister of Vinegar and Saffron, D. N. called Emplaistrum Octicroceum
TAke pitch which is about ships, saffron, dry pitch or colophony, of wax au^.
four. turpentine, galbanum, ammoniacum, mirhe, fine frankensence, masticke
au^. one. three. make it thus, break a little your galbanum, and ammoniacum,
then lay it in vinegar the space of a night, in the morning set it on the fire
and melt it, and when it is melted, strain them and seethe them till the third
part of the vinegar be consumed, then put in your pitch being pressed and
strained before, and when it is melted put in wax, the which also melted, put
in the dry pitch or colophony, and turpentine, and soon after, masticke and
fine frankensence and mirhe, stirring it always from the beginning until the
end, when it is sod, put it into cold water, and when ye take it forth, press
it with your hands till the water be forth, afterward wash it upon a marble
stone anointed with oil, and make it soft and gentle, then cast upon it the
powder of saffron, and so make you it in great pieces.

This cures broken bones, and asswageth all griefs in what part soever they
be of the body, it also mollifieth hard impostumes in any part of all the
body.

69 An Emplaister which the Pothecaries call, Ianua, D. M.
TAke of the juice of ielofloures, the juice of plantain, the juice of
smallage, au^. lib. of wax, rosen and turpentine, au^. lib. s. make of this an
emplaister.

70 An Emplaister which the Pothecaries call, Gratia Dei, of Doctor Nicholas.
TAke turpentine, one lib. rosen, one lib. white wax four. masticke one. of
veruen, gelofloures, pimpernell, au^. one m. beat these herbs, and boil
them in strong white wine until the third part be consumed, and then strain
them and cast away the substance of the herbs, then put unto the juice
strained, wax, rosen, masticke, and let them boil, stirring them till they be
thick, then take them off, and put in turpentine, and mingle all together, and
make this your plaster.

71 An Emplaister against Ruptures.
TAke of the pitch about old ships, of aloes, au^. two. of litharge, of red wax, dry pitche or colophony, galbanum, ammoniacum, au^. two. mistleto of an
oak, six. of chalk or plaster, of both aristolochia longa, and rotunda,
mirrhe, frankensence, au^. six. turpentine two. of the common woormes of the
earth, of oak apples four. of comphery, of the daisie, of bole armoniacke au^.
four. the blood of a man, one lib. make it thus, put the mistleto in first to
the water, and suffer it to boil long, in a decoction wherein a rams skin
was soddden in, and let it seethe the space of a day and a night, then take it
from the fire and put unto it turpentine, litharge, dry pitch or colophony,
mastick, and white frankensence, mirrhe, galbanum, ammoniacum, and soon after
camphory, and daises, chalk or plaster, bole armoniacke, after this, set it
on the fire again, and put in the blood of a man, and both aristolochia, and
last of all, aloes, you must stir it continually, when it is well sodden take
it from the fire, ye shall see and know it to be well sodden, when it will
not cleave nor stick unto your fingers, then lay it upon a marble stone
anointed with oil of violets, and make it soft with working and laboring it
with your hands, and after this, ye must beat it in a mortar two days or
three continually, and then reserve it.

72 An Emplaister of D. N. which the Pothecaries call, Diuinum.
TAke of galbanum one. two. of ammoniacum, three. oppoponax, one. of litharge,
one lib. s. of new wax, eight. of oil of lilies, one lib. s. fine
frankensence, one. one. of mirrhe, one. one. of green brass, one. of
bdellium, two. of aristolochia longa one. of masticke one. of aymentes, a kind
of chalk, four. mingle all these together, and make an emplaister.

73 An Emplaister for the Matrice.
TAke of the root of cinkfoly, one lib. of ligni aloes, yelow sanders,
nutmegges, barberries, of the flowers of rose-mary, or roses, au^. one. of
cinamond, cloves, squinantum, the flowers of camimile, au^.. s. masticke, fine
frankensence, a confection which the Pothecaries call, alixta muscata, and an
other which they call galia moscata, of storax calamita, and storax liquida,
which the Pothecaries call stacte, au^. three. fine musk,. s. of wax one lib.
s. of turpentine lib. s. the gum of, lade, four lib. of pitch about old
ships, three lib. make an emplaister thereof.

74 An Emplaister of red Lead.
TAke of the oil of sweet roses, one lib. s. the oil of myrtle tree, the
ointment populeon, au^. four. of hens grease, two. the tallow of an ox
gelded or of a cow, au^. lib. s. swines grease seven. litharge of gold and
silver, au^. three. s. of white lead four. of red lead three. of turpentine
ten. of wax as much as will suffice to make your plaster according to the
art thereof, somewhat black.

This does heal great and old sores as it has been proved, by the ancient
Surgeon, John de Vigo.

75 An Emplaister of white Lead, Emplastrum de Cerusa.
TAke of the oil of roses, two lib. of white lead, four lib. of white wax,
six. make an emplaister thereof.

This is a very good plaster against all sores which come by reason of the
heat of the Sun, or by any other hot causes, or against rubbings,
gallings, or excoriations of heat.

76 An Emplaister of dates of D. M. Emplaistrum Palmeum.
TAke litharge of gold, three lib. of oil olive, the grease of a young hog,
au^. one lib. s. of green copperos four. buddes or tops of date trees,
seethe them altogether on the fire, and stir them continually with a stick of
the same date tree, if ye cannot have the buddes nor the tops of the same, ye
may take the roots of reeds.

This is a very excellent plaster against wounds festred with blood, and
against grievous impostumes, burnings, broosings, shooting of humors.

77 An Emplaister of three things.
TAke of oil olive, four lib. of litharge of gold, two lib. of vinegar, lib.
s. make the emplaister accordingly.

This emplaister does bring new flesh again in wounds: also does heal them.

78 A red emplasture to dry: Diacalium rubrum.
TAke litarge of gold, three. oil of roses, oil of violets, au^. lib. s. of
wax twelve lib. the stone which the Pothecaries call calaminaris, of terra
sigillata, of read lead, au^. four. of camphure, one. make your emplaisture.

This does dry byles, and dry sores which be cleansed.

H. 79 Hiera, pecra, galeni.
TAke of saffron, spikenard, the wood of balm, of casia fistula, cinnamon,
masticke, au^. six. of aloes,. C. take of honny as much as will suffice, beat
them all, and work in the juice of coleworts, wormwood, or wine, that they
may be so mingled together, as leven in dow, put unto them scammony, that they
may the better cleave together, and also purge the body of choler, if ye put
agaricke and the inner part of coloquintida, then it will purge fleame, and if
ye will mingle the flower of harder time therewith, then melancholy is purged:
to make it more gentle in operation and less noisome to the stomach, the
Pothecaries, do put unto this composition, twice as much of aloes as of all
the other kinds, your aloes must be broken and washed, that it may the hetter
go to the bottom of the water, and the dross which swimmeth above, to be
cast away with the water, this must be done twice or thrice, and when it is
well washed, it will be an apt menicine for the stomach, and nothing hurtful
to the inward parts: after this the other kinds of spices ought to be
mingled, and so it shall be a very good purgation for weak stomachs.

This purgation which is made with aloes, does remedy ylliaca passio, and
consumes superfluous humors in the stomach, it does amend the palenes of the
face, the eyesight which is dimmy with gross humors from the stomach, it
provoke a man indifferent to the stool, working and purging from the liver,
it does hurt those which have a hot liver, but the stomach thereby is helped.

80 A Iulep of roses of doctor mesues.
TAke of rose water, three lib. of fine sugar sodden and clarified two lib.
make your iulep with a soft fire.

This quenches the thirst in hot agues, it does assuage the heat both of the
liver and of the heart, it does also resist corruption of humors, and keeps a
man whole.

81 A thin Iulep of Violets.
TAke the water of the flowers of violets, four lib. of fine sugar sodden and
clarified two lib. mingle them together, and sees them with a soft fire.

This is a present remedy in all burning agues, and to those which have a hot
liver or throat, it helps also those which have any roughnes in the wind
pipe or throat, it helps the plurisie, and the dry cough.

82 A thick sirrop of Pinaples, of D. M. loch de pino.
TAke of the grains or stones of the pinaples thirty. sweet almonds,
wallnuts made in powder, the gum tragantum, gummi arabicke, licorace, the
juice of amily, maiden hair, the roots of lillies, au^. four. the substance
of dates five and thirty. of bitter almonds, three. honny mixed with the iuce
of great resons, fine sugar, fresh butter, au^. four. of the best honny as
much as will suffice.

This does help old coughes, shortness of breath, and causes a man to avoid
gross fleame, and also spittle.

83 A thick sirope of squilla, loch de squilla.
TAke of the juice of squilla, of honny clarified, au^. lib. s. and sees it
till it be thick.

This pureth tough and gross matter congeled in the wind pipe, and causes
spittle easily to avoid, it cures shortness of wind, the pain of the breast
and the side.

84 A very excellent thick sirope of D. M. loch Sanum.
TAke cinnamon, dry hisope, the juice of liquirice, au^.. s, of iuiubes,
sebesten, au^. thirty: rasons, of corans picked, dry sigges, of moist dates,
au^. two. of fenegreeke, five. of maiden hair, one M. of aniseede, folium
indicum, flowerdeluce, camamile, of linseed, au^. four. sees al these in
four lib. of water till the half be consumed, then put unto this two lib. of
penidis, which is a confection of sugar, sees it till it be as thick as
honny, then mingle with this a pine apple pared, five. of almonds blanched,
lyquirice, the gum tragantum, of gummi arabic, of amili, au^. three. of
flowerdelyce, nine. labor this confection till it be soft and white.

This cures the cough, and the hardness of the womb, which comes of cold,
and also flegmatike humors which be in the breast or in the longs.

85 A thick sirrope of Coleworts.
Take the juice of red coleworts one lib. of safron two. of sugar, honey au^.
lib. s. make your sirrope.

A composition which king Mithridates did use, manardi mithridatum.
TAke the blood of a drake dride, blood of a ducke, the blood of a goose, the
blood of a Kidde, of wild rue, fennel, dill, nawen, au^. three. the root of
gentian, tripholy, squinantum, frankincense, dry roses, au^. three. white
pepper, long pepper, cost, and valerian, annisseede, cinnamon, au^. two. myrre,
spikenard six. benswoyn, asarabacca, ammoniacum, au^. three. mace, agaricke,
au^. two. the seed of balm, one. of flowerdeluce, saffron, rha. mastic, au^.
one. of sticados five. make a fine powder of all these, and put four times so
much honny as of the other, and make your mixtion.

87 A thick sirrop of the lunges of a Fox. D. M.
TAke of the lunges of a fore dried, the juice of lichoras, maidenhaire,
fennelseede, au^. four. make it with sugar sodden in water as much as will
suffice, some make it with the juice of myrts, and then it is both laxatiue and
a comforter of the stomach.

This is a present remedy in all consumptions and diseases of the stomach, it
does both comfort and cleanse the lunges.

M. 88 An other confection which the king Mithridates used, of doctor Nicholas.
TAke of storaxe calamita, one. one of cloves, spinard, the wood of balm,
orobis, louage, the gum tragantum, of mastic, galban, sandaric, the sweet
thorn aspalathus, of the ofter stones, the gum of Iuy, bdellium, terra
lignea, melilot, the gum of lade, oppoponar, ammoniacum, opium, brimstone
vnstecked, lichorace, salt peeter, hipoquistes, acacia, roses, germander,
saint John's worte, sotherwood, piony, hisope, organy, enulacampana, the leaves
of sauyn, ye leaves of ye bay tree, aristolochia longa, ye flower of the harder
time, wormeseede, rosemarie, centuarie, the less seholme, the flower of the
wild pomgranad, the stem or the inward rind of the myrtle tree, flowers of
pomgranads, the seed of a raddish, squilla, the seed of balm, annisseed,
giti, henbane, fennel, commin, cardamemum, silermotan, white mustard seed,
ammi, parsliseede, rue, white poppi, smalage, yelow carrots, clarry, long
pepper, basell, amomum, au^. one. gladian, the common swines nuts, capres, the
flowers of tutsayne, of the horn of the red dear, au^. two. of the juice of
the balm, or the juice of myrte tree, cinnamon, saffron, cost, sqinantum,
ginger, folium indicum, or in the stead of it, cloves, or spicnard, turpentine,
washed myrre, fine frankincense, casia fistula, agaric, spica romana, rha,
flowerdeluce, asarabacca, dittan, horehound, the inner rind of coloquintida,
sticados, mugworte, callamint, pelliter of spain, ground pin, black pepper,
white pepper, seed of parslie, manna, or sweet dew, cresses, sinckfoyle, au^.
one. beries of the bay tree, fix gra, s. of strong wine and old, one. of honey
as much as will suffice to make it.

This does cure all diseases of the head which come of cold, and chiefly
melancholy persons, and fearful, the falling evil, the migram, running
ears, and all diseases of the ears, the tooth ache, and all griefs and sores
of the mouth and jaws, if it be laid on the place infected, if any rume
distill from the head, then it must be laid unto the temples after a fashion
of a plaster, it cures also the quinsi and apoplexcian, which is when a man
can neither feel, speak, nor move, it helps the cough, and shortness of
wind, and spitting of blood, the lunges, and all inward diseases, it cures
the chollicke, the bloody flux, illiaca passio, and the flux of meat
vndisgested, if it be ministered with the decoction of the flowers of
pomgranads, it cures also stiffnes of members, when the sinews be so stiff,
that the party cannot move, it helps the crampe, conuultions, palsies,
diseases about the midrife, the raines, and bladder, it breaks the stone,
provoke the flowers stopped, and helps all diseases of the matrice, it
mollifieth all hardness, and cures the gout, it is a chief remedy against
poison, and against the biting of a mad dog or any other beast, if it be
laid unto the place, or drunk: it does also cure quartan agues, and
quotidians taken with luke warm wine, an hour before the fit comes.

89 A confection which the Pothecaries call Mycleta.
TAke of the first kinds of myrrobolance dressed and made in powder, two. s.
commin, annisseede, folium indium, ammi, carawaies, au^. one. s. cresses made
in powder two. s. belliricum, and imblicum, the fourth and the fifth kind of
myrrobolance made in powder, au^. two.. Infuse all these in vinegar a day and a
night, afterward make them in powder, then mingle them with spody, the flowers
of wild pomgranade, masticke, gum, arabicke, manna or sweet dew, au^. one.
fifteen gra. stamp them with the oil of roses, and temper them with the
sirope of myrtell tree.

This confection has been proved against the emrods, gnawing and gryping of
the stomach and the belly, the bloody flux, and also against lienterpa
which is a flux of meat undigested, and finally, it is a present remedy
against all fluxes of the body.

90 A confection which the Pothecaries call Aromatica, or mixa simplex of D.
Mesues.
TAke of the juice of quinces lib. C. put it in a clean vessel of stone, and
let it boil softly, scomming of it, till it be half consumed, then strain
it, and let it stand four hours, and then cast upon it sixty lib. of old
wine, this done, set it on the fire again, and sees it till it be thick,
some Pothecaries make it with these spices following, and some without, they
take of the best cinnamon, cardamomum the lesser, au^. three. of cloves two. of
sugar, masticke, au^. one. s. of saffron two. of ligni aloes, mace, au^. one.
s. stamp all these, except your saffron, and make them sweet with musk, one.
and with two. of the confection called gallia muscata: there be also some
other Pothecaries which do make this confection with sugar.

This confection fortifieth the stomach, the liver, and the principal
members, it causes good appetite and disgestion, it stops vomiting and
fluxes of the body.

91. A confection of honny and roses, called Mell rosatum. D. M.
TAke of red roses prepared and dressed as it is in the conserues before, au^.
two parts, of good honny six parts, sees them with a gentle fire accordingly,
some Pothecaries put in equal parts, both of honny, and of the juice of
roses, without any leaves, other some put also unto the leaves one parts s. and
of the juice one part s. of honny, three parts.

This does comfort the stomach, and does digest and purge flegmaticke humors
congeled in the stomach, or in the raines meseraicis.

92 A confection of honny and violets, called Mell violatum.
TAke of the flowers of violets one part, of good honny three parts, sees
them with a soft fire.

This is a singular remedy in hot agues, because it makes the body moist and
also laxatius, it aswageth drines of the stomach and the breast.

93 A confection of rosemarie and honny, Mell authosatum.
TAke of the flowers of rosemarie one part, of honny three parts, make it as
ye do the other.

94 Manus Christi.
TAke of sugar clarified and molted in water of roses. lib. s. sees it
together till the water be consumed, and the sugar hard, in the end of the
decoction put in. s. of perles or precious stones made in fine powder, then lay
it upon a marble stone anointed with oil of roses, or else violets.

96 Oximell, doctor Mesues, called simple.
TAke of good honny two parts, of vinegar one part, of well water four
parts, your honny and your water ought to be sodden together, so that no some
be left above, then temper in your vinegar, let it sees well till your honny
leave foming.

This does purge gross and flegmaticke humors in making of them thinner, in
dissoluing of them, in opening and breaking of them, it does also digest the
matter which comes of long agues.

97 To cause a man to avoid urine, Oximell diureticum.
TAke of the rind of the root of smallage, fennel, au^. one lib. partly,
kneeholme, or butchers broom, sperage, the seed of smalage, the seed of
fengreke, au^. one. sees these roots and seeds in two lib. of water, and a
pound of vinegar, until it come to the half or little more, then take as much
honny as will suffice, and sees it well, and make a strope.

98 Oximell of squilla.
TAke of fair water six lib. of clarified honny three lib. of vinegar,
squilla two lib. sees them well and reserve them.

This does dissolve tough and flegmatike humors, it does also cure belching
which comes of raw humors and not digested, it does also heal the bladder
exulcerated, in mollifying of it.

99 A confection of sugar and vinegar, called Oxisacra Simplex, of Doctor
Nicholas.
TAke of sugar one lib. of the juice of pomgranades eight. of vinegar four.
seethe it on the fire till it come to the fashion of a sirup.

This is very good in tertians, hot agues, and quartans, in the spring time it
purges choler in the stomach.

100 A confection of sugar and vinegar, with other things called Oxisacra
Compounde,
TAke of maiden hair, ceteracke, hearts tongue, liver woort, violets, fennel,
kneeholme or butchers brom, sperage, stitch woort, au^. one lib. make it after
this fashion. Lay your herbs and roots in the juice of pomgranades the
space of three days, on the fourth day boil them a little and strain them
well, and afterward put unto them sugar as much as will suffice, and then
seethe them till they be thick.

101 Oil of sweet Almonds of Doctor Nicholas.
TAke almonds and blanch them, and take away the inner rind, then stamp them
well and make them in massy pieces like pastides, after this, lay them in a
hot place, the space of fifteen days, then beat and stamp them again, and
then press them so, that the oil may pass forth, and if ye will, seethe it
again in a vessel set within an other the space of an hour, and then press
it, it will be the better to run, and ye shall have more plenty of oil, if
ye fill bags with almonds stamped, and then lay them under hot ashes or sand
betwixt clothes, and afterward press them.

This oil does mollify the roughnes of the throat and hardness and dryness
of the lungs, and of all the inward parts, it heals consumptions, and
increases seed in a man, it asswageth the heat of the matrice, and of the
privy parts of a woman, and also the heat of the reins and of the bladder if
it be laid to the place.

122 Oil of bitter Almonds.
THis oil must be made in all things like unto the other before.

This oil opens obstructions, and opilations, and causes wind to avoid,
it asswageth the pain of the ears, the singing and deafenes, it makes the
flesh smooth and fair, it does also take away spots and deformities in the
face, the ache in the sinowes, and all other hardness.

103 Oil of Bay, called Oleum Laurinum.
TAke of the berries of the bay tree which be ripe, and stamp them well in
warm water, and strain them when they be cold together, take of the fat which
swimmeth above, and that shall be your oil.

This oil brings heat and mollifieth, insomuch that those which be troubled
with the scabbe, ring worms, or any such other sores, be cured therewith, if
they be anointed when they bathe them, choleric persons and all those which
be suspect to have the leprie or any kind of it, must avoid and eschew this
oil, it is a singular remedy against cold and moist complexions, and
flegmatike, and those whose ioints be affected with cold, it cures the pain
in the hippes or huckle bone, it destroieth lice and vermin, and scoureth the
head of all filthiness, it cures the falling of the hair, taken with the water
of salf peeter, this done, ye must also wash your head with wine and honey, and
with the flower of fenigreeke, howbeit if your head be vexed with any grief of
heat, then ye must utterly eschew this oil.

Oil of the little grain sesamum oleum sesaminum.
VVAsh your little grain sesamum from all filth, then sprinckle upon it a
little water with salt, and rub it with your hands, then cast upon it again
till it be moist, afterward lay it forth to dry, then so dried, ye must take
it again and dry it better by the fire, but moderately, then put it in a bag
of course cloth, and rub it again with your hands till the husk go of, and
when it is husked clean, grind it and press forth the oil, and make it
after this fashion, take linseede the oil, oil of popiseede or lettis seed,
your linseede may not be husked.

This oil increases fatnes of the face, and seed in men, it mollifieth all
manner of hardness, and causes the voice to be clear in mollifying the
throat, you may also mingle this oil with many other.

Oil of spikenard oleum nardinum.
TAke of spicknard three. of wine and water, au^. two. s. the oil of the
grain sesamum lib. s. sees these with a double vessel that is one within an
other with a soft fire, the space of four hours, and styrring it continually.

This is a very good oil against all diseases of cold, wind, against griefs
in the stomach, sinows, liver, spleen, reins, bladder, matrice, the head ach,
and the migram.

105 Oil of Cost of D. M.
TAke of cost dry, and butter two. of casia fistula one. the buddes and tops
of margeram eight. of sweet wine as much as will suffice to lay the stuff in
two nights, then take the oil of sesamum three lib. seethe it as the oil of
spikenard before.

This oil engenders heat in the sinowes and in all the parts of the body,
it opens abstructions, it fortifieth the stomach and the liver, it keeps
the hair from falling off, and the head from horenes, it causes good color
and savor in all the body.

106 Oil of Rue, of D.M.
TAke oil of ripe olives, three lib. of the leaves and of the juice of rue,
au^. three. make an oil according, of the same.

This oil does heal and dry, and therefore it is present remedy against
distillations and rumes, it asswageth griefs of the breast, and brings heat
to cold members.

107 Oil of Dill of D.M.
TAke of the common oil which is sallet oil, two lib. four. of the flowers
of dill ten. two. lay the flowers of dill three days in oil, and seethe them
on the fourth day a little with a soft fire, then take them forth, this done,
put into the same decoction three. of the flowers of dill, and set it in the
sun and keep it.

This oil asswageth griefs and aches, it opens, loses, and provoke a man
to sweat, it does mittigate the cold and shaking agues, if the back bone be
anointed, it causes sleep, and cures the head ache.

108 Oil of Camamile,
TAke of sweet oil which is the common sallet oil, two lib. four. the
flowers of camamile one lib. make it as the oil of dill.

This does mitigate all aches, it stops fluxes of humors, because it does a
little bind, it is a present remedy against achss in sinews. Galen the
Physician does judge that this oil does loose and and not bind, Paulus
AEgineta, does take two. of dry flowers of camamile without the whites, and
does cover the vessel with a linen cloth, so that the oil may press through,
and then set it in the sun by the space of forty days, and after the mouth
ought to be well stopped, and so kept, if ye cannot have green flowers ye may
take dry, and sees them in a double vessel, that is one set within an other,
howbeit the oil shall be of less strength and efficacy.

This oil, as Actuarius does teach, anointed by it self or with some other
temperate thing, does open the pores, and causes the skin to be thinner, it
cures long agues, and all griefs in the body, if the place be nointed
therewith, with sweet wine.

109 Oil of myrts.
TAke of sallet oil three lib. of myrrh stamped one lib. of the best wine two
lib. mingle these together, and suffer it to boil until the wine be consumed,
then strain it, and reserve it.

This oil does refrigerate or makes cold, and binds, and therefore it
cures the flux which comes of weakness of the stomach, burnings,
principally, wheales, kybes, gallings, if the place therewith be anointed, it
heals clifts about the fundament, and the broad piles, and it stops
sweating

110 Oil of flowerdeluce oleum deireum.
TAke of the roots of flowerdeluce two. and of the flowers four. of the
decoction of roses one lib. the oil of olives two lib. let them boil within a
double vessel until the water be consumed, then strain them, and change the
roots, flowers, and the water of the decoction, this ought to be done twice,
and then strain them, and reserve it, the Pothecaries commonly make it after
this fashion, howbeit ye shall read in Dioscorides an other form of making of
this oil.

This oil scoureth, purges, loses, opens, and asswageth aches of cold, it
ripeth raw humors in the breast and lungs, it takes away the pain in the
joints, and mollyfieth the hardness of them, and hard impostumes and swellings
about the neck, or in any other place, it does assuage the pain of the
matrice of cold, the crampe, the pain about the ears, the stinking of the
nose.

111 Oil of roses.
TAke oil of olives, or the oil of the grain sesamum, wash them often with
well water, then take a sufficient quantity of the leaves of red rosesyoung,
and beaten, and cover them with the oil wherein they were washed, then stop
the mouth of the vessel, and set it in the sun the space of seven days,
then sees it in a double vessel the space of three hours, then change again
the rose leaves, and take fresh, and set them in the sun other seven days,
afterward sees them again, and change them as ye did before, then put unto
them of the infusion of roses, as much as of the oil, and stop the mouth of
the vessel, and set it in the sun the space of forty days, some Pothecaries
do not set it in the sun, but under the ground forty days.

This oil, as Doctor Mesues writes, does comfort, loose, open, and asswageth
ach, it is also good against imflamations, and fluxes of humors, and
therefore being drunken it is a present remedy against the bloody flux and all
other, there be two kinds of this oil, the one is made of rose leaves which
be ripe, and the other is made of olives and rose leaves not ripe, the first
kind does mollifye and make the skin thin, opens, and asswageth al
manner of griefs, the second does refrigerate or make cold, and bind, and
therefore it cures the head ach in agues, and of the heat of the sun, it
asswageth burning which is engendered of wind in a full stomach, and finally it
cures all aches of the head if the place therewith be anointed, it does also
resolve the griefs in the stomach, or in the bowels of sharp humors, if it
be mixed with two. of masticke, and with a little quantity of wax, it
asswageth all inflammations of rednes, if the place be anointed therewith.

112 Oil of Violets.
TAke of the oil of olives two lib. of young violets stamped, four. put them
into a glass, and set them in the sun the space of seven days, afterward
boil them in a double vessel the space of three hours, then strain them,
and reserve them: Paulus AEgineta does call this oil Iaton, and writes that
it is made of the purple violets, or else of the yealow violets, which many
judge to be hearts ease, be wills also that violets shall stand ten days in
the sun, and to be three times changed, and the vessel to be so stopped that
no air may enter in, and in the mean time, you may put unto these, of dry
violets.

This asswageth all inflammations in what part so ever they be, it mollyfieth
exulcer ations and stiffenes of the breast and lungs, it mitigateth hot
impostumes, and the plewrisie.

113 Oil of Quinces. D. M.
TAke of quinces with the rind half ripe, and stamp them and take of the juice
of them, au^. equal parts, of the oil of olive not ripe, as much as will
suffice, put it into the glass, and set it in the sun by the space of
fifteen days, then sees it in a double vessel, which is, one within an
other, the space of four hours, then change your quinces and the juice of
them twice or thrice, and make it as you did the other, then strain it and
reserve it.

This oil fortifieth the stomach, and the principal members, and the sinowes
which be loss and weak, it does restrain overmuch sweating, it is also a
present remedy against all fluxes. Dioscorides both show an other way and a
better of preparing this oil, Paulus Aginaeta, calls this oil, Melinon, and
makes it after this sort, he takes of quinces pared, with the rind, three.
of the oil of unripe olives eighteen ounces, he does set it in the sun
forty days.

114 Oil of masticke.
TAke of masticke three. oil of ruses twelve. of good wine eight. sees it in
a double vessel as the other.

This oil (as doctor Mesues does write) is the second for his virtue, it does
comfort the stomach, sinowes, the liver, the joints, it does mollify hard
impostumes, and aswageth aches.

114 Oil of Otter stones, Oleum Castoreum.
TAke one of Otters stones, and sees it in one lib. of the common sallet oil,
until the third part be consumed, then keep the oil in the powder of the
otter stones, which is good for the crampe.

115 Oil of Euphorbe.
TAke of euphorbe s.. oil of hearts ease five. of sweet wine as much, sees it
till the wine be consumed, and then reserve it.

This oil is very good against cold diseases of the sinnowes, the ache of
them, and of the iontes, the pain of the liver, the spleen, the headache, the
migram, over much fleeping, and the forgetful disease. Galen does make only
of euphorbe an oil, increasing and diminishing the euphorbe accordingly to the
portion, as it does appear in the second book of compositions of medicines.

116 Oil of a wolf, D. M. Oleum vulpinum.
TAke a wolf whole except the bowels, and put him in a vessel, and pour unto
him well water, and salt water, eighteen. of old oil three lib. ten sees
this with a soft fire, with three. of salt until the water be consumed, then
put it in a vessel, and pour unto it of the sweet water wherein the herbs
have been sodden one lib., and of time one m. sees them again till the water
be consumed.

This oil is a chief remedy against the gout in the joints, which is
called, arthritica passio, against the goat in the feet, the pain in the
raines, and the back.

117 Oil of the lies of white wine called Oleum de tartaro.
TAke of the lies of white wine, two lib. or else as much as you judge best, and
make it in powder, and wrappe it in a linen cloth, or in two, then mingle it
again with strong white vinegar, afterward dry it again under hot ashes,
till it be very black, then make it in powder again, and set it in a vessel
in a cold place, and so let it stand the space of eight days till it shall be
resolved into an oil, and run, if it will not run of it self, then press
it with your hands into a glass, with this oil women do anoint their faces
to make them smoth and fair, it does cleanse the face wonderful well.

118 Oil of scorpion.
TAke of scorpions twenty, more or less according to their quantity, put them
into a vessel of glass, and pour upon them the oil of bitter almonds two
lib. stop the mouth and set it in the sun thirty days, then stamp it and
use it.

This oil is the most present remedy to break the stone in the raines or in
the bladder, chiefly if the raines or the neck of the bladder or the places
there about be anointed therewith, or else if it be ministered in by the yard,
it is also made with old oil, and mixed with many other medicines which be
good against poison: it is also a present remedy against the pestilence, and
all other poisons.

119 Oil of Lillies.
TAke oil of olives one lib. of the flowers of white lillies four. make this
oil as you did the oil of cammamill, Paulus Aegineta does show an other way
of making of this oil.

This oil is very good against women's diseases, running sores in the head,
scurfe or any other breaking forth, if the place therewith be annnointed, it is
also good against all diseases and aches of cold, and also inflammations
anointed, with saffron, if it be dronken, it will purge choler, but it is
noisome to the stomach, it aswageth all curnels and knobbes.

120 Oil of flowers of poppie.
TAke of the flowers and of the green heads of poppie stamped au^. three. of
the oil of olives not ripe, one lib. three. make your oil accordingly.

This oil aswageth aches of heat, and causes a man to fleepe when the
occasion of waking comes of heat, or of vapors ascending to the head, if
the temples, the nose, the eyes and the forehead be anointed therewith.

121 Oil of Nenufar.
TAke of the oil of olives not ripe one lib. of the flowers of nenufar green
and stamped sour. keep them in a vessel of glass, and prepare it as ye did
the oil of violets, both to set it in the sun, and also for the seething,
the changing of the flowers, and mixing of the decoction.

This oil has almost the virtue of the oil of poppie, but because it is not
so cold, nor does not so much dull the senses, therefore we may mingle with it
the oil of poppie to cause a man to sleep the better, it does alter a hoter
complexion in what part soever it be laid.

122 Oil of Mints.
TAke of the leaves of mints, and of his juice au^. four. of the oil of ripe
olives three lib. put these into a vessel of glass, and set it in the sun
the space of fifteen days, stopping the mouth close, this done, afterward
boil them four hours, and then strain them well, this must be done thrice,
afterward strain them, and let them be kept.

This oil is good for a weak and a cold stomach, it stops vomiting and
causes digestion, it causes appetite to meat, it mollifieth all hardness in
what part of the body soever it be.

123 Oil of wormwood.
TAke of the buds of the tops of wormwood, and of the juice, au^. four. of
the oil of olives three lib. you shall make this as you did the other.

This does comfort and bring heat into cold places of members, it comfort
the stomach, and causes good appetite, it opens obstructions, and helps
diseases which come of a cold cause, it kills worms and does bring, them
forth, if it be mixed with ointments and emplastures and laid to the place.

124 Oil of worms, Oleum lumbricorum.
TAke of the worms of the earth s. lib. of the oil of Olives, two lib. of
wine two. boil them all together and make an oil as it is of the other.

This is comfortable to the sinowes vexed with cold, and also for the ache of
the joints.

125 Oil of heart ease, oleum de Cheiri.
TAke of heart ease xij.. the oil of Olives two lib. the flowers of hearts ease
must be laid three days in oil, on the fourth day sees it well with a soft
fire, this done put unto the decoction three. of the flowers of hearts ease, then
set it in the sun, and keep it.

This oil opens, loses and aswageth pain of the sinowes, the joints, the
breast, the raines and the bladder.

P 127 Powder of violets.
TAke of flower deluce, s. lib. of roses four. of cypress s.. of margeram,
cloves, au^. one. white saunders, beneswoine, au^. four. of storax calamita.
one.

128 A of Amber, pomum ambre.
TAke storax calamita one s. of benswoine two. of the gum of lade s.. of
cloves, white saunders au^. three. of roses, margeram au^. two. s. of musk, of
amber, au^. one. make your ball with the infusion or pouring in rose water.

129 A powder against the plague, Pillulae contra pestem.
TAke of sincfoly, dittan, tunis, scabios, the roots of buglosse, au^. s..
kirnels of pomcitrons, the seed of sorrel, au^. four. of coryander two. red
roses one. the seed of puseline two. the shauing of Iuory two. of white
corrall, of red corrall au^. one. s. of terra sigillata, s.. of bole ammoniac
two. mingle all them together, and make a powder.

130 A powder of the electuarie of bolermeniac.
TAke of the three kinds of saunders, galanga, ligni aloes, cinnamon, red
corrall, red roses, the seed of melons, au^. s.. the root of tunis, the root
of sinckfolly au^. three. the shauing of Iuory, of the hearts horn, au^.. s.
one nutmege, of mace, of cubebes au^. one. of annisseede, of fennelseede, of
ginger au^. gra. fifteen, of the seed of sorrel, of the kirnels of
pomcitrons, the seed of juniper, the seed of the silk worm, of cloves au^..
s. of bolearmoniac two make a powder thereof.

131 A powder against the worms.
TAke of wormeseede one. of lupines. s. of wormwood two. of the hearts horn
made in powder one. s. mingle them and make a powder.

132 A powder called Bezeardicus.
TAke of bolearmoniac two. of red roses, the seed of sorrel, of the kirnels
of pomcitron, the red deer's horn made in powder, the seed of rue, the root
dorny, of amber, the seed of wollthiltle, or carduns benedictus au^. four. of
both corrals, of ligni aloes, of silk not colored nor dried, but as it comes
from the silk worm, of the free saunders, of perls, of the bone in the heart
of the red dear, au^. one. of the emeraud two. of the powder of perls,
cinkfolly, dittan, tunis, scabios, coriander, of terra sigillata, au^. two. of
camphure two. of saffron grains fifteen, of amber two. of musk four. thus
make it into a powder.

133 A confection made like sugar writhen like ropes, called Penidias.
TAke of the best sugar one lib. or two, and at the most three, put it in a
vessel of brass covered with tin, or else in a vessel of earth covered
likewise with glass, having a wide mouth, the vessel of glass is better for
this purpose, melt your sugar with such a quantity as will cover it, and if
your sugar be very good and strong, mingle with it, for every pound of it,
one. of honny, then sprinkle upon it oil of sweet almonds, if ye have not this
oil, ye must use some other in stead of it, and set your vessel on a fire of
roales without smoke, and sees it till the water be almost consumed, ye shall
know if it be well sodden or no, thus, take a drop of it, and lay it on a
marble stone, and touch it with your fingers, if it appear like threeds, and
will cleave and stick unto your fingers, then take it from the fire, and lay
it upon the said stone, and draw it abroad, after that ye have mingled it with
the oil of sweet almonds or sesamum, then gather it together again as hot as
your hands may suffer: afterward draw it forth again with your hands as
sweet electuaries be drawn, and then strike a crooked nail very hye in the
wall, and cast it upon the nail, and so draw it so long, till it be white: ye
must keep it by the fire so long as you do draw it, that it may be more hot
and more gentle to draw, and when ye judge it to be white enough, then cut it
with sheares in pieces, if ye make this in round confections long, or
otherwise, then take of white ammelum, break and stamp it, and lay it upon a
marble stone, then cast upon it the past of penidis, and roll it, and cut it,
and make it in what kind so ever ye will, howheit you must make it quickly,
lest it be cold between your hands, this done, lay it in a seeue or some
other like thing nigh the fire for the space of an boure, then take it and
reserve it for your purpose.

134 A confection which the Pothecaries call Pignolatum.
THis confection is made with sugar disolued in rose water, and well clarified,
when it is sodden enough, put in pineaples pared, and let it stand and cole
till it come to the form of a hard confection, and then keep it.

135 Pills which a man ought always to have at hand, pilloe sine quibus. D. N.
TAke of aloes washed twelve. of the five kinds of myrrobolance, rheubarbe,
masticke, wormwood, roses, violets, seen, agaricke, dodder, au^. one. temper
them with the juice of fennel, into the which ye shall put six:. s. of
scammony well broken, howbeit first mingle your scammony with the juice of
fennel, then press forth you juice with a strayner so much as will suffice
for the decoction, then make your pills with your hands anointed with the
oil of violets or oil olive.

These he present pills to purge choler, phlegm, melancholy, and against
evil sight which comes of evil humors, against pains of the eyes, and iliaca
passio.

136 Golden pills, called pillulae aureae.
TAke of aloes, diagridion au^. five. of roses, the seed of smallage, au^.
two. s. of annisseede, fennel seed, au^. one. s. of masticke one. of saffron,
of the inner part of coloquintida, thus make your pills with the infusion of
gum tragantum.

These be very excellent pills to purge the head, and to amend the eyesight,
the wind in the stomach, or the bowels, they purge without any pain.

137 Pilula rahie, of doctor Rhas.
TAke of the powder of hiera picra ten. of coloquintida three. one. of stammony
two. of turbith, sticados au^. five. mix it with the sirope of sticados, and
thus make your pills.

These pills do purge the head, and chiefly of gross and cold humors
marvelous well, it aswageth the head ach and the mygram.

138 Pills of eight things of D. N. called ex octo rebus.
TAke of aloes diagredian, au^. two. the inner part of coloquintida, of the
flowers of the harder time, agaric, mastic, the third kind of myrrobolance,
wormwood, au^. one. temper them with the juice of dwale,

139 Pills of all the kinds of myrrobolance.
TAke the five kinds of myrrobolance, agaric, diagridion, coloquintida, seen,
au^.. s. the flowers of harder time, turbith, annisseede, fennel, mastic, the
stone lazure, au^. two. s. grains five, of aloes one. make these pills with
the juice of wormwood, and if ye will mingle a little ginger with them, your
pills shall be the better.

These pills be very good against isiatica passio, which is an ache in the
hippes or huckle bone: against the gout in the feet, the spleen, they do
clear the sight, and purge burnt choler.

140 Pills of sweet powder, which the Pothecaries call alefangene. D. M.
TAke of cinnamon, cubebes, ligni aloes, calamus aromaticus, mace, nutmigs,
cardamomum, cloves, asarabacca, masticke, squinantum, of spicknard, the fruit
of balm, au^. one. of dry wormwood, of roses, au^. v.. beat and strain thee^,
but not small, then put unto them twelve lib. of water, then sees them til two
parts of the water be consumed, then rub them with your hands, and strain
them, and press forth the water, this done, take aloes cycatrine, one lib.
wash it in some little pan or such like vessel of stone covered round about
with glass, ye must of wash it, and with rain water, then dry it and cast
upon it two lib. of that which you did press forth, so dry it in the sun,
then mingle with your aloes, of myrrh, mastick, au^. v.. of safron three. beat
them well, and cast upon them the residue of that which was strained, and rub
them with your hands until they be broken, many of ye Pothecaries wash aloes
with the infusion of rhewbarbe.

These pills aswage the grief of the stomach which comes of phlegm, and
purges the stomach very well, the brain, the instruments of the senses from
gross and corrupt humors.

Pills made of diverse things which the Pothecaries call pillulae agregatiuae.
D. M.
TAke of the first kind of myrrobolance, of rhewbarbe au^. three. of the juice
of agrimony, the juice of wormwood au^. two. of diagridion. six. of the third
kind of myrobolans, of agaric, of coloquintida or of polipodi au^. two. of the
best turbith of aloes au^. six, of masticke, roses, salgem, the flower of
harder time, annisseede, of ginger au^.. s. of the electuarie of roses as much
as will suffice to make it thick.

These pills be very good against long agues, and those which be mixed with
diverse humors, and ach of the head, stomach, liver, they purge corrupt
choler, melancholy, and and phlegm, they quicken and refresh the instruments
of the of the senses.

142 Pills of rhewbarbe of Doctor Mesues.
TAke of rhewbarbe three. of the juice of licoras, the juice of wormwood,
masticke, au^. one. of the first kind of myrobolans three.. s. of the seed of
smallage, wild lillies, fennel au^.. s, little balls of roses which the
Pothecaries call trochisti diarodon three. s. of hiera picra ten. make them
with this water of fennel.

These pills do cure long agues, and those which be engendered of diverse gross
humors, and they assuage the pain about the liver, and chiefly they cure the
dropsy, some Pothecaries use this in the end of a mixed tercian, ye may make
them stronger with other simples, and as ye shall judge best for the patient,
take this in the morning two. or one. s.

143 Pills of the gum Sarcacolla.
TAke of the gum sarcacolla three. of turbith four. of colloquintida one. s.
of ginger one. s. of salgem one. dissolve the sarcacolla in rose water, and
mingle all together with it, and so make your pills.

These pills purge phlegm, and help all diseases of phlegm, howbeit few
Physicians do use them.

144 Pills of Mesues, which the Pothecaries call fedidae maiores.
TAke of serapium, ammoniacum, oppoponax, soft bdellium, coloquintida, au^.
five. of spurge, scammony three. of cinnamon, spicknard, safron, the stones of
the otter au^. one. of turbith four. of ginger one. s. of euphorbe one. ij..
dissolve your gum in juice of leekes, and thereof make your pills.

These pills purge gross humors, and be very good against the ache in the
iointes, and the gout in the feet, against pains of the back, kneees,
stomach, cholicke, and the the white leprie.

145 Pills of euphorbe of D. M.
TAke of euphorbe, coloquintida, agaric, bdellium, serapium au^. two. of aloes
five. make pills with the juice of leekes.

These pills be good to expel, drive out, and to purge phlegm, and do
mollify, they cure the palsy, and purges gross humors which have course to
the iointes, and sinews, they cure isciatica passio which is the ach in the
hippes, or huckle bone of humors.

146 Pills of D. Mesues, which the Pothecaries call lucis maioris.
TAke of roses, violets, wormwood, coloquintida, turbith cubibes, calamus
aromaticus, nutmigs, spicknard, the flower of harder time, the seed of balm,
the wood of balm, filer montan, the seed of rue, squinantum, asarabacca,
mastike, of cloves, cinnamon, annisseede, fennel, of smallage, casiafistula,
safron, of mace au^. two. of all the kinds of myrobolans, of rhabarbe au^.
four. of aloes cicatrine as much as of them all, of agaric, of seen au^. five.
of eybright, six. make them with the juice of fennel.

These be present remedies against evil sight, they purge the instruments of
the senses, and superfluous humors, they keep the body strong and in health.

147 Pills which the Pothecaries call pillae lucis minoris.
TAke of the wood of balm, the seed of balm, au^. one. of celidon five. of
roses, violets, wormwood, eybright au^. three. of seen, of the flowers of
harder time, of all the kinds of myrobolans, of agaric, of coloquintida,
squinatum, of the stone licius, of the stone lazure au^. two. s. of aloes
cycatrine as much as of them all, make them with the juice of fennel, or
celidon.

These do purge melancholy better then does the other.

Pills of the stone lazure, of D. Mesues.
TAke of the stone lature washed, five. the flower of harder time, of spody
au^. eight. of scammony, of the best salt au^. two. s. of agarick, eight. make
them with the juice of endive.

These be excellent pills against long diseases of melancholy, and burnt
choler.

149 Pills of the gum bdellium.
TAke of bdellium twelve. of ammi, three. of all the kinds of myrrobolans, of
amber au^. two. s. mingle your bdellium with the juice of leekes, and so make
your pills.

These pills have been proved against running emrods, and the sores of them,
and to stop the flowers in women.

150 Pills of wild lilies, of Doctor Mesues.
TAke of wild lilies, of aloes, of the yealow myrrobolans, which is the first
kind of turbith, coloquintida, of soft bdellium, of serapium au^. six. the
stones of the otter, which the Pothecaries call castoreum, of the gum
sarcocolla, euphorbe, opoponax, wild rue, smalage au^. three. of safron one.
s. mingle these with the juice of coleworts, and make them in pills.

151 Pills against arthretica passio, which is the gout in the iointes, which
be called pillulae arthreticae.
TAke of wild lettyce, turbith, of agaric au^. four. of casia fistula, of
spicknard, of cloves, the wood of balm, the seed of balm, ginger, masticke,
fennel, annisseed, saxifrage, sperage, kneeholme or butchers broom, of roses,
gromel seed, salgem au^.. s. of aloes cicatrine as much as of them all, make
them with the juice of fennel.

These pills do purge and cure arthretica passio, which is a kind of gout in
in the joints, and in the feet.

152 Pills for the stomach.
TAke of aloes six. of masticke, of roses au^. two. make them with the juice
of dwale.

These purge the stomach, and the head.

153 Pills to be taken before meat, called pillulae ante cibum.
TAke of ligni aloes, cloves, folium indicum, masticke, the wood of balm, the
seed of balm, casiafistula, mace, nutmigs, cinnamon, cubebes, safron, siler
montan, spicknard, two. of rhubarbe, aloes cicatrine au^. as much as of them
all, mingle them with sweet wine, and make your pills.

These pills cause good digestion, and do distribute meat digested.

154 Pills of agaric.
TAke of Agaric, masticke, au^. three. the roots of lillies, horehound, au^.
one. of turbith five. hiera picra, three. of coloquintida, the gum sarcocolla
au^, two. of myrrh one. make these pills with the juice of herbs or fruits
fined either in the sun, or by the fire: this juice so fined is called of the
Pothecaries rob.

These pills purge the stomach from gross humors, and they be very good
against the shortness of wind and old coughes.

155 Pills of Fumitory.
TAke of the five kinds of myrrobolance, au^. five. mingle them with the juice
of fumitory, then let them stand till they be dry, then sprinkle again the
juice of fumitory, and suffer it again to dry, and so do the third time, then
let them stand till they be thick, and so make your pills thereof.

156 Common Pills of Doctor Rhas.
TAke of aloes two. of saffron, of mirrhe, au^. one. make them with sweet wine.

These pills be much used of the apothecaries and physicians, if you do take
them in summer, then your aloes must be washed with endive water, and if they
be taken in the plague time, then ye must put unto them, as much bole
aromeniac as of aloes.

157 Pills which the Apothecaries call Assairet Auicena.
TAke of hiera picra one. of mastic of yelow mirrobolance which is the first
kind of au^.. s. of the best aloes two. make your pills with the juice of
sticados.

These pills be a present remedy against the head ache.

158 Pills against the cough, called Pillulae Bicheae.
TAke of the juice of licoras, ammily, tragantum, gum arabic, sweet almonds
au^. one. of good sugar three. and make them with the slimy sap of the seed
of quinces.

159 Pills imperial, called Pillulae imperiales.
TAke cinamond, ammonium, anniseed, mastick, cardamomum, ginger, fennel, mace,
nutmegs, cloves, saffron, cubebes, ligni aloes, turbith, manna or sweet dew,
agaric, the coddes of seen, spikenard, of the five kinds of mirrobolance au^.
one. of rhubarbe as much as of them all, of aloes as much as of all the other,
make them with sirup of roses or violets.

160 Pills of Hiera picra Simple.
TAke of the pouders of hiera picra simple one. make them with the conserve of
roses as much as will suffice.

161 A confection of fruit, called Pomatum.
TAke of the grease of a young kid, one lib. temper it with the water of musk
roses the space of four days, then take five apples and dress them and cut
them in pieces and larde them with cloves, then boil them all together in the
same water of roses in a glass or in a vessel within another, let it boil on
the fire so long until all be white, then wash them with the same water of
musk roses, this done, keep it in a glass, and if ye will have it to smell
better, ye must put unto it a little ciuet or musk, or them both.

These, gentlewomen do use to make their faces smooth and fair with: it does
heal clifts in the lips, or in any other place.

R. 162. A confection of young Roses, called Rosara Nouella, of Doctor Nicholas.
TAke of roses, sugar, licoras, au^.. one. two. of cinamond, ij.. two. ij. gra.
of cloves, spikenard, ginger, galanga, nutmegs, setwall, storax calamita,
cardamomum, smallage au^. one. gra. eight, make these into powder.

This powder stops vomiting, and casting of the stomach, it fortifieth the
body, it quenches the thirst, it restores those which have been long sick,
and lets over much sweating.

163 A sirope of the sower juice of pomcitron.
TAke of the sower juice of pomcitron twelve lib. sees it in a vessel of
glass on the coals with a soft fire, till the third part be consumed, then
strain it, and let it stand till it be clear, then take of that which is
clear twelve lib. then pour upon it of clear and fined Iulop five lib.
seethe it until it be thick, if it be summer, then let it stand in the sun
till the water be consumed.

This is a present remedy against all diseases which come of gross and corrupt
humors, it is good against the pestilence, and all poisons, it does also
quench the thirst.

164 A sirope of the juice of sorrel. D.M.
TAke of the juice of sorrel clarified three lib. of sugar clarified two lib.
make of this your sirope.

This sirope is good against choleric persons, and certain agues, the
burning of the stomach, and the heart, it is a singular remedy against plagues,
and agues of corrupt humors.

165 A sirope of the green unripe grape.
MAke this as ye do the sirope of pomcitron, this cannot be made but only in
summer, because the juice that is gotten of the unripe grape, it is not to be
gotten but at that time.

166 A sirope of Calamints.
TAke of the garden and of the wild calamints au^. two. of louage, yelow
carrots, squinantum au^. five. of raisons, of corans picked lib. s. of honny
two lib. make the sirope, and when ye make this sirope ye must take six lib.
of water to boil your raisons in, then cast forth the water and take as much
again, and let it sees till the half be consumed, afterward put your honny
unto it and make your sirope.

This sirope is a present remedy against all diseases of phlegm, and chiefly
if it be hardened, it does comfort those which have their inward and
principal parts cold, or short winded, or the cough: it does purge
marvelous well the stomach, the breast, the bowels of gross and corrupt
humors.

167 A sirope of mints, of doctor Mesues.
TAke the juice of quinces, of the juice of sower pomgranads, cast upon these
the juice of dry mints one lib. s. of rose leaves two. let it stand a day and
a night, and then sees it with a soft fire, with honny and sugar, until the
half be consumed: mingle with your sirrop the confection called gallia
muscata, to make it more pleasant.

This sirope is good for a cold stomach, it stops vomitting, and the
disposition unto it: it takes away the hicup and fluxes of cold.

168 A sirope of wormwood, of doctor M.
TAke of the common worm wood, lib. s. of red roses two. of spicknard three.
of good old wine and sweet, the juice of quinces au^. two lib. s. let it
stand a day and a night in a vessel of stone, then sees it with a soft fire
till the half be consumed, with two lib. of honny, and so make this sirope.

This is an excellent remedy to fortify the stomach, and to cause good
appetite, to make strong the bowels, the liver, and chiefly when it comes of
a cold cause, it helps also in hot diseases, if so be it be tempered with
cold things.

169 A sirope of fumitory compound, of D. M.
TAke of all the kinds of myrrobolance, au^. twenty. of the flowers of borage
or buglosse, of violets, of wormwoode, of dodder, au^. one. of licorace, of
roses au^. s.. the flowers of the harder time, polipody au^. seven. of prunes a
C. of raisons, of corans picked, au^. one lib. s. the fruit of wild date tree
called thamarind, of casiafistula au^. two. let these boil in ten lib. of
water till it come to three lib. then make your sirope with the juice of
fumitory, sodden and fined, and with three lib. of sugar, seething them
accordingly. In this sirope making, ye must observe this order in putting in
your simples, because some require more time, some less in seething, therefore
first of all, put in polipody, then prunes, rasons, licorace, wormwood,
dodder, roses, the flowers of borage, then violets and myrribolance, the
flowers of harder time, casiafistula, thamarinde, the which after some
physicians judgment, they should not boil, because it is very tender,
howbeit, it pleases other learned men to put in it at the latter end of the
decoction, and suffer it to boil once that if may the better be mixed with the
other: and if a man would contend, that soft and tender simples do diminish in
boiling their moisture, then we must answer, that they diminish not their
natural moisture, but the unnatural and accidental, ye must also observe
this order which follows, if ye will make your sirope well, when your
decoction is made, then clarify your sugar with well water, the which being
sodden and clarified, then put unto it the juice of fumitory when it comes
nigh to the fashion of a sirope: the same decoction must be sodden by little and
little till it shall be well and perfectly sodden, then put in your fruit
thamarind, and casiafistula, and so make an end of your decoction.

This sirope opens and takes away all stoppings both of the stomach and of
the liver, and it comfort all the members, it cures all sores about the
inward parts which comes of salt and burnt water, as of the scabbe, the
leprie, and the french pocks.

170 A sirope of fumitory simple.
TAke of the juice of fumitory well fined, four lib. of sugar clarified two
lib. s. and make your sirope.

171 A sirope of licorace.
TAke of licoras two. of maidenhaire one. of dry hisope. s. cast upon this
four lib. of water, and let it stand a day and a night, then sees it till it
be half consumed, this done, put these unto the decoction, of sugar, honny,
penidis, au^. eight. of rose water six. make of these your sirope.

This is a present remedy against the plurisie, old coughes, to purge the
stomach and the lungs.

172 A sirope of hisope.
TAke of dry hisope, of the root of smallage, fennel, licorace au^. ten. of
barley the husk taken off. s. the seed of mallows, the gum tragantum, the
kirnels of quinces au^. three. of maidenhaire six. iuiubes, sebesten au^.
thirty in number, raisons, of corans picked twelve. dry figs, dates moist and
sappy, au^. in number ten, of white penidis two lib. make a sirope. To this
sirope making, take eight lib. of water, and sees it till it come to three,
then press it and let it boil with penidis, until it come to the form of a
sirope, and in making of it, ye ought to keep this order for your simples,
first take iuiubes, sebesten, raisons, figs, dates, the roots of smallage,
fennel, then barley, the seed of malloes, and of quinces, the gum tragantum,
hiscope, and maidenhaire.

This sirope cures diseases of the stomach, the cough, the plurisie, shortness
of wind, and all griefs of the body, and here ye must note, that when soever
ye read take this herb or that dry, it ought to be understand of those
herbs which be but superficial or little dry.

173 A sirope of horehound.
TAke of young and green horehound two. hisop, dry maidenhaire, au^. six..
licoras one. of calamint, annisseede, the root of smallage, the root of
fennel au^. five. the seed of malloes, fenigreke, flowerdeluce, au^. three.
of linseede, seed or kirnels of quinces au^. two. of raisons, of corans picked
five. of dry figs in number fifteen, of penidis two lib. of good honny two
lib. make of this your sirope: ye must take to the making of this sirope ten
lib. of water which shall boil till the half be consumed, because the honny
and penidis require much seething.

This sirope does cure old coughes, long diseases of the breast and lunges,
shortness of wind, and chiefly in old men if it come of flegmatike humors,
gross, corrupt and hard to be dissolved.

174 A sirope of the flowers of harder Time.
TAke of the flowers of harder time of the garden, twenty. of the two first
kinds of myrrobolance au^. fifteen. of dodder, of fumitorie au^. ten. of time,
buglosse, calamint, of the fourth and fifth kind of myrrobolance, of licorace,
polipodi, agaric, of sticados, au^. six of roses. fennel, of annisseede au^.
two. s. raisons, of corrans four. thamarind. two. s. of sugar four lib. of
roses two lib. And here ye must note, that when ye read rob alone, that then
it is taken for new wine boiled unto the third part, of this make your sirope,
and to the making of this, you must take ten lib. of water which must be sodden
to three lib. and this order ye must keep as concerning your putting in of
your simples: first take polipodi agaric, raisons, and licorace, fennel,
annisseed, sticados, fumitory, roses, dodder, buglosse, of myrrobolance without
the stones, the flowers of harder time, dissolve your thamarinde in one part of
the decoction, and let your sugar boil with rob, and when your decoction shall
be as thick as honny, yet sees it a little more, and in the end put in your
thamarind, and let them boil once or twice, till they come to the thicknes of
a sirope.

This is a proved medicine against the french pockes, cankers, falling of the
hair, great wounds and deep, lepries, and all diseases of melancholy, and
against adust and burnt choler: this does purge marvelous well, if a man take
thereof a good quantity: for commonly we ought to take from four. unto six.

175 A sirope of Egrimony.
TAke of the roots of smallage, fennel, endive, au^. two. of licoras,
squinantum, dodder, wormwood, roses, au^. six. maidenhaire, bedegre, of the
flowers of buglosse, or the root, of annisseede, egrimony au^. five. of
rhubarbe, mastic, au^. three. of spicknarde, asarabacca, folium indicum, sees
them in eight lib. of water, unto the third part be consumed, and make a sirope
with four lib. of sugar, and with a sufficient quantity of smalage and endive.

This sirope is good in long agues, and chiefly for to fortify the weakness
of the liver and the stomach, it cures the dropsy and the evil liking of the
body, of old sores almost incurable, it delivers the stomach of wind and
coldness, it aswageth the pain of the midrife, and the swelling thereof.

176 A sirope of sticados.
TAke of the flowers thirty. time, calamint, organnie, au^. ten. of
annisseede, pellitorie of spain, au^. seven. long pepper three. ginger, two.
raisons, of corans four. of sugar five lib. but also unto them these pouders
following, cinnamon, calamus aromaticus, saffron, ginger, black pepper, long
pepper, au^. one. s. bind them in a thin cloth, and hang them in the sirope.

This has been proved against all cold diseases of the sinowes, as ye
palsy, falling evil, crampe, shaking, writhing of the neck on the one side,
rheumes from the head to the breast, it does also comfort the stomach.

177 A sirope of violets.
TAke of the infusion of violets five lib. of sugar clarified four lib. mingle
them together, and sees them with a soft fire, and so keep them.

This is a present remedy against hot agues, a hot liver or heart, the
plurisie, the dry cough, the roughnes of the wind pipe, and of the throat.

178 A sirope of poppie.
TAke of the heads of white and black poppie au^. threescore. sees them in
four lib. of rain water until it come to a pound and half, and with four.
of white sugar and penidis.

This sirope causes a man to sleep, and quenches thirst, it stops rheumes
coming to the breast, and does mitigate the pain: this is not so cold as the
compound.

179 A compound sirope of Poppie.
TAke of white poppie and black au^. fifty. of maidenhaire, fifteen. of
licoras five. of iuiubes in number thirty, of the seed of lettice forty. of
the seed of malloes, the kirnels of quinces, au^. six. sees them in four
lib. of water, until the half be consumed, then make your sirope with eight.
of sugar and penidis.

This compound sirope has the same virtue which the simple has, but it
causes greater cold, and aswageth pain better. Doctor Mesues does judge it
to be good against a dry cough, and a consumption.

180 A compound sirope of myrts.
TAke of myrts twenty, of saunders white and re dde, manna or sweet dew,
flowers of wild pomgranads, barberies, au^. fifteen. of medlars, fifty. of
well water eight lib. boil them all until they be half consumed, then
strain them, and put into the straining, the juice of pomgranads, the juice of
quinces au^. six. of sugar clarified three lib. mingle these, and make them
sees until they come to the fashion of a sirope.

181 A simple sirope of myrts.
TAke of the juice of myrts twelve lib. sees it in a vessel of glass with a
soft fire until the third part be consumed, then strain it, and let it stand
until it be clarified, then take eight lib. of that which is clarified and put
unto it five lib. of honny, and sees it till it come to the thicknes of a
sirope, if it be in summer, set it in the sun until the water be consumed.

This fortifieth the stomach and all the inward parts, it cures an old cough.

182 A sirope simple of vinegar called Acetosus simplex. D. N.
TAke of good white sugar five parts, and put it in a vessel of stone, then
cast upon it four lib. of sweet clear well water, and then sees it with
coals, or else with a soft fire without smoke, always scumming it, and sees
till it shall be clear, and the water half consumed, then put unto it of
vinegar, of white wine not very strong two parts, of very strong vinegar
four parts, of new and fresh vinegar three parts, sees it until it be
enough.

This is a present remedy against all hot diseases, cold, subtle, or gross
matter.

183 A compound sirope of vinegar and roots called acetosus compositus.
TAke of well water ten lib. put unto it the roots of fennel, of smalage,
endive, au^. three. of annisseede, fennel seed, smallage seed, au^. eight.
the seed of endive, s.. sees them with a soft fire until they shall come to
five lib. and then put unto them three lib. of sugar, let it be clarified as
before, and mingle with it a sufficient quantity of good vinegar according to
the form of the sirope before.

This sirope purges gross choler and phlegm, it scoureth and opens
opilacions and obstructions which be about the liver, the spleen, and the
raines.

184 A sirope simple of endive.
TAke of the juice of endive fined eight lib. of sugar clarified five lib. s.
make your sirope, seething all things as in the sirope before, howheit, first
you must clarify your honny, and when it is clarified, put in your juice.

This is a principal medicine to aswage the heat of the liver, the heart and
the other chief parts, and to cure the frensy.

185 A compound sirope of endive.
TAke of the juice of endive, the juice of liuerwoort, au^. three (...) lib.
these iuces must be clarified, the^ take of roses, violets, lentils, tentewoort
au^. s.. of maidenhaire, barley the husk taken of, the four greater cole
seeds, au^. on. of sugar as much as will suffice, and make your sirope, and
powder it with white and red saunders, barberies, the seed of quinces, of
ligni aloes, cinnamon, the rind of pomcitron au^. one.

This asswageth the great heat of the liver, and of the heart, and of the other
principal parts, it is very good for all hot complexions, it loses, opens
all opilations, and obstructions, it does comfort weak members, which be
troubled with heat, it does also digest choler and sharp matter.

186 A sirope of cichorie.
TAke of endive both of the garden, and the wild, of both cichories, au^. j.
m. of gourds, liuerwoort, white endive, lettyce, fumitory, lupines, au^. one m.
barley not husked, and of alcakengy au^. four. of licoras, maidenhaire,
ceteracke, tentewort, dodder au^. six. the roots of fennel, and smalage,
sperage, au^. two. boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and strain
them, and make your sirope with good sugar, and so for every pound of your
strope take three. of rhewharbe, and four of spicknard, bound in a thin
piece, which shall be often times pressed till your sirope be well sodden: the
quantity that a man shall take one time is three. with the water wherein the
four common cole seeds were sodden in.

187 A sirup of Quinces.
TAke of the juice of tart quinces fined and clarified ten parts, of sugar
two parts, and make a sirup thereof.

This stops vomiting, and quenches the thirst, and it does comfort the
stomach.

188 A sirup of Nenufar.
TAke two lib. of the flowers of nenufar, and see the them once, then press
them, and put unto the juice pressed two lib. of sugar, and seethe it till it
come to the form of a sirup.

189 A sirup of Barberries.
TAke of the juice of barberries fined, four lib. of sugar clarified, three
lib. and thereof make a sirup.

190 A sirup of tart Pomgranades.
TAke of the juice of tart pomgranades, two lib. s. of sugar clarified, four
lib. make the sirup as before.

This sirup is good against hot agues of choler and phlegm.

191 A sirup of Bizans.
TAke of the juice of endive, the juice of smallage, au^. two lib. of hoppes,
borage or buglos, garden or wild, au^. j. lib. boil them once, and then
strain them and fine them, this done, take four lib. of the juice clarified,
of fine sugar two lib. s. so seethe it with a soft fire until it be as thick
as a sirup.

This sirup is very good against agues which come of obstructions, and of
choler, phlegm, and the yelow iaundize.

192 A sirup of the infusion of young Roses.
TAke of the infusion of young roses five lib. of sugar four lib. mingle them,
and make a sirup.

This is good to quench the thirst in burning agues, and to assuage heat, it
does comfort the stomach, the heart, the the liver being troubled with heat,
it preserves the body from all corruption, and from the plague, it resists
poison.

193 A sirup of dry Roses.
TAke of the infusion of dry roses and sugar au^. two lib. mingle them and make
a sirup accordingly.

This does marvelous well comfort the stomach, and also it binds.

194 A sirup of the juice of Roses.
TAke of the juice of roses fined, one lib. s. of sugar clarified, one lib. s.
and make your sirup accordingly.

195 A sirup of the fruit Iuiubes.
TAke of iuiubes in number threescore, of violets, the seed of mallows, au^.
five. of maydenhaire one. the seed or kirnels of quinces, the seed of white
poppy, the seed of mellons, the seed of lettise, the gum tragantum au^.
three. of licoras, of barley husked, au^. eight. seethe them in four lib. of
well water or else rain water, until the half be consumed, then strain it,
and put unto the juice strained, three lib. of sugar clarified, and so make
your sirup, seething it accordingly.

This is very good against horsenesse of the voice, the cough, the plurisie,
and exulcerations of the bladder.

195 A compound sirope of maidenhaire
TAke of maidenhaire two m. of tentwoort, ceteracke au^. one m. of iuiubes,
licoras au^. two. make a decoction, putting unto it three lib. of sugar, and
make your sirope accordingly thereunto, but many learned men do use this form
following in making this sirope: they take of maidenhaire four lib. of iuiubes
three lib. of licoras three. of sugar six lib. this sirope is judged to be the
better.

This purges gross humors, it loses, opens obstructions, it scowreth the
reins, and cleanses the breast of gross humors.

196 A simple sirope of maidenhaire.
TAke of the decoction of young maidenhaire three lib. of sugar two lib. and
make your strope thereof.

Another sirope of maidenhaire of D.M.
TAke of licoras scraped two. of maidenhaire five. cast upon them four lib. of
well water, and let it stand a day and a night, then boil them unto the half,
and strain them and put unto the decoction eight. of sugar clarified, penidis,
and maidenhaire, then sees it till it come to the form of a sirope.

197 A sirope of mugwoort.
TAke of mugwoort two m. of calamint, folium indicum, sauery, of organy, time,
quickbeame, sticados, au^. one m. camomile, melilot, margeram, roses, au^. one.
of little fishes called vnguis odoratus, calamus aromaticus au^. three. of
spikenard one. germander, motherwoort, ielofloures, sothernwood au^. s. m.
gladian, horehound, the leaves of the greater madder, siler montan,. au^. one.
asarabacca, squinantum, anniseede au^. six. fennel, ammy, smallage au^. six.
boil them in a sufficient quantity of water according to the art, then put
unto them as much honey as will be sufficient, and make your sirope.

This is a present remedy to provoke the flowers in women, which are stopped.

198 A sirope of Lemmons.
TAke of leumons the juice, one lib. s. of sugar clarified, three lib. and make
your strope accordingly.

This is very good to consume gross and corrupt humors, or worms, it
asswageth heat in agues, it purges raw humors.

199 A sirope of Ceterac.
TAke of ceterac, hearts tongue, of endive, liuerwoort, woormewood, of cichory
au^. s. m. of dodder, linseed, one. the four common great seeds, the flowers
of borage, buglosse or langdebeefe au^. one m. maydenhaire, roots of fennel,
parcely, kneeholme, or bochers-broome, au^. s. m. make your sirope accordingly,
and cast on these pouders, folium indicum, spikenard, the gum lacca, casia
fistula, au^. two. bind these in a thin cloth, and boil them in the sirope,
and then reserve them.

This does comfort the liver, it scoureth the raines, and it delivers the
spleen from all obstructions.

200 A sirope of Buglos.
TAke of the infusion of the flowers of buglos, or langdebeefe three lib. of
sugar two lib. make it accordingly. An other way to make this sirope, take of
the juice of buglos fined, four lib. of sugar three lib. make your sirope
accordingly.

This sirope does comfort the stomach, it makes a man merry, it is also
ministered against sounings or fainting of the heart.

A Musk ball which the Pothecaries call, Sapo Muscatus.
TAke soap of venis four lib. and cut it in small pieces with a knife, then
put unto it the powder of cloves, white sanders au^. two. made in fine powder,
of benswaine one. of musk twenty gra. temper them with rose water, some
Apothecaries put unto them a little quantity of the oil of spikenard, mingle
all together and make your ball.

202 A confection which the Pothecaries call Theriaca Galeni.
TAke of the little balls which he made with squilla, which they call,
throchristi scilliticum two. two. long pepper two. five or six gra. little
balls of triacle which the Pothecaries call trochristi theriaci, little balls
of coral, au^. one. one. of the wood of balm two. seven gra. the juice of
black poppie, agaric, seed of wild rapes, cinamond, the juice of balm, au^.
one. fourteen gra. of rhubarbe, saffron, spikenard, cost, of squinantum,
ginger, casia fistula, storax calamita, mirrhe, turpentine washed, the whiter
frankensence, calamint dittan, sticados, wild time, the root of cincfoly,
parsely, white pepper au^. one. seven gra. folium indicum, gummi arabic,
coporas, serapium, terra lemnia, hipoquistis, spikenard, gladian, germander, of
gencian, wild fennel, the seed of balm, smallage, amomum, fennel, wild
carrowaies, siler montan, cresses, anniseede, saint Jones woort, pisa spalton
which is a compound thing of pitch and iues lime, the stones of the otter which
the Apothecaries call castoreum, oppoponax. Iues lime or pitch, galban, the
less centuary au^. one. of the best honey as much as will suffice.

This is judged to be the chief and principal of all medicines, because it
brings quietness, and does cure the greatest diseases and griefs in any
part of the body, as the falling sickness, insensibilitie, which is a disease
when a man can neither moous, feel, nor understand, it helps conuulsions,
the headache, the grief of the stomach, the migram, horsenesse of the voice,
and straightness of the breast, and shortness of wind, and diseases in the wind
pipe, spitting of blood, the yelow iaundes, dropsy, diseases of the liver,
iliaca passio, wounds, or exulcerations in the bowels, franzies, the stone, it
provoke the flowers stopped in women, and delivers a woman of a dead
child, it cures leprie, measels, and all old diseases, it is a present
remedy against cold, and all poisons, and the stinging of venomous beasts: and
here ye must note and understand, that the quantity ought to be changed in
the ministering of it, according to the quantity or quality of every disease,
and this does refresh and comfort the senses, the heart, brain, liver and
stomach, and it does keep all the body safe, strong, pure, from all diseases
and corruption.

203 A confection called Trifera Magna.
TAke of the juice of black poppie two. of cinamond, cloves, galanga,
spikenard; setwall, ginger, cost, storax calamite, calamus aromaticus, cipres,
spikenard, roses, pepper, annisseed, smallage, fennel, parsely, yelow carrots,
henbane, of comin, basell, of honey as much as will suffice.

This is a present medicine against all inward diseases of a woman, and against
the pain of the stomach taken with the decoction of the seeds of fennel,
anniseed, mastick, it cures all diseases of the matrice of cold taken, with
wine wherein mugwort was sodden in, also if you make a round piece of silk or
wool tosed, after the fashion of a finger, anointed with oil of a weasell,
or such other oil, and put it into the matrice, it will move the flowers of
women which do not conceive, and it is also a singular remedy for children
which speak in their sleep or cannot sleep, if it be taken with wine wherein
mandragore or elderne has been sodden in: it will also help them if it be
taken with woman's milk, according to the quantity of the little grain cicer.

204 A confection of three Sanders, called Triasandali. D.N.
TAke of white, read, and yelow sanders, of sugar au^. three. some
Apothecaries do take fliwoort for sugar, which is thought to be better, Galen
does make this composition after this sort. He takes of rhubarbe, of spody,
the juice of licoras, the seed of purslan, au^. one. s. of amily, gum
arabic, tragantum, of the four great commin seeds, the seed of white endive
au^. one. s. of camphire one. some Apothecaries put unto this four times as
many of roses as of all the other, of the sirope of roses as much as will
suffice.

This does cure the pain of the liver and the stomach, and those which be in
a consumption, or have the yelow iaundes.

205. Trochistes or little balls of Roses.
TAke of roses, ligni aloes two. of masticke one. s. the common woormewood,
cinamond, spikenard, casia fistula, the flowers of squinantum au^. one. make
your balls with old wine, and with the decoction of the common roots, as
smallage, parcely, and borage.

These balls be very good against old agues, and those which come of diverse
causes, against quotidians, and all agues by the which the beauty and form is
corrupt.

206 Little balls of Violets.
TAke of the young flowers of white violets, five. of amily four. the seed of
white poppie two. one. of rhubarke five. the seed of plantan one. of balm
one. of rose water as much as will suffice, and make it after the form of the
balls before: and this is not used but when it is mingled with other
compositions.

207 Trochistes or little balls of Squilla. D.N.
TAke one squilla whole, and bake it in pass well leuened, when it is baked,
take it forth of the pass and cast away the outward rind, and beat the
substance of squilla in a mortar, and put unto it as much of the sine flower of
orobus, and temper it with wine or honny, and if ye have not probus at hand,
then take as much bread well baken and finely broken, and make your balls, and
dry them in the sun: the Pothecaries do make in this confection, one part
of squilla, and two parts of barley flower.

208 Little balls called theriaci, of D. N.
TAke a young adder of the length of a spanne, with red eyes, a shaking tongue,
horns like the grame of wheat, cut away the head and the tail of either three
fingers, and the midst to be dressed, the skin taken off, and the garbage
cast away, then wash it often in sweet wine, and sees it so long till the flesh
fall from the back done, then beat the flesh well in a mortar, cast away the
back bone, then temper the flesh with the own juice, and put unto it as much
of the flower of orchus or of baked bread, and make little balls of the weight
of one. s. and dry them in ye shadow.

These be not used but when they be taken with other great simples or
compositions, except it be in curing of the leprie.

209 Little balls of coral, of D. N.
TAke of red corrall, cinnamon, of myrre, amomum, poppie au^. four. of
squinantum, saffron, au^. two. of calamus aromaticus, the wood of balm,
casiafistula, folium indicum, mastick, wild time, valerian, asarabacca, herb
robert au^. one. this being first made in powder, then for to make your little
balls with wine.

This is a present remedy to staunch blood and to stop the bloody flux, it
does also fortify the stomach, and causes good disgestion.

210 Trochistes of camphure.
TAke of the leaves of roses four. of spody two. of yelow saunders two. s. of
saffron one. of licorace two. of the four greater cold seeds, spicknard,
au^. one. of ligni aloes, cardamomum, ammili, camphure, au^. two. of five
nigor, manna or sweet dew au^. three. make your balls with the sappte part of
flywort and rose water.

This is very good in hot agues, and to quench the thirst, and for burning of
red choler or black: it aswageth the heat of the stomach and liver, all the
inward parts, it cures the yelow iaundis and those which be in a consumption.

211 Little balls of Alchakengi. D. M.
TAke of the beries of alchakengi three. of ye four greater cold seeds au^.
three. s. of bolearmonick, gum arabic, white franckinsence, dragons blood,
white poppie, bitter almons, the juice of licorace, tragamum, ammily, the
stones of the pineapples au^. six. the seed of smallage, ambre, henbane, the
juice of black poppie au^. two. make your balls with the sappie juice which
was pressed forth of the berries or grains of alchakengi.

This is a present medicine against exulcerations in the raines and bladder,
and of the pain in pissing.

212 Little balls of myrre of D. Rasis.
TAke of myrre three. of lupins five. the leaves of rue, of wild mint,
pennyryall, commin, madder, pellitorie of spain, of serapium, opoponax au^.
two. make your balls of the weight of two drams, of the which let the patient
take one. in the day time with ye water wherein the seeds of juniper were
sodden.

This is so strong a medicine to purge flowers in women, that it will cause the
child to descend if they use it often: also the flowers be moved very well in
boxing of the crooking of the hamme, or in cutting the vain which has course
by the ancle, ye may also use boxing about ye thighs.

213 Trochists or little balls of musk. D. M.
TAke of the wood of aloes five. of ambre two. of musk one. the gum
tragantum, with rose water as much as will suffice to temper them together, and
so make your balls.

These do comfort the stomach, the heart, the liver, and be used with great
medicines.

214 Trochists of Rheubarbe. D. M.
TAke of rheubarbe ten. the juice of egrimony four. of roses three. of
spicknard, annisseede, madder, smallage seed, wormwood, asarabacca, au^. one.
bitter almonds four. make your balls of the weight of one. s.

This does aswage the pain of the liver, and delivers it from obstructions,
it does cure inward impostumes, old griefs, the dropsy, yelow iaundis, and
restores again good color, the drink of them is a present remedy for those
which be of euel liking or in a consumption: many physicians do use them in
hot agues, and when the body begins to fall in a consumption.

215 Trochists of Spodie.
TAke of red roses twelve. of spody ten. the seed of sorrel six. the seed
of purselane, the seed of coriander infused in vinegar, and afterward dried,
the rind of frankicense tree au^. two. s. of amyly made in powder, the flowers
of wild pomgranads, barberies, au^. two. gum arabic made in powder one. s.
make these with the juice of unripe grapes.

These balls taken with the juice or seeds of sorroll, be very good against
agues of choler which have a continual flux, they aswage the burning
stomach, and the liver, and quench the thirst.

216 Little balls of wormewoode. D. M.
TAke of roses, wormwood, annisseede, au^. two. of rhubarbe, the juice of
egrimonis, of asarabacca, smallage, bitter almonds, spicknarde, mastic, folium
indicum au^. one. make your balls with the juice of endive.

These be good in long agues, and deliver the liver and the stomach from
obstructions and hardness, and do comfort the same, they take away pain in the
principal parts, and do cause good appetite: if they be dronken in long
agues, then they do profit very much.

217 Trochists of egrimonie.
TAke of manna or sweet dew, the juice of egrimony au^. one. of roses. s. of
spicknard three. of rhubarbe, asarabacca, annisseede, au^. two. of spody three.
s. make your balls with the juice of egrimony.

These be necessary against long agues, and the cold and shaking of them, and
against obstructions, the yelow iaundes, and the dropsy if they be taken at
the beginning.

218 Little balls of terra sigillata.
TAke of dragons blood, of gum arabic made in powder, ciuet, rose leaves,
seed of roses, ammyly made in powder, spody, acatia, of hipoquistes, the stone
which does staunch blood, the flowers of wild pomgranads, bolearmonicke, terra
sigillata, hempseede, coral, perls, ambre, au^. two. tragantum, black poppie,
au^. one. s. the seed of purseline made in powder, franckinsence, the horn of
the red dear made in powder, oak apples, saffron, au^. two. and make your
balls with the juice of plaintaine.

These be excellent balls to staunch spitting of blood, and chiefly if they
be taken with the water of plantane: if the forehead be therewith anointed, it
stops bleeding at the nose, if the matrice be anointed therewith it
stops the flowers, and also for any flux.

219 Trochists of ambre, of doctor Mesues.
TAke of ambre, aver six, of the horn of the red dear made in powder,
gum arabic, coral made in powder, tragantum, acatia, hipoquistes, the
flowers of the wild pomgranads, of mastick, the gum of lade washed, black
poppie made in powder, au^. aver two, franckinsence, saffron, opium, au^. aver
one s. make these with the slimie sap of fly wort.

This does staunch blood, from what place soever it comes.

220 Telagualteri.
TAke of the common oil or sallet oil one lib. of ceruse four, of litharge
two. myrre s.. make of these like cerota which be made of wax.

This does heal and dry up old sores.

V. 221 An ointment called Apostolicum.
TAke turpentine, white wax, of rosin au^. fourteen. opoponax, the powder of
brass au^.. ammomacum, fourteen. aristolochia longa, white frankincense au^.
six. of myrre, galbanum, au^. four. bdellium, six. of litharge nine. infuse
your bdellium in good vinegar, and so dissolve it, and in summer sees it with
two lib. of oil, and in winter with three.

This does cure old fistules easily, swellings and hard kirnels, it eats
away dead flesh, and it cleanses also wounds.

222 An ointment of roses called Rosatum.
TAke of young swines grease as much a you think best, and wash it in hot
water nine times, and as often in cold water, then stamp with it as great a
quantity of young roses, and let them stand the space of seven days, then
sees them with a soft fire and strain them, then take again as many roses
and stamp them with the grease, and so let them stand the space of seven
days, then cast upon them one part of the juice of roses, of oil of almonds
six parts, sees them altogether with a soft fire until the juice be
consumed, if ye will put unto the rose water a little quantity of opium, then
it will prove a very excellent medicine.

222 A singular good ointment called Basilicum magnum.
TAke of white wax, rosen, tallow of a cow, dry pitch, fat of the bellies of
great fishes, fine franckinsence, myrre, au^. six. of pitch liquid or moist
three. and of all the other au^. one. s.

This is a present ointment against wounds inflamed, and wounds in the
sinowes, it does purge them and does bring flesh again. The learned sort of
surgeans think this ointment not fit to be laid unto hot sores nor wounds
because it is of his nature hot, and so it shall cause greater inflammations,
wherefore use it rather in wounds without all inflammations of heat.

224 An other excellent ointment called Basilicum minus, of D. M.
TAke yelow wax six. good oil two lib. s. turpentine two. rosen, dry pitch,
au^. one. s. fine franckinsence, mastick, au^. one. saffron one. make your
ointment.

This has been proved to heal broses and strokes.

225 A very good ointment called Aureum.
TAke of rosen, pitch, wax, oil as much as will suffice, and make your
ointment therewith accordingly.

226 An ointment that is called Populeon.
TAke the buds of the populer tree one lib. s. black poppie, leaves of
mandragora, the buds of the bramble, of henbane, dwale, the less houseleeke or
stonecrop, lettis, houseleeke, burre, violets, maidenhaire au^. three. of young
swines grease not salted two lib. dry all your herbs and boil them with your
grease, and make your ointment.

This is good to anoint the temples, the pulses, and palms of the hands, and
the soales of the feet in hot agues.

227 An ointment called Marciaton of D. N.
TAke of white wax two lib. of oil eight lib. of rosemary leaves, of laurel
au^. eight. of rue seven. of quickbeme seven. of sauin, of water mynt, sage,
bassel, wild time, calamint, mugwort, enulacampana, gelliflowers, branckursin,
goose grease, paritary, pimpernell, egrimonie, wormwood, primrose, curage,
young buds of elder, orpin, mellifoly, houselike, germander, centuarie,
strawherie leaves, cinckfoly, herb india au^. four. the root of holyhooke,
cummin, myrtle, au^. three. of fennigrecke, one. s. of fresh butter one. two.
of nettles, violets, red poppie of the corn, of balsamum, the third kind of
myrts, and of maidenhaire, woollthistle or carduus benedictus, woodbinde,
valerian, herb robart, sorrel of bosse, hearts tongue, oxeye, camphure,
storaxe, dear suet, au^. s.. the fat of a bear, or hen, mastick au^, one.
of franckinsence s.. oil of spicknard two. let all your herbs be gotten in
May, within two days space if ye can get them, and from three of the clock
in the morning unto twelve stamp all your herbs together, and infuse them in
sweet wine seven days, on the eight day sees them with a soft fire, and when
your wine does begin to consume, then put in your oil and boil them
altogether until your herbs begin to consume, then strain them, and cast
away the herbs and set the juice strained on the fire again, and when it
boyleth, put in storax, and soon after the butter and the grease, oil of
spiknarde, masticke, franckinsence, wax, when the wax is all melted, then
take it from the fire, stirring it always in boiling till it shall be thick,
and then reserve it.

This is a singular ointment for the headache of cold, the grief of the breast,
stomach, and against hardness of the spleen and the liver, it cures iliaca
passio, which is ache or the gout in the hippes, the frenzy, gout in the
feet, swellings, and to be short, all aches of cold.

228 An ointment called of D. N. Aragon.
TAke rosemarie, margeram, and the roots of wake robin, wild time, rue, the
root of wild cucumbers, au^. three. s. the leaves of the bay tree, sage,
sauin, au^. three. of horsemint, of laurel, nine. of brionie three. of neppe,
the leaves of wild cucumbers au^. s. lib. of mastic, of frankensence au^.
seven. of pellitor of spain, and euphorbe, ginger, pepper, au^. one. the oil
of a weasell. s. oil which naturally runs out of a stone, one. of the
grease of a bear, the oil of the bay tree, au^. three. of butter four. the
common oil or sallet oil, five lib. of wax one lib. three. gather your
herbs in June, and use all other things as in the other ointment before,
stamp them well and lay them in a mortar of stone in oil, the space of seven
days, on the eight day set it on the fire until the herbs go down to the
bottom, then strain them, and set the juice strained on the fire again, and
when it begins to boil, put in your oil of the bay tree, the butter, the
grease of the bear, and wax, and when it is melted, then put in mastick,
frankensence, and at last your ginger, pepper, pellitory of spain, euphorbe,
when they be well sodden, then take all from the fire and reserve them.

This cures aches of cold, if it be anointed after this fashion, take a shell
of an egg, and warm the ointment in it at the fire, and anoint the places:
when the places be anointed, lay also to the place the shell wherein the
ointment was warmed, and it heals the crampe and conuulsions, and when a man
is so stiff for cold that he cannot move his neck, it is good against
arthritica passio which is a gout in the joints, and against the ache in the
hippe, and against a quartaine, if so be the back bone be therewith anointed
before the fit come.

229 An ointment of Holihocke, of D. N.
TAke of the roots of holihocke, two lib. of linseede, fenigreeke, au^. one
lib. of squilla, s. lib. of the oil four lib. of wax one lib. of turpentine,
the gum of iuy, galban, au^. two. of dry pitch or colophony, of rosen au^. s.
lib. wash your roofes well, and beat your fenigreeke and squilla all together,
then put them all into seven lib. of water, the space of three days, on the
fourth day boil them till they be thick, then put them softly into a bag and
strain them, putting unto them a little fair hot water, to cause the slimy
juice to strain the better, after this, take two lib. of that juice and boil
it with oil until the juice be consumed, then put in the wax, and when that
is melted, put in turpentine and galbanum, the gum of the iuy tree, the last,
powder of rosin and dry pitch, and when it is thick, then take it from the
fire, and make your ointment.

This does assuage pain of the stomach of cold, the pluresie, if ye anoint
therewith the place, it does also purge heat, it mollifieth and causes
moistnes.

230 An ointment of Agrippe.
TAke of briony two lib. the root of wild cucumber, the root of squilla
six. of flowerdeluce, four. the root of fern two. the root of walwoort,
the root of sethistle au^. two. wash your roots twice or thrice, then beat
them in a mortar or marble stone, then put unto them four lib. of the oil of
masticke, or the common oil, the space of two days, howbeit if they lie five
or six days they will be the better, because they increase their heat,
savor and strength, boil them on the third day until the roots shall become
soft, then strain them, and when they be strained, set them on the fire
again, and when it begins to boil, take fifteen. of white wax, and when
the wax is melted take it from the fire, and make your ointment when it is
cold.

This is a present remedy against the dropsy, and all swelling, in what part
soever it be, it asswageth pain in the sinowes, it provoke urine, and
causes a man to be laxatiue, and it cures pains in the raines of cold.

231 An ointment of Pompholix.
TAke of the oil of roses ten. of white wax five. of the juice of the berries
of dwale eight. of white lead, four. of the common lead made in powder, of
tutis a kind of lead au^. two. of frankensence one. Make these simples in
powder, which be fit to be made in powder, seethe the juice of dwale with oil
of roses until the juice be consumed, then mingle the wax with the pouders,
and beat them in a mortar, and make your ointment.

232 An ointment of Enula Campane.
TAke of the root enula campana, sodden in vinegar, and dride well afterward,
one lib. of swines grease and of common oil au^. three. of new wax one. of
common salt made in powder, s.. of quick silver and turpentine washed au^.
two. make this ointment accordingly, then take swines grease five. oil of the
bay tree, of quick silver slecked, of wax washed, of frankensence made in
powder au^. two. of salt eight. the juice of plantane, the juice of fumitory,
as much as will suffice, and make it after this fashion: set your juices with
the wax on the fire, with oil of bays, swines grease, and let them boil
until all be melted, then put in salt, frankensence, masticke, and boil them
all until the juice be consumed, then take them from the fire and put unto them
the quick: silver slecked, as ye did in the other ointment before, and so use
it.

This is a very strong ointment, therefore ye must take diligent heed, lest ye
touch any principal member with the ointment, because of your quick silver,
and you must also mingle with it a great quantity of masticke.

234 An ointment for children which be scabbed.
TAke of turpentine washed four. of butter washed two. of salt one. of the
juice of pomcitrons, the yolks of eggs au^. in number three, oil of roses.
do them all together, and make your ointment thereof.

235 A red ointment to dry.
TAke of the stone which is called of the Apothecaries calaminaris, of terra
lemnia au^. four. litharge of gold, of white lead, au^. three. camphire one.
of wax five. oil of roses, oil of violets au^. six. and make your ointment
accordingly.

236 An ointment against Worms.
TAke of the oil of bitter almons one. juice of the leaves of peaches, the
juice of motherwort au^. s.. of roses, the flower of lupines, of ye horn of
the red dear made in powder, au^. one. aloes cycatrine two. some put unto this
two. of ox gall, also take a little quantity of vinegar, and as much honey as
will suffice.

237 An ointment called Resum Ptiuum.
TAke of swines grease four. of hens grease, of goose grease, of ducks
grease au^. two. of moist isope s.. oil of violets, oil of camomill, oil of
dill au^. two. of fresh butter one lib. of white wax six. of tragantum, of
the slimy sap of the kirnels of quinces, the slimy sap of linseed, the
slimy sap of holihock, the slimy part of the gum arabic au^. s.. mingle
them together and make your ointme^t.

238 An ointment of Rhasis, Vnguentum Album.
TAke of the common oil two lib. of fine white lead one lib. of white wax
six. some Apothecaries do put unto these two. of camphyre, make this your
ointment according to the same.

This is good against all inflammations of heat.

239 An ointment called Nutritum.
TAke litharge of gold three. of the common or sallet oil, s. lib. of vinegar
three. make your ointment in a mortar of lead accordingly.

240 An ointment called Egiptiacum.
TAke of the flower of brass five aur. of honey fourteen aur. of strong
vinegar, seven aur. seethe them until they be thick and make your siropes
thereof.

This is a singular good ointment against old wounds and fistules, which
stand in need of clensing: it does also eat away dead flesh, and also it
purges all corruption.

241 A yelow ointment called Citrinum.
TAke of borax a kind of salt peeter, two. of camphyre one. of white coral s..
of see glass burnt one. of marbon stones, of the gum tragantum, amili,
marble, of fine frankensence, and white, salt peeter au^. three. of white
marble two. of serpentary, of white lead six. make it after this fashion,
stamp your tragantum and the marbon stones in a mortar of marble with an iron
pestle, and stamp the other alone in the same mortar, then sift them through a
fine sieve, with a fine linen cloth, with one lib. s. of fresh swines grease,
goats grease, one. s. hens grease, one. these greases must be put in a
skillet, or in some other such like vessel, the which vessel ought to hang in
a cawdron full of water on the fire, let the water in the cawdron so boil,
that the grease may melt in the skillet, by the heat of the water in the
cawdron, and when it is melted, strain it through a fine cloth into a dish,
and put unto it all the pouders, except camphyre and borax, stirring it
continually, until all go together in a lump, this done, mingle with it two
or mo pomcitrons, stirring it always, and when it begins to boil, put in
your camphyre and borax, it must be continually well stirred till it be cold,
when it is taken from the fire, the which done, make your ointment: and here ye
must note, that one pound of powder will require eight lib. of grease.

242 An ointment called Meapolitanum, by Johannes de Vigo.
TAke oil of camomile, dill, of spikenard, lilies, au^. two. of swines grease,
the fat of a veale, au^. one lib. of e uphorbe five. of frankensence, ten. oil
of the bay tree one. s. grease of a viper two. s. of quick frogs in number
six, of woormes washed in wine three. s. juice of the roots of walwoort and
of enula campana, au^. two. of squinantum, of sticados, of motherwoort au^. one
m. of sweet wine, two lib. boil them all together until the wine be
consumed, then strain them, and put into the straining litharge of gold, one
lib. of turpentine washed, two. make this ointment or serotum with white wax,
putting unto it when it is almost sodden one. s. of stact, or of the fattest
and tenderest part of mirrhe, then take it from the fire, and stir it till it
shall become luke warm, after this, put unto it four. of quick silver
slecked with your spittle, stirring it till the quick silver be run amongst
the other simples even like, on a lump.

243 An other ointment.
TAke oil of spikenard one. oil of the lees of white wine, oil of the bay
tree, petroloum, of swines grease four. of frankensence s.. euphorbe one. s.
the ointment of holihocke, the ointment of agrippa au^. one. of quicksiluer
four. mingle all together, and make your ointment.

244 An ointment of Galen.
TAke of white wax one lib. oil of roses, three lib. let them be melted all
together and washed well and often with cold water until they be white, the more
this is washed, the better and stronger they will be, at the latter end wash
them with a little vinegar.

245 Sugar of Roses.
TAke fine sugar and dissolve it with rose water, seethe it well, then cast it
on a marble stone till it be cold and hard, afterward cut it in great
pieces, and reserve it.

Thus ye may make also sugar, violet and buglosse.

FINIS.
Approved medicines, most of them practiced by the Translator hereof.
A good ointment and a precious, for all goutes and aches in the joints.
TAke and shave a hearts horn till it come to the innermost part of the horn,
then take that part and cut it in diverse small pieces, and put it into a pot
with a pound of common oil, then fill it with wine, and boil it till the
wine be consumed, and then stir it well and let it stand a day and a night,
then strain it through a cloth, and there shall come a black liquor, which
liquor ye shall reserve, and therewith anoint your griefs in the morning and
evening.

For the cold and griefs of the breast.
TAke pimpernell and seethe it in vinegar and use it, and thou shall have
health.

For to draw teeth without any pain.
TAke the root of cucumber and meddle it with vinegar, but first seethe it and
wash it well, make it in powder and then put thereto vinegar, then put it on
the toothe, but look it touch none other but that.

For the palsy over all the body.
TAke castoreum, rue and sage, then seethe them together in wine, and give it
him to drink.

A notable medicine destroying phlegm of the head.
TAke pellitor, saxifrage, cichory, organy, hisope, and sees them in wine, and
use to drink it.

For the web in the eye and darkness of sight.
TAke a quantity of honny, in seething scumme it well, then take as much
rennish wine, and boil them both together till the half be consumed, then
take it off the fire and keep it, and with that anoint the eye, and do it in
the eye, and thou shall break it.

If thy stomach be over full, and to make good disgestion.
TAke a spoonefull of mustardseede in a spoone, and reserve it dry, and so
swallow it down, and drink a spoonefull or two of water incontinent after,
and thou shall feel thy self well by the morning.

To make thy face white.
TAke beans and husk them, then lay them in vinegar, or in wine a day and a
night, then dry them in the sun and make thereof a powder, with the lilly
root, and temper them together in luke warm water, and use to wash when thou
go to sleep, and also thy hands and neck, it makes thee clean, and does
away all slime and spots.

For him that has had long a quartaine ague.
LEt him drink daily always first and last, and he shall be whole. Also for
the quartaine, take wormwood, sothernwood, and the middle pille fraxini, then
sees it in good wine, then put unto it sugar to make it sweet, and let the
sick drink thereof before meat and after meat, and without doubt it shall
make him hole.

To break a core without any peril.
TAke an ounce of cantaradice, of orpement two drams, make them in powder, and
temper them with strong vinegar, then lay it to the sore in manner of a plaster.

For the crampe.
Often bathing in the water in which linseed is sodden does away the crampe. Also
tie about thy arm or leg, the bone which lies in the head of a house
snaile, which bone shall preserve thee. Likewise for a thorn: a gander or
goose dung all fresh taken and laid to the place where thou have a thorn it
shall help thee.

For the piles.
TAke apostolicon and heat it at the fire, then anoint the place about: do
so three or four times when it comes out, and bath him in the water in which
peritorie called pericaria, and the leaves of the fig tree, and porretis, or
of the pericarie alone.

For milk that is crudded in the breasts.
TAke and make pellets of wheat flower and water, and swines blood, then lay
them thereto, and that shall bring out all the filth.

For a fistilo.
TAke powder of white lime, the powder of lorier sodden together in honny till
it be thick.

A sirope for the same.
TAke egrimony, veruaine, annisseede, bittony, piloselle, saxifrage,
pimpernell, filipendula: take the juice of these herbs and sugar together,
and use this sirope every day first and last, for it purges the matter and
dries the fistilo.

For the cough, and the breast.
TAke the root of enula campana, cinnamon, pellitor, hisope, ciminum marubium,
sees all in wine, or in good ale, and give it him in his meat, also the
powder called dredge powder, to be eaten first and last, as a sovereign
remedy.

For the aching of the teeth and gummes when they do grieve thee.
RVbbe thy temples for the aching of the upper teeth, and for the lower teeth,
rub thee under jaws, use this, and it will away anon.

For a sere cloth for pain in the joints.
TAke olibanum, masticke, and poys garsoire, boil them each alike on the fire,
and then spread it on the cloth, and lay it on the grief as hot as you may,
if need be, put thereunto apostolicum cirurgien.

Another. Take poys garsoire and black pitch, and rosin, of each alike, then
boil them together, and then lay it on the cloth, and as hot as you may
receive it.

For all aches of the head, or if thou can not sleep.
TAke oil of mandrage, and anoint thy temples therewith, when thou go to
bed, and use it till thou feel ease.

To know if one shall live or dye being wounded.
Give him the juice of pimpernel mingled with water, and if it go out at the
wound, he shall dye, or else not.

Another. Take cinckfoly, and give him to drink with water, if he cast it, he
shall dye.

To staunch a vain that is cut.
TAke a swines dung, and sees it in wine, and it is good therefore.

For red eyes, and watering eyes.
TAke catie, sarcocalla and woman's milk, of each one. and water of roset.

For the web in the eye.
TAke oil of wheat, water of rosh, juice of veruine, of each alike, then
boil it well in a brazen, vessel, and then put it in thine eye.

To make mustillage of hollihooke.
TAke hollihooke, and sees it in water all day, and then strain it out all
hot, also make mustilage of fenecreke or of linseede, take and pound it, and
cast thereto a little hot water, and let it stand then two days and so reserve
it.

An emplaisture of Diaquilon.
TAke muscillagine two pound, of oil four pound, then put them all together
in a vessel over the fire, and let them boil till the muscillage be wasted,
then put thereto a powder of alecargiry three pound, then stir them till they
be sodden like unto pitch, but not too thin, then strain it into a vessel of
water, and so let it cole, then make thereof pellets, your mscilage shall be of
fennygreeke, and of the seed of linseede, and of the root of bismalue.

An emplaister for all wounds, and it closes them also.
TAke the juice of pimpernell, juice of veruine, juice of bittonie au^. two
rosin half a pound, turpentine, wax, au^. four. olibam one. boil it with
wine together, then put thereto the powder olibam, of masticke, and woman's
milk of a man child one. then make thereof a plaster.

For noli me tangere, a spice of an ague.
Beat the leaves of rue and strain it out, then anoint the place with the
juice, and after lay thereon the substance of the rue, use this and without
doubt it shall be hole.

An emplaister for to cause a man or woman to sleep.
TAke henbane, optj thebaici of each three ounces, juice of poppie, the seed
cicicte, of each two. mingle them all with the white of an egg, and anoint thy
forehead therewith.

An emplaister to close wounds.
TAke wax, rosin boales, tallow, of each three. and pitch.

A medicine to heal flesh wounds and to knit them, within eight days it
shall be whole.
TAke pitch three. litharge, red wax and white rosin, armoniaci, galbani, of
each two. oken glue six. allam three. masticke two. wedders tallow six.
giptianum six. aristologia longa four. myrre, franckinsence, of each six.
turpentine two. thiscoli four. the root galle one. consond the more and the
less of each two. of man's blood a pound, then sees a wethers skin with the
wolle in water, til the tallow melt that is therein: then take that water and
strain it, and set it on the fire again, and put your oken glue, and stir
it well till it be half sodden, then put in your white wax and read, and
common pitch, soon after that, turpentine and litharge stirring it well for
cleaving to the pan, then put in your masticke, rosin, olibanum and myrre,
then take it off the fire and put in your gummes, then set it on the fire
again, and put thereto psiulum and gipsium, and wedders tallow, and man's
blood, then stir it still for growing to, then put in aristologia longa, and
rosin, and last put in aloes, then sees it till the water be wasted: to know
when it is well sodden, put a drop thereof in a cold vessel, and stir it well
with thy fingers, and if it hang rough thereon it is sodden enough, or else not.

For a wound or cut.
TAke white soap and shepes suet in like portion* then boil it together in a
sawser, and use it in tent or plaster and it shall heal.

For Sinnowes that be strained or broken.
TAke in May the root of the hedge vine which bears read berries, otherwise
called the white vine, and do uncover his root, then cut off the top
thereof, and make a great hole with your knife in the midst, and then cover
it with a tile stone, the space of three or four days, and ye shall see it
full of water, take it out with a spoone, and put it in a close glass, and
cover the said root so long as any water will come: reserve it, and when ye
have any grief, take of the said water with a cloth, and lay thereon first
and last, and use to lay the wet cloth also thereon, and ye shall see
wonderful experience. Probatum.

For purging melancholy.
IEra rufini: also it is good for the scabbe of salt phlegm, called Elephacia,
which is nigh the leprie. Also diacene lectuarie purges the spleen and the
heart. Trifera sarasenica, auoideth melancholy out of the head, stomach,
liver, and the stopping of the veins, sinowes, the spleen, the iaundis of
burnt choler.

To purge choler.
DIa prunes does purge the stomach and liver.

A bath against choler for women.
HOllihock, mugwort, elder flowers, willowes, violets, maidenhaire, valerian,
fenycreke, linseede, smallage, wild tansie, wild time, malloes, germander,
hisope, worm wood, marigolds, lauender, suceory, borage, langdebeefe and
rosemary.

Against the stuffing about the stomach and heart in an ague.
TAke cinckfoly, auens, watercresses, hearts tongue, a fennel root, of each a
quarter of a handful, wash and broose them, and boil them with a quarte of
ale, and ob. of raisons, of corans four, licoras sticks beaten, and boiled
therein till half be wasted, strain it and put to sugar and mace, and drink
warm four spoonefuls thereof, evening and morning.

A plaster to comfort the stomach.
TAke read mints, lauender, cotton, tansie, crummes of bread leuened, broose
them and put them all in a frying pan with vinegar, and parch it dry, and lay
it warm in a bag to your stomach, remove it not off four or six days.

To kill a tetter in your hands.
Boil oats in water, and cover it close, leaving a small hole open, which you
shall hold over your hands so long as ye can suffer them, and cause them to
sweat, then wash therein till the said water wax cold, and this will heal
it with once or twice.

For the piles.
TAke of hair in an old saddle which has been over the most sweating place
of the horse back, and let the patient fit over a close stool, and burn of
the same hair in a chafing dish underneath. Use this three or four times
every morning, and he shall be hole.

A potion against melancholy.
TAke of sugar, hoppes green, and fumitorie, of each a handful, sees them to
the third part in fair water with a soft fire, strain it, and make it sweet
with sugar or honny, drink thereof every morning a draught fasting, and so
before supper one hour.

A bath.
TAke of fumiter and enula campana leaves, sage, fethertherfue, rosemarie and
wormwood, of each a handful or two, sees them in a sufficient quantity of
water til they be soft, and put as much as a wallnot of allam, and a little
brimstone in powder, and therewith bath the places of your body affected.

An ointment.
TAke a handful or two of docke roots, scrape them and mince them, and beat
them in a mortar with fresh butter, then boil them softly on the coals, in
stirring them, when they are cold, put in before a quantity of powder of
brimtone, but strain it first, then stir it well together, and keep it in a
box. Use this after ye have bathed, or when ye go to bed against a good
fire, and wrap ye in a sheet, and sleep.

Against the crampe.
TAke the juice of chickweed, and eat thereof with fresh beef, or mutton, or
in a sallet.

Mother Bowiers Medicine, a drink to cleanse the stomach, to be gathered at
Michaelmas.
BVrre roots, gallingale roots, turmericke roots, of peneriall, herb
grace, unset time, the roots of philipendula, the herb of oreall riall, of
each a like quantity, bruise them and put them into a quart of malmesie, and
let them boil till a pint, then take thereof so much as ye will drink at
once, warm it, and so at night blood warm, probatum.

To kill a pin and a web.
TAke twelve or more of sowes that breeds in posts of houses, or in the
barks of trees, wash them in ale and bruise them, then strain them with ale,
and drink it twice or thrice fasting and it will help it, and also help the
yelow iaundes, probatum.

Against a Consumption.
TAke a pint of muscadell, a quarter of a pound of blaunched almonds, beat
them well in a mortar of stone, then put in a little muscadell and strain it:
so beat the almonds again, and put in the said wine as before: so long as any
of your stuff is left, then take the yolks of two beaten eggs new, and
strain them with the said stuff and stir it well, and put in so much of fine
beaten sugar, and give it a boiling or twain in stirring of it still. Use this
warm, evening and morning, four spoonefuls, probatum.

An other excellent for the same.
TAke a quarterne of pure red rose water, put it in a pewter platter or basin,
set it over a chafingdish of coals, take clean annisseedes and bruise them a
little in a mortar, put thereof into your rose water a good handful, and put in
also of sliced licoras, bruised and tore in pieces, three or four sticks, and
as much of parsely roots, the pith taken out, bruised and slised and put
therein. Then last put in a good spoonefull of the tender croppes of hisope, so
let them boil from a quart to a pint, still bruising them with a spoone as
they boil, and when it is sufficient boyld, strain it into a glass, and take
thereof evening and morning a pretty draught, fast two hours after, and before
meat fast two hours, use this, it has done woonders, quoth Maistresse Roger.

For any ache in a man's body gotten by a knock or bruise.
RVbbe thereouer with a handful of read nettles, so use it as ye see cause.
Often proved.

Against any Itch.
TAke of brimstone, baie salt, elecampane, all made in fine powder, even
portions, and put it into a little bag, and lay it in a sawser, and put of
sallet oil unto it, then warm it, and use to rub a little on the itching
place. Proved often.

An other.
TAke bay salt, the powder of elecampane roots finely beaten, mixed with the
oil of flowerdeluce, and so a nights rub and chafe it in against a fire.
Proved true, which is also good for the crampe, taken of cold.

A declaration of certain qualities of seeds, herbs, flowers, roots, and
waters.
THe four greater hot seeds, annisseede, fennel seed, comin seed, and
carrowaies.

The four lesser hot seeds, ammi amomum, smallage, yelow carrots.

The four greater cold seeds, goordes, cucumbers, millons, and citrones.

The four lesser cold seeds, endive, succory, lettise, and purselaine.

The four hot ointments, maciaton, the ointment holihocke, ointment agaron,
and agrippa.

The four cold ointments. Vnguentum album, citrinum, populeon, and resumptiuum.

The four herbs assembled to hair, hearts tongue, tentewort, maiden hair,
and ceterac.

The five common roots which do open, smallage, fennel, parsely, and
sporage, and butchers broom.

The four waters for to comfort the heart, endive, succory, scabios, and
langdebeefe.

The eight herbs which be laxatiue, mallows, mercury, holihock, paritarie,
violets, colewoorts, branckursin, and betes.

The three common flowers which be hot, camomile, mellilot, and lillies.

The four common flowers which be cold, violets, roses, borage, landebeefe.

FINIS.
A table of all those medicines which be contained in this Book.
A
THe medicine antidotum asincritum. 1 Aurea Alexandrina. 2 Aromatum rosatum. 3
Aromaticum gariophilatum. 4 Alipta muscata. 5 Acacia. 6 Amilum. 7 Aqua
odorifera. 8
B
BEnedicta. 9 Balsamum artificial. 10
C
COnfection of sweet musk. 11 Confection hormeche. 12 Cerotum stomachicum. 13
Colurium album. 14 Conserve of buglos or of langdebeefe. 15 Conserve of the
flowers of rosemary. 16 Conserve of borage. 17 Conserve of roses. 18 Conserve
of violets. 19 Conserve of maidenhaire. 20 Conserve of gladian. 21 Conserve of
enula campana. 22 Conserve of succory. 23 Conserve of sorrel. 24 Conserve of
quinces. 25 Concoction of the substance of the apple of the quince. 26
Confection dia galanga. 27 Confection diacuminum. 28
Dia Aries. 38.

D
DIa ambre. 29 Dia margaritum calidum. 30 Dia margaritum frigidum. 31 Dia rodon
abbatis. 32 Diaculum paruum. 61 Dia comeron. 33 Dia calamintha. 34 Dia trion
pipereon. 35 Dia prasium, of horehound. 36 Diaries simplex, of flowerdeluce. 37
Diairis salomonis. 38 Dia tragantha. 39 Dia tragantha frigida. 40 Dia moron
potio, of mulberries. 41 Dia codium, of black poppy. 42 Dia papauer. 43 Dia
curcuma, of saffron. 44 Dia saturion. 45 Dia prunes. 46 Dia phenicon, of dates.
47 Dia cartanium, of garden saffron. 48 Dia coralium magistrate. 49 Dia casia
fistula, for a glister. 50 Dia seen. 51 Decoctio pectoralis for the breast. 52
Decoctio communis. 53
E
ELectuarie which is called, catholicum. 54 Electuarie of the juice of roses.
55 Electuarie de psillio, of fliwort. 56 Electuarium indi maioris. 57
Electuarium confortatinum stomachi. 58 Electuarium de geminis, of precious
stones. 59 Emplaister diaculum album comune. 60 Emplaister diaculum paruum. 61
Emplaister diachilum magnu^. 62 Emplaister de mucilaginibus. 63 Emplaister for
the stomach and liver. 64 Emplaister of bay berries. 65 Emplaister of mellilot.
66 Emplaister ceroneum of wax. 67 Emplaister oxecrocium, vinegar and saffron.
68 Emplaistrum de Iemma. 69 Emplaistrum gracia dei. 70 Emplaistrum against
ruptures. 71 Emplaistrum diuinum. 72 Emplaistrum for the matrice. 73 Emplaister
of red lead. 74 Emplaister of white lead, cerusa. 75 Emplaister de palmeum. 76
Emplaistrum triphariuacum. 77 Emplaistrum de ciccatrinum rubrum. 78
H
HIera picra galeni. 79 Hamech. 12
I
IVleppe of roses. 80 Iuleppe of violets thin. 81 Inde Maiores lectuary. 57
L
LOch de pino, a thick sirup. 82 Loch de squila, a thick sirup. 83 Loch sanum,
a thick sirup. 84 Loch decalibus, of coleworts. 85 Loch of the lungs of a fox.
86
M
MAthridatum manardi a composition. 87 Mithridatum nicolai, a composition. 88
Micleta nicolai, a confection. 89 Miua simplex, a confection. 90 Mell rosatum,
of honey and roses. 91 Mell violatum, of honey and violets. 92 Mell authosatum,
of rosemarie and honey. 93 Manus christi, a confection. 94
O
OXimel simplex. 96 Oximel diureticum, provoking urine. 97 Oximel of squilla,
of sugar and vinegar. 98 Oxisacra simple. 99 Oxisacra composita. 100 Oil of
sweet almonds. 101 Oil of bitter almonds, oil of bays. 102 Oil of the
little grain sesanum. 103 Oil of spikenard. 104 Oil of cost. 105 Oil of rue.
106 Oil of dill. 107 Oil of camomile. 108 Oil of mirtes. 109 Oil of
flowerdeluce. 110 Oil of roses. 111 Oil of violets. 112 Oil of quinces. 113
Oil of masticke. 114 Oil of castoreum of otter. 114 Oil of euphorbe. 115
Oil of a fox. 116 Oleum de tartero. 117 Oil of a scorpion. 118 Oil of
lilies. 119 Oil of the flowers of poppy. 120 Oil of nenufar. 121 Oil of
mintes. 122 Oil of swormewood. 123 Oil of worms. 124 Oil of hartsees. 125
Oil of chiere, of hearts ease. 126
P
Powder of violets sweet. 127 Pomum ambre, a ball of musk. 128 Powder against
the plague. 129 Powder of bolearmoniac. 130 Powder against worms. 131 Puluis
bezeardicus. 132 Penidis, a confection. 133 Pillule sine quibus. 134
Pignolatum, a confection. 135 Pillule aurea. 136 Pillule cochie. 137 Pillule de
actoribus. 138 Pills of the five kinds of mirrobolans. 139 Pills of
ale-faugine. 140 Pillule agregatiue. 141 Pills of rhubarbe. 142 Pills of the
gum sarcocolla. 143 Pillule fetide maiores. 144 Pills of euphorbe. 145 Pillule
lusis maioris. 146 Pillule lusis minoris. 147 Pills of the stone lazare. 148
Pillule de bdellio maioris. 149 Pillule de hermodactilis maioris. 150 Pillule
arthretice. 151 Pills for the stomach. 152 Pills before meat, antecibum. 153
Pills of agaric. 154 Pills of fumitorie. 155 Pillule communis. 156 Pillule de
assairet. 157 Pillule bichie, for the cough. 158 Pillule imperiales. 159 Pills
of hiera piera simple. 160 Pomatum, a confection of fruit. 161 Rosata nouella,
a confection of young roses. 162
S
SIrope of the juice of pomcitrons. 163 Sirope of the juice of sorell. 164
Sirope de agrippa, unripe grape. 165 Sirope of calamintes. 166 Sirope of
mintes. 167 Sirope of wormwood. 168 Sirope of fumitorie compounded. 169 Sirope
of fumitorie simple. 170 Sirope of licoras. 171 Sirope of hisope. 172 Sirope of
horehound. 173 Sirope of the flower of harder time. 174 Sirope of egrimonie.
175 Sirope of sticados. 176 Sirope of violets. 177 Sirope of white poppie
simple. 178 Sirope of white poppie compound. 179 Sirope of mirtes compound. 180
Sirope of mirtes simple. 181 Sirope acetosus simplex. 182 Sirope acetosus
compound. 183 Sirope of endive simple. 184 Sirope of endive compound. 185
Sirope of succory. 186 Sirope of quinces. 187 Sirope of nenufar. 188 Sirope of
barberries. 188 Sirope of sower pomgranades. 189 Sirope of bizantes. 190 Sirope
of the infusion of young roses. 191 Sirope of dry roses. 192 Sirope of the
juice of roses. 193 Sirope of the fruit of iuiubes. 194 Sirope of maidenhaire,
compound. 19 Sirope of maide^haire simple. 196 Sirope of mugwort. 196 Sirope of
lemmons, 198 Sirope of ceterack. 199 Sirope of langdebeese or buglos. 200 Sap
of musk, a ball. 201
T
THeriaca magna galem. 202 Trifera magna. 203 Tria sandaly, a confection. 204
Trochistes of roses. 205 Trochistes of violets. 206 Trochistes of squilla. 207
Trochisti theriaci. 208 Trochistes of coral or camphire. 210 Trochistes of
alchachengi. 211 Trochistes of mirrhe. 211 Trochistes of galia muscata. 213
Trochistes of rhubarbe. 214 Trochistes of spodie. 215 Trochistes of wormwood.
216 Trochistes of egrimony. 217 Trochistes of terra sigillata. 218 Trochistes
of charabe or ambre. 219 Tela gualtari, a confection. 220
V
VNguentum apostolicum. 221 Vnguentum rosatum. 222 Vnguentum basilicum magnum.
223 Vnguentum basilicum minus. 224 Vnguentum aureum. 225 Ointment populeon. 226
Ointment marciaton. 227 Ointment aragon. 228 Ointment of holihock. 229 Ointment
agrippe. 230 Ointment ponpholix. 231 Ointment of enula campana. 232 Ointment
for children scabbed. 233 Vnguentum rubrum, to dry. 234 Ointment for worms.
236 Vnguentum resumptiuum. 237 Vnguentum album, of roses. 238 Vnguentum
nutritum. 239 Vnguentum egiptiacum. 240 Vnguentum citrinum, yealow. 241
Vnguentum neapolitanum. 242 An other like ointment. 243 Vnguentum galeni. 244
Sugar roset. 245 Sugar violet. 246 Sugar buglos. 247
FINIS.
An other Table wherein ye shall know what Medicines, and how many be
expedient for every disease.
Against quotidian agues.
AVrea alexandrina. 2 Mithridatum. 88 Sirope of bizance. 190 Trochistes
diarodon. 33
Against tertian agues.
Aurea alexandrina. 2 Oxisacra simple. 99 Sirope of the juice of sorell. 164
Sirope of tart pomgranades. 189 Sirope of bizance. 190
Against quartaine a gues.
Antidotum a sincritum. 1 Dia seen. 51 Mithridatum. 88 Oxisacra, simplex. 99
Ointments agaron.
Against hot burning agues.
Sirope of violets. 177 Dia prunes not laxatiue. 46 Common decoction. 53
Electuarium catholicum. 54 Mel violatum. 92 Iulep of violets. 81 Oxisacra,
simplex. 99 Sirope of limmons. 198 Trochistes of camphire. 209 Ointment
populeon. 120
Against agues mixed, of diverse humors.
Dia phenicon. 47 Pillule agregatiue. 154 Pills of rhubarbe. 142 Trochistes of
roses. 205
Against long agues of cold.
Dia curcuma. 44 Dia coralium magistrale. 49 Pills of rhubarbe. 142 Sirope of
egrimony. 175 Trochistes of rhubarbe. 214 Trochistes of wormwood. 216
Trochistes of egrimony. 217 Trochistes of roses. 205 Oil of camomile. 108
Medicines to be used after hot and long agues.
Trochistes of egrimoni. 217 Sirope of sticados. 175 Oil of dill. 107 Oil of
sothernwood. 123 The seeds of honisuckles to be drunken.
To cause good appetite.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aromaticum rosatum. 3 Miua simplex. 90 Oil of mintes.
123 Concoction of quinces. 26 Sirope of wormwood. 168 Trochistes of wormwood.
216 Electuarium confortatiuum stomachi.
Comforting a cold brain.
Electuarie of precious stones. 59 Aromaticum rosatum. 3 Conserve of gladian.
21 Theriaca galeni. 202
Comforting a moist brain.
Conserve of rosemarie. 16 Confection of hamech. 12 Confection of horehound. 36
Dia tragacantha calida. 40 Electuarie inde maioris. 57 Pillule alephagine. 140
Against pain of the breast.
Decoction for the breast. 52 Lochisti de squilla. 207 Oil of hearts ease. 125
Ointment merciaton. 227
Against straitnes of the breast.
Alipta muskata, confection of musk. 5 Conserve of maidenhaire. 20
Diatragacantha calida. 40 Theriaca galeni. 202 Ointment marciaton. 227
The causing of boldness.
Electuarie of precious stones. 59
Against gnawing of the belly.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Mithridatum. 88
Keeping the body strong.
Pillule lusis maioris. 146 Rosata nouella. 162 Sirope of the infusion of young
roses. 191 Theriaca galeni. 202
Against spitting of blood.
Mithridatum. 88 Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aurea alexandrina. 2 Theriaca galeni.
202 Trochist of amber or coral. 209 Trochist of terra sigillata. 218
Against biting of venomous beasts.
Mithridatum. 88 Theriaca galeni. 202 Oil of a scorpion. 118
Against evil liking of the body.
Dia curcuma. 44 Dia tragacantha frigida. 40 Dia comeron. 32 Oil of sesamum.
103 Sirope of egrimony. 175 Trochists of rhubarbe. 214
Aswaging pain in all the parts of the body.
Oil of dill. 107 Emplaistrum oxicroceum. 68
Against all inward diseases of the body.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aurea alexandrina. 2
Against pain in spitting blood, or other humor.
Emplaistrum ceroneum. 67
Against burning or scalding.
Emplaister of dates. 76 Oil of myrts. 109 Ointment of roses. 222
Against crushes or brooses.
Emplaister of dates. 76 Ointment of aureum. 225
Against diseases of the breast.
Dia comeron. 32 Dia tragacantha frigida. 40 Sirope of horehound. 173 Sirope of
maiden hair compound. 195
Against belching of raw humors.
Dia galanga. 27 Diatrion piperion. 35 Dia tragacantha calida. 40 Lochisti
sanum. 84 Oximel stilliticum Sirope of calamints. 166
Against pain in the back.
Oleum de cheiri. 125 Pillule fetida maiores. 144
To draw out broken bones.
Emplaist. oxicrocium. 68 Emplast, contra rupturam. 71
purging the bladder of grauel
Antidotum asineritum. 1 Benedicea. 9 Dia curcuma. 44 Oximell dureticum. 97
A swaging pain in the bladder
Emplaister of bayberies. 65 Mithridatum. 88 Sirope of iuiubes. 194 Trochists
of alcachenge. 211 Oil of sweet almonds. 101 Oleum de cheiri. 125
Against exulcerations in the bladder.
Oximell stilliticum. Trochists of alcachenge. 211
C
Against the cholike.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Area Alexandrina. 2 Dia phaccion. 47 Electuarie inde
maiores. 57 Pillule sine quibus. 135 Pillule auree. 136 Theriaca galeni. 202
Pillule fetide maiores. 144 Mithridatum. 88 Emplaister of bayberies. 65
Against old coughes of humors.
Sirope of pineaple. 82 Lochust sanum. 84 Sirope of horehound. 173 Sirope of
myrts, simple. 181 Mithridatum. 88 Pille of agaricke. 154 Pillule biche. 158
Sirope of hisope. 178
Against the dry cough,
Iulep of violets. 177 Sirope of licorace. 171 Sirope of violets. 177 Sirope
compound of poppy. 179 Sirope of iuiubes. 194
Against the cough in the lunges.
Antidotum afincritum. 1 Dia tragacantha frigida. 40
Against coughes of superfluous humors in the stomach.
Aurea Alexandrina. 2 Dia margariton calidum. 30 Dia comeron. 32 Dia
calamintha. 34 Diaries salamonis. 38 Dia papauer. 43 Loch sanum. 84 Sirope of
calamints. 166 Decoction for the breast. 52 Loch of the lungs of a fore. 8^
Against the crampe.
Mitridatum. 18 Oil of castoreum. 114 Theriaca galeni 202 Sirope of sticados.
176 Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Ointment merciaton. 227 Ointment aragon. 228
Against conuultions.
Mithridatum. 88 Theriaca galeni. 202 Ointment merciaton. 227 Ointment agaron.
228
Against the consumption.
Aurea alexandring. 2 Dia margaritum callidum. 30 Dia comeron, 32 Dia rodon
abbatis. 33 Kia tragacantha frigida. 40 Mithridatum. 88 Triasandali. 204 Loch
of the longs of a fore. 86
Against the canker in any part of the bodle.
Compound hamechi. 18
Against al aches and diseases of cold
Oil of bay. 102 Ole of spicknard. 104 Oil of cost. 105 Oil of camamil. 108
Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Oil of roses. 111 Oil of masticke. 114 Oil of
lillies. 119 Theriaca galleni. 202 Ointment merciaton. 227 Ointment aragon. 228
Ointment hollihocke, 229
Against clifts about the fondament or other places.
Oil of myrts. 109 Pomatum. 161
To deliver a woman of dead child.
Theriaca galleni. 202
Things which do cause good color.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Electuary of precious stones. 59 Oil of cost. 105
Trochists of roses. 205 Hiera pica galleni. 79
Things purging choler.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Compound hamech. 12 Confect. called dia curcuma. 44
Conserve of langdebeefe. 15 Conserve of borage. 17 Conserve of maidenhaire. 20
Conserve of succorie. 23 Conserve of sorrel. 24. Oxisacra simplex. 99
Electuarie of roses. 55 Electuary of flywort 56 Pillule sine quibus. 135
For cold complexions.
Dia ambre. 29 Electuarie inde maioris. 57
For hot complexions.
Dia tragacantha frigida. 40 Sirop compound of endive. 185 Trochists of
rhubarbe. 214 Sirop of tarte pomcitrons. 186 Sirope of the juice of sorrel. 164
Sirop co^pound of fumitorie 169 Sirop acetosus compositus. 183

To cause good digestion.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aromaticum rosatum. 3 Concoction of quinces. 25 Dia
galanga. 27 Dia cuminum. 28 Dia ambre. 29 Dia calamintha. 34 Diatrion pipereon.
35 Miua simplex. 90 Pillule ante cibum. Oil of mints. 122
Against the dropsy.
Dia comeron. 3^ Dia curcuma. 44 Trochists of egrimonie. 217 Trochists of
rhubarbe. 214 Pills of euphorbe. 145 Theriaca galleni. 202 Emplaister of wax.
67 Emplaister of bayberies. 65 Sirope of egrimonie. 175 Ointment of agrippe.
230
E
Curing the eysight.
Dia pracium. 35 Hiera picra galleni. 79 Pillule sine quibus. 135 Pillule
auree. 136 Pills of five kinds of mirrobolance. 139 Pillule lucis maioris. 149
Against pain in the eyes.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Electuarie of roses. 55
Against sore eyes.
Collirium album. 14 Mithridatum. 88
Against all manner of exulceratio^s in what place soever they be.
Oil of violets. 112 Emplaister of white lead. 75 Theriaca galleni. 202
Trochist of alcachenge. 211
Against disines and pain in the ears.
Mithridatum. 88 Oil of bitter almonds. 102 Pillule sine quibus. 135

F
Against the falling evil.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aurea alexandrina. 2 Compound of sweet musk. 11
Sirope of sticados. 176 Theriaca galeni. 202
Against the frenzy.
Sirope of endive simple. 184 Antidotum asicritum. 1 Theriaca galeni. 202
Ointment marciaton. 227
Things purging of phlegm.
Antidotum asiincritum. 1 Diacartamum. 48 Compound hamech. 12 Mel rosatum. 91
Conserve of rosemarie flowers. 16 Conserve of gladian. 21 Conserve of enula
campana. 22 Pillule sine quibus. 135 Pills of the gum sarcocolla. 143 Pills
of euphorbe. 145 Pillule fetide maiores. 144 Diatrion pipereon. 35
Against salt phlegm.
Sirope compound of fumitorie. 169
To make a beautiful and smooth face.
Oleum de tartaro. 117 Pomatum. 161
Against fluxes of the body.
Dia coredion. 42 Mithridatum. 88 Micheta. 89 Miua simplex. 90 Oil of roses.
192 Sirope of dry roses. 192 Sirope de agrippa. 165 Sirope of the tarte
pomcitron. 189 Sirope of myrts, simple. 181 Oil of myrts. 109
Against the flux of meat undigested.
Sirope of calamints. 167 Mithridatum. 88 Oil of myrts. 109 Trochists of
coral. 209
Against the bloody flux.
Diacodion. 42 Mithridatum. 88 Micleta. 89 Trochists of coral. 209 Oil of
roses. 111
Provoking the flowers in women.
Mithridatum. 88 Sirope of wormwood. 168 Trifera magna. 203 Trochists of
myrre. 211
To stop the flux in women.
Pills of bdellium. 149 Trochists of terra sigillata 218 Trochists of ambre.
219
To stop the flux after a strong purgation.
Electuarium comfortatiuum stomachi. 58
Against palenes of the face.
Hiera picra galeni. 79
To cause new flesh.
Emplaster tripharmorum.
To consume dead flesh.
Ointment. Apostolicum. 221 Ointment. egiptiacum. 240
Against old fistules.
Ointment. apostolicum, 221 Ointment. egiptiacum 240

G
Against the gout in the iointes of heat.
Electuarie of roses. 55 Pillule arthritice. 151 Oil of worms. 124 Oleum de
cheirie. 125
Against the gout in the iointes of cold.
Benedicta. 9 Electuarie inde maioris. 57 Mithridatum. 88 Pillule fetide
maiores. 144 Antidotum asincritum. 1 Oil of bay. 102 Oil of spicknard. 104
Oil of flowerdeluce. 100 Oil of masticke. 114 Oil of euphorbe. 115 Oil of a
fore. 116 Pills of euphorbe. 145 Ointment merciaton. 227 Oytment aragon. 228
Against the gout in the feet.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Benedicta. 9 Mithridatum. 88
Pills of the five kinds of myrribolance.
Pillule fetide maiores. 144 Oil of a fore, 116 Ointment merciaton. 227
Against gallings or exulcerations.
Emplaistrum de cerusa 75 Oil of myrts. 109
Good for glisters.
Dia casiafistula magistratis. 50

H
To comfort the heart.
Dia caralium magistrale. 49 Electuarie of precious stones. 59 Sirope of the
juice of sorrel. 164 Cheriaca galleni. 202 Trochists of gallia moscata. 213
Aromaticum rosarum. 3 Aromaticum gariophilatum. 4 Conserve of roses. 18
Confection of ambre. 29 Dia margaritum calidum. 30 Dia rodon abbatis. 33
In gendring heat in the inward parts.
Aromaticum gariophilatum. 4 Diacuminum. 28 Dia ambre. 29 Emplaister for the
stomach and the liver. 58 Oil of rue. 106
Against trembling of the heart.
Confection of sweet musk. 11 Electuary of precious stones. 59 Conserve of
borage. 17 Conserve of langdebeefe. 15
Against heat of the heart.
Iulep of roses. 80 Iulep of violets. 81 Sirope of violets. 177 Sirop compound
of endive. 185 Sirope of the infusion of young roses. 191 Sirop of the juice of
sorrel. 164
Against horsenes.
Oil of sesanum. 103 Decoctio pectoralis. 52 Loch sanum. 84 Sirope of iuiubes.
194 Theriaca galleni. 202
Against the hicup.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Sirope of mynts. 167
Against falling of the hair.
Oil of bay. 102 Oil of cost. 105
Against ache in the hips or huckle bone.
Aurea alexandrina. 2 Pillule fetide maioris. 144 Pills of the five kinds of
myrrobolance. 139 Oil of bay. 102 Oil of a fox. 116 Ointment merciaton. 227
Ointment aragon. 229
Against all manner of hardness.
Mithridatum. 88 Oil of sweet almonds. 191 Oil of bay. 102 Oil of mints.
122 Of hollihoke ointment. 229 Oil of the grain sesanum. 103 Emplaister
diachilon album. 60 Emplaist. diachilon magnum. 61 Emplaister de mucilaginibus.
63 Emplaister of mellilot. 66 Emplaister of occecroceum. 68 Ointment
apostolicum. 221 Ointment marciaton. 227 Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Oil of
masticke. 144
To purge the head.
Pillule auree. 136 Pillule cochie. 137
Against old aches of the head.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Pillule coche. 137 Pillule agregatiue. 141
Against the head ache of heat.
Electuarie of roses. 55 Oil of roses. 111 Ointment of roses. 222 Oil of
flowers of poppie. 120 Oil of nenufar. 121
Against cold ache of the head.
Mitridatum. 88 Aurea alexandrina. 2 Oil of dill. 107 Oil of spicknard. 104
Oil of euphorbe. 115 Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Ointment merciaton. 127
Against the hemerods.
Micleta. 89 Pills of bdellium. 149
To keep thy hair from hoarines
Oil of cost, 105
Against vermen or scurfe in the head.
Oil of bay. 102 Oil of lillies. 119

I
Against hot impostumes of the liver, and in the stomach.
Cerotum stomachicum. 13
Against the yelow iaundis.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Diorodon abatis. 33 Electuarie of roses. 55 Sirope of
bizantes. 190 Theriaca galleni. 202 Trochists of camphure. 209 Trochists of
rhubarbe. 214 Trochists of egrimonie. 217 Tria sandali. 204
Against illica passio.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Theriaca galleni. 202 Mithridatum. 88 Hiera picra
galleni. 79 Pillule sine quibus. 135 Ointment merciaton. 227
Against inflammations.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Cerotum stomachicum. 15 Oil of roses. 111 Oil of
violets. 112 Oil of lillies. 119
Against hot impostumes in the throat.
Potio dia moron. 41
Against inward impostumes.
Trochists of rhubarbe. 214 Trochists of egrimonie. 217 Oil of violets. 112
To ripe impostumes.
Emplaister diachilon paruum. 61 Emplaister diachilon magnum. 62 Emplaister
diachilon album. 60 Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Oil of masticke. 114
Against insensibilitie.
Mithridatum nicholey. 88 Theriaca galleni. 202
Against inflammations of choler.
Conserve of violets. 19 Ointment of roses. 222

L
Against the pain of the liver.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Dia curcuma. 44 Pillule agregatine. 141 Pills of
Euphorbe. 142 Trochists of rhubarbe. 214 Sirope of ceterakce. 182
Against heat of the liver.
Iulep of roses. 80 Iulep of violets. 81 Trisandali. 204 Trochists of camphure.
209 Electuarie catholicum. 54 Sirope of violets. 177 Sirop compound of endive.
185 Trochists of spodie. 215 Ointment of roses. 222 Mel violatum. 92
Against coldness of the liver.
Cheriaca galleni. 202 Dia galanga. 27 Dia rodon abbatis. 33 Trochists of
gallia muscata. 27 Trochists of wormwood. 216 Emplaister for the stomach and
liver. 64 Oil of euphorbe. 115 Sirope of egrimonie. 175 Sirope of wormewooode.
168 Trochists of egrimonie. 217
Against hardness of the liver.
Emplaister diachilon album. 60 Pills of euphorbe. 145
To make a man laxatiue.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Hiera picra galleni. 79 Conserve of violets. 19 Dia
casiafistula. 50
Against danger of life.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Dia comeron. 32
Against heat in the lunges.
Dia tragacantha frigida. 40 Dia rodon abbatis. 33 Tria sandali. 204 Sirope of
violets. 177 Sirope of endive simple. 184 Sirope compound of endive. 185 Sirope
of the infusion of young roses. 190
Against coldness of the lunges.
Confection of sweet musk. 11 Conserve of maidenhaire. 20 Theriaca galleni.
202 Trochists of wormwood. 216
Against drynes of the lunges.
Oil of sweet almonds. 141 Sirope of licoras. 171
Against the leprie.
Hamech a confection. 12 Theriaca galleni. 202 Trochisti theriaci. 208 Pillule
feride maiores. 144

M
Against the mesels.
Theriaca galleni. 202
Against madness.
Aurea alexandrina. 2 Dia seen. 51
Against the mother.
Antidotum asincritum. 1
Aswaging pain of the matrice.
Emplaister of bayberies. 65 Oil of sweet almonds. 101 Triaphera magna. 203
Against diseases of the matrice of cold.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Dia ambre. 29 Electuarie of precious stones. 59 Oil
of lillies. 119 Emplaistrum seroneum. 67 Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Oil of
wormwood. 123 Emplaister of bayberies. 65 Loch sanum. 84
Against over much stretching of the matrice.
Antidotum asincritum. 1
Things to cause mirth.
Dia ambre. 29 Dia margaritum callidum. 30 Dia comeron. 32 Dia seen. 51
Electuary of precious stones. 59 Conserve of borage. 17 Sirope of borage Sirope
of langdebeefe. 200
Things purging of melancholy.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Mithridatum nycoley. 88 Alipta moscata. 5 Trochists of
wormwood. 216 Trochists of egrimonie. 217 Pillule sine quibus. 135 Confection
of sweet musk. 11 Dia seen. 51 Pillule agregatiue. 141 Pillule lusis maioris.
146 Pills of the stone lazare. 148 Sirop of the flowers of the harder time.
174 Conserve of roses. 18 Conserve of maiden hair. 20 Conserve of succory. 23
Conserve of langdebeefe. 15 Conserve of rosemarie. 16 Conserve of borage. 17
Against al diseases of the midrife.
Mitridatum nycoley. 88 Sirope of egrimony. 175
Against the migram.
Mithridatum nicoley. 88 Theriaca galleni. 202 Pillule chochie. 137 Oil of
spicknarde. 104 Oil of enphorbe. 115
Pills to be taken before meat, to cause good digestion.
Pillule ante cibum. 153
Against sorenes in the mouth.
Dia moron potio. 41 Mitridatum. 88

N
Against bleeding at the nose.
Trochists of terra sigillata. 218 Trochists of ambre. 219
Against a stinking nose.
Oil of flowerdeluce. 110
Against the wrything of the neck on the one side.
Confection of sweet musk. 11 Sirope of sticados. 176

O
Against obstructions.
Trochists of rhubarbe. 214 Trochists of wormwood. 216 Trochists of egrimonie.
217 Sirop acetosus compositus. 183 Sirope of bizantes. 190 Sirop compound of
endive. 185 Sirope of maidenhaire compound. 195 Sirope of ceteracke. 199 Oil
of bitter almonds. 102 Oil of cost. 105 Oil of dill. 107 Oil of camamil.
108 Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Oil of wormwood. 123 Oil of cheirie. 125
Things causing good odor and savor.
Electuary of precious stones. 59 Oil of cost. 105

P
To comfort all the principal parts.
Aromaticum rosarum. 3 Aromaticum gariofilatum. 4 Electuarium comfortatiuum
stomachi. 58 Dia ambre. 29 Dia margaritum callidum. 30 Miua simplex. 90 Sirope
compound of fumitorie. 169 Sirope of buglosse. 200 Conserve of roses. 18
Conserve of enula campana. 22 Electuarie inde maioris. 57 Sirope of calamintes.
166 Oil of cost. 105 Oil of masticke. 114 Oil of quinces. 113
Against the drines of the principal parts.
Oil of sweet almonds. 101
To mollify the principal parts.
Conserve of roses. 18
Against the Palsy.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Confection of sweet musk. 11 Mithridatum nicolei. 88
Pills of euphorbe. 145 Sirope of sticados. 176 Ointment marciaton. 227
Against the plurisie.
Sirope of licoras. 171 Sirope of hisope. 172 Sirope of endive. Sirope of
Iuiubes. 194 Dia tragacantha frigida. 40 Sirope of violets. 177 Loch of
squilla. 83 Iulep of violets. 81 Conserve of maiden hair. 20 Oil of violets.
112 Ointment of holihock. 229
Things purging the wind pipe of gross humors.
Dia prasium. 36 Theriaca galeni. 202 Loch de squilla. 83 Loch sanum. 84 Sirope
of licoras. 151 Sirop acetosus compositus. 183
Against the pestilence or poison.
Theriaca galeni. 202 Mithridatum nicolai. 88 Powder contra pestem. 129 Sirope
of tart pomcitron. 189 Sirope of the juice of sorrel. 164 Sirope of the
infusion of young roses. 191 Oil of a scorpion. 118
Against pimples or wheales.
Oil of mirtes. 109 Confection of musk. 11

R
Against Rawnes.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aurea alexandrina. 2 Mithridatum nicholai. 88 Dia
prasium. 36 Sirope of sticados. 176 Sirope simple of poppy. 178 Oil of rue.
106
Things purging the reins of gravel.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Benedicta. 9 Oximell diureticum. 97 Sirope acetosus
compositus. 183 Sirope of maidenhaire, co^p. 195 Sirope of ceterack. 199
Against pain in the reins.
Aurea alexandrina. 2 Mithridatum nicholei. 88 Dia comeron. 32 Dia curcuma. 44
Electuarium inde maioris. 57 Oil of a fox. 116 Oleum de cheiri. 125
Emplaister of bay berries. 65
Against Ring worms.
Hamech. 12

S
Comforting the stomach.
Theriaca galeni. 202 Dia rodon magistrale. 33 Dia margaritum calidum. 30 Dia
prasium. 36 Aromaticum rosatum. 3 Aromaticum gariophilatum. 4 Trochistes of
coral. 209 Mithridatum. 88 Miua simplex. 90 Electuarie comforting the stomach.
58 Electuarie of precious stones. 59 Electuarie inde maioris. 57 Sirope of
mirtes, comp. 180 Sirope of sticados. 176 Sirope of wormwood. 168 Sirope of
langdebeefe. 200 Sirope of quinces. 187 Conserve of langdebeefe. 15 Sirope of
dry roses. 192 Conserve of roses. 18 Conserve of enula campana. 22 Confection
of quinces. 25 Oil of quinces. 113 Oil of cost. 105 Emplaister for the
stomach. 64
To purge the stomach of gross humors.
Hiera picra galeni. 76 Pille fetida maioris. 144 Pills of sarcocolla. 143
Pillule ale-fagine. 140 Pillule lusis maiores. 146 Pille stomachi. 152 Pills
of agarick. 154 Theriaca galeni. 202 Sirope of hisope. 172 Sirope of horehound.
173 Sirope acetosus simplex. 182 Oximell. 96 Oximell stilliticum. 97 Sirope of
maidenhaire. 195 Sirope of limons. 198 Emplaistrum ceroneum. 67
Against heat and burning of the stomach.
Trochistes of spodie. 215 Triasandali. 204 Sirope of the juice of sorrel. 164
Diarodon abbatis. 33 Trochistes of camphire. 210 Iulep of roses. 80 Ointment of
roses. 111
Against hardness of the stomach.
Pills of euphorbe. 145 Emplaistrum diachilo^ album. 60 Ointment marciaton.
227
Against coldness of the stomach.
Sirope of mintes. 167 Oil of mintes. 122 Oil of wormwood. 123 Ointment of
holihock. 129
Against pain in the stomach.
Emplaister of bay berries. 65 Pillule fetide maiores. 144 Pillule agregatiue.
141 Emplaistrum ceroneum. 67 Trifera. 103
A against the diseases of the spleen.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Dia curcuma. 44 Dia seen. 51 Pills of the five kinds
of mirrobolans. 139 Sirope of calamintes. 166 Sirop acetosus compositus. 183
Electuarium catholicum. 54 Oil of euphorbe. 115
Against hardness of the spleen.
Trochistes of wormwood. 216 Trochistes of egrimony. 217 Sirope of calamintes.
166 Pills of euphorbe. 145 Emplaistrum diachilo^ album. 60 Ointment marciaton.
227 Emplaistrum ceroneum. 67
Against sighing.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Dia margaritum calidum. 30
Things to cause the spittle easily to avoid.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Sirope of pineapples. Loch of squilla. 83
To restore the speech.
Diairis salomonis. 38
To break the stone.
Aurea alexandrina. 2 Theriaca galeni. 202 Mithridatum nicholai. 88 Oil of
scorpion. 118
Against the strangurie.
Aurea alexandrina. 2
Against souning or fainting of the heart.
Dia margaritum calidum. 30 Dia seen. 51 Conserve of langdebeefe. 15 Sirope of
langdebeefe. 200 Conserve of borage. 17
To provoke sweating.
Oil of diu. 107
To prohibit over much sweating.
Rosata nouella. 162 Oil of quinces. 113 Oil of mirtes. 109
To cause a man to sleep.
Dia papauer. 43 Sirope of poppie. 178 Oil of the flowers of poppy. 120 Oil
of dill. 107 Oil of nenufar. 121
Against children which cannot sleep, or speak in their sleep.
Trifera. 203
Against strangling.
Dia moron potio. 41
Against the scabbes.
Hamech. 12 Oil of bays. 102 Ointment for children. 234 Ointment against the
scabs. 223
To purge the instruments of the senses.
Pillule ale-phagine. 140 Pillule agregatiue. 141 Pille lusis maiores. 146
Theriaca galeni. 203
Against the squinsie.
Mithridatum. 88
Against weakness of members.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Dia margaritum calidum. 30 Mithridatum. 88 Oil of
wormwood. 123 Oil of mirtes. 109
Against the stifnes of the inward parts.
Mithridatum. 88 Conserve of rosemary. 16
To mollify and ripe all swellings.
Diachilon paruum. 61 Emplaistrum of bay berries. 65 Emplaister diachilon
album. 60 Oil of flowerdeluce. 110 Vnguentum apostolicum. 121 Vnguentum
marciaton. 227 Vnguentum agrippe. 230
To increase seed.
Oil of sweet almonds. 101 Oil of sesanum. 103
Against sleep, or forgetful diseases.
Oil of euphorbe. 115
Against diseases of the sinowes.
Sirope of sticados. 176 Conserve of gladian. 21
Against loosenes of the sinows.
Sirope of sticados. 176 Oil of quinces. 113 Oil of mastick. 114 Ointment of
agrippe. 230
Against diseases in sinowes which comes of cold.
Oil of euphorbe. 115 Oil of worms. 124 Oleum de cheirie. 125 Pills of
euphorbe. 145
Against shooting of humors.
Emplaistrum palimeum. 76
Against great and cold sores.
Tela gualterii. 220 Emplaister of white lead. 75 Emplaister of red lead. 74
Vnguentum egiptiacum. 240
To dry sores and biles.
Emplaister de ciccatrinum rubrum. 78 Vnguentum apostolicum. 221

To quench the thirst.
Trochistes of camphire. 210 Trochistes of spodie. 25 Sirope of the infusion of
young roses, 191 Sirope of quinces. 187 Sirope of white poppie. 178 Sirope of
the tart pomcitron. 189 Rosata nouella. 162 Mel violatum. 92 Iulep of roses. 80
Conserve of violets. 19
Against the turning sickness.
Antidotum asincritum. ^ Iurea alexandrina. 2 Confection of sweet musk. 11
Electuarie of roses. 55 Dia prasium. 36 Electuarie de spillio. 56
Against the tooth ache.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aurea alexandrina. 2 Mithridatum. 88 Dia prasium. 36
Against the roughnes of the tongue.
Dia tragacantha frigida. 40 Oil of violets. 112
Against roughnes of the throat.
Dia tragacantha frigida. 40 Dia moron potio. 41 Sirope of violets. 177 Iuleppe
of violets. 81 Oil of sweet almonds. 101 Oil of fesanum. 103 Oil of
violets. 112
Against shortness of wind.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Mithridatum. 88 Diaries. 38 Sirope of calamintes. 166
Confection of musk. 11 Confection of sweet musk. 11 Diacomeron. 32 Theriaca
galeni. 202 Pills of agarick. 154 Sirope of horehound. 173 Sirope of hisope.
172 Sirope of pineapples. Loch de squilla. 83
To break wind.
Antidotum asincritum. 1 Aromaticum gariophilatum. 4 Pillule auree. 136 Dia
galanga. 27 Dia cuminum. 28 Dia curcuma. 44 Electuarium inde maioris. 17 Sirope
of egrimony. 175 Oil of bitter almonds. 102
To stop vomiting.
Aromaticum gariophilatum. 4 Miua simplex. 90 Rosata nouella. 162 Sirope of
mintes. 167 Sirope of quinces. 187 Oil of mintes. 122
Curing the disposition of vomiting, which is when a man would vomit and cannot.
Rosata nouella. 162 Aromaticum gariophilatum. 4 Miua simplex. 90 Sirope of
mintes. 167
Provoking of urine.
Antidotum, asincritum. 1 Aurea alexandrina. 2 Dia curcuma. 44 Dia satureon. 45
Oximell diureticum. 97 Ointment agrippe. 230
Provoking Venus.
Dia saturion. 45
Healing of wounds.
Balsamum artificial. 10 Emplaistrum palmeum. 79 Vnguentum apostolicum. 221
Vnguentum basilicu^ magnu^. 223
To scower and cleanse wounds.
Tela gualteri. 220 Vnguentum apostolicum. 221 Vnguentum basilicum magnum. 223
Vnguentum egiptiacum. 240
Against worms in the belly.
Powder of worms. 131 Sirope of limons. 171 Ointment against worms. 123 Oil
of wormwood. 123 Aloe ciccatrinum. 31. to spurge, to stay woorking, eat some
broth. Messene 31. do purge gentlye, taken with sack fasting in powder.
FINIS.

