THE Doctrine of the SAINTS Infirmities.

Deliverd in Sundry SERMONS.

By John Preston, Dr. in D: Mr. of Emmanuel College, in Cambridge.

AND late Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

London.

Printed for Henry Taunton, and are to be sold, at his shop in St. Dunstons,
Churchyard, Fleet street.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE SAINTS Infirmities.

Delivered in several Sermons by JOHN PRESTON Doctor in Divinity, Mr. of
Emanuel-Colledge in Cambridge.

And late Preacher of Lincolnes INN.

LONDON, Printed by Nich. and John Oaks for Hen. Taunton, and are to be sold at
his shop in St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street. 1636

TO THE LEARNED and Religious Gentleman HENRY LAURENCE Esquire.
WOrthy Sir, although your own native worth might justly draw from us a greater
testimony of observance, then the putting of this little Treatise into your
hand; yet have we been rather hereunto induced, by the consideration of such
adornments of wisdom, learning, and piety in you, as had expres relation to
the author, and may to be the fruit and issues of his labors in your younger
years. It is true indeed that the goodness of the soil ads much unto the
greatness of the crop; but it is as true, that the industry and wisdom of
the husbandman ads also much unto the goodness of the soil; yet neither of
these without a gracious influence from heaven bring forth a harvest.

It has pleased God, there should be extant diverse monuments whereby the
authors eminent abilities do yet survive in the hearts and eesteeme of men:
yet none express him more unto the life, then the piety and ver tue of those
that grew up under him, he lives 1 These. 3. 8.
if they stand fast in the Lord. Among whom as you had a greater intimacy, of
all the nearest, not of a pupil but of a bosom-friend, and continual
companion; and therein a longer time: so have you answered it, as then in love
and respect to him, so since in a proportionable and happy improvement of what
you did receive. And therefore as we conceived, it would be a derogation
injurious to your candid and ingenious disposition, to think you unwilling to
be put in mind of him, by whose religious care you were so often put in mind
of God, and of your self: So also an unworthy and un grateful direspect, to
have omitted inscription of your name; especially by us, who long have been
and are

Your loving and obliged Friends. Tho. Goodwin Tho. Ball.


SERMONS BY JOHN PRESTON Dr. of D.
2. Chron. 30. 18, 19, 20. 18 FOr a Multitude of the people even many of
Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulon, had not cleansed themselves; yet
did they eat the Passover otherwise then it was written, but Hezekiah prayed
for the saying, the good Lord pardon every one.

19. That prepares his heart to seek God: The Lord God of his Fathers, though
he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary.

20. And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.


UPon the occasion of these words was the illegality of some resorters to the
Passover at this Time, for this solemn Duty having been long neglected, by
occasion of the negligence of former Governors: Ezekiah sends his Messengers
not only into Judah, but also into Israel, to assemble them, if it were
possible, unto this great Solemnity, which was effected with various success,
for in some places they were entertained with scoffs; in others, with great
readiness, to submit themselves unto this Sacred ordinance; but the warning
being short, and journey long, there were many wanted legal cleansing; Hezekiah
seeing the promptness of the people, and that in the substance of the Duty
they had not failed, puts up this Prayer to Almighty God, in their behalf.

In which prayer we have these three things to be considered, and understood.

1 The substance of it, which was that God would pardon or be merciful.

2 The persons for whom he made it, and they are described two ways.

1 From the preparation of their Souls and inward man, they prepared their
whole hearts.

2 From the imperfections of their outward and legal preparations, they were
not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary.

3 The success and issue that it had, which was the healing of the people,
that is, God blessed that ordinance of his for the removal of that outward
guilt, contracted by those ceremonial neglects, or otherwise, and for the
strengthening of their Souls in grace and holiness, and for the curing of
their outward estate, which lay open at this time to many pressures and
calamities on every side. The points of Doctrine might be many that would hence
arise, but we do purpose only to handle two.

1 That in all the parts Doct. 1
of public worship and performances, the Lord especially requires, and
expects, the heart be right; he would have nothing wanting, but of all the
rest he would not have the heart imperfect, or defective, the good Lord,
(says this good King) be merciful to every one that prepares his whole
heart, to seek the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed, that is,
though he be in other things imperfect and defective, so Solomon, this good
Kings predecessor, Pro. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, thy foot is
not to be neglected, Eccle. 5. 1. but to be kept, but not with so much care and
circumspection as the heart, that part must not be wanting whatever other
parts were, and therefore if any were in this defective Hezechiah prays not
for them.

1 Because the heart is Reas. 1.
that which God himself does most delight in, no duty can be well performed
where God himself does not vouchsafe his his presence, and assistance. Heb.
13. 15. By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, by his assistance and gracious presence, but where there
is not a heart to receive and entertain God in, he never will, nor does afford
his presence. Esaias. 66. 1, 2. Heaven is my throne and the earth my foot stool,
etc. But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
heart, according to that of the Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit: a broken and contrite heart, etc.

Though to the eye of men it may seem a despicable and mean abode, for such a
glorious and excelling Majesty, yet sure it is not so by him accounted, when a
great man is to be received into our houses, we are careful that there be no
breaches in them, but when the Great and glorious God, is to be received into
our hearts, he will not stumble at the wounds and breaches.

The heart is that only Reas. 2
part, whereby God estimates, and makes a judgment of the whole, he takes
measure of a man by his heart, if that be sound and upright, he never
cuririously examines other parts; we commonly are taken with the face and
countenance, because we are not able to look deeper; but God regards not
that, as being able to descend into the secret closet of the heart, 1. Sam. 16.
6. 7: And he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the Lords anointed is before
him: But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, nor on the
height of his stature, because I have refused him; for the Lord sees not as
man sees; For man looks on the outward appearance; but the Lord sees the
heart: And accordingly ye have the doom of almost all the Kings of Judah,
according to the goodness or badnesse of their hearts: 2. Chron. 25. 2. He
did that which was right in the sight of God, but not with a perfect heart: And
the like is also testified of many other of them.

3. The heart is the hardest piece to manage and Reason 3.
manure; and therefore he that keeps that well in tune, is not likely to be
wanting in the other: if in a Violl, I find the Treble string in tune; I make
no question of the Base that goes not out so easily: Simon magus had composed
the other parts, Acts 8. 13. He did believe and was Baptized: but this string
was out of tune, the Apostle finds this jarring, ver. 21. Thou have neither
part nor lot in this business, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God;
in his own sight no question but he thought it so, but it was not so in Gods
sight: And indeed, the heart is so deceitful, that it will deceive the very
owner and possessor of it: like to your Juglers, that will do a thing before
your face, and yet you shall not see him do it, 2. King. Why weepeth my Lord?
(says Hazael) Why (says the Prophet) for the great evil, that I know thou will do unto the Children of Israel; their strong holds thou will set on fire,
etc. And Hazael said, Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great
thing: There were Characters of of cruelty engraven on his heart, which
himself had never read, nor been acquainted yet withal, Who knows (says
the Apostle) 1. Cor. 2. 11. the things of a man, but the spirit of man that is
within him: One would think a man should read his own hand, yet some do write
so bad, that they cannot read it when they have done and so did Hazael, he had
hatched such cursed thoughts within him, that he could not see unto the utmost
terminus and end of them; if a man has a spot upon his face, he is warned of
it by every body else, because its known he cannot see it, but he may have a
thousand spots upon his heart, and neither he, nor no man in the world beside
be able to discover it: he therefore, that has well prepared this part, will
hardly be defective in the rest.

4. The heart is the spring Reason 4.
and first wheel of all that curious Clocke-worke of the soul; so that if
that be but ordered and kept aright, it will direct and order all the rest, and
this is the reason that the Holy Ghost is pleased for to give, Prove. 4. 23. Out
of it are the issues of life: If a man had a Well or Fountain in his Garden,
out of which came all the liquors that he used, he had need be very diligent
to keep that clean; if that were poisoned, it would be hard for himself long
to escape,. Now the heart is such a fountain, Romans 10. 10. With the heart man
believes to righteousness, And from within, even out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, etc. Mar. 7. 21. the Gentiles were accounted common and profane
before Christ's time, but after their hearts were purified, even Peter himself,
the Apostle of the Circumcision, durst venture on them, Act. 15. 9. For God put
no difference between them and the Jews, after that by faith he had purified
their hearts: give me never so bad a man, make but his heart right, and I dare
venture to close with him, if ye take out the Serpents sting, he may be
played with, or otherwise employed, without either danger, or other
inconvenience.

Let us everyone be hence Use.
encouraged to examine well, and look unto our hearts; for if they be any way
difordered and out of tune, our actions and performances will not be relished:
Remember what the Apostle says Heb. 3. 12. Take heed brethren lest there be
in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God; an
unbeleeving and evil heart will evermore be drawing back from God, will not
come at him by its good will, Mat. 15. 8, 9. They honor me with their lips,
but their hearts are remooved far from me: And what then became of all their
worship? why surely it came to nothing, In vain they worship me: A hartlesse
worship is a worship that God regards not; but if the heart be framed and
prepared as it should be, God looks not at the many imperfections that may be
found in circumstantiall matters.

But it will be here demanded, Question.
how one may know when his heart is truly qualified and fitted for a duty?

When he is persuaded Answer 1.
of a special, and peculiar eye of God upon him in the duty, that God in a
special manner does behold him, and observe him how he does it; he must
believe that God is at his Elbow, Heb. 11. 6. He that comes to God, must
believe that God is; that is, must have his heart delivered from that blindness,
wherein by nature al men's hearts remain. What was the reason that the
Gentiles, even in their solemn worship of their Gods, were so abominable
oftentimes, because their hearts were dark and blind in spiritual and
celestial matters, Romans 1. 21. 22. 23. Their foolish hearts were darkened, and
then they changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped the Creature in
stead of the Cretor, etc. But when the heart is seriously convinced that God is
present, records and registers all our deportments whatsoever: it makes us
circumspect and careful, even those that are otherwise regardlesse of their
duties; yet when their masters eye is on them, will consider what they do: and
therefore the Apostle requires of Christian Servants more, Ephesians. 6. 6. Because
the Heathen would do thus much, the very Ass, when she saw the Angel in the
passage behaves her self accordingly, Numb. 22. 23: If a man would therefore
know, whether his heart be fitted and prepared for any duty, let him seriously
examine, whether he is thus persuaded of the special eye of God upon him in
it.

2. The heart is then prepared for a duty and service unto God, when it is
sequestered, and taken off from other things: when the dross and stain of
natural self-love, and earthly mindedness is gotten out: as we see, men bring
not filthy vessels, unwashed, and uncleansed to their Masters table. Ye may
see, perhaps, an impure and filthy vessel in the Kitchen, but upon the Table
it is not tolerable: These men that came unto the Passover, although not
washed according to the purification of the Sanctuary; yet were, no question,
purged inwardly: they had, no doubt, a Substantial, though not a Ceremonial
cleansing, according to that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 21. If a man do
therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor,
sanctified, and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.
There Is none of us would have our meat come up upon a dirty Dish, and much
less God. When David asked for some holy Shewbread from the Priests, he tells
him withal, that the vessels of the young men, that were to carry it, were
holy 1 Samuel 21. 5. So must our hearts be, when we adventure to draw near to
God: And though we cannot here attain a perfect purity, but that corruption
will still be mingled with our best performances, yet that must be removed, and
laid aside, that kept us back from turning to the Lord: the rubbish of
necessity must be removed, that stops the building from going on, 1 Pet. 1. 22,
23. Seeing ye have purified your souls to the obedience of the truth, unto
unfeigned love of the brethren, etc. Being borne again, etc. That is, seeing
that original impurity, that blocked up the soul from turning unto God, is
done away, the heaps of muck and rubbish, that stood where now the building is
erected; for that is done always at the first conversion of the soul to God,
and never fully does return.

3. When it is softened, and fitted to receave impressions: when the Centurion
by much dejection and prostration of his soul to God in secret, had his heart
so mollified, that any thing would make a charracter or Print: He tells Peter,
He was ready to hear whatsoever God should be pleased for to speak, Act. 10
33. It Is not enough that the metal be refined, and purged from the dross,
that before did cleave unto it: unless it likewise be so softened, as that it
will accommodate it self unto the mold, or stamp it shall be cast into: and
therefore it is powered into that while it is soft and liquid. So the Apostle
Romans 6. 17. argues They now were truly freed from the dominion and power of
their former unregenerate estate, because their Hearts did yield unto the
stamp that was imprinted on them, (...). As the metal then is judged to be
sufficiently continued in the Furnace, when it willingly receives the form and
figure of that which it is cast and poured into. Thus Paul was melted by that
Sun of Righteousness, that shone into his soul when he was going upon
other errands, Acts. 9. 6. And he trembling and astonished, saying, Lord, what
will thou have me for to do? as if he should have said, This fire of thy
love has now so thawed and melted my obdurate, and kicking soul, that it is
prepared for any mould, to receive what print soever thou shall be pleased for
to stamp upon it: put me into whatsoever shape thou will, I am now ready for
any mold; to be a preacher that have been a persecutor; to suffer my self,
that have been the cause of so much suffering to others formerly, and
therefore no marvel, if the Lord professes he would look to such alone,
Isaiah 66. 2. because only such are fitted to be wrought upon; whereas,
unbroken and unmollified spirits submit to nothing, but the word is as water
spilt upon the Rock, that makes no manner of impression.

4 The heart is then prepared for a duty, when it makes the duty but a bridge
to lead him unto God, when it rests not in the deed, but passes by it, and
through it to God: Ye have many very frequent in the outward acts of duty,
will hear, and pray, and fast, and preach perhaps; yet raise their souls no
higher then the outward act alone. Hos. 7. 14. And they have not cried unto me
with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds: Therefore not with their
hearts, because not unto me, or at least, with hearts well qualified, and
fitted for that holy duty: There were some (it may be) among these people that
came unto the Passover to please the King, because the King was pleased for to
have it so, and so they should, but if they rested there, and went no further,
their service would no be accepted, neither were they included in Hezekiahs
Prayer, for he only prays for them that sought the Lord God of their
fathers; not that sought the face of the Ruler, or the favor of this godly
King, or any other bie and carnal end. So Esa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he
may be found. The duty is ordained to draw and to allure the soul to God, no
more but an opportunity that God and men may trade and have commerce with one
another: As Solomon did therefore build the glorious Temple to the Lord, that
he might dwell with men. 2. Chron. 7. 12. But now if any rested in that Temple,
and went no higher, he had no interest in any promise that was made unto it,
for the condition of the promise was that they should seek his face. ver. 14.
If my people which are called by my name, shall humble them selves and pray,
and seek my face, and turn from their wicked way: Then will I hear from
heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their Land, if they shall
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face; but if they prayed never so
much, and in their prayers had only respect and aim unto themselves, he
would not hear them, It is a strange expression, of the Prophet, Amos 5. 25.
26. Have ye offered unto me Sacrifice, and offerings in the wilderness, by
the space of forty years O ye house of Israel. Why, what did they with the
Tabernacle, and all their furniture? but accomodate their public service in
the wilderness; no says God, Ye did it to your selves; your ends and aims
were carnal, sensual and earthly in it, and you had no profit by it, as
neither have many now a days; for want of disposing and preparing of their
hearts for God aright. And so we have done with the first point observed from
the Text.

We are now to come unto the latter part, and reason of this holy man's
request, which was there not being cleansed according to the purification of
the Sanctuary, which was a legal bar and let to stop them from the
Passover, how upright and sincere soever they were: Wherefore he labors by
earnest prayer to remoove this bar and great impediment, and the Lord
expresses here his willingness to be entreated, for the Lord heard his
prayer, and healed the people, whence this will follow.

Where there is uprightnes Doct. 2.
and sincerity of heart: Infirmities do not exclude from mercy, this is
apparent in the Text, for he prays for mercy and has it granted, although
they were not qualified as God required, and may be further proved.

From the wisdom Reason 1.
of God, who knows what we can do, and will expect no more, as a wise parent
will not look for so much from a weak child, as from a strong, nor from a
sick servant, as from a healthful; it is his wisdom to consider what we
are, and accordingly to deal with us; and therefore we may be sure that he
will not cast us off for our infirmities, but as a Father bears with his Son
that fears him, though he spies many faults in him: Like as a Father pittieth
his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. For he knows our
frame, heremembreth that we are but dust. Psalm. 103. 13. 14. So the Lord has
compassion on them that fear him: Why? because he knows whereof we are made,
he remembers that we are but dust: So we see that when the Israelites had so
provoked God, that he could scarce hold his hands off them; yet he stayed his
hand, even then when he was ready to strike. And many times says the Text
Psalm. 78. 38. 39. But he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquities, and
destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not
stir up his wrath; For he remembered that they were but flesh, and that they
were even a wind that passes away, and comes not again. He called back his
anger, because he remembered they were but flesh. And herein God shows his
wisdom, and we ours: A wise man looks for no more of his servant then he is
able to do: but on the contrary, a foolish man expects as much from a weaker,
as from a stronger, and falls presently upon him if he does not as much: So we
our selves show our wisdom in other things; as for example.

If there were a little Gold, and much dross mingled together; A wise man will
not for the dross sake cast away the gold, but purify and try it: So if we
have corn, although there be some cockle in it, yet a wise husbandman will
not reject it, but winnough it, and purge it.

So God being a wise God, does not cast us off presently for our infirmities,
if there be any truth and sincerity in us: And as God is wise, so
compassionate, and bears with our infirmities.

The Taske-masters wanted compassion, and therefore expected more from the
Israelites, then they were able to do: So whilst we were under the Law, there
was a burden laid upon us, which neither we nor our our fathers could bear;
but now if we be once undergrace, the Lord does not lay such loads upon us:
But if there be truth in the heart, he accepts of our endeavors, although
accompanied with many weaknesses.

A second reason is taken Reas. 2.
from the covenant, for so long as a man is in the covenant, his infirmities
cannot cut him off from Gods mercy. Now it is certain, we may have many
infirmities, and the covenant remain unbroken: for every sin does not break
the covenant, but those that untye the marriage knot: As in marriage every
offense does not disanull the marriage; but only the breach of the marriage
vow: to wit, adultery: So only here those sins that break the covenant,
which untie the marriage knot, (as it were) and that is;

First when we take any 1.
new master, and this we do when we let any sin reign in our hearts, if
we set up any sin, that commands and rules us; then the covenant is broken,
for thou have chosen a new Master.

Secondly, if we take another 2.
husband, and this we do, when we make a league with sin, if we be in
league with any thing in the world, that does draw our hearts from God, we
break our covenant in choosing another husband. But other failings do not
break the covenant, and whiles it remains in force, we have interest in Gods
mercies, for he cannot forget his covenant, which if he should, yet Christ is
the Mediator, and would put him in mind of it.

A third reason is drawn Reason 3.
from the common condition of all the Saints: Take all the Saints that ever
lived, and every one of them have had infirmities: Now if God should be too
extreme, to mark our iniquities, (Psalm. 130. 3. 4.) who should stand: If God
should cast off all that have infirmities, then none should be saved, and then
wherefore has Christ dyed? But says the Psalmist; Mercy is with thee,
therefore thou art to be feared: That is, if God were so severe a master, that
he would endure no failing, then he should have no servants: But it is his
mercy, that makes him to be feared. And thus we see, that infirmities do not
cut us off from Gods mercy, if we be sound at the heart; but withal we must
remember these two cautions.

First, though infirmities Caution. 1.
do not utterly exclude us from the mercies of God; yet they may bring upon us
many and sore afflictions; and hinder us of many blessings, and here we must
remember these distinctio^s.

First, there is a voluntary infirmity, which proceeds 1.
from our own wills; and by how much the more, will is in an infirmity, by so
much the more God is provoked to anger, and to punish and afflict us.

But there is another infirmity which arises from some impediment which a man
would feign remove, but he cannot. As for example: A man would feign remember
all he hears, but he cannot, because his memory is frail, and he cannot
help it, he would convert many to God, but he cannot, because he has weak
parts. He would feign have such a lust removed, but God does not please to set
his Spirit at liberty, though he do his uttermost endeavor, for that must
still be remembered, for if a man says he would pray fervently morning and
evening, and yet sits still, and does not set upon the duty and strive to do
it; this is the act of the sluggard: So also in other things.

Secondly, there is an infirmity 2
that arises from want of grows, for there are some Babes in Christ, some
buds that are but tender, even as a tree has some buds, and sprouts as well as
branches: And these suck sap from the as well as the branches: Now, God
bears much with those that are such, and will not presently punish them for
their failings, he will not in this case quench the smoking Flax; nor break
the bruised Reed: He will not put new Wine into old vessels; he knows there
is much of the old man still in them, and therefore will not enjoyne them to such
great duties as they are not able to perform; he will not put too much on
them at the first: He mands us not to reject or despise those that are weak,
Romans 14. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling-blocke, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way. And sure then, himself will practice that rule that he
prescribes to us.

But now there are other infirmities that arise from sickness, in those that
have been strong. And through some distempers, are become sick, and are
fallen from their first love, as in the 2 of the Rev. 2. 4, 5. Nevertheless I
have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love: remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remoove thy Candlestick out of his
place, except thou repent; Or that arise from some desertion themselves being
then causes of it, by reason of presumption; as in Peter and Hezekiah: Now in
this case, God does not bear with a man, butwil come against him quickly, and
will not stay long, unless they repent, and do their first works

We must remember, that to some God has appointed 3.
a lesser stature in grace, and to others greater. There are Christians of all
sizes, as it were. Now those that are of the least size, they are the weakest,
and these are generally weak, that is, they ate weak in their understandings,
weak in affections, weak in all; and with these God bears much: As we may
see in the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2. 24, 25. But unto you I say, and unto the
rest of Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known
the dephs of Satan, as they speak: I will put upon you none other burden;
but that which you have already, hold fast til I come. There were some that
were expert, and others that were weaker: Now for those says God, that have
not this learning, neither have known the deepnesse of Satan, I do not
require so much of you, but only, that you hold fast that which ye have.

Fourthly; but now there is another infirmity, which does not run in general
over the whole man, but is some particular infirmity, which is in a man that is
strong, and has attained a greater measure of grace: As a body may be strong,
and have some particular weakness, and a wall may be strong, yet have some
weak parts: so a Christian may have strong lusts: some particular infirmities;
as indulgencies to his Children, or pride, or any other; so then this rule is
true; that strong infirmities bring strong afflictions: as we see it did in
Elie, for his indulgency, and so in David, he had strong, and long afflictions,
for his strong lusts.

Fifthly, we are to remember, 5.
that there is an infirmity in a man that he is sensible of, and strives
against it with all his might, and yet cannot get victory over it: God may
suffer a man to labor and tugge and yet profit nothing by his pains, but
gives him grace which is sufficient for him; he gives his pardoning grace,
though not his prevailing grace, 2 Cor. 12. 9. In this case God will bear
much, though he cannot get the victory, yet he may get pardon.

Sixthly, but there is another infirmity, that befalls 6.
us in peace and prosperity; that we are not sensible of, but are as it were
in a sleep and forget our selves, and so let some infirmity steal upon us;
and in this case, though it will not quite cut us off from Gods mercy, yet it
will bring some great affliction upon us, whereby God does waken us, and bring
us unto our selves again: So he dealt with Hezekiah, no sooner was he settled
in peace and prosperity, but presently he forgets himself, suffers pride to
steal in upon him, for which we know how the Lord awaked him, So David Psalm.
30. when he was in prosperity thought he should never be moved; but then God
hides his face, and makes him look about him, therefore we must remember this
caution:

That though infirmities do not cut us off from Gods mercies, yet if voluntary
infirmities in which our will has a hand, if such as are not from weakness, and
want of growth, but from sickness, if they be some particular weakness in a
strong christian, if they steal upon us by our own sloth, and we are not
aware, nor sensible of them, then they will bring upon us some great cross and
affliction, and hinder us of some great blessings.

The second Caution is, Caution 2.
that ye take heed, that ye do not mistake those infirmities that proceed
from the regenerate part, for those sins that proceed from the ungenerate:
For these latter are rebellions, not infirmities, they are wickednesses, not
weaknesses, and therefore, we must beware, that we do not mistake the one for
the other.

To this purpose, it will be needful to know what an infirmity is, and this
we may do by the contrary, if we consider what strength is.

Now for this we must know, that there is a twofold strength.

First, a natural strength. 1.


Secondly, a supernatural. 2.


First, a natural strength is that, by which we perform the work of nature;
this in it self, is neither pleasing nor displeasing to God; but as a Cipher,
when it stands by it self is nothing, but a figure being set before it, it
increases the sum: so this natural strength neither pleases God nor
displeases, but as it is in a regenerate man, or unregenerate man, so it
helps, or hurts.

Secondly, there is a supernatural 2.
strength, by which we are enabled to do more than Nature could help us to,
and this is either for evil, or good things. First, there is a supernatural
strength 1.
that tends to evil, when as to the natural, Satan adds a supernatural, to
enable men to evil: such a strength have they who dyed for Turcisme, and the
like; who kill Kings, etc. see how the Apostle sets out this, 2 These. 2. 9, 10.

Such a strength have they that write and dispute against the truth, they have
the strength of mad men, which we say, are three men strong: So likewise there
is a super-naturall weakness, when to natural imbecility there is a superadded
weakness, in the 8 of Luke. 12, there we see that the first ground forgot the
Word: why? through weakness only? No; but Satan he helps on: he comes, and
takes away the word, etc. And so we read of a more than natural unaptnesse to
receive the Gospel, 2. Cor. 4. 3. 4. The devil he puts to his hand, he blinds
their eyes, that the light of the Gospel should not shine to them: He helps
forward the natural weakness.

Secondly, there is a supernatural strength to do good, as Christ bad his
Disciples to stay at Jerusalem, till they were endued with strength from above,
Luke. 24. 49. because they were to enter upon a great work, above natural
strength: to wit, to preach the Gospel; therefore they had need have strength
above nature, because they were to preach the Gospel. This supernatural
strength we may know by this; it will enable us to do more then nature can,
it over-flies the reach of nature, or mortality our common grace: Nature can
do as much as lies in her power, or as is her work: but there are some things
which Nature, though never so well refined, can never reach unto. As Iron can
do as much as is in Iron, if it be made bright and fit for those several
uses it serves unto; but if you would have this Iron to turn to the North it
cannot do it, till it be touched with the Lodestone, and has a higher
quality added to it. So take the purest water, and it can do what is in the
power of water; it can moisten, cool, descend, or the like: But if you would
have water to heat, to ascend, it must be by a supernatural power, and by a
superadded virtue. And so take nature, and let it be refined, with more
virtues, and common graces, and it can do as much as is in nature. But if you
would have it love God, or some such higher work, it cannot do it; The water
rises no higher than the spring from whence it came: So natural men can
ascend no higher then nature, and therefore for works of a higher reach, there
must be strength from above to perform them.

But what are those things Question.
which nature cannot superficially enable a man to do?

Take the best of the Answ.
heathen, or the best natural man, and mere nature cannot enable him to do
these things following.

First, it cannot bring him 1.
to this, to prefer God before himself upon this persuasion, that his
welbeing does depend more on God, than on himself.

Secondly, it cannot enable 2.
a man to see sin, as the greatest evil in the world, and so to hate it; and
to look upon Christ as the greatest good in the world, and so to embrace him.

Thirdly, nature cannot 3.
make a man resolute, not to part with Christ upon any terms, but willing
rather to bear the greatest persecutions on the one side, and to refuse the
greatest offers on the other side, then to part with his Christ.

Fourthly, nature cannot 4.
make a man to love God, for this is a distinguishing property of a godly man,
and so are all the other affections; now a natural man cannot hate sin,
cannot grieve for wickedness, as abomination to God: Take this for a rule, that
howsoever natural men may know much, and do much, yet they have no spiritual
affection; they have no spiritual love, hatred, grief, or joy.

A fifth thing which nature 5.
cannot do, and which this supernatural strength does, is this, it overcomes
and subdues the lustings of our own spirits, and that, not by restraint; but
putting in it a contrary lusting; the spirit lusts against the flesh; this
supernatural strength of the spirit, it hemmes us about, it comprehends and
keeps us: Acts 20. 22. Behold, I go bound in the Spirit (says St. Paul) to
Jerusalem: When a man's own spirit would fall loose, this supernatural
strength stays and strengthens it; when God leaves any of the Saints to
nakedness and emptiness of his own spirit, he becomes as another man, as it
was said of Sampson, they become weak as water, as we see in Elias, David, and
Peter. But when this supernatural strength is within us, it sits at the
stern, and guids us, and carries us through all. Now then if thou find that
thou have any strength in thee more than natural, though it be but a little,
all thy infirmities shall not exclude thee from the mercies of God in Christ.

Is it so? be not then discouraged for any thy infirmities, Use.
but come boldly to the throne of grace: it is a great fault in christians, if
because of such, or such an infirmity they be kept from the thron of grace, or
weaken their assurance. It Job. 27. 5. 6.
was the commendation of Job, who (notwithstanding all his infirmities) would
not let go his righteousness

Look upon Asa, his infirmities were many, as to imprisone the Prophet: to
trust to the Physician, more then God, etc. Yet because there was an
uprightness of heart, see what testimony the Lord gives of him in the 2.
Chron. 14. 2. the like in Iehoshaphat. So David had many foul infirmities, yet
because sound at the heart, God calls him a man after his own heart. So Saraah
notwithstanding her infirmities, is commended as a pattern to wives. 1. Pet. 3.
6. Rahab, her infirmities are pased over, and she commended for her faith and
good works: James 2. Heb. 11. and therefore (notwithstanding our infirmities)
let us trust perfectly in the grace of Jesus Christ, and if we see they do
abound, let us lay the more on Christ, as needing his help the more.

The second use, is, from the first Caution: seeing Use 2.
infirmities, though they do not cut us off from Gods mercy, yet they may
bring upon us many troubles; therefore let us take heed of them; it is not a
small matter to be subject to infirmities: so it was but an infirmity in
Rebeckah and Iakob to compass the blessing by indirect means.

But consider what it cost him, a great deal of grief and pain: And see how
dear David's infirmities did cost him: So Moses, when he distrusted God, God
would not suffer him to go into the Land of Canaan; these were all great
afflictions, which their infirmities brought upon them, though they did not
cast them out of Gods favor, therefore if we would avoyde such troubles, let
us beware of living under infirmities.

The third use, is from Use 3.
the second Caut on, that we do not mistake rebellion and wickedness for
infirmities and weakness. Now seeing we may easily be deceived, let us try and
examine our selves narrowly; for it is the use of men to shroud themselves
under infirmities, they say, their meaning is good, etc. But its their
infirmity. And on the other side many are upright in heart, and because they
have infirmities, they think they have no grace, and therefore we had need to
judge both with righteousjudgement.

Now to help you in your trial, consider, first what an infirmity is: Secondly
the signs of it.

First, an infirmity is such a weakness, as when the heart is upright, yet by
reason of some impediment it cannot do that good it would: and does the evil
it wouldnot. So that there must, be first uprightness of heart, else it is not
an infirmity, but iniquity, the heart must be perfect with God in all things,
there must be a purpose to please God in all.

Secondly the reason, that 2.
it cannot do so, is from some impediment that hinders: and this arises from
the rebellion of his flesh, which leads him captive, makes him omit the good
that he would do, and do the evil he would not.

But now secondly to come to the notes and characters: For a carnal man and a
godly man, both be guilty of one and the same infirmities, as to have their
hearts wandering in prayer, in reading, and to idleness in their calling, etc.
Yet these may be wickedness in the one, but weakness in the other, and therefore
to know this, consider these signs.

First, if it be an infirmity, Sign.
it continues not, but assaults thee by fits, and starts, and so away; and
afterward thou will return to thy former course: As a stone that is thrown
up, it flies as long as the force of the hand that threw it remains; but after
it takes its own course again: But if it continue upon thee, it is sign that
it is natural to thee: As a stone, it rests on the earth, because it is the
natural place of it: my meaning is not, but that an infirmity may assault a
man all his life, for so some may, as we shall show afterward; But I say, it
comes by fits, and so is gone. This we see in David, in Peter, and the rest of
the Saints, that their infirmities continued not so, but that afterward they
returned to their course again.

Secondly when a man 2
amends not upon admonition, it is a sign it is not an infirmity, if a man
intends to go to such a place, and one should meet him, and tell him, this is
not the way, and direct him into the right way, he would thank him, and
return into the right way, because that is the way he intended to go. So if
your faces be set toward Ieru salem, and one should tell you, here you went
out of the way, he would be glad of it, and return.

So it was with David, when he would have slain Nabal in a passion, and
Abigal met him, and stayed him: oh how thankful he was to God, and her! it was
a sign it was but an infirmity: and so in the case of Vriah, when Nathan told
him, he was in the wrong: Prove. 25. 12. He that reproves the wise and
obedient, it is as a golden ear ring, or as an ornament of gold, says
Solomon, that is, he whose heart is upright, whose intent is to grow rich in
grace, he accounts of those that reprove him, as of golden ornaments: But if a
man after admonition and reproof will take his own course, it is a sign of
his wickedness, and not infirmity.

Again thirdly, a sin of infirmity is always 3.
with grief and sorrow of heart for that weakness: now what is grief, but
the endeavor and strife of the will, when a man cannot attain to that he
would, or would shun something he cannot avoid, then he is grieved and pained:
As it is in the body; all the grief there, is, when a part or member cannot
perform its office or function there: So in the soul when it would feign do
such a thing, when the desire of the mind is set on such, or such an object,
and it cannot attain it; then follows grief: so here, when the heart is
drawn up to please God in all things, and something comes in the way that it
cannot, and therefore it is grieved, and therefore in the 2. Cor. 10. 11. the
Apostle makes this sorrow, a ground of their uprightness, and it is certain,
where this grief is not mingled, it is no infirmity.

Every sin of infirmity, 4.
produces a hearty complaint, and an earnest desire, and a serious endeavor
to have it cured, for every infirmity in a body, that is quickened, that has
some life in it, and so is sensible of it. As in a disease, that a man is
sensible of, he tells his friends, or any other, that he is in company with, of
it, to see if they can help him, if they cannot he complains to the
Physician, and goes to him to have it cured: so in an infirmity or sickness of
the soul; an upright heart, complains to his christian friends, I have such an
infirmity, what shall I do to cure it? if they cannot help him, he runs to
him that has the balm of Gilead, to Jesus Christ to have it cured, the 2.
Cor. 12. 8. 9. this was so in St. Paul, he prayed three times that it might be
removed, he does not only complain as in the 7th of the Romans 24. and desire
that it may be healed, as in the forenamed place, where he prays against it,
but to this he adds, a serious endeavor, 1. Cor. 26. 27. he beats down his
body, etc. that is, he used all good means for the overcomming of this
infirmity: and where this complaint, desire, and endeavor is wanting, it is a
sign it is not a man's infirmity, but iniquity.

Fifthly, if thy sin be a 5 Sign.
sin of infirmity, thou shall find in thy self a continual reluctance, and
strife against it: for as there is in thee a body of sin; so also a body of
grace, which being contrary to the other, will not suffer thee to be at quiet,
the Spirit will be against the flesh, as well as the flesh against the spirit:
and as the flesh will not suffer thee to do a good duty without resisting, and
interrupting thee; so neither will the spirit suffer thee to sin without
striving against, and opposing it.

But if thou can sit down, and let it rest without striving against it, it
is no infirmity, but rebel lion, therefore try thy self by these signs.

But others besides true Christians are able to do Objection 1.
this; for take an unregenerate man, and he will make the same plea for
himself, that it is but his infirmity: Indeed he is overtaken sometimes, but
it continues not; and when he is admonished or reprooved, he finds his heart
yeel to it, and he grieves, and is sorry for it, he complains of it, and
seeks to help it, and strives against it, and therefore these are not sure
signs to distinguish him from another.

I answer, that there is Answ.
something in an unregenerate man which is much like, and comes very near to
that in the regenerate man, he may do much by that light he has, but yet
there is a broad difference between them: for the regenerate man has another
object about which he is conversant, he has a new light put into his heart, he
is renewed in the spirit of his mind, and he has the Law written in his heart,
2. Cor. 3. 3. Heb. 8. 10. That is, all the spiritual duties that are written
in the Law: and he has something in his heart that answers to what is in the
Law, as tally answers to tally; or as that fashion in the lead, to that in the
mold; or as in a seal character answers to cha racter, impression to
impression, so that which is in the Seal, the same is in the wax: So
whatsoever is in the Law of righteousness, if you could see that which is
written in the heart by Jesus Christ, you should see character for character,
print for print; and so, that if there were not a written Law, he would be a
law unto himself to obey God, perform duties according to the Law written in
his heart: Now when it stands thus with a man, and something, some impediment
comes in the way, that he cannot serve God as he would, the law of his members
rebelling against the law of his mind, then this troubles and grieves him,
this he complains of, and strives against, and labors to have it mended.

But now a natural man, Difference.
has not the law thus written in his heart, he has all things revealed to him
within his sphaere, to wit of nature, he ascends no higher: and although he
has good purposes and meanings, and grieves and complains, yet all this is
for sins committed against common light, against natural conscience, against
the second table. Now this is in a lower sphaere, they are sorry, but not godly
sorrowful, they cannot grieve for omission of spiritual duties, required in
the first table, and so we see they are not pitched on the same objects which
makes a greater difference. Now for the further and fuller clearing of this
point, we will answer some questions or cases.

First, suppose I have striven long against such a Quest. 1
lust, and done what I can, and yet cannot prevail against it, shall I say
that this is an infirmity?

To this I answer, first, Ans.
that we may be, and are often deceived in this, when we have striven long
against it (yet we grow worse) and that the infirmity gets ground of us; for
an infirmity may appear to get strength, when as it loses it. As when we
cleanse a pond, it appears more muddie then it was before, though in truth it
loses mud more and more. Every contrary, the more it is resisted, the more it
appears; as fire the more cold is about it, the hotter it is: so an infirmity,
the more it is resisted with the contrary grace, the more it appears to
prevail, though in truth it loses ground and strength.

And therefore secondly I give this rule, that 2.
though you have striven, yet you must not leave off, but continue your
striving still, and yet be content with Gods hand in suffering such an
infirmity in you: for there is a double contentment; first, that which is
opposed to murmuring against Gods hand, and impatiency, and so we must be
content to suffer an infirmity on us: we must not repine at Gods proceedings.

Secondly, such a contentment, as is opposed to striving against the infirmity,
and so we must not be content to suffer it on us, but must strive constantly
against it: As in a natural disease we are to labor to have it cured: but if
God will have it lie upon us, we must be content: So here we should
continually strive against our infirmities; but if God see good to let it rest
upon us, we must be content with his hand: for God does it that we might have
something to humble us, and Humility is the Nurse of grace, without which all
grace would wither and decay.

And again, the power of God rests and dwells in an upright heart, and that
must have an empty place; and humility makes room for this, when the power of
God dwells in us, when it begins to settle in a man's heart: if he now begin to
grow up in conceit of himself, this expells the power of God, and crowds it
out: And therefore God would have something to be in us, to keep us in an
humble condition. It is with us as with Paul, when he looked on his infirmity;
at the first he was impatient, would have no denial at Gods hand, but have it
removed; he prayed thrice, that is, often, to this purpose. But when he saw it
was a medicine, which he thought a poison, that it served to humble him, and by
that means the power of God dwelt in him, then he was content, and so should
we.

Again thirdly, I answer, 3 Ans.
suppose you do not get victory over your infirmity, and you be no better
then you were before, nay lose ground of it, yet strive still, for this strife
makes you hold head against it, which otherwise you would not do: for if when
you strive, you do but keep your ground, or lose somewhat, then what would
become of you, if you did not strive at all, should you not go quite down the
stream, and lose all? yes certainly.

As a man that rows against the stream, so long as he rows, he do some
good, loses some ground, and gets some; but if he leaves rowing, he goes
quite down the stream. And as a man may keep the field against his enemy,
though he do not conquer him, yea though he loses ground; yet it is one thing
to keep the field, and another thing to be beaten out, and overcome; now this
continual striving, makes a man to keep the field, against his infirmity, and
not to be overcome, and therefore its worth the while to continue striving.

Lastly, I say, that 4. Ans.
though a man is sure of victory, and that his cause is never so good, and that
he goes on a good ground, yet GOD may in his wisdom so dispose of the matter,
that he may lose the victory for a time, as we see the Israelites, in a good
cause were foiled twice by the Beniamites; and so the Disciples of CHRIST that
were sent on his business to fish, they fished all night in vain. And so
Moses though he went on Gods errand, yet he prevailed not a good while, but the
people were oppressed more than before, Exodus 5.

And so Paul though he was called to go to Macedonia, yet see in the story
what a many letts he had, yet afterward he planted a Church there; so when we
strive against any sinful lust, our cause is good, and we have a certain
promise, that we shall overcome, even as certain a promise as Iosuah had,
that he should drive out the Canaanites, and overcome them, when the Lord
encouraged him, saying, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. So sure a
promise have we, in the 1. Luke 74. we shall be delivered from all our
enemies, that so we might serve God in holiness: and therefore be not
discouraged, though thy infirmity hang long upon thee, but strive against it,
and in the end thou shall get the victory.

A second question is, Quest. 2.
whether an infirmity may hang on a man all his life, or no; for some men may
say, I have had a sin which haunted me all my life hitherto, and may do
till my dying day for ought as I do know, and shall I then say this is an
infirmity?

In this case we must Ans.
distinguish of infirmities, for infirmities are either occasional, which are
occasioned by some other accident, or habitual, which stay longer by a man, and
these are either natural to us, and so proceed either from our parents, and so
are hereditarie to us, even as some diseases are; and so we are subject to the
very same infirmities, that our parents are: else they are such, as arise from
the temper of our own bodies.

Such as proceed from our natural complexion, ^
or else such as proceed from custom, which is another nature, now I say that
occasional infirmities such as arise from without, as such as come from
Satan, these continue but for a fit, and do not last all a man's life, God
does usually set Satan a limited time, he may give him liberty to tempt a
man, but he sets him his bounds, thus long he must do it, and no longer,
usually I say God does thus; For he may suffer him to do it longer, but
seldom all a man's life. But now for our natural hereditarie infirmities these
may and do oftentimes continue for term of life: for they have a root in
us. Now though you do loppe off the branches, yet the root will send forth
more again: I do not say, that they so prevail, as that they reign in a
man; for Grace will continually get ground against it: but it may remain in a
man so long as he lives, and GOD has a good end in it; for he would glorify
his Son in us, not only at our first conversion, but all our life after, he
would make us depend on CHRIST always, as well for Sanctification as for
Justification: he would make us see what need we have of a daily Mediator,
and therefore leaves daily infirmities in our nature to exercise us with, and
to cause us to look up to Christ, as the Brazen Serpent was lift up amongst
the Israelites.

Another case may be Quest. 3.
this, whether a sin against knowledge, and with deliberation may be said to be
a sin of infirmity, or no?

To this I answer, that Answ.
a sin committed simply with deliberation, cannot be an infirmity: that is,
let a man be ever himself, without let or impediment, let him be his own man,
let the eye of his understanding be as when the Sun shines, and dispell the
mists, so that it may see all before it, and let his will and affections walk
at liberty: and in this case a good man cannot sin deliberately. See the
ground of this, Romans the seventh, and the seventeenth verse. If I commit
sin, it is no more I, but sin that dwells in me: That is, when I am my
self, my own man, not bound up with any lust, I thus do not sin, it is not
I: But in this case, which is the usual and indeed all the case of Christians,
namely, when any passion orinordinate affection, or strong distemper does
either blind the eye of reason, or tie up his affection, so that he is not at
liberty, then I may commit a sin, having long deliberated on it. There may be
such distemper of affection as may continue long, and though it do not wholly
blind Reason, yet it blinds most of it. And this was the case of David in
numbering the people, he deliberated on it: Ioab tells him the truth, and
reasoned the case with him, and yet he did it: and so we know in murdering
Vriah, it was consulted on, and a deliberate actio^, but there was much passion
mingled with it: David was not himself, there was some strong affection that
did bind and tie up the use of the regenerate part, as in drunkenness, that
excess binds up for a time the use of reason, so that he could not walk in
the liberty of his spirit, and therefore it was his infirmity: we may see that
passion overcame David for the time, by his com ming out of these sins: For
when after he came to himself, and saw the greatness of it; as usually when
a sin is committed, (and not before) then we see the grievousnesse of it; so
then David confessed he had sinned, and done very foolishly.

So a Christian may fall into a course of worldly mindedness, or the like, and
this lust may hang upon a man, and yet be a sin of infirmity, ^ when a man is
himself he sees it, and repents it.

Secondly, I answer, that in this deliberation, Answ. 2.
which is mingled with passion, there is a double error; namely, when a man
erres either about the ultimate and last end, or when he erres only in the
means. Now a regenerate man has set up God for his last end, whom he must
never forsake, nor part with for all the world, but in some particular thing
he may err: As when he thinks he may do such a thing, and yet keep his God
still, or else he may get pardon of sin quickly, or else minceth his sin
with distinctions, etc. and so may commit a sin deliberately: For this is a
true rule, that any sin is a sin of infirmity, so long as we do not err
about the last end, though in some particular we are out, concerning the means
and way to it.

But now an unregenerate man, he deliberates after this manner; I would have
God for my God; I would not be without God in the world, but there is such a
pleasure, such a profit, which I must needs have, and rather than he will lose
it, he will part with God, thus he makes pleasure his uttermost end. A man
loves his life, and loves the use of his members; as of his hand, his arm, or
his leg, etc. But he had rather lose his hand or any of his members, than his
life. So a wicked man covers his pleasure more than his life, he cannot live
if he have it not; and God he esteems but as one of his members, which he
would not willingly want: But a Christian has God for his chief end, and
never sins with deliberation, about this end, he will not forget God upon any
terms, but may err in the way, thinking he may fulfill such a lust, and
keep God too.

Another question is, whether a Regenerate Question 4.
man may not fall into some presumptuous sins, and so commit a sin that is
not of infirmity?

For answer to this, we Answ. 1.
must know, that a presumptuous sin is of two sorts: First a sin that is
simply presumptuous, when we know such a thing to be sinful, and yet
presuming on Gods mercy, we will do it; I say thus a godly man cannot sin
presumptuously.

But there is a sin that is 2.
comparatively presumptuous; to wit, in comparison of our other sins, which
we commit with more reluctance, with more tenderness of conscience: but some
others we commit more against knowledge, and are more our selves when we do
them; these are comparatively presumptuous sins, and a godly man may sometime
commit them: As we see it was David's case in the matter of Vriah, when he
plotted his death.

The end of the first SERMON.
THE SECOND SERMON, BY JOHN PRESTON Dr. of D.
Math. 12. 18. 19. 20. 18. BEhold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in
whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall
show judgment to the Gentiles.

19. He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets.

20. Abruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth Judgment unto victory.


I HAVE made choice of these words for the Affinity they have with that Text,
whereof we have so lately spoken in this place, that out of this Text we might
prosecute the point already entered upon by occasion of the prayer of that good
King in the former Text: for Christ is here brought in showing Judgment to the
Gentiles, and doing it in a meek and tender manner, as ver. 18. 19. which
manner is here illustrated by the consideration of the persons, to whom this
Judgment was declared or showed, who are here expressed under the similitudes
of a bruised reed and smoking flax.

A reed the weakest plant, that is, not a strong tree; yet this a broken one,
none of the strongest: So Flax, that takes the fire a great deal sooner than
a Reed will, especially if it be dry, and have hung near the fire, but most of
all, if it be already smoking, the least spark will do that, yet Christ will
not quench that little spark.

Then he shows the issue of this teaching, till he bring forth judgment into
victory: that is, until that little spark have got the mastery, or that he
may etc. and so it is a reason of his tender dealing; because otherwise, is
roughly dealt withal, it never would prevail As a little coal, if it be
hard blown, is soon extinguished, but if nourished, and gently dealt with,
increases to a mighty flame: So the least grace, though as weak as a bruised
crushed reed, or as small as aspark of fire, that only makes the flax to
smoke, yet if cherished by Christ, it will increase, and come at last to
victory; so that in these verses ye have four things.

First, the Office of our Savior Jesus Christ, which is, to teach men
Judgment.

Secondly, the manner how he does it, namely, with tenderness and meekness.

Thirdly, the persons, namely, such as are very weak in grace and holiness.

Fourthly, the issue, namely, that He will bring forth Judgment into victory.
For the first and second of these.

The office (I say) of Doct. 1
Christ, is to teach men judgment, and this he does with much tenderness,
compassion, and gentleness: for the former part, that Christ's office, is to show
men judgment.

First, to teach men the just and righteous 1
ways of God, so the word is taken in the old testament. to enlighten men to
judge of the ways of God. There be two ends why Christ came; first, to
justify, and secondly, sanctify us, to give us forgiveness of sins, 3. Act.
last, 5. Act. 31. therefore Christ is often compared to a shepherd, in the 10th
of St. John, (and many other places) that feeds his flock, and he is also
called Iobn 1. 9. the true light, which lighteneth the world, and every man
that comes into the world (that is) if Christ had not come into the world,
there would not have been one spark of GODS image left in man, neither Adam,
nor his posterity should have known any thing, but a cloud of darkness
should have seized on men's minds. But now by Christ's coming every one, even
the wicked have this benefit, that they have seen common light: Christ lightens
every one that comes into the world, in some sort teaches them so much as
shall make the^ inexcusable

It is his office to teach 2
men, and he does it in the next place, with much gentleness and tenderness: this
we will easily grant, if we consider who it is that teaches, and who we are
that are taught, a rude people so hard to conceive, so ready to forget,
therefore he had need have much ge^tlenes. We say when one quickly conceives a
thing, and then goes to teach it, to another that cannot apprel end it, it will
weary him, if he be not very meek. An angry man when he finds any
impediment, he flies on the face of it presently, and a proud man, he will not
bear so much, nor wait so long. But now Christ is meek, and thinks not much
to wait from day to day, to drop in here a line and there a line, here a
little and there a little: he teaches with much meekness; the reason is in
the verse before, Christ deals with us according to his nature and
disposition. Now as it is said before, he shall not strive nor cry; when the
Pharisees would have killed him, rather than he would strive with them, he
departed, yielding to them, went his ways from them. And again it is said,
neither shall his voice be heard in the streets, alluding to an action of his,
when he had wrought a great work, he bad them not utter the matter: he came not
with Pomp, and majesty, as great men, that cannot come into a place, but the
town must ring of them; he deterres no man by his greatness, from coming unto
him, but was of an humble and meek disposition. And according as his nature
was, so dealt he with us, teaching us with much tenderness, and meekness:
then there is no reason, why we should be discouraged for any of our
infirmities, for Christ will bear with them. If he were not God, and man, that
is, if he were not patient in an infinite manner, he could not bear with us:
but he is infinitely patient, therefore be not discouraged, in Ezekiel 34. 16.
ver. he compares himself to a shepherd, and (says he) I will seek that which
was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that
which was broken, and will strengthen the weak: where we see, there be four
causes of weakness. Causes. 4


First, men are apt to straggle 1
out of the way through vanity and weakness of their own spirits. Now when a
man does so weaken and lose himself through his own folly; then Christ seeks
him, and will not suffer him to be utterly lost.

David wandered as well as Saul, but God sought David again, and would not lose
him: therefore we see, that David delights to use this Metaphor in Psalm. 119.
176.

Again a temptation may come on a man which is too strong for him, and drive
him out of the way, as sheep when thieves come, are driven out of the fold,
whither else they would not have gone: these Christ promises to bring back
again: as David recovered the sheep, out of the paw of the Lion and Bear, so
Christ will recover his children that were carried away with such strong
temptations.

Again, suppose there be some wound made in the soul, by some actual sin,
if there be some breach made into the conscience, Christ promises in the next
place to make up this breach, that he will bind up that which was broken: a
man may complain that he is weak and ready to straggle, as before: therefore
Christ promises to strengthen that which is weak, that is, he will lead them
on to a greater measure of strength daily, whereby they shall be able to get
victory over such infirmities: Isaiah 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and shall carry them in
his bosom, and shall guide them with young: Here we see, that in the fold of
Christ there is this difference of sheep.

Some are strong that can go apace, some are weaker, that cannot keep pace
with the other, and they are compared to the Ewes with young, that can go but a
slow pace: Some are so weak, that they must be carried, else they cannot go.
Now those that are so weak that they cannot comprehend Christ, he is ready to
comprehend them: when men are weak, and have not that use of their faith which
others have to lay hold on Christ; Christ will take hold on them, and carry
them in his bosom, and those that are weak and cannot keep pace with others,
he will guide them, and drive them on, according to their pace, and he will
drive on the strong according to their strength, and though he bear with the
weak, he expects more from the strong: See how Jacob ordered his flock in
that manner that he would not out-drive them, and shall not God do so also,
who has taught the husbandman this discretion, Isaiah 28. use it himself?
surely he will: in the 1. of St. Iam. ver. 5. If any man lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth none, and
it shall be given unto him: that is, you shall find this difference between
God and man.

If one be foolish, and goes to man; man is ready to despise him, and laugh at
him: but if he ask wisdom at Gods hands, he gives it to him liberally, and
twits him not with his folly; upbraides him not with his weakness: look how a
tender mother deals with her child, the more its weakness is, the more tender
she is of it; so does Christ guide us according to our weakness, and tender us
the more, because we are meek and humble: and therefore we have no cause to
be discouraged, for that weakness which we find in our selves. We are
indeed exceeding backward to believe this, and therefore see what is added:
Ezekiel. 34. 16. He says he will feed them with judgment: That is, with wisdom
and discretion: for he is wise, and knows how to feed the^, according to their
weak capacities, and so his Wisdom may be a ground that he will tender us.

Again, his power may show that he will do this with us, because he is able
to make crooked things straight: If a man meet with a crooked piece of wood,
which he would streighten for his use, and cannot; he throws it away, because
he cannot make it straight. Men if they are to deal with a Scholar that is
hard to learn, they give him over, because he is incapable; they cannot make
him conceive instructions. But Christ is able to make crooked ways straight,
to quicken those that are dull, to put new natures into us; and therefore he
will not deal so harshly with us.

Again, if there be any grace in us, it is his own work, and therefore it is
for his credit to perfect it. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24 verse. Phil. 1. 6. he should not
be faithful else, if he should not do it; but he will do it: as a worke-man
loves his own works, and will not leave them unperfect, so neither will
Christ. Again, it is his Fathers will, that those who are weak should be
cherished, his delight is still in leading them from one degree of strength to
another; for his power is more seen in them and he has more thanks from
them, as he had from Mary Magdalen.

But some will say, oh Object.
but my heart is so untoward, that I fear I never shall overcome?

Consider well that place Answ.
the 42 of Esaias, 5, 6 verse. Thus says the Lord, He created the Heavens, and
stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which comes out
of it; he that gives breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that
walk therein: I the Lord have called thee, etc. Consider who it is that
created the Heavens, the Earth, and the buds thereof; that gives breath, etc.
is it not God? now then suppose he finds nothing in the nature of man, but an
emptines of grace and holiness, is it not he that made the heavens when there
was none before, and then is not he able to create grace in a man's heart?

Again look on the earth in the winter, it is very hard, a man would think it
should never bring forth flowers, yet in the spring it puts forth many kind of
fruits and flowers; so though thy heart be as herbs in the winter, yet God
is able to make grace sprout forth there, as flowers in the spring; besides it
is he that gives breath unto the people, that is, if you look upon all the
creatures in the world, yet none was able to put life in them, but GOD. So
though your souls be like unto a clod of earth, he is able to put life into
them, the breath of life, as he did at the first, he is able to enlighten and
enlarge them further, and therefore be not discouraged for thy weakness.

Is it thus? that Christ teaches 1. Use.
in judgment, and that with much compassion, and rendernesse? then this should
encourage men to come unto Christ, to learn of him, to take his yoke on them:
this use we find to be made of this Doctrine in the 11th of S. Mat. 28, 29,
and 30. verses, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you: take my yoke on you, and learn of me, and you shall find rest to
your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light: that is, let a man
look upon Christ and his ways, and usually they are discouraged with the
strictness of religion, they think they shall be too straight laced, and
bound with fetters, that are too straight for them. No (says Christ) fear
not, for I am meek and lowly, and such shall you find my dealings to be
toward you.

There be two things in the Text to moove us to come in to Christ, and to be
subject to his yoke.

First, the nature of the 1.
thing it self, it is an easy yoke: Before you come to me, you are like men
in prison, but when you come to me I losen you, and set you at liberty: before
you were as in darkness, but when you come to me I enlighten you: before you
were as men in sickness, but when you come to me, I strengthen and heal you.

A second thing, is from 2.
the person you have to deal with, that is, Christ: Come unto me, for I am
exceeding gentle, and meek, and such shall you find me: John Baptist and
Moses came roughly; but Christ is come in tenderness; if you be subject to
infirmities, he is ready to pass them by; if you be overcome with them, he
is ready to recover you: and therefore now come in to Christ; submit your
selves to his yoke, to his teaching and discipline, to his rule and government,
which is so easy. But if you will not, he will rule you with a rod of Iron, and
break you in pieces like a Potters vessel; if you stand out with him, then
none is so rough as he, and therefore observe him.

If a King should say at his Coronation, he would open all the prison doors:
would not offenders take that opportunity? or if a Creditor should say to his
debtors, come to me at such a time, and I will forgive you and your debts, and
give you in your bonds: would the debtor over-slippe that time?

So let us, when Christ offers himself to teach us with such tenderness, go
to him, take that time especially; considering, that these are such times as
are in Gods own power; those things that are in our own power, we may do
what we will with, and take our own time: but these times are not in our
hands, but in Gods: and therefore take heed of over-slipping that time, when
Christ carries himself as a nurse unto us: there is a time for every purpose,
and that lasts but for a season Eccles. 3. 11, 12. There is a certain season
which God has appointed for every purpose, there is a time when the business
may be well done, and if that be let slip, it will not succeed, but he will
be snared in an evil time, because he knows not the good time.

Therefore when it is past, his misery is great. So chiefly there is a time of
receiving grace, but this time a man knows not, yet he is undone if he pass
it; therefore take heed of overslipping any offer of grace: procrastination in
all things is dangerous, but here especially. Now that which deceives us, is
the deferring: but we must not defer one day, and say, then we shall do it
another, no, for then we shall let the time be past: as in a chariot, the
wheels run near one another, but they never overtake one another. And as in
a clock the minutes are but little distant one from another, yet none of them
are together, So the devil by his cunning thinks to make you do it now, and
by and by, till he have made you pass your hour: therefore take heed of
deferring, and come in, whilst Christ does express himself thus unto you in
these terms, whiles he deals thus tenderly and gently with you. It is a
very dangerous thing to lose the opportunity of receiving Christ when he offers
himself, when he deals gently, which we gather from that place, thus; if
there be a time for every purpose, then certainly there is a time for the
greatest business that a man has to do on the earth, that is, to come in to
Christ, and receive him; and if the misery of man be great upon him, if he
let slip other seasons, much more if he neglect this; but now there is a time
for every purpose, as these places testify. And to instance in some few Gehezi
took a gift of Naaman, 2. Kings 5. says Elisha to him, is this a time to take
gifts? there was a time when thou might have done it, at another time, of
another person thou might, but this was not a time: for Naaman was a
stranger, and did not know the customs, and Elisha would give him his health
freely, and therefore it was not the time, and therefore we see the misery was
great, the leprosy clave to him and his posterity, because he knew not the
time; so Saul because he sacrificed before Samuel came, the thing he did was
good, but he took not the right time, he was too hasty, he knew not his time;
and so his misery was great upon him; God took the kingdom from him, and
gave it to his neighbor, 1. Sam. 13. 13. 14. so Jacob when he sought the
blessing, he thought he did a good thing, but he did not stay the time, so the
misery was great upon him: see what a long peregrination, what a hard service
did he undergo under his uncle Laban, and all because he knew not the right
time: so the Israelites when they sought a King, if they had stayed their due
time, God would in his due time have revealed unto them, that David should be
their King, for he had so appointed it: and therefore because they missed of the
time, their misery was great on them, so likewise for other purposes, so for
this; there is a time for a man to come in, and take the offer that Christ
makes, a time when he is kind and gentle, and ready to receive us; if we know
not this time, and so overslip it, our misery will be great upon us. Now then
it is very requisite to know, and find out this time, because if we choose
Gods time, God will join with us in the work, and so it will be done with
ease, Eccles. 3. 9. 10. A time to love, etc. what profit has he that works,
in that wherein he labors? I have seen the travel which God has given to
the sons of men, to be exercised in it. (that is) men take much travel and
pains to bring their purposes and ends to pass; when they do not take Gods
time, and what profit have they by it?

Now if you will open when Christ knocks at the door, harken to the motions of
the spirit, and blow them, and nourish them, and it will be done with much
ease; but if you miss this time, your misery is great; you may desire, and
cry, and pray, and never the better, Eccles. 9. 12. For a man also knows not
his time, as the fish is, that is taken in an evil net, and as the birds that
are caught in a snare, so are the son of men snared in an evil time, when it
falls suddenly upon them: There is a double time, as we may gather out of
these words; a good and acceptable time, so called because God is then ready to
accept and receive us, if we come in that time, and if we do not make use
and embrace that good and acceptable time, then the evil time shall fall upon
us, we shall be caught in an evil net and snare: there may be a good net
come on us, as affliction, sickness, and the like may come upon us, so as to
do us good, as we catch at some things to preserve them alive for a better
condition then they were in: but now if we over-slippe the good time, then the
evil net shall fall upon us, sickness, death, and destruction shall come on us
suddenly as a snare: that we may see the ground of this, see what Christ
says, Luke 19. 42. 43. I thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy
day; the things which belong to thy peace: but now they are hidden from thine
eyes: He speaks it to the Jews, who yet enjoyed the ministry of Christ, and
he tells them that the time of their visitation was past.

So that a man may have the liberty to liveu^der the ministry, long after that
God has rejected him: Christ came then and visited the Jews, and al profited
nothing; then they were like the Fig Tree that Christ cursed after their day
was passed: and this day may be long before a man's death, he may live long
rejected: and therefore let us take heed we do not stand out our time. In
outward things we are wont to anticipate and prevent time: so Jacob got the
blessing before the time: and the Israelites sought for a King before the time:
and so men would be hastily rich; and so for pleasures, if we would stay Gods
time, to take it after labor, we should do well, but we prevent our time
here; but in spiritual things we are too slow, let slip our time, to come
after: But this is dangerous; take heed of it: It Is a good note which the
Stoiks have; some things are in our own power, and in them we may use our
own liberty, but other things are in the power of others; and then we must
take the opportunity while it is offered, we must sail when the wind blows.
Now of this latter kind are spiritual things, and therefore we must take the
time that is offered: Indeed if the time were in our own power, or if we knew
the time, then we might delay: Acts 1. 11. It is not for us to know the times
which the Father has kept for his own power, and no man knows what shall
be, neither can any tell it him, and therefore take heed of letting slip
the time: Satan deceives us in this, just as the Lapwing does when a manis
near her nest, she flies a little before a man, and then lights, and flies
a little further, till it has led us quite out of the way.

So Satan makes us defer a little longer, and a little longer, till our time
be past; and therefore defer now no longer, but come in unto Christ whiles
he offers himself in a loving and tender manner. And so much for the office
of Christ, which is to teach, and his manner of teaching, with much meekness
and gentleness.

Now follows the third thing to be considered, and that is the persons that
Christ has to deal with, such as are very meek; compared here to a bruised
reed, and smoking flax. A reed is of it self very weak, and shaken with
every wind, and not only so, but broken with the least force. So a Christian
may be subject to much unevenness, and inconstancy in his ways, shaken with
every temptation; but when this shall be a broken reed, this is a further
degree of weakness: and so for smoking flax, it must be an exceeding little
spark, which will not cause flax to smoke, and yet with such weak ones has
Christ to deal: he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax.

Now from the persons that Christ teaches, that is, weak ones, observe this
point.

That there may be exceeding great weakness, in true Christians; we see in
the text they are compared to the weakest things, a bruised reed, and smoking
flax: the first reason of it is this.

Because it pleases Rea. 1.
Christ in working grace, to do it by degrees, he might have perfected the
work of grace altogether as he did in the work of creation in an instant, but
he deals with us now according to the course of generation, as a plant is
first sown, then rises by degrees: So we in the beginning of grace are
exceeding small, he heales us as he did the blind man, not altogether, but by
little and by little.

First we see more darkly 1
and confusedly, and then more clearly, and he heales our lamenesse, not
altogether by setting us on our feet at the first, but he gives us strength by
degrees, first, to go on crouches, as it were, or to creep or step forward,
and afterward to go more strongly: and hence it is that there are many weak,
because grace is but weakly wrought in them. Now the reason why Christ does
thus lead us on by degrees; is first to humble us, and to let us see that the
work is not of our selves, it is God that works in us according to his good
pleasure for when we are brought on by degrees, thus it makes it evident unto
us, that we receive strength from another. Secondly, he does it for his own
glory, that we might know the righteousness of Christ: in the 8 of Deuteronomy. 2. 17.
there is set down these 2. ends, why the Lord led them through the
wilderness, and not the nearest way.

First, Gods end in it was 1
to humble them.

Secondly, to let them know that he did it for for his own sake. So he does
here to humble them, and for his own glory, God does not perfect grace at the
first, but by degrees, and likewise that they may know his power, that it is
his strength in which they walk, that if a Christian should be left to
himself, he would quickly find that it is Christ's power that he must walk
in, that must go along with him to guide him, and to deliver him from his
enemies.

Now for the use of this Use.
it may serve to comfort weak Christians; what though thou art not at that
growth as other Christians are? yet be of good comfort: a reed has life in it
as well as the strongest oak, what though thou can not see the flame of an
holy conversation, but only the fume? yet you may know there is fire: men that
are in the covenant, are like men that are gonein at a door, or into a Church
or the like. Some are further in then others, but yet all are in; So though the
weak be not so forward as another, yet he may be in, though not so far in:
for a budd draws sap from the root, as well as the fruit, why so thou must
be a budd, and have grace in some measure, though not in so great a measure,
yet thou may be a true Christian, though a weak Christian.

But you will say that it Objection.
is a hard thing to be persuaded, that God will accept of such a weakling as I
am.

Therefore consider the Answ.
nature of Christ, for we are deceived in that as in other things, in 2. of
the Heb. verse 17. We see that it behoved Christ in all things to be made like
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest,
etc. Christ is our High Priest, now there are 3 offices of our high Priest:

First he was to receive Three offices of Christ.
every sacrifice.

Secondly to offer sacrifice daily.

Thirdly, to lay the wood together, and preserve 3.
the fire.

Now then it belongs to Christ to receive every sinner that comes to him, as it
did to Aaron to receive the sacrifice; and if Christ should not do all that
belongs to his office, he should be an unfaithful High Priest: But he is called
a faithful High Priest: If then a sinner come to Christ, and says; Lord I know
that God is a consuming fire, and I dare not come to him in my self, but in
the merit of that Sacrifice which thou offredst: Christ cannot reject him; but
says he to him: Come unto me, and I will receive you: If they do but come,
he cannot but receive them, else he should be unfaithful in his office, and
in his promise: But he is faithful in both, and not only so, but he is a
merciful High Priest, and so will pity them that come unto him: and if you
have many sins daily renewed, many infirmities and imperfections; why, it is
Christ's office to renew the sacrifice daily, he offers up a daily sacrifice
for us, even his own righteousness; and as he does this for justification, so
for sanctification also. When Sacrifice was laid on the Altar, the Priests
could not bring fire from Heaven to consume it; but God sent it, and so showed
that it was accepted: we may lay the wood together, but cannot bring fire from
heaven: But Christ is a Priest of an higher order than was Aaron; he will
kindle this fire of Sanctification, and increase it, and keep it still
burning, it is his office so to do; and therefore doubt not but Christ will
receive you.

Oh, but this were some comfort, if I had assurance Objection.
that I had but one spark of true grace in me: therefore how shall I know that?

I answer, there be 5 Answer 5. Signs.
signs laid down in the Text, whereby a man may come to know this.

First, in these words, He will bring forth judgment 1.
into victory: That is, the first thing that Christ does, even to set up a
right Judgment in thee: When the Apostle prays for the Philippians, he
prays, That they may abound in knowledge and judgment.

Secondly, there is life in a bruised Reed, as 2.
in the strongest Oak.

Thirdly, there is fire, though never so 3.
small, as in the strongest Oak.

Fourthly, there is 4.
a Combat.

Fifthly, there is victory. 5.


Now for the first of 1.
these, consider whether Christ has set up his judgment in thee: when the
Apostle prays that the Philippians may abound in knowledge and in all
judgment: That is, that they may discern of things that differ, and he takes
it for granted that it was right, else he would not pray for the increase of
it.

So that when a man can discern of things that differ, when he can put a
difference between the ways of God and sin, between spiritual privileges,
and outward vanities, between truth and falsehood; then there is a light come
into a man, and this makes them pure and blameless, fills them with the
fruits of righteousness: now then if thou have this in any degree, thou have
the spirit of Christ: As it was in Christ, Esaias 11. 2. 3. He had the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord. So is it in all his members; they have the same spirit,
and do not judge according to the sight of the eye, or the hearing of the
ear, but judge righteously, for there is a two fold judgeing, first, when our
eye or ear judge, and we judge according to that; when we send out our
spirits and hear what they report, and this is ready to bring in a false
report, to say that sin is sweet and pleasant, and it will represent grace as
vile, because it judges according to outward appearance, and the outside of
Christianity is base, in regard of misreports, that are brought up of it; As
the ten messengers brought an evil report upon the land of Canaan, and in
regard of the outside of it in those that profess it, who are many times poor
and conte^ptible men, and in regard of the infirmities and failings of the
Saints; Now if a man judge by the eye, that sees nothing but the outside, he
will esteem of religion as base. But it is otherwise when a man has the
spirit of judgment, he will look further into things, he pries into the
inside, and then he will not judge of the ways of God, and of sin as the world
does; But will see a baseness in sin, and an excellency in religion, because
he is enabled to judge aright.

For Christ, as he makes his Princes and Priests, so he makes them Prophets
likewise, to judge and discern of things aright, and this he does by opening
the eyes, Act. 26, 18. that is, good things in themselves are very excellent,
and desirable, but we see them not till our eyes are opened, there is a veil
drawn over our eyes till Christ removes it, and opens them.

What is that? Question Answer.


Why, Christ he elevates and raises up that light which we have, unto an
higher degree, and that is by putting a new light into their souls John 1. 9.
that is, the true light, which lightneth every one that comes into the world.

Before the Creation was complete there was some light; the first day after
the Sun was created, and after the fall he enlightened every one that came
into the world: (that is) all men have some light or other by Jesus Christ;
before there was no spark of light in us, but all that we have is by Christ:
that glimmering light which is in natural men, is but a spark of the new
Image, which Christ has put on us: But in this, Christ raises up the light
higher and higher; and when this new light is put in us, then a man's eyes are
said to be opened, when he can see round about him, and discern that
excellency in grace, and that baseness in sin, which were in them before,
but they could not see it. As the Chariots and horsemen were with Gehezi, but
his eyes were not opened to see them: And so the Well was near Hagar, but she
saw it not till God had opened her eyes, and showed it unto her.

So death and destruction may be very near an unregenerate man, and he not see
it till God opens his eyes: so also a Christian may have ground of comfort, and
he not know it, till God shows it unto him. Now where a man's eyes are opened,
that he can see thus round about him, then has Christ set up this judgment
in a man.

But here now all the business will be to discern between the common
judgment of a man, and this right judgment which Christ sets up in him, which
difference is seen by these particulars.

First, they differ in the 1.
authors of them: another man's judgment is borne and bred with him; but this
comes from above from God: it is a new judgment, yea, a renewed judgment
Ephesians. 4. 23. Be ye renewed in your spirits and minds: When thou have such a
judgment of sin and godliness, which thou had not before, this is a new
judgment.

Secondly, they differ in regard of the subject: this new light is always in a
pure heart; the other, not: so long as the heart is overwhelmed with lusts, so
long the eye of the soul is dim, as in a mist, that we cannot see before
us; but Christ takes away this mist: Titus 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. When the Grace of
God has appeared, etc. Then we see clearly: whereas the unregenerate man
never judges aright of an holy way; because his heart is full of lusts, which
are as mists, that they cannot see.

Thirdly, they differ in 3.
the measure. Common light will persuade you of common truth, or of truths in
general, that such and such things are commendable; but if you come to a
particular action, and practice that, you must do this, and this, here it
fails him: But this right judgment helps a man to do particular actions; it
inlightens him in every particular, takes away all objections, and guides you
in the right way 2. Tim. 2. 7 Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things, (that is) I have told thee these things in
general, but when you come to particular, the Lord must direct you.

Fourthly, they differ in the growth: this right 4.
judgment grows more and more, it is as the light that shines clearer and
clearer, till it be perfect day: Esaias 42. 3. 4. He shall bring forth judgment
unto truth: when this judgment is put into a man, every thing adds something
to it: A good heart makes use of every thing, but another man that has but a
common sight he does not grow, but is apt to be offended, and at length that
light that he has turns into injudiciousnes of mind, you shall find it
decrease more and more, 2. Tim. 3. 13. evil men wax worse and worse, for that
light of theirs is but like a flower, which when it is at the best, fades and
decays; and the reason of it is because God gives a man leave to use that
common wisdom that he has for a time, but when they do not improve that
knowledge that they have, then God takes it away from them, and turns it into
foolishness, as we may see Romans 1. 25. Because they changed the truth of God
into a lie, therefore they were given up to vile affections: 1. Cor. 1, 19. God
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the understanding of
the prudent.

Fifthly, they differ in the effects which they produce, 5.
for first this right judgment brings forth poverty of spirit, when as before
a man thought he had some good things in him; now he sees he is nothing.
Saving wisdom makes him see himself empty of all that was good, makes him
see that before he knew nothing, as he ought to know; but now common judgment
breeds pride, it puffes a man up, 1 Cor. 8. 1, 2. and makes him prefer
himself before his brethren.

Secondly, this right 2.
judgment, it causes a man to know every thing, as they ought to know it, when
he knows a right use of it: As for example, a man that knows his ground
which he owes, when he knows what grain it will best bear, what tillage
and manure is best for it, then a man knows his tool as he ought, when he
knows how to use it as he ought.

So a man that knows sin as he ought, when he looks upon it so as to lose
it and loath it, then knows he the promises as he ought, when he makes that use
of them, as he should make; when as other men mind them no more than their
old shoos: and then we know forgiveness of sins as we ought, when we think
it the most precious thing in the world: and so if we knew earthly vanities as
we ought, we would weane our selves from them; yea, from all world ly things:
as the lusts of the flesh, and pleasure, the lust of the eye, and riches,
honor, and pride of life, or any other excellency in the world, be it what it
can be, we will not then endure it.

Now when a man's eyes are opened, and he is savingly enlightened, and knows
these things as he ought, then he looks on carnal pleasures, and sees they
will bring bitterness in the end: when he looks upon riches, he sees that to be
true which is said of them: Why will thou set thy heart upon them, which are as
nothing? he sees they are uncertain, insufficient, and not able to satisfy
his soul: And for the pride of life, or any excellency which before he greatly
prized, now he accounts it vile and contemptible, this the spirit of right
judgment enables a man to do.

Thirdly, the singleness 3.
of the eye is another effect of this, it teaches a man to look on things
with a single eye: Math. 6. 22, 23. There is mention made of a single eye, and
of an evil eye: if a man has a single eye, he will not look on God and on
the world, but on God alone, cleave to him, and serve him alone; the other is
called a wicked eye, because there be many lusts on which it looks. But this
right judgment makes us look on God singly, abstracted from all other things.

A fourth effect which this right Judgment pronounces, 4.
is, Conversion of the whole man unto God: if thine eye be single, thy whole
body is full of light, (that is,) shall be set straight; and when this is not
done, it hinders our conversion unto God, as we may see in the 13 of Math. 15.
we cannot look on other things, and turn our eyes upon God at the same time.

Fifthly, this right Judgment it sets up, and makes 5.
a man willing to be guided by the word of God, by the ministers, or any
servant of God, a Child may lead him, the weakest Christian may lead him, if
they bring Spiritual reason, as natural men are led by reason, so these by
the word of God.

Sixthly, it makes a man 6.
able to practice that he knows, whereas another man knows much, practices
little, but this Judgment brings forth practice, this knowledge will lead us
into action, and so much for the first sign, 1.
whereby we may know whether Christ has wrought any spark of grace in us,
namely, if he have set up his Judgment in our hearts.

Now for the second; this is such a Judgment 2.
as begets life: a Reed has Life as well as an Oak now if you would know if
this life be right or not, you shall know it by the hear, there is fire: so if
we would know if this be right, see it by the co^bate; if you would know if
that be right, try it by the victory: well then, now we have to speak of the
second sign; Consider 2.
though you be weak, whether you are not as a bruised reed yea or not, which
has some life, some strength in it. A bruised reed will he not break, here we
will consider 3 things.

First that there must be some strength and life in 1.
the weakest.

Secondly, this strength is subject unto bruisings, 2.
A bruised reed, etc.

Thirdly, that Christ 3.
will heal al these bruises, he will not break the bruised reed, but will
bring forth Judgment into victory.

For the first of these, there must be a reed which has some life in it: Now
life is such a faculty whereby creatures move themselves in their own places,
so say Philosophers: other things that have not life, may move themselves when
they are out of their own places: as a stone when it is out of its own place,
moves downwards, and fire here below, being out of its place moves upwards; but
nothing can move it self in its place, but that which has life in it; To
apply this to our purpose, whosoever moves himself in the ways of God, has
life in him; There be many things may move us toward God, as good education,
a powerful ministry, good company, and the like, as Ioash and Amaziah, were
good while their good friends lived, but all this does not argue life in us,
because they are but extrinsecall causes, as a hand may make a stone move
upwards, the stone has not life therefore; but when a man is so far
enlightened, so fashioned and formed by Jesus Christ, that he judges aright of
the ways of God, and being thus formed, he moves himself to do good, then he
is said to be alive, when Christ shall set up Judgment in the heart of man, to
see the evil of the ways of sin, and the good that is in the ways of God,
even then, he moves toward those ways naturally and willingly, such a one
has life in him: Let some consider this, that live in the Church, under good
Tutors, or Masters, or Parents, that are carried on in a crowde of good
company, they may do much, and yet have no life, because it may proceed from
an outward cause; not froman inward persuasion of the heart, of the goodness
of the ways wherein they walk.

There is a twofold persuasion: one is, that the ways of God are good; a bare
persuasion only, and yet this stirs not men up to walk in these ways; but
it lies dead in the heart.

But there is another persuasion 2.
which is ingrafted in the heart, that moves a man to new obedience: 1 James
21. 22. So we shall find there a double expression of light: one, which
barely shows men all evil and good: But there is another light; with life,
John 8. 12. He that follows me, shall have the light of life: It is an
Hebraisme, he shall have the light of life that is, the lively light: Ephesians.
5. 14. Awake from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.

The first difference between them, is, the one 1.
reveals the ways of God, but so, that the affections are not moved, the
hands are not set on work.

But the other is, when 2.
that the ways of God are so revealed, that we see an amability, an
excellency in them; and so, that we lift up our hearts unto the ways of the
Lord, as before we did unto vanity, (that is) we desire earnestly to walk in
them.

Consider how you sitted up your hearts to riches, pleasures, and other earthly
vanities; if now you so lift up your hearts to walk in his ways; then here is
that inward persuasion; that lively light wrought in you; that life whereof we
speak: This life is nothing else but that which the Scripture calls faith.

Now there is a dead faith spoken of: and how shall we know it to be dead?
Thus, when it stirs us not up to good works: And howshall we know it is
living? when it moves us willingly and readily to duties of obedience, Christ
dwells in the heart by faith, so says St. Paul, The life I now live, is by
faith in the son of God, Gal. 2. 20. (that is) there are two men that look
on Christ; one looks on him, believes all the promises, all threatenings, all
his word, opens his heart, and lets Christ come in, and rule, and do there
what he list.

Another says (if you ask him) that he believes all this, but we shall know
it by this: because it does not make him moove forwards unto new obedience: now
according to our life that is in us, so is our strength, the less life, the
less strength, Revelations 3. 8. The Church of Philadelphia is said to have a
little strength: now if you would know whether you have true strength or no:
you must distinguish between life and strength, to wit, the least degree of
strength will first enable a man to do all things in some measure; though not
in that measure you should: it will enable you to love God, to believe, to pray,
etc. you can do something of every thing. Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me.

Secondly, though it do 2.
not reach the highest degree, yet it aims at it, and has a desire to come to
it; After he had said, he had not yet attaind to perfection, Phil. 3. 14. 15.
but aimed at it, made forward toward it: he ads, let as many as be perfect, be
thus minded: the least spark of fire will endeavor to rise above the Air, as
well as the greatest, and where true strength is, it wilendeavour to be
stronger.

Thirdly, this is not an empty leveling at it, but it grows up to it; so does
not 3.
other common strength; there is a strength in iron to resist violent strokes,
and in a rock to resist the force of the waves, but this is not a vital
strength; so in other men there may be strength of resolution, but it is not a
self moving strength, and therefore it co^tinues as it was, and grows not; but
in vital strength, there is a period to which it grows, and never rests til
it comes up to it, as we see in plants, and other living creatures, and men,
they grow up to their full strength so Christians have their period which they
grow up to, and this period is perfect holiness, which they cannot attain to in
this life: and therefore they are still growing so long as they live. Now then
see if you have such a strength; and if you can find that you have, then there
is life in you: and that is the first that we propounded to show, that there
must be some life, some strength.

The second thing was; 2.
that this strength is subject to much bruising; A bruised reed will he not
break: A wea Christian, though he have not the strength of a man, yet he has
the strength of a child; though not of a tree, yet of a plant; and such
strength is subject to bruisings, and the less strength, the more subject it
is tobruisings, as we see in plants.

Now bruisings are of two sorts, and both arising from sin.

The first arise from sin as it is unpardoned, (that is) as you apprehend sin
to 1.
be unpardoned, the more ready you are to be bruised.

The second sort arises from sin as it is unmortified, 2.
when a man sees still that sin grows up, which he had thought he had cut
down, he is ready to be bruised. The former sort is contrary to the grace of
justification, the latter to that of sanctification, now Christ has promised
to heal these bruises, which is the third thing 3.
to be considered, let those therefore that are thus weak, consider this
promise here, that Christ will heal all these bruisings, and so all other, the
promise for this purpose that he will heal these bruisings, which arise from
our doubting of justification, Esaias 61, 1, 2, 3, 4, ver. this is the bruising
for which Christ came into the world, to preach glad tidings to the weak, and
to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives. Therefore
if a poor soul would go to Christ, and say thus, Lord I am bound with a
chain of my sins, and thou came to set such at liberty, Christ he would do
it; for he was anointed for that very purpose.

And so for the bruisings that arise from sin unmortified, 2.
why Christ has promised not to leave thee, to thy self, nor forsake thee, but
will de stroy all the works of the devil in thee; therefore go to Christ, and
put him in mind of this promise, and say, Lord. I am one of them to whom this
promise is made, I am as a bruised reed, and as smoking flax; and thou have
promised, not to break a bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax: put
Christ thus in mind of his promise, and he will hear, and help, and heal thee.
But now here are so^e cases of Cases of conscience.
conscience to be resolved

First, some will be ready Quest. 1
to say, that they have none of these bruises, that they are not thus weary and
heavy laden, because they cannot greive for sin, so much as for other things.

To which I answer, there 1 Answer.
may be some violent and sudden grief, which may exceed grief for sin, as
David's grief for Absalom; But here is the difference, the grief for sin is
constant and perpetual, but the grief for some loss or the like, is but for
the present. Now a spring that runs and is never dry, yields more water then
a land flood, which for the present seems greater, but is soon dried up: so
grief for sin, is like water that runs from a spring, which continues; and
grief for other things, is like a land flood which lasts not long.

Again they differ in regard of the terms of this sorrow: when a man has
lost a friend, he looks on it as a total and irrepairable loss, and so
greives the more; and so in like manner, if we should look on the favor of
God, as a thing irrevocably lost, his grief for this would exceed the other.
But because he always conceives some glimpse of Gods favor, in the midst of
this mourning, therefore this grief seems the less, though in regard of
continuance it be greater.

Oh! but I have not attained 2 Case.
to a just measure of bruisednesse.

If there be such a measure of bruisednesse in Answer.
thee as brings thee home to Christ, thou have attained a sufficient measure,
to bring thee to heaven. But this distinction must be remembered, that there is
a double bringing of a man home to Christ.

One is, when a man is brought so far toward 1.
Christ, as to be willing to take the crown, and partake of the privileges
only, but this is not sufficient; but when thy sorrow shall so bring thee home
to Christ, that thou art willing to take Christ's yoke on thee, to subject thy
self to Christ in all things, so much sorrow and bruisednesse as this, is
sufficient to bring thee home.

Oh, but though I am 3 Case.
thus far bruised, that I am willing to bear Christ's yoke, and to do that
he shall command me; yet I do not find that this promise is performed to me;
God hides his face from me, and I cannot find him, whom my soul loves, and
that I cannot find that my sins are pardoned: and so for bruises belonging to
sanctification: I have striven long against such a lust, and cannot see it
mortified any whit.

To this I answer, that Christ in withholding Answ.
the Comfort, and suffering thee to be more laded, does ever fulfill this
promise here made, Math. 11. 28. Come unto me, etc.

But the Objection might be made: We have Object. 1.
come unto thee, and yet find no rest: Christ therefore adds: Take my yoke on
you, and learn of me, etc. The yoke of Christ is the government of Christ, the
taking of this yoke upon us, is the subjecting our selves to this government.

Now the government of Christ, consists 2. Things.
in two things,

First, it commands us to 1.
do many things.

Secondly, he will have 2.
us to suffer many things: and if we take Christ's yoke upon us, we must do
both. Now, a man is willing to do many things that Christ commands, but
stoppes at some things; there is some thing, some duty, which he will not do; as
prayer, giving of alms, or some other: And so also for suffering, he is
willing to endure some things for Christ, but there is something again which he
cannot endure: Reproaches, Scoffs, and the like. If therefore God hold off
comfort for any long season, let a man look well to his spirit, and see if he
be perfectly willing to take Christ's yoke upon him, if he were, the promise is
certain, and shall be made good, he shall find rest to his soul: and if he
do not, there is some fault in himself. In the tenth of Judges ver. 10, to
the end of the Chapter, there the people were burdened, and cried unto the
Lord, and yet found no rest: but God deferres comfort, and tells them, he would
deliver them no more; the^ the people submitted themselves unto God, saying,
Do with us what pleases thee, and put away their strange Gods, ver. 16. and
served God. Now when the children of Israel were brought to this, to cast away
the relics of Idolatry, and to serve the Lord perfectly; then it is said: The
Lords spirit was grieved for the misery of Israel. So if a man would have
peace, and have sought it long, and cannot find it, let him see whether there
be not some relic of corruption which God would have cast out of thy heart:
and when it is done, and thou art willing to serve god perfectly, then thou
shall find rest unto thy soul. And so much for the second sign of true grace
wrought in a man, to wit, if there be any life and strength in him, though it
be mingled with much weakness.

The third we named, that where true grace was 3.
there was heat. Smoking flax will he not quench; where there is smoke, there
is fire, and where fire is, there is heat, be it never so small; and this
added to the former of life; Life is nothing else but a sublimary heat, and
where there is life, there is heat, all life is joined with heat: but not on
the contrary, where there is heat, there is life. For cold things may be
warmed from without, by the Sun; but where there is heat from an inward
principle, there is life. The Spirit is compared to fire and heat; Quench not
the spirit: He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: or which is
as fire, Therefore where this spirit is in a man, there the holy Ghost has
bin. Now this heat is nothing else, but a solicitous and earnest desire to
please God in all things, to get and increase communion with Christ, and to be
built up in grace. I say, it is, first, a solicitous and earnest desire, a
desire accompanied with carfulness how he may do to please God in all
things, whereas in other men, there is a lukewarmnesse, a remissness in all
things, they care not whether they do it or no: but this is an earnest
careful desire, and that in the second place to please God: an hypocrite may
have strong desires, let him be brought to have an apprehension of Gods wrath,
and hell fire, and he would have an earnest desire to be delivered from it:
But all this is not to please God, but himself, and not God in all this: But
our desire must be to please God: See how the affections 1 Cor. 7, 11.
were stirred; and what fruits it wrought, they were moved by motives taken
from God, and with desire tending to him, and so must we be.

Again this righteous 3.
fire has in it this property, that it purifieth the heart from dross and
filth, and it puts it self forth in holy actions, makes a man ready to pray,
to speak profitably, and the like; as fire makes men active and fit for action.

Lastly, it is always guided 4.
by the spirit of judgment, when you mind that most, which the Scripture
presses most, where the heart is upright, a man despises none of the ways of
God, not the meanest truth, but would know them all: but that which the
Scripture most of all urges, that he most earnestly presses after, and
labors to bring his heart unto them, as the Scripture is most love and the
like, so he takes most pains with his heart about this: now therefore try by
these properties, whether you have heat in you, or no.

Oh! but I cannot find Object.
this heat in me, I cannot find these holy affections in my heart.

I answer, consider if Answer.
thou find any affections that are holy in thee, though not many; yea, if
thou find none, consider if thou have not this smoke, for sometimes a man
may find the fire it self, sometimes only this smoke, what is it? I answer,
when you find not the affections so moving as you see some others do, yet you
find in your self a carfulness, and watchfulness over your ways, that
thou wilt'st not run into sin, though thou can not do what good thou
would: why, here is the smoke, and some fire, though but small; David was
not able to do as he was wont to do, to pray as he was Psalm. 5. 1. 12
wont, and therefore he prays God to restore him his spirit, and the joys he
was wont to have; but yet he was careful over his ways afterward: And if
thou findst but this smoke, this care over thy ways, this resolution to commit
no known sin, though thou findst not the flame of this holy affection, yet
be not discouraged, thou have that which is of the same nature within thee:
Smoke is of the same nature with flame, for flame is nothing but smoke set on
fire; and therefore take comfort, and continue constant still, till God
inflames thee, and that is the 3 sign.

Where there is true grace wrought, there is 4.
combat and strife in the working: and afterward till he bring forth
judgment into victory. Before victory there goes a combat: this then is
implied, Math. 18. 1.
there must be a strife. The Disciples strove amongst themselves who should be
the greatest in the kingdom of Heaven. This is a property of all his servants:
as Christ's kingdom is not of this world: so are they not apt to contend for
any thing in this world. But you may know if you be Christ's servants, or no, if
you contend for spiritual things. Strive to enter in at Luke 13, 24.
the straight gate, for many shall seek to enter in thereat, but shall not be
able. We see there are two dispositions of men, that some seek, and are
willing to go to Heaven, but take no pains for it; these seek says Christ,
to enter, but shall not be able to get in: but others strive and contend with
all their power, and such must be our strife, if we will get into Heaven. The
difference between the wise Virgins and the Math. 25.
foolish lay in this, that the wise were more diligent than the other. Formal
professors may contend, but it is but for a fit; they are soon weary of this
contention: they leave off rowing, and suffer the boat to go down the
stream: but we must strive until we get the victory, and run with St. Paul
until we get the prize. And what made 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25.
him to do so? why, he considered 2 things first, he looked on the Crown, an
incorruptible Crown. Secondly, he was loath to run in vain, and lose all his
labor so the reason why we do not contend, is because we do not consider
these 2 things, namely, the prize and crown of reward, and that else we shall
but lose our labor; and therefore we must strive: if we be remiss, it is an
argument that we have a name to live, but are dead.

And therefore consider it, there must be a strife and a combat; and there
will be that, by reason of that original corruption that is in us: We have
continual work with our own hearts; the flesh is ready to have the first
hand in every business, if we do not resist it; we shall exceedingly go
down the wind, if we do not strive, and that hard: For when there is an
infused habit as grace is, and a corrupt nature contrary to it, nature is ready
to take part with it, which was bred and borne with it. When I would Romans 7. 21.
do good, evil is still present with me: there is something lay at the
fountainehead, as it were, and stopped him, when he would do any good. It is
our case also; in well-doing we see how backward we are to begin, and when we
have begun, how ready we are to leave off. But if it be a business that
concerns our selves, we are ready to do, yea, to over-doe it: How ready we
are to idle words, how backward we are to profitable conference; how ready to
spend on our lusts, how backward to true liberality; and so I might instance
in diverse others. And therefore seeing we have this flesh about us, we had
need to strive; it is that which a Christian should make account of, to do
that which he has not a mind to do, and not to do that which he has a mind
to do; and so still to do the contrary, and strive against the lusts of the
flesh, and so to restrain his nature from what he would do.

But how should we do 1 Object.
to contend thus?

To give you some directions, Answ.
Fight the good fight of faith: The acting 1. Tim. 6. 12.
of our faith, and setting it on work when any thing comes to hinder us, will
help us to overcome in this combat. Let a man believe the promises and
threatenings of God, and he shall be able to resist the flesh: but let faith be
asleep, and it will quickly prevail against us: Take the shield of faith:
Now, Ephe. 6. 16.
what a shield is for the defense of the body, that faith is for the defense of
the soul. When any temptations are suggested unto us, faith is it that repells
them; never is a man overcome but through defect of faith, or when the habit
lies hid asleep in us. Heb. 11. When they set their faith on work, what
mavelous things did they! what made Jeroboam so weak, but only want of
faith: What was it that overcame Eve? but only that she did not believe
steadfastly the word of God. On the contrary, what was it that strengthened
Daniel, the three Children, and infinite others? it was their faith. The Saints
when they have the use of their faith, are very strong: but when they have not
the use of their faith are very weak, as other men; as Abraham, how weak was
he, when he exposed his wives chastity, for want of faith? and David when he
dissembled, and Peter when he denied his Master; but when he was strengthened
through faith, how bold was he before the council? it was his faith that
enabled him to fight the good fight, because he kept the faith, in the
profession of it, and in the practice of it, and in teaching of it: and
therefore if we would be strengthened to resist our spiritual enemies, we must
labor to set our faith on work, that is the first means.

The second means, St. 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Peter sets down: Dearly beloved I beseech you as strangers and Pilgrims
abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul. First consider that you
are but strangers and Pilgrims: for if you take the pleasures in the world,
you cannot sit by them, why? you are but strangers, therefore abstain from
them.

Again consider that these lusts they fight against the soul. No man in the
world, that did consider that such a man now knocked at the door, whom if he
did let in, would cut his throat, but that he would use all means to bar him
out: why this now is our case; they seek our lives, nay our souls, they
fight, there is their force, they seek to prevail by maine force if they can;
if they cannot, then they seek to proceed by fraud and cunning: they are ready
to persuade us, that they are friends, and not enemies, and that you may go to
heaven though you yield to them, and that you may quickly overcome them, that
if you satisfy them for the present, they will be gone, and trouble you no
more, and a thousand such like: but take heed, fight against them, keep them
out, not only for the present, for they renew the battle, as an enemy if he
be too weak at one time, in one place he increases his forces, takes more
advantages, and renews his battle again: so do these, they will set upon us
again and again with a fresh force, and if they cannot prevail one way, they
will try another way, and if they cannot do good by one, they will use all
ways.

And then consider the end of this fight, it is to kill and destroy, as we know
the end of a fight is: Now these lusts they fight against your soul, and
nothing will satisfy them but your life. Every time they set upon you, it is a
buffetting; every time you yield to the^, it is a wounding, and if you do not
resist and strive against them, they will procure your utter perdition. And
therefore I beseech you as strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts
which war against your souls.

Yes, I could be content to strive if there were any Object. 1.
hope of doing any good: but I am afraid I shall be overcome, and therefore as
good yield at the first, as at the last.

I answer, there is great hope, yea, assurance of victory, Answ.
wheresoever true grace is, though it may be held down long, and saffer many
oppositions: yet in the end he shall be sure of victory, till he bring forth
judgment into victory.

A fifth sign to know if 5.
there be saving grace, yea, or no; if there be, it shall at last have the
upper hand; but all through Christ, He that has begun that good Phil. 1. 6. 1
These. 5. 24.
work, will perfect it: For he will do it, for he is faithful, and in him we
are rich: 2 Cor. 8. 9.
through him we shall be more than conquerers, not through our selves; we are
apt to be discouraged, when we sit down and consider what corruptions we
have arising from our natures, which we think we shall never master. True,
we cannot do it in our own strength, but Christ has undertaken to do it for
us, he shall subdue our iniquities.

There are 2 things in the kingdom of Grace, which when we look on, are apt
to make us discouraged.

First, when a man looks 1.
on his own strength, and sees how little he can do of himself.

Secondly, when he looks on the Kingdom 2.
of Grace abroad, and sees how it goes down the wind, and how the wicked
prevail, and the godly are weak, and go to the wall: But Christ he will
afford us his strength against our lusts to subdue them, and for the enemies
of the Gospel, he will crample the^ all under his feet; it is his promise, He
will bring forth Judgment into victory. Now Christ does this 2 ways: first,
by watering the buds, the seeds of grace, and makes Esaias 44. 4.
them to spring up as Willowes by the water courses: his branches shall spread,
and his beauty shall be as the Hosea 14. 7.
Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon: they shall revive as the Corn, and grow
as the Olive, etc.

Secondly, by removing 2.
all these impediments, which hinder the growth of grace any way. And therefore
now let us not be discouraged, but make use of these promises of
Sanctification, which we are so apt to forget: And though we be as weak as a
bruised Reed, or as the smoking Flax, yet let us not faint, nor give over,
but be encouraged to strive, and contend without reasoning, seeing we are
sure the day shall be ours: for so is his promise, A bruised reed shall he
not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he bring forth
Judgment into victory.

FINIS.

