A SERMON PREAched at Eggington, in the County of Darby concerning the right
use of things indifferent, the 8. Day of August, 1596.

By SIMON PRESS Minister there.

Fear God, honor the King. 1. Peter. 2.17. Printed at Oxford by Joseph
Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bible.
1597.

TO HIS LOVING PARIshioners Mr. F. COOK, R. JOHNSON, W. WALTON, R. KNIGHT, I.
GYLLYVER and R. SLYGH increase of true zeal and endless felicity.
When I understood your attention in the heating of this sermon, and
diligence in noting certain principal points, and pains in conferring to
give, penning, acquainting and sending your collections unto many your
worshipful friends, and at the length unto the right honorable Sir Edmund
Anderson knight. Lord chief Justice of the common Pleas, with intent (as I
guess) to make my simple skill liked and allowed of them, I thought it my duty
to accept your endeavor very kindly, and to requite you with procuring the same
sermon to be imprinted, that all men might give you deserved commendations, and
note your names amongst the number of vigilant hearers to your immoratall
praise. Thus, not doubting of your good acceptance of the same, I end.
Eggington, the 28. of January.

Yours, Simon Press.

For if any man see thee that have knowledge, etc. 1. Cor. 8.10.11.12.13.
THe occasion of these words was this. When Paul as a father, had begotten
the Corinthia^s unto Christ, by the preachinge of the gospel, upon the sudde^
there crept in certain, who perverted the strait way of the Lord, seeking to
draw disciples unto themselves, and prevailed so much, that they had won them
to the bent of their bow: for some would follow this teacher, and some that,
wherewith many godly men among the^ were sore grieved, and signified the sa^e
unto the Apostle by their letters: And with all moved diverse doubts whereof one
was, concerning meats sacrificed to idols, whereunto he answers in this
chapter, and in this order. First, he reproves them, that upon an
overweening conceit of their own knowledge, used the same without charity.
Secondly, he declares that the meat sacrificed unto Idols, was of the number
of those things which are by nature mere indifferent, and of themselves, do
neither hinder nor further the salvation of him that uses them. And thirdly,
he reports the rashness of them, that use such things to the offense of
others, as in this text at large is declared. The sum whereof is thus much,
that we ought so discreetely to behave our selves in our christian liberty,
that we do not thereby offend our weak brother. The parts whereof are these.

1. The manner how, they used their liberty to the offense of others. verse. 10.

2. The Apostles reasons to dissuade them from that practice. verse. 11.12.13.
which reasons are threefold. The first is drawn from the hurt that is done to
our brother ver. 11. The second from the persons, against whom he sins.
verse. 12. And the third he draws from his own resolution. 13.

Now to the first part.

1. The manner how they used their liberty to the offense of others.

For if any man see thee that have knowledge. etc. verse. the 10. As if he had
said thus in plain terms. There are amongst you Corinthians, some, that so
much presu^e of their own knowledge that without regard of their weak brethren
run into the Idols temples, and there eat the meats that have been
sacrificed unto Idols, and thereby encourage them by eating to give the same
reverence to the Idol, which they did, before they were converted unto Christ.

Out of these words, If any man see thee. We observe first that a christian
ought to be well advised in the practice of things indifferent, who sees him,
least he should offend his weak brother by the want of due consideration: the
reason whereof is this, that if he omit this duty, he brings a curse
upon himself which is to heavy for all the world to bear, as our savior
Christ forewarneth. It cannot be avoided but that offenses will come, but woe
be to him by whom they come. It were better for him that a great millstone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea, then that he
should offend one of these little ones. Luke 17.1.2. Therefore it is very
necessary that we should regard them that look upon our actions. There are
2. sorts of lookers upon us, 1. God: 2. his creatures. God, in every action
looks upon the intent of the heart, in whose sight nothing is good, except it
be done in sinceritye and obedience to his will. Deuteronomy. 12.32. 1. Sam. 16.7.
Proverb. 23.26. Therefore in regard of God, our actions are not well done when
they are well done outwardly, but when the fountain, I mean, the heart is
pure and vncorrupt. For no stream is sweet, which comes from a sower spring.

The second sort of beholders are Gods creatures. And they are either
celestial, or terrestrial. The celestial are the angels, who behold not
only us in earth, but also the face of God in heaven, Math. 18.10. And are
ready to protect or to punish as execudors of his will. Psalm. 34.7. and 103.20.
Heb. 1.14. Which is manifested by Senacheribs host, and by the deliverance of
Elisha besieged in Dothan 2. Reg. 19.35. and 6.17. Therefore as thou ought
by reason of the angel to te^per thy tongue from evil words, so ought thou
to be careful of thy actions in his sight Eccles. 5.5.

The terrestrial creatures that behold us, are either unreasonable, or endued
with reason. The unreasonable creaturs, that behold us, ought to affray us,
lest, as Balaams Ass had a man's voice give^ him to reprove the foolishnes of
his master: so these should be produced against us as witnesses of our
actions which we have done in their presence. For if it be so that a man
ought not to curse the king, no not in his thought, least the fowls of the
air bewray him: how much more should we be affraide, to do any thing against
the will of our God, in the sight of his creatures, whether sensles or
sensible, Eccles. 10.20. The reasonable creatures that behold us on this earth,
are divided by S. Paul into 2. sorts. 1. Cor. 4.9. Whereof the former is called
the world. The latter men. By the world, he understands the wicked of the
world: that as they live in the world so they delight in and love the same,
nether can like any thing that suits not to their worldly affections. These
men, though they can for their advantage, pretend much holiness, yet they
intend the overthrow of religion, with the preaching and practice thereof. Now
for them no man that has God and a good conscience, to be witnesses of his
well doing, needs to care, but ought to go one, in the same whatsoever they
say to the contrary as our savior by his works and words has taugh us.
Math. 15.12.13.14. The men beholders, are either weak in the faith, or strong
in the faith: the weak in the faith, are either such as are offended with the
using of things indifferent, or such as are offended with the refusing of the
same. The former sort are such as be persuaded, that the word of God and
sacraments, are profaned, where things of their own nature indifferent, but
heretofore abused in the time of Popery, are used. And these men had rather
fly from the word, then be present to see such a ceremony as the surples
worn as by experience I knew 600. men and women fly from a sermon, because
the surplesse was worn in the sermon time, such men are indeed weak, for
they will either have Christ naked or none of him at all, not considering, that
the kingdom of God stands not in any outward thing. Romans 14.17, 18.

The weak of the other sort are they who be so addicted to the ceremonies,
that either they will have them used or else they will not hear the word, nor
receive the sacraments. Yea they are resolved, that the word and sacraments
are betiered by the ceremonies and made of less force without them. These men
must have Christ in what garment pleases them, or they will have none of him
at all. Now what must a minister do in this case, shall he, hand over head use
or refuse the ceremonies? I trow not. But must teach both these their
weaknesses, by declaring unto them, that the commanders and vrgers of
ceremonies are of two sorts, and they have either of them a several end of
their commandment. The one sort of commanders, and vrgers are the Pope and
his adhere^ts, the end of whose commandment is to bind men's consciences unto
the use of ceremonies upon pain of damnation. Yea they will not stick to
pursue to death such as refuse any one of their ceremonies: and by this means
many a poor wretch is driven, for fear of one wicked man, to use such things
against his own conscience, and with the grievous offense of the weak: both
which are intolerable sins, against himself that does the thing, against his
weak brother that sees the thing done, and against Christ the head of the
mystical body. Any one of which offenses is sufficient to cause a good
christian to resolve with himself, never to use the surplesse or any such
ceremony in such a case. For, God forbid that such co^maunders and vrgers of
ceremonies as are the popes friends, should draw a man into the danger of his
own soul, whereas we are taught rather to obey God then men, Acts. 5.29.
and to go forward in our calling without fear what man can do unto us.

The other sort of commanders and vrgers are christian princes, and such as
are substituted of them, who command and urge such things, because no church
government can stand without some ceremonies. And it is thought fit by them,
that in one and the same region and regiment, one uniform order should be
used, which otherwise being left, to the discretion of every private man,
there would be as great variety and alteration in ceremonies, as there is in
apparel. To prevent which disorder, certain ceremonies are still retained by
the Queens most excellent majesty (whom God long preserve) not to bind men's
consciences with fear of da^natio^, but to train all her subjects in due
obedience, respecting this end, that according to the Apostles doctrine, all
things may be done comely and in order. For as disorder in the common wealth is
dangerous. So much more in the church of God: for thereby men are brought from
superstition to no religion, a thing in these last days much to be regarded.
But some men will ask, what if the things commanded by the prince, have been
heretofore abused in the time of superstition, may we then use them with a good
conscience? I answer yea, if the thing commanded be one of Gods creatures,
when the superstition is removed and it restored to the original without
offense to his conscience that uses the same, the people being taught, the
indifferency of the thing, viz, that it is not forbidden in the word, neither
by express commandment, nor by necessary consequence then it may be used,
without grudge or scruple of conscience. As for example, the censors which the
conspiratours against Moses and Aaron abused, were lawfully made a covering for
the altar of the lord Numb. 16. And also the bullock fedd. 7. years to be
sacrificed to Baall, was now sacrificed to the lord with the wood of the
grove, and by the lord accepted. For the abuse was taken away, the thing was
brought back to his original, and then used in the service of the lord, and
not by him rejected. So must we deal in the practice of things indifferent
to cut of occasion from them that seek occasion, that God in all things may be
glorified, the prince obeyed, superstion banished, the people edified and the
peace of the church preserved. Thus shall the weak of neither sort, have any
just cause to be offended with our using of things indifferent. And thus much
of the^ that are weak in the faith.

The other sort, namely the strong in the faith, know the right use of
things indifferent, as well as he that uses them him self. For as they cannot
be greeved with the use, so will they not be offended with the want of such
things. But when they are practiced these men remember the obedience due unto
princes. And when not used they call to mind that the word of God is neither
bettered by them, nor made worse with the want of them. Where a man has such
to look upon him, he may without scruple of conscience use the ceremonies, to
show his obedience to christian princes. Wherefore to conclude, let every man in
the use of things indifferent measure his actions toward his weak brother by
charity; let his charity proceed of faith, and his faith abhor the Pope,
and bring forth true obedience to his prince, not so much for fear of
punishment, as for conscience sake. So shall he neither offend his brother,
his prince, nor his God. And then needs he not to care who sees him, to
practice things indifferent. And thus much of the first observation.

If any man see thee. etc. In these words again our Apostle covertlie gives a
caveat to every man to take heed to his eyes, lest by them he be unboldened
to imitate such things as are wrought in his sight. From whence we learn,
that sin enters into our souls by our eyes as light into an house by yt
window: for the eye vieweth the object, and sendes it by degrees into the
heart; the heart po^dereth upon the report, yields consent, and sets the
eye on work to perform the hearts desire. And hereof it comes yt our savior
Christ says, a wicked eye mommeth out of the heart, and defiles the man. Mark.
7.22. Yea and proceeds further, affirming that he who looks upon a woman
and lusts after her, has committed adultery already with her in his
hearie. Math. 5.28. Herevppon David makes this earnest prayer, turn away mine
eyes, O lord, from regarding vanity. Psalm. 119.37. Wherefore it is good for
us, rather then thus to offend by them, to pluck them out and cast them from
us, Math. 18.9. which course if our great grandmother Hevah had taken, when
she looked upon the apple, she had not so soon yielded unto satan, neither
intised her husband to do the like, nor inwrapped mankind in ye insufferable,
and yet unavoidable curse of God, Genesis 3.6. The sons of God that beheld the
bewty of the daughters of men and chose them wives by sight, not by virtue were
a great cause of the general deluge. Genesis 6.2. David had little joy a great
while of that sight of Bathsheba. His sweet meat had very sower sauce, 2.
Sam. 11. and 12. per totum. Wherefore let everye man be admonished with Job to
make a covenant with his eyes, not to look upon any unlawful thing. And if
he cannot rule them, let him pluck them out that they may not be an
impediment to his soul. And thus much of this second observation.

That have knowledge etc. The Apostle here notes that men of knowledge may
abuse the same to the hurt of others and so make that exellent quality hurtful
to them selves, and to them with whom they converse. From whence this
observation naturally arises, that, that which is commanded in the substance,
may be made sin in the circumstance. For God will have all our actions to be
suitable to his will, both in matter and form, otherwise they are not good in
his sight. For it is not enough to do that which he commands except we do
it as he commands the same to be done. Moses and Aaron are commended, not
only for observing the commandment, but also because that as the lord
commanded Moses and Aaron, even so did they, Exodus 7.6. Our savior Christ
(when he had washed his disciples feet) bids them, not only to do that
which he had done, but also as he had done, John. 13.14.15. For as well the
form as the matter must concur in every action. Wherefore if you mark it,
you shall perceive that every thing has his limitation. Out of which compass
virtue is turned into vice, as for example alms deeds, prayer and fasting, are
commanded and commended by Christ Jesus, yet may they be wrought and not be
acceptable unto God, as our savior manifestly declares, Mat. 6. from the 1.
verse unto the 18. for there we may see, that if he who gives alms, cause a
trumpet to be blown before him, or desire to be seen of men, or to be
praised of them, he is gone out of the compass and has lost his reward.
Prayer is commended likewise and the form thereof set down: but he that
prays, must not run into the streets and open places to be viewed and
praised of men, neither may he use vain repetitions, as the papists, nor much
babbling as the heathen. Fasting also is a preparatiue unto many virtues, but
yet a man may neither look sower, nor disfigure his face to be seen of men,
nor think to make God indebted unto him for his fasting, as though he had
need of it. Knowledge in like sort is commanded in the scipture, and we are
commanded to call after knowledge, to cry for understanding, to seek for it as
for silver, and to search for it as for treasures, Pro. 2.3.4. yea and to
account our selves happy when we find it, for ignorance is very hateful
unto God and hurtful unto me^. Yet for all that, knowledge must keep her
self within her bonds, she must not puff him up that possesses her, she must
have charity her companion and guide. And howsoever she may show her self in
her dime^sions unto her acquaintance, yet unto strangers, that is, the
ignorant, she must make her self known by little and little, as they are able
to receive her to their edification, and not to their destruction. For she must
be to the ignorant as milk to babes. To the weak, as herbs to sickly
stomachs, and to the strong as strong meat for men. And to evry one as they
are able to abide her, that at the length, by her they may be won unto the
lord. For have her they must in some measure, or else heaven will be not
habitation for them. For knowledge is the mother and daughter of faith. And is
so associated unto faith, yt none can be saved but such as believe and come to
the knowledge of the truth. 1. Tim. 2.4.1. Pet. 1.9. And what should I say
more, the case is clear. Whatsoever thou do, be it never so good in
substance; yet may thou mar it in circu^sta^ce. Be it never so holy in the
matter, yet may thou so soil it in ye manner of doing, yt the lord may justly
aborre it, though he have commanded thee to do it, because it is not done as
he commands. And thus much of the third observation.

Sit at table in the Idols temple. Our Apostle would have the Idolatrous place
and persons avoided, as where and among whom no good can be gotten to a man's
self and much evil may be susspected to come thereby. For often it comes
to pass, that with whom we converse familiarly in worldely things, by him
we are drawn, either from our profession, or from the former zeal, we were
wont to have there in, besides the corruption of our manners. Whereby we are
taught this necessary lesson, to be curious of the place and company we keep,
lest we corrupt our faith and defile our manners. For he that touches pitch
shall be defiled there with, which the lord foresaw and therefore made this
proclamation by the prophet, depart, depart ye, go out from thence, and
touch noe unclean thing, go out of the midest of her, be clean ye that
carry the vessels of the lord, Isa. 52.11. And this caused our Apostle to urge
a separation between the godly and ungodly. 2. Cor. 6.14.15. Lot must pack
out of Sodom Genesis 19.17. The congregation of the Lord must separate themselves
from the tents of Corah, Dathan and Abiron, Numb. 16.26. Iehoshaphat is wondered
at by the prophet, that he will help the wicked and like their company that
hate the lord. 2. Paral. 19.2. what does all this teach us, but that we ought
to be curious with whom we keep company, lest thereby we not only hurt our
selves but offend the Lord. But some men will say, do ye absolutely condemn
accompanying with the wicked? I answer no. For as a Physician may be in the
company of the sick, having this end to heal them, so may a good man be in
the assembly of the wicked, having this purpose to win them unto the Lord. So
Christ kept company with the publicans and sinners, not allowing of their life,
but persuading them to amendment. And when he was carped at by the malicious,
he defended his doings by three arguments. The first drawn from the need yt
the parties had of him with whom he conversed. The second he drew from the
disposition of the lord, who is more delighted with mercy showed in the
conversion of a sinner then with all other sacrifices. And the third argument
he draws from the end of his office, which was to call sinners to
repentance. Math 9.12.13. Wherefore in such cases we may lawfully keep
company with sinners, without hurt unto our selves, and with much profit unto
them. Otherwise we ought to observe the gene^rall doctrine to be curious of
the place and persons with whom we keep company, lest we hurt our selves and
do them no good. And thus much of the fourth observation.

Shall not the conscience of him that is weak be boldened to eat, etc. Our
Apostle foreseeing that small offenses would grieve and perplex the weak,
admonishes the Corinthians to have a special regard not to trouble such
co^scie^ces with the abusing of their knowledge. From hence we learn, that
such as make conscience of every thing which they do, must circumspectly be
dealt with, lest they be led out of the way, or be driven to despair by a
matter of it self of small importance. For there are some that yield
themselves so humbly unto the word preached, that when any thing is denounced,
their heart melts and their flesh trembles. And though it be not applied by
the preacher, yet they apply it very strictly unto them selves. And if any
fault whereof they are guilty be amplified, or a comfort not presently
ministered, they are in the horrors of death, and brought almost into
desperation. Now because these are the best people, and the nearest to the
kingdom of God, Psalm. 51.17. Isa. 66.2. Math. 11.28. We ought to be most
careful of them, and to remove all stumbling blocks out of their way. As for
example, if they have a great zeal but not according to knowledge we must
gently and charitably instruct them without wrangling disputations: As we are
taught, him that is weak in the faith receive unto you: but not with
controversies of disputations, Romans 14.1. And if he, (by the subtlety of
Satan) be prevented with a fault (as who is free from falling) we must not
aggravate or amplify the same, but follow that rule which the holy ghost
teaches. Brethren, if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which
are spiritual, restore such a one by the spirit of meekenes considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one an others burden and so
fulfill the law of Christ, Gal. 6.1.2. We which are strong, ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves, Romans 15.1. For if
it be David that has sinned, tell him but of it, and he will confess it,
and be woe at the heart for it, thou need not to dwell much upon it. And if
it be Peter that has done amiss, let Christ but lack back upon him, he
will go out forthwith and weep bitterly. Therefore such tender consciences,
must choisely be dealt withal, lest they be swallowed up of over much
sorrow. And thus much of the fifth observation.

Those things that are offered unto Idols. Our Apostle in these words makes
it evident, that there is a 2. fold eating of that which is sacrificed unto
Idols. For one man has knowledge, and thereby is instructed, that the meat
which he eats has been sacrificed to Idols, yet is neither bettered nor
made worse thereby. An other man that wants knowledge, makes conscience of
the meat and thinks that it is much bettered by the sacrificing, and so his
conscience being weak is defiled. Therefore the Apostle restrains the former
from using his liberty, until the latter be further instructed, in the right
use of such things. From whence we may draw this doctrine: that a man, who
either has or wants knowledge, may by the indiscreet carriage of himself,
in the use of things indifferent, make that sin, which God has neither
commanded nor forbidden in his word. He that has knowledge may sin one
way, that is, by using his liberty, to the offense of an other christian that
is weak. Unto him therefore, it must often be inculcated, destroy not the
work of God for meate-sake. All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for
the man that eats with offense. It is good neither to eat flesh nor to
drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth or is offended or made
weak, Romans 14.20.21. Therefore he offends God, that wittingly and willingly
gives offense unto the weak, by the using of things indifferent. Now he that
wants knowledge may offend in the use of things indifferent three ways.

First, if he use the same unto an other end the^ for which it was ordained of
God. As if a man use this meat and refuse that, use this garment, and refuse
that, thinking thereby to please God, he indeed sins against him. For he
must understand that the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but
righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy ghost. For whosoever in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable unto God and approved of men. Romans
14.17.18. For every creature of God is good and none to be refused, if it be
received with giving of thanks. 1. Tim. 4.4. Wherefore he that inventeth an
holyer use of Gods creatures then that whereunto they were ordained, does as it
were set God to school than which, what can be more malapartly done. Isa.
40.13.14. secondly they that want knowledge may offend in the use of things
indifferent thus: as if they have a resolute opinion, that the use of such
things offends God, and yet will go on in the practice thereof, against
their own conscience, they indeed, grevously offend against God. For to him
that judges any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, Romans 14.14. And
if a man's own conscience condemn him of disobedience, who can absolve him, 1.
Io. 3.20. And thirdly he that wants knowledge, may offend his God thus, when
he proposes a thing by himself to be done, and doubts whether he shall
do well or ill in the doing of the same, yet for some outward respect he puts
the same thing in execution. For he that doubts is condemned if he eat,
because he eats not of faith. And whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans
14.23. Therefore in the name of Christ Jesus, let both strong and weak look
warely to their actions, that they offend neither God, their weak brethren,
nor their own consciences. And thus much of the first part.

The second part contains the reasons to move men to be circumspect in the
carriage of themselves in the matter of things indifferent. Whereof the first is
this that he that omitteth this duty shall cause him to perish for whom
Christ died, verse 11. the second extends it self unto the persecuting of
Christ Jesus for whatsoever is done unto any one of his church, he takes as
done unto himself, verse. 12. And last of all he that omitteth this duty
opposes himself against Paul's resolution who was guided by the spirit of God.
And thus much at this time. Let us pray etc.


