THE LAW OVT LAVVED OR, The Charter of the Gospel showing the privilege and
prerogative of the Saints by virtue of the Covenant.

Wherein these four points of doctrine are properly observed, Plainly proved,
both by Scripture, and reason: and pithily applied. VIZ: Doctrine 1 That he
that is in the state of grace lies in no known sin, no sin has dominion
over him. 2 That sin though it does not reign in the Saints, yet it does
remain and dwell in them. 3 That the way to overcome sin, is to get
assurance of the Love, and grace, and favor of God, whereby it is forgiven
them. 4 That whosoever is under the Law, sin has dominion over him.


By that late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ. JOHN PRESTON.
Doctor in divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel
College in Cambridge, and sometimes preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that you should obey
the lusts thereof,

Romans 6.12. EDINBVRGH Printed by John Wreittoun. 1631.

Romans. 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not
under the law, but under grace.


THese words are brought in thus, the Apostle exhortes them not to sin, but
to give their members as instruments unto righteousness, and to move them to
this, he tells them that sin was not their Lord now as it was heretofore, and
that it shall have no more dominion over them, and therefore he bids them
strive against it: and then he adds a reason of this, because they were not
under the law, but under grace, now Christ has changed their hearts. for while
a man is under the Law, sin has dominion over him, it tells him what to do,
but gives him no power to do it, but you have the grace of sanctification to
change your hearts, and enable you to every good word and work, so that you
delight in the Law, after the inner man, albeit you see another law in your
members roaring against the Law in your mind, and bringing you into captivity
to the law of sin, which is your members, as it is said, in the 7. chapter, and
the 23. verse.

Whence we may learn?

That he that is in the state of grace, lies in no known sin, Doct.
no sin has dominion over him.

Now sin is said to have no Dominion over a man, three manner of ways, viz.
in regard

Q It has no right to rule over him, it is no more our Lord, but is as a
servant that has no dominion, but is said to offer violence to us, as if the
King of Spain should rule over us, he has no dominion over us.

Secondly, In regard its not obeyed, for there it has dominion, as a Prince
may have right to a kingdom, yet he be not obeyed, he has no dominion.

Thirdly in regard though it strive against us, yet it never gets the victory,
for though it assault us, yet if it get not the victory it has no

(...) But, besides these scriptures there be other reasons to prove that the
regenerat man cannot lie in any known sin,

Reas.
First, because he that lies in any known sin: has another for his Lord and
God, and so is an Idolater, and so cannot be regenerate, for he yields to
the same still, if it commands, he obeys, God commanding him, he neglects
it, and therefore makes it his God.

Reas,
Secondly because he lies in any known sin, will be unconstant in the
serving of God, now God rejects such an one, for though the temptation to
that sin, being removed he serve God, yet that sin setting upon him, he
forsakes Gods service, and obeys it, and when soever occasion is offered, he
turns to obey it, now such unconstancy God hates, as among men a flower
though it more beautyfull then a pearl, yet it is not regarded so much because
it is fading, and a ship may sail safe a great while, but yet falling upon a
rock makes shipwreck of faith and good conscience, and such a one cannot be
in the state of grace.

Reas,
Thirdly. because he that lies in any known sin, will if he had like
strong temptations commit all the sins in the world, as be a man inclined to
covetousnes or uncleannes, he would commit any other if he were as much
inclined to any other, now such an one cannot be in the state of grace.

Fourthly because if a man have a good heart, no sin can grow there, because it
is out of its proper place, and therefore cannot prosper as plants that grow in
India if they be set here wither, so every sin in a good heart is out of
its proper place, and will not grow but wither every day more and more, but he
that finds sin growing in his heart, his heart is not regenerat.

Reas,
Fifthly because he must hate the word of God and godly men, for when a man is
ready to commit sin, the word is at him to dissuade him, godly men dissuade
him, and therefore now if he do it and they still rebuke him, he comes to
account the word a reproach and he hates it and good men likewise, Thus John
is Herod's friend a great while, till he tells him of his beloved s^^, and then
off goes head, so they hate God and wish that there were none, because he
resolves to sin, and God reproves him, and so he cannot be in a good
estate:

Reas,
Sixthly and lastly, because all his actions will have an evil tincture from
that his sin, it so weyeth all he does, so that nothing is current in Gods
sight. As if a man were set to get honor, though he did not directly fall into
that sin, yet he squareth all his actions that way, he affects such persons
that may further that his intent, so that sin leaveneth every action of his,
and whenever any act of religion opposes him, he then forsakes all, as if a
man have a project to get a harvest that is not yet come, all that he does is
for that end, he ploweth, sows, and the like, so it is with a man that has a
sin and resolves to follow it, he by-useth all his actions by that, therefore
God abhorres him: and all that he does.

First this is to try us, Use.
every man may know if he be in the state of grace or no, if he lies in the
least known sin that is, he is but counterfeit, if though he be admonished
and told, that God will not have him to do such a thing, yet he does it: its a
sign he is not in a good estate, as if a man knew, and were persuaded, he
ought not to abound in idle speeches, and yet will, it is a sign he is not in
the state of grace, so when he is commanded he ought to pray and yet does it
not, or does it only for show, its a sign he is in a bad estate, for if he
knew its a sin to be idle, and it comes into his mind that he should not,
and is persuaded of it, and yet will; its a sign his estate is not good, so as
for immoderat gaming, if one be told he should not, yet will use it, all
carriage is naught, certainly he is bad, so for the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, when a man shall spend all his time,
and find all his thoughts bent that way for any one of them, certain it is his
heart is not gracious, for then these thoughts would not abound in him, but
thoughts of growing in grace, but if his morning thoughts be for satisfying of
the flesh and the lusts thereof, or his secrets plots, he may justly fear its
a reigning sin, for when all his projects and thoughts, are upon one thing,
as to be in fine apparel, its certain sin reigns in him, and so he is in
the state of damnation, as a scholar that wholly aims at vain glory, and how
to get honor and credit, that sin reigns in him.

But there were many which seemed religious men which had these infirmities in
them in the scriptures. Obs,


True, and many therefore not truly regenerated, Ans,
but seeming only so, now many youths make a fair show, under the means, when
faling into temptations fall away, but if they be not commanded or think of
it, great faults may stand with true grace, but if they be admonished by their
conscience or others, and told they must not do it, then their estate is not
good, for true grace cannot stand with these failings.

Now the signs whereby we may know, whether we live in known sins or not,
are these,

(...) Paul speaks of the heathen, that they had a conscience that did accuse
excuse them, but when a man does not commit sin, being enlightened by a
spiritual conscience, which is when a man has a love to the contrary grace,
and is carried with a certain desire to do it (as men eat) though there were
no reward, and hate the sin and will not commit it, but a man may have a
restraint from a natural conscience, yet it may have dominion over him,
because it is as a barking dog, that keeps the thief robbing.

When a man First does not purpose to commit the sin. Secondly has reluctance
in the committing of it. Thirdly grieveth afterward, and rises with a better
resolution not to do it.


But if this proceeded from a natural conscience it is nothing, but (...)
proceed from a spiritual conscience and hatred of sin, this is a good sign.

Nintly, when after striving we have the victory, for we shall have the victory
if we strive aright, this taks way their excuse, that say its their
infirmities, but if they lie not in sin, they will have the victory over it, else
thou art not a King, for a King is victorious, yet a King may have rebels, yea
he may be wounded yet he keeps his power. So the saints may have many
infirmities, yea they may have sound fails, yet in the end they have the
victory. God shall tread Satan under their feet wherefore the Godly man's heart
though he fails sometimes is like a troubled fountain, which though it be
muddy, yet because their is a spring of grace in his heart, it works it self
pure again, and works out all the mud, therefore content not your selves with
dislike of sin but leave not till you have got the victory.

Tenthly, Observe whether thou delightest in those, commit the same sins, if
you do you ly in sin whatsoever you pretend, they do not only these things,
Rom 1 last,
but have pleasure in those do them which is a sign of a desperate heart, for
a man may be drawn to sin by passion, yet his heart may be upright, but when
he allows, and loves it another, then there is no passion to lead him, but
its a sign his heart is bent to it, for its a sign of grace, when you love
those excel in grace, its a sign your hearts are good, so on the contrary its
a sign of a corrupt and rotten heart, when we rejoice in iniquity, as for
example, suppose a man have a lust of uncleannes, yet disliketh it on another,
and likes these that excel in the contrary virtue, and grace, its a sign he
is in a good estate, and this is true, because in another a man has no passion
to lead him away.

Eleventhly, when a man shall commit a sin, clean to the contrary after
persuasion, and long deliberation, that is taken from Jeroboam example Saul and
Ahab, these committed their sins but once or twice as Saul had a commandment
from Samuel not to do it, he had many days deliberation upon it, yet he did
which lost him his soul. David committed greater sins, yet God counted them
nothing, because he did not cast God away but Saul had cast off, so Jeroboam
set up the calfe on deliberation and contrary to the persuasion of the prophet,
therefore God cast him off. This was Balams sin who deliberated what he should
do, yet having a secret desire of reward, did curse Israel which made God cast
him off, this was the sin of Francis Spira who was smitten for committing of a
sin of deliberation.

Thirteenely and lastly, when a man shall make no conscience of small particular
sins, wherein his Judgment is convicted that they are sins, its a sign sin
has dominion over him, this is plain by scripture, he that is not faithful
in the greatest, he may do it, yet not be faithful. Again by reason, if a
small sin be a sin against God, then why make you conscience of the least, for
God is offended with these as well as with the greatest, so if ye make
conscience of the greatest of the duties of Gods worship, why do you not also
of the least duties? Luke 1^,
for God is pleased with these, as well as with the other, some say they will
be religious, but they need not be so prease as some scrupulous men are, but
let them examine themselves, if the least sins be sins, they must also make
conscience of them, so if we must keep an hour of the Sabbath, there is the
same reason of the rest of the hours, so for idle speeches, and fashioning of
themselves to the world, so if we seek for preferment or riches, it is
contrary to the commandment of God, seek not to be rich, for they drown
themselves in perdition and destruction, so we must not keep company with
evil and unsanctified men, examine how we practice this in all duties
commanded, let us try our selves by abstaining from occasions, whether we
refrain our selves from the temptations of objects, for our speech must be
gracious, not by fits, but always, so we must be diligent in our callings, 1
Pet, 4.
if out of conscience we do this we are faithful, otherwise we are not, for
the same God which commanded not us to kill, commanded us not to commit
adultery, if then thou committest adultery thou offendest God, so Moses would
not leave an hoof behind him in Egypt, because God commanded him so to do,
know you not that no unrighteous man shall inherit the Kingdom of God, so if
we abstain from foul sins, 1 Cor, 9, ^^
yet if (...) not presently judge them to be hypocrites: Be not many masters,
says S. James. that is censure him not, for he stands or falls to his
own conscience.

Rom, 14, 4.
3. This should teach us to be watchful, and not to think our labor is at an
end when we are in the state of grace, for sin still dwells in us, and
though we have the victory over sin one day, it will fight against us the
next day, as in a garden the weeds will grow, because the roots are not
quite plucked up, and taken away, so sin is in us, and therefore we must
think it will fight against us and vex us, and therefore I say, let us renew
our strength.

Now for this we must do these two things. First weaken sin. Secondly pray
to God to make us watchful.


And so I have also done with the second doctrine, again from the latter part
of these words, or reason of the promise made unto them in in the former part
of this verse, that sin shall not have dominion over them, because they are not
under the Law, but under grace, I gather this conclusion, viz.

That the way to overcome sin, is to get assurance of the love and grace of
God, Doct, 3
and that it is forgiven them, the reason why the Apostle promises them sin
shall not have dominion over them, is because they are not under the law but
under grace, that is, they had assurance of Gods love, and that it is forgiven
them, this is proved from that faith purifieth the heart, and you repent and
believe the gospel.

Gal 3, 2
Now the reasons hereof are these four especially,

Q. Because it is the means to get the spirit, without which no sin is
forgiven, which comes by faith, for it is not received by the law, for so
says the apostle, received you the spirit by the works of the law or by the
deeds of faith. Ans.


Secondly, the way to make us believe the promises, to make us believe that we
are transformed into a heavenly nature, Reas.
for when we believe the promises are true, that works love in us, and love
transformeth us into the divine nature, without which no sin is overcome.

Reas,
Thirdly because hereby we are able to resist the tentations which are either,
for the enjoying of good, or sleing of evil, so that these promises propound
more good, then sin can harm, sin threatened the love of outward things, but
the promises propound eternal life, which is better then all things else in
the world.

Fourthly, because we do delight in God, Use. 1,
for when we do believe in God that our sins are forgiven us in Christ, then
we look at God, as on a merciful Father, and then we cease to delight in
the world, and we begin to delight our selves in the Lord.

1. First, for direction to teach us the way how to heal a sin, Use, 1
and that it is to get assurance that is pardoned and forgiven, for legal
terrors do not heal a sin, but is faith that purifies the heart, and
purifying pacifies it: as a Traitor will not come in, when he hears a
proclamation out for his death, but when he hears he shall ^ive and be
pardoned, this makes him to come in, so we when we only fix our eyes upon the
legal terrors, we shall not heal our sins, but when we believe they are
pardoned, this heales them.

But sorrow and a broken heart are required, Object.
for sinners to be assured of their forgivennes.

This sorrow is not so much commanded, Ans;
but it is that whereby God prepares his servants hearts, to make them see
what need they have of pardon and so they may ask pardon, but the sorrow
commanded is that which follows belief, for the more I believe the promises,
the more I shall grieve for displeasing him. Quest.


But what is the way to get assurance of the forgivennes of our sins may some
say?

I answer that that be done which is to be done on our part. Ans,
believed which God has promised


Q, The things to be done on our part, are these,

Confession plainly and truly we must confess them to God, and to man, when
we our selves cannot overcome them,

Secondly, contrition) which is when a man is not stubborn, and resists Gods
will, and will please himself, to get his heart broken, Hab, 6, 2,
and he says as saint Paul says. Lord what will thou have me to do? and then
we are subject to his will, to him will I look that is of a contrite heart.

Thirdly, desertion), or forsaking of sin, for he that forsakes not his sins
shall not prosper, which is when we having the like occasions, Pro, 2 ^
yet will not give way to him, but follow our own lusts.

Secondly, That that be believed which God has promised and that is, that as
he has said; he will forgive our sins, upon such and such conditions, so we
believe it, and to make us to do this, these motions may persuade us. motiv^


Q. Because he is merciful, in whose mercy there are three things, (...) give
our sins, that we may believe it.

But I have committed the sin often.

Ans
Yet God will forgive thee, though thou have often committed whooredome, yet I
will forgive thee, if thou turn unto me says the Lord, by the Prophet of the
house of Israel. Ier. 3.

Hence then to make some use of it, as our use is, we may learn not to deceave
our selves, ^o think we are in the state of grace, when we are not, Use
for if we did truly believe our sins are forgiven us, we would be healed, but
if we have the same lusts, and keep the same company, which we did when we were
not changed, it is a mere delusion, what soever we say or think.

And thus much for the third point too, there yet remains one more behind,
wherewith we will conclude the whole text, and that we may draw from the
contrary, to what the Apostle here says, and indeed it is employed, though not
expressed. for if sin have no dominion over them that are not under the law but
under grace, then on the other side must it needs be as true. viz

That whosoever is under the law, sin has dominion over him, that is, ^oct, 4,
he that refraineth sin only for fear of the law, and of judgemnets, sin has
dominion over him, this is the case of them that refrain sinning, only for
fear and for the salvation of their souls, or for educations sake, which have
been brought up in good families, or such as repent upon some amazement, like
the bulrushes which hang down their heads only while the shower lasts, and
that,

First because all such as are not under grace, but under the law have not
received the spirit, Reas,
which comes by hearing the gospel, and no creature can change one creature
into another. as lead unto gold, or a Wolf unto a Lamb, unles it be by Gods
spirit.

Secondly, to such Gods service is burdensome, and violent motions last not
long: they are weary in clamtering up an Hill, all natural motions are swifter
at the last then at the first, but these are like the Israelites who after a
time, would have returned into EGYPT again.

Now then to end all with the time, let us

(...)
Q Be exhorted not to abstain from any sin, for fear of punishment, but
consider whether thou would serve God for Gods sake although there were
neither heaven nor hell; it must be our meat and drink, which men would do
though there were no punishment for the omission of it, Blessed is he that
hungereth and thirsts after righteousness.

2. Hence we may learn not to defer repentance till death, sickness, crosses,
or age somes, then it may be you would not sin though with Balaam you had your
housefull of gold and silver, for its not the abstinence from sin that God
loves, but the change of the heart. Amaziahs heart was not right though he
walked in all the ways of David, these are the men that have made a covenant
with hell and death, but God will dissanull that covenant, or it will be but
equivocal, many have sworn in their sickness never to commit sin again which
afterward, they have committed again with greedines, many have dyed in the
same repentance.

3. Labor to see your selves doing duties with as much love as you can, and
with as little fear, because perfect love casts out fear, Vs^
and so beloved I have given you a brief survey of the several points
contained in the portion of holy Scripture, wherefore if you know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them, wherefore that ye may do them, let us call upon
God for a blessing on what we have heard.

FINIS.
AMEN.

