

THE YOUNG DIVINES APOLOGY for his continuance in the University, with
Certain Meditations, written by NATHANIEL POVVNOLL, late student of
Christ-church in Oxford.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1612.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard: by MATTHEW LOVVNES at the sign of
the Bishops head.

TO THE REVEREND FAther in God, JOHN, L. Bishop of London.
RIght worthy, and reverend Father in God.

Blame not your ancient Obseruer, if now, after he has recovered in a manner,
at Cambridge, that life, which he lost at his departure from Oxford, he rises
aniew, as it wear out of his ashes, to do his humble service to your Lordship:
and, indeed, to whom can any fruit that comes from him, be with more right
presented the^ to him, in whose garden, and under whose shadow it griew? Into
whose hand should this small book, though wanting his own Epistle, be
delivered, but unto that, to which it has before given so many Epistles? whear
can it look for protection with more hope the^ whear it has formerly, with
all favor, found it.

If your Lordship thearfore will be pleased to be the defender of this
Apology, and to breath, as I may truly say, the breath of life again into
his sequent Meditations, that so being annimated aniew with those unspeakable
sighs, and alike fervent zeal of spirit, whearwith they wear first, as in
fiery chariots, carried up into heaven; I doubt not but they will seem,
being so quickened, to any that shall read them (especially if, as Job wished
in a case not much unlike, his foul wear in his fowls stead) no cold, or
dull, or dead lettets: and in so doing, you shall not only follow him into
his grave, but call him out of it with this so special a benefit, binding with
the dead in one knot of thankfulness all his Friends that yet live, and cannot
but joy to see your Lordships favor out-liue the person, on whom it is
bestowed: of whom my self, being the least, shall ever think I am most bound
to be.

Your L. to command in all good service, G. FLETCHER.

To the Reader.
THe Author of this small discourse, or rather (give me leave so to call him)
the Swan that, before his death, sung this divine song, is now thear, whear he
neither needs the praise, nor fears the envy of any: whose life, as it
deserved all, so it was covetous of no man's commendation; himself being as
far from pride, as his desert was near it. Yet because it was his grief,
that he should die before he was fit to do God the service he desired; and
his friends desire, that being so fit as he was for his service, he might
(if it had been possible) never have died at all: thearfore his book was bold
to thrust it self into that world, which the Author of it had lately left,
thereby to satisfy both his Makers desire, in doing the church of God some
service; and his friends grief in not suffering him altogether to lie dead.

And truly what better service can it do, then to persuade with reason, since
Authority forces not, our young Neophytes to abide awhile in the schools of
the Prophets, at Bethel, before they presume to enter the Temple at Jerusalem,
and if reason can do little with them, because happily they want it, yet let
his Example (an argument that prevails much with the common People, of whom
such Prophets are the tail) make them at least see, and confess, though they
know not how to amend their fault. Ten years had he lived in the University,
eight languages had he learnt, and taught his tongue so many several ways by
which to express a good heart; watching often, daily excercising, always
studying, in a word, making an end of himself in an ouer-feruent desire to
benefit others; and yet, after he had, as it wear out of himself, sweat out
all this oil for his lamp, after he had with the Sun ran so many heavenly
races, and, when the Sun was laid abed by his labors, after he had burnt
out so many candles to give his mind light (having always S Paul's querie in
his mind, (...);) he never durst adventure to do that, after all these
studies done, and ended, which our young Novices, doing nothing, coumpt
nothing to do: but still thought himself as unfit, as he kniew all men wear
unworthy of so high an honor, as to be the Angels of God.

I could wish that he had left behind him, if not all his learning, yet some
of his modesty to be divided among these empty sounding vessels, that want
both: but since in him so great examples of piety, knowledge, industry, and
unaffected modesty are all fallen so deeply a sleep, as I am afraid we shall
hardly find in any of his age the like, (which I speak not to deny just praise
to the living, but who will not affoard a fiew flowers to strowe the cophine of
the dead?) thear was no way to awaken them, and in them him, but by layeing
them up, not with him in his grave, but in these immortal monuments of the
press, the living Tombs proper to dead learning, wherein these flowers may
live, though their ^oote be withered, and though the trunk be dead, the
branches flowrish.

Let rich men therefore, in the gilded sepulchers, and proud monuments of
their death, beg for the memory of their lives: the righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, without any such proud beggary: nor shall he ever be
behoulding to a dead stone for the matter: and good reason. Righteousness being
a shadow of that divine substance, which has in it no shadow of change, much
less of corruption* only I could wish that their lives wear as long as their
memories; that so this crooked age might have as great store, as it has need
of them.

G. F.

AN APOLOGY FOR YOUNG Students in Divinity why they stay in the University
to learn, before they presume to teach abroad. Written, and sent by NATHANIEL
POVVNALL, for his own defense, to his Parents.
MOst gracious, and dear Parents, I could never yet persuade my self to be of
Galbas mind, who thought it needless that any man should be tied to give an
accoumpt of his idle time; much less of Pericles, Plutarch).
that having ill stewarded the Commonwealths Treasury, did not think so much
how to make his account, as how to make no account at all: but since the season
does in a manner now require, that I send you some fruits of your so long, and
so well manured, and so carefully planted, and yet so long barren vine, (as
whose fruits you have with patience for many more years expected, then that
Husbandman did the fruits of his barren figtree) though as yet it being the
first spring, it can send forth but small grapes, yet such as they are, since
they be not wild grapes, I hold it honest so far to serve the time (though no
time seruer) as of mine own accord (unlike those bad husbandmen in the Gospel)
to offer them unto you. And because I know that as it is your greatest desire,
so it would be your greatest delight, if now after you have mist me from you
(not as Mary and Joseph did Christ for three days) but for many years, you
should at last find me (as they did Christ) in the Temple praying, and going
about the business of my heavenly Father; therefore I had once, I confess, in
my resolution pledged my self (as Judah made himself surety never to return
or see his Fathers face again, unless he brought Benjamin with him) not to
come again unto you, Genesis 43.9.
except as S. Paul assured his coming, in the abundance of the blessings of
the Gospel: that my thanks might not only be, like those angels ascending on
Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12.
in continual prayers for you, but also as Angels descending by the graces of
Gods word unto you. For good reason it seemed to me (to invert S. Paul's
argument) reaping your temporal things, to make you partakers of those
spiritual things, that I have here learned at your charges in Christ's school.
In this conceit somewhat I conceived, but in a word (to express my issue in
the Prophets phrase) when the children came to the birth, Isa. 37.3.
there was not strength enough to bring the^ forth: howsoever, I thought it
wisdom to defer that expectation of me, which I was not yet able to
satisfy by this short Apology of my long seeming silence. For since you have
been unto me far unlike Jobs unnatural Ostrich, which, deprived of
understanding leaves her eggs in the dust, and forgets them: or his wild
hindes, and goats, that bow themselves and bruise their young, and cast forth
their sorows, and so leave them, but rather as pious Anna, 1. Sam.
having placed her Samuel in the Temple, did not so leave him, but yearly
brought him up a coat, and other necessaries, out of your continual care
ministering to me yearly maintenance, have still watered what you have
planted, far be it from me in unthankfulness to resemble Jobs young hinds,
that growing up, and waxing fat, go forth, and never return unto their
dammes: but rather as the young Storkes (emblems of natural piety) are said
to bring corporal food unto the old: so shall it be my care and endeavor
hereafter to bring you whatsoever spiritual food I can provide, and cause all
my fruits, such as they are, to bow down toward the root that bears both
them, and me. In the mean time, my Apology in a word is the same that is
expressed in the Gospel in the behalf of the fig tree: That my time of fruit
is not yet (by Gods grace) past, but only that it is not yet come; neither
shall it (I trust) prejudice my cause, that in the like case the fig tree was
nevertheless accursed, Harmon. page 117.
since (as Calvin, the best Interpreter I find, cleares the place) Christ did
it not in spleen, to revenge himself on the harmless tree, but only took
occasion to work a miracle for the propagation of Gods glory, diuerting, and
satisfying his hunger with the bread he speaks of, Ioh. 4.34. making that his
meat to do the will of his Father.

But (that I may solue the mean objection) since there are so many praecoces
fructus, rathe, and forward fruit, ripened, and ready in less then half my
time, whatsorie seed and soil is mine, that my time of fruit is not yet come:
I grant, both may be true in me, but for the other, I rather pity, then
envy them; so far is it, that their last should be the measure of my foot,
or I be induced to be the Echo to such voices, or speak after them, because
they speak, that indeed like the Spartans nightingales, Plutarch. in Ages.
are mere sound, and nothing else. But as Jacob said of those brethren in
evil, Genesis 49.6.
Into their courses, and counsels let not my soul come, my glory be not thou
joined with their assemblies: for so to shun shame, and seek glory, what
were it else, but (as the Spaniard speaks) to escape the thunderbolt, and
fall into the lightnings slash? For alas, what a fond conceit is that of theirs
(it being the guise of fools (as the Italian has it) to think themselves
wise) so easily to persuade themselves like those foolish Laodiceans, Revel.
that they are quickly learned, able and sufficient enough, as if Nox nocti
indicaret scientiam, and the blind could lead the blind, or could with that
little learning they have gotten (as Christ with a few loaves and fishes did by
miracle) feed whole multitudes, and have remainder enough for other times;
expecting that God should miraculously (as to the widow) multiply their little
oil, for the discharging of so great a duty, and filling of so many empty
vessels: yea, although they have too little oil for themselves, yet (which
the wise virgins would never do) they must needs be storing others, Matt. 25.9.
as if (Leviathan-like) they could swallow up whole rivers at once, Job 40.18.
and think to drink up Jordan too: So that their learning is put into a
bottomless bag, that cannot hold it, and their little wit, but as a secret
in a fools mouth, Pers. Sat. 1.
and Quae semel innata est, rupto iecore exierit caprificus; if once in, like
young Eliphaz they will burst, if they vent not. And when all is done, what is
it that thus splents those tombs, but steriles mala robora ficus, which though
it make much shift to come forth, is but a barren wild fig tree, that never
brings forth fruit to maturitie: so that their ouer-hastines is no other then
as a hatchet that cutts off their better growth. Bion apud Laert.
For how many that happily (as Antigonus said of Pyrrhus) might prove some
body, Plut.
if they would stay their time, by this means spoil their growth, and ever
stay at the same stature, that they first attained unto. And therefore no more
then he, when he would accomplish that by strength of arms, which in his
youth, and in the flower of his age with facility he performed (as he found by
lamentable experience being made a pray to beasts, whilst being old he
sought to rend a splinted oak) should they arrogate unto themselves a task of
elder years, thinking that (like the palm tree, and camomill) they shall grow
the better for being burdened and pressed down. As for the fruit of this
their arrogancy and ostentation, whereof they are (or should be, had they so
much grace) ashamed, it is but as the Italian has it, where pride rides, shame
lackies, or rather as the Prophet, while they sow the wind, Ier. 48.10.
they reap the whirlewind. For while they do verba dare, (the periphrasis of
an imposture) give nothing but words (which are naught but wind) what reap
they but the whirlewinde, even the curse of the Prophet, and are so far from
edifying, that their hasty fruit proves but windfalls, and their green wood
rather smothers away in smoke, then burns, and casts out heat, as an ardens
lucerna should, and their issue, as the untimely fruit of a woman, becomes
abortiue, and so indangers the womb that bare it. For as great a danger as
befalls the commonwealth when children are the princes, Eccl. 10.16.
and governors thereof, the like betides the Church when these which are
indeed but children, and babes in Christ, 1. Cor. 3.2.
will take upon them to be the Fathers thereof. A woe I say, when every
Empiricke will take upon him to heal the soars of Sion, to the danger of as
many souls, as those unskillful Practitioners do hazard the lives of diverse
bodies. S. Gregory in his book de cura pastorali says, part. 3. c. 26.
that it is as dangerous for such Nouices to undergo the burden of a pastoral
charge, as to lay the roof of the house upon the walls while they are green;
a ready means to ruin, not to build. And indeed for any burden they sustain
in the Church (for rather like the Pharisees, Matt. 23.4.
they bind heavy burdens on other men's consciences, but put not so much as a
finger thereto themselves) I cannot better compare them, then to those little
statues, or angelets that we often see affixed to the pillars of our Churches,
stooping the head, and bending the back, as if they did support the whole
fabricque, whereas they sustain nothing at all, but are rather themselves
supported. Good cause therefore had Saint Paul to put in that caution to
Timothy, 1. Tim 3 6.
that such a one as he made choice of for the Ministry of the word, should in
no hand be a young scholar, least he being puffed up, fall into the
condemnation of the Devil. For indeed to suffer such to take a charge upon
them, what else were it, but as if the trees of the forest should rest
themselves under the shadow of the bryer; the issue whereof was but this, the
fire came out of the brier, and devoured the Cedars of Lebanon. Judge. 4.
Such fruit as this well argues, what is the tree: Matt. 7.17.
and for my part I wonder not if such fruits as these like wild grapes, and
crabbes come up in abundance. For it is as easy (God wot) as lightly to run
away, like an horse, with an empty cart: (as one well compares it, whom for
his worth I deservedly rank with my best Authors) no matter to stand, speak,
King on Jonas.
and exercise after their manner, and with such dexterity to outrunne their
fellows (as hasty Ahimaaz did Cushai, 2. Sam. 18.23.
though he had none, or but sorry news to carry) since they can be content to
run the playner, though the worser way. And so little cause is there to envy
such, that in compare of these untimely fruits, the barren womb that bears no
children may rejoice, Isa. 54.1.
and they that travel not, break forth and cry: yea, the desolate (in good
time) may have many more children, the^ they that are so wedded. And happily
these hairebraind vpstarts, whilst they glory in their own shame, may be truly
answered, as that Italian answered that busy body, cracking how early he had
been up, and how much idle business he had dispatched, while the other lay in
bed, that one dream of his was better worth then all the others business: and
in the end, as it fell out in Zeuxis and Parrhasius their emulation, Plin. l.
35.
which had the masterie in his art, though the one perchance with his painted
grapes (whereof there was the color, but not the sap, or nourishment) might
ouerreach some silly birds, (fond auditors:) the other with his figured
artificial veil, (the true emblem of Judicious silence) will ouerreach and
go beyond many such superficial artizans as these: Only herein stands the
difference, that whereas Zeuxis triumphing upon the fond birds arbittrement,
imagined there was a picture under the others curious veil, where there was
none; and therefore bid him draw his curten: on the contrary, our insulting
Novices think there is nothing at all covered under the veil of judicious
silence: whereas indeed, as in the ancient Sileni (curious statues so
cunningly contrived, Cael. Rh.
that while they were closed, they seemed rough hewne and deformed, but
vnioyned appeared most curious) there is much beauty within, though at first
little show without. So that in the end all will with the Orator, prefer the
discreet silence of the one, Cicer.
before the others fond babbling. And if Nature do naught in vain Aristot. l. 2
Phys.
(as the Philosophers hold) it is not for naught that our curious Anatomists
observe that she has given the tongue (the least, but most dangerous member of
all other) most bonds and ligaments, even nine flowing from the heart, like so
many raynes to restrain and govern it, that it set not on fire the bodies
frame. Neither makes it any thing for these bablers (for so may I as justly
term them, Act. 17.18.
as Saint Paul was unjustly) that the Apostles were inspired, since long ago
it has been ordered, that miracles, and extraordinary callings ceased with
the Primitive Church: whereunto it was requisite as water for a new planted
garden; but now, that it is come to further growth, unnecessary: or if they
will needs look for miracles, such as these are as unlikely to be the
subjects thereof, as dirt is to open the eyes of the blind (though Christ once
powerfully used it to that end, Ioh. 9.6.
) a means rather to destroy, then restore the sight. And though it be a
question among schoolmen, Aquin.
whether in the creation God first brought forth the flower, or the fruit, the
seed, or the plant, the hen, or the egg (which is defined, that he brought
forth all in their full perfection) yet now it is no question at all, but God
proceeds orderly to bring all things to maturitie, and perfection by degrees,
and so must man, if he will imitate his heavenly Father, or have his blessing.
To be short, I have said enough to prove that this their custom should be no
prescription unto me, and therefore giving care to that Prince of preachers,
Eccl. 4.17.
who has set down the summarie of this my motive, That we should take heed
unto our feet, entering into the house of the Lord, and be more ready to hear,
then to offer the sacrifice of foolese I leave these Ba^tologists to that due
account of every idle word they must justly make him, who has made himself
accountable for every hair. Now as I had sufficient reason, why these cords of
vanity should not draw me the faster on, so it stands me as much upon on the
other side, to demonstrate for your satisfaction, that it is a cause of great
importance, and no bad, base, or by end that draws me back. God himself can
witness with my conscience, that it is no excuse for negligence, or pretense
for idleness, as if, with Salomons sluggard, Prou. 6.9. and 10.
I did only desire a little more sleep; and a little more folding of the
hands; or that like that drowsy shepherd (so famoused amongst the Poets for
an afternoones nap of 57. years long) did intend to sleep out my life here in
the University, as in a cave, or set up my rest (as Tullie did his felicity
after his turmoiles) in vacatione rerum omnium: Cicer. de Orat.
and like Is^achar, seeing the rest good, and the land pleasant, to sit me
down between my burdens: so that, as one buried alive, there should want
nothing but Senocas epitaph passing by the house of a sluggish citizen, Epist.
ad Luc.
Hic situs est Vatia; here lies one that only served to make one, qui nulla re
alia nisi otio notus consenuit, only by keeping tale of the many years of his
age, and standing, grew old, and died. For such a life, if it be any thing, at
the best it is but as Pyndarus prizes it; a shadow, a dream: such a body, but
the souls sepulcher; and such a soul fit for nothing but to embalme a
carcass, and keep it from putrefaction. But though such be the quiet,
contented, and pleasing life we lead here in the University (which from the
pleasant situation thereof has long since won the surname of Bellositum)
such indeed (that I may borrow the Italians proverb of Venice) that he who
has not seen it, and lived in it, cannot prise it (marry he that lives
there, it costs him dear) though such, I say, be the content I find here, that
had I lived never so many years, yet (according to the epitaph of that noble
Roman, Aul. Gell.
who dying old, professed he had been long indeed, but lived only seven
years, which free from the service of the Court, he had past quietly at his
country farm,) I might well number the days of my life only from the time I
began my study here, and justly bless the means thereof, as far as ever
Augustine did his friends liberality strayning themselves to maintain him at
the University of Carthage: Confess. ^^b. 4.
yet far be it from me to make that quiet, and content, which God has given
but as means for the furthering of better ends, my utmost end: or as (if I
were in my proper place, where each body is quiescent) to set up my rest, and
make me a Tabernacle here. No; man (I know) was expulsed paradise to labor,
and not to make himself another paradise elsewhere for ease, and pleasure: And
as far do I wish from our University all such priests as sacrifice here to
Vacuna, the goddess of idleness, Alex. ab Alex.
as her Temple was removed out of the gates of Rome. For mine own part, as
fearful, and as brief as the trumpe of judgment always sounded in Saint
Hieromes cares, is Saint Paul's woe ever before mine eyes, Epist.
1. Cor. 9.16.
if I preach not the Gospel: and when I leave my diligence in my calling, or
love my ease, or pleasure more then that; nay, Ps. 137.6.
if I prefer not Sion in all my mirth, then God do so to me, and more, and
leave me likewise, as indeed unless he leave me, I cannot leave his service.
For (according to that reason, which that glorious Martyr gave the Tyrant, why
he could not choose, but always remember the name of Jesus) it is written in
my heart, it cannot out. And therefore I will gladly make the Prophets
contestation my own, Let my right hand forget that little skill it has, when
I forget Gods service; yea, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, Ps.
137.5.
and forget to speak, when it forgets to speak of thy word and testimonies.
But though this ease and quiet has not had power to captiuate me, yet
peradventure I stand off, as ashamed of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, repenting
me of my choice, as if, like Demas, I could be content to forsake the
Ministry, and follow the world. No; I shall ever magnify my calling, as my
crown, and my rejoicing, and think my self much more bound to give thanks
to almighty God in this behalf, then Plato, because he was made a Grecian,
rather then a Barbarian: And so far ever was I from Hercules crosse-way,
Cicer. Tusc. qu.
to demur and debate the matter, that as if this one thing were necessary I
ever minded, Luke 10.41.
and intended it alone; and howsoever in other things I wish to put off
childishnes, and grow in wisdom as in years: yet shall I never be ashamed in
this behalf, still to think, as when I was a child: but rather it shall be my
daily prayer (as it was Gods for the Israelites when their heart was right)
that the same heart be ever in me, Deuteronomy 5.29.
and for ever so affected to my calling. But happily as the loveliness thereof
has allured me, so the difficulty thereof now deterreth me, and the greatness
of the charge, being as one terms it, Onus Angelicis humeris formidandum,
Chrysostom.
such a burden that the angels themselves would tremble to undergo it, does so
discourage me, that with Gedeons faint soldiers, Judge 7.
for fear I desire to be dismissed from this warfare, and being called to so
great a charge, like fearful Saul seek to lurk, and avoid so troublesome a
function. 1. Sam.
Indeed if I thought it enough to pretend authorities, as that Braggadochian
said, Ter* ^un.
he would be with them paulo post principia, after the fraie was well begun,
and the worst past: and good reason why, for fecerunt Herules and Pyrrhus; I
have presidents enough before me to countenance my weakness, and fearfulness.
For Moses thrice refused, Exodus 3.
and excused himself, even till God was angry: Ezekiel. 3.14.
Ezechiel, for all God so labored to strengthen and confirm him; yet went
unwillingly, yea in bitterness, and indignation of his spirit; Ion. 1.
and Jonas directly turned his back, and fled an other way. How many of the
Fathers, whilst they took counsel with flesh and blood, withdrew their hands
from the Lords plough. Paul. in vita Ambr.
This made Ambrose hide himself, and three times fly from Millaine, and when
he was miraculously brought back (after he had traveled all night, finding
himself in the morning but at an other gate of the same city) though one of
singular integrity, he sought to defame himself, to try if by any means he
might avoid this pastoral charge. This drove Gregory Nazianzene to fly
again and again to the study of Philosophy: In eius vita a scipso scripta.
And this caused S. Augustine Possido.
to absent himself from Churches where pastors were wanting, and even to
weep, when (taken unawares) he was to be ordered, and to deprecate the
Episcopal function (put upon him by Valerian) in these terms; Quid vis? vt
peream? Aug. Epist. 148. ad Val.
as if it stood him as much upon, as his life, and souls salvation came unto.
But of all, Chrysostom is most plain in this point, Ex Ecclesiae ministris
non arbitror multos saluari, Homil. 3. in acta Apost.
translating upon Ministers that hard saying of our Savior, with what
difficulty rich men shall be saved, because of the greatness of their charge,
and their negligence therein. But though this difficulty have made many so
backward, that the Lord of the harvest has been forced even to thrust out
laborers into his vinyard; yet, Matt. 9.38.
while I remember nihil esse difficilius etc. sed apud Deum nihil beatius, Aug
Epist. 148. in inst.
etc. the one so ballanceth the other, that I profess, the difficulty
thereof, though I duly weigh it, yet waighing withal, from whom and to what
end it is, it daunts me not a whit, but I rather in that respect embrace the
pains and toil thereof, as those virgins in Eusebius did their martyrdom,
running thereunto, tanquam ad nuptias, as if they were to meet their
bridgroomes; and digesting the greatness of the charge (if I may compare small
things with great) as that great Alexander plunged in a dangerous exploit,
Quint. Curt.
boasted, that he had now encountered a peril parallel to the greatness of his
mind: so do I rejoice, that in this depth I have met with that at once, that
is alone able to employ and exatiate the infinite desire and ardour of my
mind, (which God alone, that is infinite, can do, and the study of his will)
and will ask, and challenge to it self all my strength, soul, Matt. 22.37
and mind with the powers, and faculties thereof, which as I owe of duty, so
do I destinate to Gods service: being thereunto lessoned by S. Augustine;
Ingenium, Aug. epist.
prudentia, eloquentia sunt dona Dei: Cui melius seruiant, quam ei a quo
donantur, vt ita custodiantur, augeantur, perficiantur? For no more then the
rain could extinguish the fire of the sacrifice, nor the wind break the
pillar of smoke ascending, no more can any difficulty break off what is
destinated to Gods service: neither indeed (a little to vary and amplify S.
Paul's Act. 20.24.
phrase) is my life dear unto me, Act. 20.24.
or my pains precious, so I may attain that end, and finish my course with
joy: Not that I contemn, or set light by the greatness of the charge, but
rather work it out, as a case concerning my salvation with fear, Phil. 2.12.
and trembling Only I profess that (as I shall have occasion to say more at
large) it produces this effect with me, to make me, not more cowardly, but
more cautelous, nor so much to prepare for flight, as to provide, and to arm
my self the better, how to bear the brunt of the battle, and the heat of the
day.

But howsoever the perfection of this high calling has rather attracted, then
any way daunted me; yet it may be the consciousnes of mine own infinite
disproportioned imperfections make me (like him in the Gospel, that with a
very small force was to encounter with a far greater puissance) thus in the
plain field to give over: especially since according to our Philosophical
axiom, there is no dealing or proportion at all, between that which is
infinite and In tersinitum, and insinitum, etc.
boundless (such as is the study of Divinity) and what is finite, and
streightened within narrow bounds (as is my small ability) I have learned of
S. Augustine (whom (as he was wont to style Tertullian) I willingly call my
master) that he, Prolog. in lib. Retr.
who cannot hold the first place of wisdom, should yet hold the second place
of Modesty. And therefore I rather ingenuosly acknowledge my imperfections,
then seek to color or cover them with Adams art, especially in compare of
that transcendent reference, which man can no more comprehend, then (like God)
he can measure the heavens with his spanne; and what the most absolute men are
inferior unto, much more am I, that am inferior to so many. But to grieve and
repine at mine inabilitie, because there are many better enabled, were but an
argument of an evil eye. Nay rather, as far as Moses was from grudging that
others prophesied besides himself, who wished that all the people of the Lord
might likewise prophecy; Number. 11.2^
so far am I from murmuring at the Lords gifts, and graces elsewhere, that I
heartily wish not only those many, but even all the Prophets and Ministers of
the Lord were before me, for the better building up of the body of Christ: and
I shall ever rejoice with that worthy Lacedemonian in behalf of his
Commonwealth (after he had stood in election, Plut.
but mist to be in the number of the 30. Senators) that the Church has so many
hundreds better then my self, in whose rank and number I am not worthy to
stand. And I shall ever thank amighty God, that I have in some measure received
of his fulness, (and am in hope yet to receive) neither can I deny but that I
have had a child's portion, yea larger then many that are every way my betters;
yet as I dare promise nothing of my self, being but one of his meanest
instruments for the building of his Temple: so will I despair of nothing
because of my weakness, knowing that the Lords arm is not shortened, but his
ability still the same to perfect his power in weakness, that the glory may be
wholly his.

And for mine own part to help the matter what I may, I will only use the
wise man's sovereign restoratiue for the repayring of my strength: that is,
whereas the instrument is blunt, and dull, to put the more strength thereunto,
and add the more to my studies, and endeauours.

It is not then any bad, base, or by end, that diuerts me, neither is it a
cloak for idleness, nor figgeleaues to cover nakedness, that I seek:
neither is it any loathing of the Manna I am to feed upon, that takes away my
stomach, nor the narrowness of the way, that makes me to baulk it, nor the
height of my calling, nor mine own unworthiness, that can separate me from
Christ Jesus.

What then may be the cause of this my Fabian-like cunctation and long pausing?
in a word; a due, and serious consideration of the length, breadth, Ephesians. 3.8.
and depth of the great mystery of godliness, the study of Divinity that I
undertake; which I have found right like that river the Fathers compare it
unto, Greg.
wherein, though the lamb may wade, the greatest Elephant, presuming on his
own strength, may swim, and sink at last: such is that inaccessible light
wherein God inhabiteth, and that wisdom of God, whereof Saint Paul cries out,
Romans 11.33.
O altitud^, being unsearchable almost, and past finding out, at the least
wise, not to be found on the sudden, nor attained unto like Angelical
motion, in an instant, nor to be gotten like Hesiods Poetry, or Esops
eloquence, in a dream. Preface in Lull.
Let the vain Lullists boast of the prodigious proficiencie of some of their
sectaries, that by the rule of their great art of Idiots, in a short time
proved excellent Clarks, and attained to the summary perfection of all Arts
and Sciences. And let our profound Bacon measure other wits by his own, and
undertake, by his method, to teach the three learned tongues; Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew, in three days a piece: (I would soon have credited him, if he had
said so much of the three next principal tongues of our European world; the
Italian, French, and Spanish, whose facility is such, by reason of their
exceeding affinity with the Latin, that a scholar may go very near to
attain unto them in the like term of time:) It is not so in the infinite
Abyss of the study of Divinity, wherein one depth does call upon Psalm. 42.7.
another, and now that special inspirations are ceased, there is no such
precocitie, or sudden ripenes. But what Hippocrates says of physic (which
concerns the health of the body) is much more true in Divinity (which
concerns the health of the soul, Hipp. proem. in Apho.
) that vita breuis, and ars longa; it is not the short span, or scantling of
any mortals life, can measure the length thereof, but even the Angels, and
Saints in heaven, after this lives imperfect glass is broken, find work enough
in this divine study, to employ themselves for all eternity.

No wonder then, if all our endeavors in compare can do no more, then
(according to S. Augustines vision, Possidor. in eius vita.
walking by the sea side, in deep contemplation of the Trinity) as if a child
with a cockle shell, should labor, by continual lauing, to empty the maine
ocean sea into a little ditch, (the one, if we look here for exact
comprehension, being as endless as the other.) And though it be a fond, and
ridiculous question that Velleius the epicure makes in Tullie, 1. De Not. Deor.
that if God did indeed make the world, how, or whence had he ferramenta, and
machinas, instruments great enough for so great a work: yet it may with better
reason be doubted, how a mortal man can possibly frame fit instruments
proportionate to the immensitie of such an immortal work. For when all is
done, (as a Philosopher said) all our knowledge makes not up the least part of
our ignorance: yea, (as a father better observed) our highest degree of
knowledge is to profess ignorance, since what we see here, Romans 13.12.
we see but imperfectly, as in a glass; these imperfect shadows being only
conveyed as it were by setting perspectiue glasses from so far a distance, as
the heaven and earth are distant.

Since then all our lives labor can attain to little more then the alphabet
and rudiments of this infinite study, blame me not, if I, having yet scarce
dipped my foot, nor gone up to the anckles in that river of Ezechiel, Ezekiel. 47.3.
be somewhat timorous how I go further on, before I have fathomed the depth
thereof, and found some foord or passage. For if the greatest Orators at the
Rostra, being to speak but before the people in civil affairs, (as Tullie
often professes Cic.
of himself) did quake every joint of them: Totis artubus contremisco.
and (according to the Poet, Lugdunensem rhetor dicturus ad aram Palluit, vt
nudis qui pressit calcibus anguem) were so appalled, as if they walked among
snakes, because they ventured in trial the extreme hazard of their fame, and
credit for ever after: how much more ought we to fear, 2. Cor. 2.17.
and tremble, standing in his Temple, the place where his honor dwells, and
speaking in the sight of God, Men, and Angels. And therefore I think, I have
the same reason to borrow respite, as that Philosopher had to defer his
resolution from day to day of Hieroes question concerning God, Tull. l. 1. de
not. Deor.
because the further I go, and the more I think of these Divine mysteries,
the more difficulties I meet withal. I must confess indeed, there was a time
heretofore, when dulce bellum inexperto, I thought I might with as great
facility promise, and perform a sermon, as I had done heretofore a
declamation: but as while the sun shines not, the house seems clear, but the
sunne-beames once shining in at the windows, so thick of motes, and dust,
that it has gained a proverbs place to make comparison of thicknes thereunto:
so now (and not before) that I am a little enlightened, and entered, I see those
wants and imperfections, that before in the shadow of Philosophy I never
dreamed of, and those difficulties I heretofore did little think of. Indeed if
I could content my self with a perfunctorie performance as many do, it may
be, little ado would serve the turn: but I dare not so take up my rest, when
as my very soul and eternal life is at stake and pawn upon it; fully
persuading my self, that if my pains exceed not the complementall formalitie
of these Pharisees, Calvin. in Exodus 30 ^3. and Genesis 23.15.
I shall never come to the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore as the shekel of the
Sanctuary (as interpreters do gather from diverse passages of Scripture) was
double to the common shekel: so do I well perceive, that double pains, and
space, to that I heretofore bestowed in my other studies of Phosophie, and
humanity, is requisite to sanctify me for the Lords Sanctuary: and howsoever
it may be faulty in other civil, and worldly affairs, which Apelles was wont
to reprehend in curious Protogenes, Plin. l 35.
Quod manum de tabula continere non potuit, thinking it never perfect enough;
yet in Divinity, Zeuxis reason will answer any that is reasonable, Plut.
Diu pingo, quia pingo immortalitati, that as he was wont to be long a drawing,
because he desired so to draw, that it might last for ever: so in this divine
study, we must have the longer leave to limate the lineaments of our
portraicts, because the impresses we make, are to hold their impression for all
eternity. Experience teaches us, that every triuiall mechanic trade, does
ask at least seven years apprentiship, or learning (for so the French word
signifies) and that so much more time is allotted to each work, by how much
the work is more exquisite; how then can they be excused, that so far abase
the valuation hereof, (as though there were no difference between prophesying,
and selling doves in the Temple) and in stead of polishing the corner stones of
the Temple, for have, daube it up with untempered mortar.

I fear, I confess, the woe of such negligent workmen; and fear withal, I
should prove no better, did I like those hot-spurres, unripe and unready as I
am, make so sudden an adventure. For as those captive kings said of Gedeons
young, and therefore unwarlike son, Such as the man is, such is his strength:
no wonder, if as young David I cannot yet march in complete armor, neither yet
upon the strength of a little meat dare Eliahlike undertake so great a journey,
neither yet in this weakness venture (in public) into the open air to my
further danger, but rather keep close within, till I grow the stronger.

There was five years silent hearing enjoined a Pythagorist for the learning
of his symbolls, Laert.
and therefore with safety may I a while awaite like Elihu upon the words of
the ancient, thereby to aspire to the knowledge of our christian mysteries. And
indeed our Universities has well provided in this case, calling none to
public course of preaching till he be of four years standing Master of
arts: which authority though it might justly sway me, since when we proceed
we are bound by a formal oath to keep the customs, Tu iurabis, etc.
as well as the statutes and privileges of the University; yet have I also a
greater authority then that for my warrant, even that of our Savior, (to
pass the like example of John Baptist his Coetanean, Luke 2.
born the same year) who being the wisdom of his Father, in whom is the
fullness of all graces, so that he could as well have preached at twelve years
old, as have disputed with Doctors: yet because it was the manner of the Jewish
synagogue, (grounded upon the example of Joseph, Joseph. antiq.
that came to his authority, and of David, that came to his kingdom at those
years) not to profess, or teach publicly before that age, undertook not the
charge of a Priest, or Prophet, till he were thirty years of age, as all
Comments gather out of Saint Lukes computation. Whereupon S. Gregory makes an
excellent collection fitting my purpose, Redemptor noster in coelis, Gregor. de
cura Past. part. 3. c. 26
Doctor Angeloru^, ante tricennale tempus noluit fieri doctor hominu^, vt
praecipitanti vim saluberrima^ timoris incuteret, cum ipse qui labi non
poterat, perfectae vitae gratia^ non nisi perfecta aetate praedicaret; whose
actions I ever held for instructions, and herein his example a perfect law, in
so much that I am emboldened to commence my suit (being the like with his) in
the same terms, that my Master (S. Augustine I mean) has taught and done
before me, Possidor.
who (as Possidorus his scholar witnesses) soon after he was unexpectedly
ordered, called by good old Valerius Bishop of Hippo (a man of great sanctity,
but inferior in learning) to be his Coadiutor in his Episcopal function (for
his part out of an admiration, and high conceit of his learning, though as
himself confesses, at that time he was set to guide the stern, before he
knew how to handle the oar) with such incredible vehemency, earnestness,
and importunity (even with the same that Paul adiureth Timothy before God, 2.
Tim. 4 1.
and before the Lord Jesus Christ, that shall judge the quick and dead at his
appearing) does beseech and implore Valerius; Obsecro te per veritatem and
seueritatem Christi, per misericordiam and iudicium eius, per eum qui tantam
tibi inspirauit charitatem erga nos; and again, ipsam charitatem and affectum
imploro, for which he professes he had made great suit by friends before time,
Seneca. magni emit. qui precatur.
impetrare volui per fratres, and nunc per has literas volo; but what is it
that he would buy so dearly, with all these importunate prayers? a matter,
surely he thought highly concerned him (and therefore out of his judgment I
have reason to think it also greatly concerns my self) all is for this in
conclusion, vt miserearis mei and concedas mihi ad hoc negotium quantum rogaui
tempus: ad finem Epist. predict.
(as seems by the circumstances about a years respite) S. Augustine might
well think this enough for him, and has herein also said enough for me, his
case being an Idea, and sampler of mine own. But least relying upon bare
authorities I incur Socrates censure of the Sophisters of his time, whom
(because when they knew not how to tell their own tales, they used only to
cite others authorities) he compared to idiots, that making a feast, are glad
to send for fiddlers in, because they know not otherwise how to entertain the
time with plausible discourse of their own: I will also interpret his mind,
and mine in mine own phrase.

To use then a little variation, my suite in effect is the same with his to
redeem time (or (as in some of our stricter colleges, where there is large
allowance of al things save vacant time) to borrowe a few days) and (according
to that excellent counsel our Savior at his departure, gave his Disciples to
tarry at Jerusalem) to keep here at the University, till I shall find my
self endued with power from above, and furnished with gifts meet for so high
a calling; least showing my self abroad before riper years, and endowments
suitable, some more ancient tax me, as Eliab did David his younger brother, 1.
Sam. 17.28, 29.
Quare veristi? ego noui tuam superbiim and nequitiam cordis tui, since I
cannot reply as David did, Quid feci? nunquid non verbum est? Having proved my
cause, which I hope will prove allowable, tending to no other end, but (with
him, who by deliberate delays and stays wearied Hannibal and reestablished
the ruinated estate of Rome) cunctando rem restituere, to strengthen and enable
my weakness by a little stay: that so (to pass the Poor Virgil, Qua^tum
vertice, etc.) I may according to our Saviors description of good seed in good
ground, by taking deeper root, bring forth better fruit; and having according
to the first, and best course of nature, an evening and a morning for my day,
an evening for contemplation, rest, and repose, and a morning, for labor, and
exercise, I may in the one, make my wax, and comb, and in the other, bring
honey to the hiue, in the one, gather my stubble, and in the other, make up my
full tale of brick; in the one, by my private meditations (as Moses in the
wilderness) learn to feed my flock; in the other, being sent with Moses,
call the children of Gods spiritual Israel from the flesh-potts of Egypt,
their concupiscible bodies, to the land which flows with milk, and honey; from
the bondage of their spiritual Pharaoh, to the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. And you, seeing the fruits of my labors (whom next God I ever willingly
remember, and thankefully acknowledge, both the plantors, and waterers thereof)
may thereby be induced to give me your blessing, and therewithal your hearty
prayers to almighty God, that it please him so to increase in me his
spiritual graces, that I may still go forward from grace to grace, and from
virtue to virtue, till I become a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

His meditation upon the Calling of the Ministry at his first institution
unto it.
I Know my unclean hands, O God, are not fit to carry thy Arc, or touch
those things that are hallowed, and consecrate unto thee, my polluted lips
most unworthy to take thy name into my mouth. What am I that I should speak
unto my Lord, by prayer, from my self, and others, and yet live, much less
speak from my Lord, by his word, unto others to make them live in thee? yet
since it has pleased thee to call me, standing idle in the marketplace, and
attending the vanities of this world so early into the vinyeard, it behooves
me to labor, and willingly to bear the heat of the day, and gladly (while
the light of the Gospel lasts) to do the work of my heavenly Father, the
works of light. It is a burden, indeed, that I undergo, but thine, O Christ,
and therefore light, and easy; it is a yoke, but thine, and therefore sweet.
Much more blessed are thine, then the Servants of Solomon, much more blessed,
since in this Ministry the heavenly Angels are their Servants: not unto us,
not unto us, Lord, but unto thy name give the glory; thou art still the same
gracious God, that show grace unto the humble, and call Publicans, and
sinners, and poor silly souls (such as wear thy fishermen) unto thee,
because thou art able to get thee praise out of the mouths of very babes, and
sucklings, and even of stones to raise thee up children: and with the folly of
thine to confound the wisdom of the world, let my soul therefore ever
magnify thy holy name, because thou have ruised me out of the dust to stand
before thee, and have showed me the light of thy countenance, and let mine
eyes see thy salvation. To be a servant of Servants was once a curse, but to be
a servant of one of thy servants, is one of the highest blessings; thou thy
self being Lord of all, deigning to serve thy Servants, washing their feet,
and it being an office wherein thy blessed Angels do rejoice. But howsoever
it is an honorable calling, yet it is unto thee a service, and not unto ease,
or pleasure. Those that are in Princes Courts may go in soft raiment, and live
at their ease, but not so they that serve in thy Courts, O Lord. Thy self
did begin thy preaching with a fast of forty days, and did enjoin to
all that did follow thee to leave all earthly pleasures, which together with
the world, they were to forsake, and in stead thereof to take up thy cross,
that so thy members maybe conformable unto their head. Men are all borne to
labor, as a spark to fly upwards, it is a curse that followed man's fall: but
to labor in thy vineyard, is a blessing following man's repayring, and
redemption to keep and dress thy Paradise, thy enclosed garden, as it was
Adams charge, in the happy estate of his innocence, so is it now the
Ministers, after the happy restoring thereof. Thy vineyard lay desolate, and
the wild bore of the forest spoiled it; but thou have new dug, planted, and
hedged it, and built a Tower therein, and thou have set it forth at a price to
thy Ministers to be the Keepers thereof; wherefore if it yield thee not the
fruit, or do not well entreat thy servants, or suffer it to grow wast, they
can look for no other but to be cast thence out of thy paradise. Not without a
cause did thy servants rejoice that they were thought worthy to suffer for thy
sake, and thy Martyrs gladly shed their blood for the seed of thy Church, and
to water what thou had planted. Thy first grace to thy servant Paul, after
thou have chosen him for a vessel of thine honor, was to show him what great
things he should suffer for thy sake, as thou have done before for ours: but,
alas, let us do what we can, or suffer whatsoever we are able for Christ's
sake, yea though we should lay down our lives for him, or his sheep, as he
for us, and them, yet wear we but unprofitable servants. Nevertheless as
blessed were the pappes that gave thee suck, so blessed also are those, whom
thou have made the Nources of thy Church to give them meat in due season:
blessed the womb that bare thee, and so that which bears thy children: the
womb indeed that bare the Lord was deliueuered without pain or labor; but
thy children must be borne with labor, and travel, and the Ministers are as
it were daily to travail in birth with such as are begotten by them unto thee,
but they soon forget their travail, and rejoice, so that children be borne
unto thee, and thou make them fruitful, and take away the reproach of
their barrenness.

I know, Lord, I am no more able to do the service, then thou have need of my
service, and yet since it has pleased thee, though all-sufficient, and
all-powerfull of thy self, to use the weak things of this world as thine
instruments thereby the more to manifest thy power, able to work by the most
unlikely means, I humbly, and willingly yield my self (as if I were even now
in thi^e hands new to be framed, and created) as clay to the hands of the
Potter, to be made whatsoever vessel, either of honor, or dishonor, (yea
though it wear to be an Anathema) to thy service. For now that I have (...) my
hand to the plough for the tilling of that good ground, wherein the seed of thy
word is to be sown, I may not look back to Sodom, to the world, whence thou
have called me, but wholly intend the work thou have set me to do. Thy
servants must know they are under a Taskmaster (though a righteous one, unlike
those of Egypt) that will duly, and daily exact their work of them, and see
that having straw given them, they make brick for the building of thy house,
and multiply the Talents committed unto them. And now there is a woe for me,
if I preach not the Gospel, and that sincerely; not can I (unless I will be
worse then Baalim) for a world go farther, then thy holy word will warrant
me. Grant, O Lord, that my delight be wholly in thy word, that I may think
always I therein hear thee speaking, and as thy sheep, knowing thy voice,
may follow the sheapheard of my soul whether soever he call me.

O let not the book of thy holy word, I beseech thee, be a sealed book unto
me, but thou that have the key of David, the Lamb that art only found
worthy to open it, unfold it, and give me an understanding heart, (which,
above all things, having undertaken so great a charge, I desire with Solomon)
that I may be a right dispenser of thy holy word, and go out and in before thy
people. For I know, Lord, they which will preach in thy name, if thou send
them not, and assist them, are but like those, who, without authority from
thee, would cast out devils in thy name, which prevailed against them: yea even
those whom thou have called, and set apart to thy ministry, if they do not
well, and abide in thee, and thou in them, the devil will enter into them, as
he did into Judas, and make them the sons of perdition ten times worse the^
before. Give me grace therefore first to direct mine own ways according to
the dictat of thy holy Spirit, and word, that beginning with my self, and so
speaking out of the treasure, and abundance of my heart, and knowing the things
which belong to salvation, I may be blessed, if I do them: let me first work
out mine own salvation with fear, and trembling, and so save both my self,
and others, least otherwise I be beaten with many stripes: First, O Christ,
make the vessel new, make me a new man, and then put in new wine, turn thou
my water to wine. And because thy Ministers are as the eyes of thy mystical,
and military body (for as thou art the light of the^, so they are the light
of the world) O let there be no beams in their eyes, who are to be eyes to the
blind; but make their very feet to shine as the stars in the firmament,
make them convert many to righteousness, and being first guided by thee, the
bright morning star, let them become themselves stars also (though shining
in the night, and with thy beams) to guide, and direct others to the house of
the Lord, that so having found the Messiah, they may, wi^h the wise men, noise
it abroad, and cause others, as Philip did Nathaniel, to come and see. O make
them lamps to burn always before thee in thy Temple, willing even to consume
themselves to give light unto thy house, and ready being set on fire, as it
were in a burnt offering spend themselves for thine, and thy Churches service;
and let me, the least of them all, find grace with my Lord, to see my candle
also lightened by the Father of lights, and so set it in thy Temple, not
suffering it at any time to be removed out of the Candlestick; but in thy
mercy as thou did increase the widows oil, all the time of the famine; so
also increase thy grace in my lamp, that it may, with the wise virgins, be
found burning, and shining at the coming forth of the Bridegroom, and so I
received into the rest of my Master. Guide the Army of thy Ministers with thy
principal spirit, O Lord, and lead them out of Egypt with a stretched out
arm, that all the powers of darkness, bandied especially to assault them,
prevail not against them. It is Satan's desire to grind and winnowe them, to
make the watchmen of thy holy city to sleep, that so it may be betrayed. Out
of his hatred to thee, he seeks most to persecute these, whom thou have set
in thy stead, that the light of thy Temple being extinguished, and put out,
and their Candlesticks removed, he may walk himself in the dark, and that
their eyes being darkened, the body blinded, may fall into his pits, and
snares. Thou therefore, O God, go forth with our Armies unto battle, the cause
is thine, set bounds unto the raging sea, that it ouerflow not thy holy Land.

And now, Lord, since I am come into thy service, and have left all to follow
thee, let me never leave thee to follow any other thing. For as thou could
never have chosen a worse servant, so shall I never find so good a Master, or
meet with such a service, it being fit only, indeed, for thy heavenly
Angels: but because it has pleased thee (as that King) to set earthe^ vessels
among the golden ones of thy Temple, therefore as every creature, even the
silly worm does strive to do the service, in his kind, and order, so among
the unworthiest of them, do I present my humble service unto thee, and knowing
not what other thanks to render thee, who have made me fellow-seruant with thy
Angels, (that are ministering spirits, sent for the good of thy choosen) I will
even render thy grace unto thy glory, and joyfully yield up my self, and my
soul, which thou have so graciously accepted, unto the hands of my faithful
redeemer: there is nothing worthy to have part with thee, nothing shall usurp
thy right in me, or rob thee of thine honor. Though, O Lord, it is not I
that do, or can do thee service. It is thou, that seruest thy self by me, as
by an instrument: I have not so much as moving of my self, it is thou that
workest in me both the will and the power. I am of my self but a iarring
instrument, quite out of tune: it is thou that tunest me, and make what
soever music, and harmony is in me, that so I, among the rest of the
Levites, might with joy, and mirth help to bring home thine Arc unto
Jerusalem, that is above. I have nothing that I can call properly mine own,
but my sins, weakness, and imperfections, and wretchedness: whatsoever is
else in me more then these, is thine O God, of thy free gift, and grace, and
therefore bound unto thy service.

A meditation upon the first of the seven paenitentiall Psalms of David.
Psalm. 6. verse. 1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine Indignation, neither chastise
me in thy displeasure.

I Require not, O Lord, that thou rebuke me, or chastise me not at all: it
being the prerogative of thy children here in this world to be chastened, and
punished for their sins, whereas thou suffer the wicked, without
troubling, to heap up wrath against the day of wrath, till they have filled up
the measure of their iniquity. My sins, I know exact chasticement, only I
desire that thou correct me in thy mercy, not in thine anger, as a son, not
as a bastard, with the correction of thy Israel, not with the plagues of Egypt,
to amendment, not destruction, to the humbling, not the hardening of my heart,
to my comfort, not confusion: that thou reaching out thy helping hand, as thou
did to Peter, when he was sinking, I be not overwhelmed in the waters of
temptation, or as the burning bush, or three children, be not consumed in the
fire, and furnace of affliction: but that they may be to me as the whale to
Jonas, not to swallow, but to preserve, and to my sinful soul as salt to
tainted flesh, to keep it from putrefaction. Set bounds, O Lord, to the raging
seas, that they ouerflow not, and put thy bridle, and hook into the mouth of
the beast, that it devour not the heart of the Turtle. If thou rebuke in thy
wrath, who can bear it, if thine anger be kindled, yea but a little, who can
stand before thee, if thou but touch the mountains, must they not smoke for
it? The least breath of thy displeasure is able to blast all the beauty of the
world, and as a word of thy mercy made all, so a word of thine anger is able
to destroy all. How glad would they be, that bear the insupportable burden
of thine anger, if in exchange thereof, the mountains would fall upon them,
and the hills cover them. Oh how light a load are the greatest mountains in
comparison of thy least heavy displeasure? At the day of thy wrath the heavens
shall be rolled up as a piece of parchment, the stars fall from the
firmament, the moon be turned into blood, and the sun darkened: then, Lord,
who am I withwhom thou should be angry, or what is flesh and blood, what
seely man that thou should strive with him? Turn the edge of thy wrath, O
Lord, against those principalities, and powers of darkness, that resist thee
from us poor souls, that submit our earthen vessels even to be broken in
pieces by the Potter that made us. O thou Lion of the Tribe of of Judah, spare
them that lie prostrate before thee* and pardon us, if not thy punishment, yet
thine anger: then if thou killest us, we shall love thee, and in death it self
remember thee, in the pit give thee thanks.

Verse. 2. Have mercy upon me, Lord, for I am weak; O Lord heal me, for my
bones are vexed. O God, whose mercy is thy greatest glory, and whose glory,
and power is most seen in man's weakness, and frailty (as wherein there is no
other power seen) let not thy invincible strength strive with so weak an
adversary, as an arm of flesh; wrestle not, O God, with thy poor servant (as
with Jacob) unless (as unto him) thou change his name to Israel, and give him
the blessing of prevailing with God. For, O Lord, thy iron rod, if it, as
that of Moses, he turned into a serpent, would soon devour ours, and if our
earthen vessels should encounter with thine, stronger then brass, how can
they escape breaking, must not our weak ships, if, driven with the tempest of
thine anger, they fall upon that rock of thine, be needs grinded into their
own elements of dust. Therefore be merciful unto me, O Lord, because I am
weak. The strong will arrogate the glory to themselves, and say, by the
strength of their own arm they have gotten themselves the victory, but in
showing mercy to the weak, not unto them, but unto thy name thou give
glory. For there are none so reprobate, but in thy mercy to the weak, they
will confess that it is the finger of the Lord. Let not then the sunshine of
thy grace go down in thy wrath, but refresh, and relieve a pore Lazar, a weak
fainting soul, lying begging at the door of thy rich mercy, and desiring to
be satisfied but with the crummes, that fall from thy heavenly table, with the
least (if any little) of thy graces. For thy least grace (as those five loaves)
is able to suffice thousands, as thy least anger (if thy mercy should not
meet and kiss it) were enough, as an other deluge, to ouerwhelme the whole
world. That is the two-edged sword, that pierces the very bones, and divides
unto the marrow; so that for selfe-guiltines, and horror thereof, my very bones
are vexed, and even that small strength I had powered out, as water, upon the
ground. It is only the pouring out of thy bowels of compassion, that can gather
me up again, only the sovereign hand of thy mercy, that can heal the
wounds, wherewith the severe hand of thy justice has so deeply impierced me.

Verse. 3. My soul is also sore troubled, but Lord how long will thou punish?
IF thy lightning* O Lord, had only ceazed on my bones, and had not past my
bodily sheath, and entered into my soul, my spirit (like a faithful companion)
should have given some rest to my earthly tabernacle, and helped to heal my
infirmity: but a wounded spirit in a bruised, and broken body, who can bear?
Thou have melted my very soul within me, the venime of thine arrows has
drunk up my spirits: so that now both my body is vexed, because my soul
hides it self from his comfort, and because thou hidest thy face, my soul is
troubled. And in what waters does that Behemoth delight to drink, but in such
as are most troubled, who now (like a cunning fisher) has laid his baits,
and hooks in every part of my soul, while I in these troubled waters am not
able to discern or discover them: but since thou have sent thine Angel, O
Lord, (as into the poole of Bethesda) to trouble the waters, and they are gone
over my soul; and my body (with Jonas) is cast into the tempest, O let me
come out in thy good time, whole, and recured of all my infirmities, let the
tempest of thine anger be at length appeased. How long shall my sacrificed
soul under this altar of flesh, wherein it has been so long crucified, cry
unto thee; how long Lord holy, and true, before thou will hear the voice and
avenge the cause of our martyred spirits, justly complaining against the men of
the earth, our earthly ly members? Thine answer is, but for a little season:
but even a little time, O Lord, seems long without thee, and as a thousand
years is but a day with thee, so a day is as a thousand years without thee.
But is this a question for me, who can make no end of sinning, to ask, when
thou will be pleased to make an end of thy punishment? May not thy answer be
to me justly the same with that of Iehu to sinful Ahabs motion of peace: what
have thou to do with peace, as long as the iniquities of Iesabel, nay far
worse, remain in thee? True Lord, if thou still look on me with the eye of
thy justice, (which is as those eyes which kill, what they behold) I know thou
must needs still punish me, since the bow, and sword of thy justice never
depart empty from the battles of the Lord against sin, and sinners: but
thou have two eyes, O God, one of Justice, another of Mercy: O let thine eye
of Justice look upon the merits of thy Son, an object able to delight even
that just eye: but bend thine eye of mercy upon the miseries of thy servant,
that so when thy justice has seen my miseries made his, his merits by thy
mercy, may be made mine.

Verse. 4. Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercy
sake. IF thou but turn thee, O Lord, and look graciously out of heaven upon
me, the powers of darkness, with the shadows of death, will at thy first
fight, as at the day breaking fly all away: but because I turned from thee
with my Father the first Adam by pride, and returned not unto thee by humility
with thy Son, the second Adam, but would needs leave Jerusalem to go to
Jericho, therefore am I fallen among thieves, who have spoiled and wounded me,
leaving me nothing but a cureles body, and a careless soul, that sending out
perpetual streams, and issues of blood, ready presently to die: this not
knowing, but denying thee his Maker, by whom only it is able to live. O if
thou would but turn aside with the merciful Samaritan, or turn back, as to
the woman diseased with a flux of blood, or turn thine eye only upon me, as
upon Peter, my wounds should be washed, the issues of blood stopped, and my
denial pardoned. Turn thee therefore, and remember David's troubles, O Lord.
Shall the hand of little David, O thou most mighty, if a ravenous bear break
into his flock, and steal away a sheep, or if a roaring Lion sallie out of
his den, and rent away a lamb from him, be able to deliver them both from
the mouth of the bear, and the pawe of the Lion; and shall not thou be much
more able to rescue the sheep of thy fold, and lambs of thy flock? Or is that
wild beast of the wood, or that roaring lion, that going about has long
sought, and now, while thy face is turned away, has found whom to devour
(even my dismayed soul) able to make greater resistance against thee, then
those against David? Or was his Flock dearer to him, the^ thine is to thee? Or
can David become more merciful, then his God? Or, if thou be that gracious God
of whom David has so often sung, that Thy mercy endures for ever, thy mercy
endures for ever, is thy mercy come now utterly to an end, or have thou
forgotten to be gracious, and shut up thy bowels of compassion for ever and
ever? Or what is it; is my sin greater then it can be forgiven, that so my
wickedness should exceed thy goodness? No, no, none of these. If David
delivered his lamb from the pawe of the bear, thou deliueredst David from the
pawe of the Lion: if he loved his flock, by which he lived, sure thou must
needs love thine for whom thou diedst; nor is it likely, that thou have shut up
thy bowels of compassion, since thou have opened so large an entrance for us
in the side of thy Son, wherein all thy tender bowels of compassion are
laid up: and how can our sins be above thy mercy, when thy mercy is above
all thy works, and and thy works above all others works, nay when our
wickedst work has something good in it, being an action, and so done by thy
virtue, but thy least goodness has in it not the least evil, being, like
the Author, full of perfection. Turn thee therefore, O Lord, and deliver my
soul, O save me for thy mercies sake.

Verse. 5. For in death no man will remember thee, and who will give thee thanks
in the pit? THou, O God, art the living God, the God of the Living, and of the
Land of the living. While we live, we are bound to remember thee, and though we
are worthy to die, yet death is not worthy to take away the remembrance of
thee. Thy glory, and praise ought to be eternal, as thou art. Let them not
perish then, O Lord, whom thou have created unto that end, the most excellent
end of all things created. How few such swans are there, O God, who sing unto
thee in their death, and perishing how few that will remember thee, with
Jonas, in the belly of the whale, or with Joseph in the pit, or with Daniel in
the lio^s den? who will not rather with Ezeckiah mourn, when they are to go
down into the pit, and with Job, being cast down, curse the day of their
birth, and show themselves almost forgetful of all thy benefits; so far
will they be from giving of thanks. In the pit there is mourning, and howling,
and gnashing of teeth, but the voice of the Turtle, and the singing of birds is
not heard there, the joyful shout of a King is not heard among them. It
belongs unto the Followers of the Lamb, in that everlasting Sabbath, and
Iubile to sing perpetual halleluias, and to cast down their crowns before
thy throne, and to give thanks, glory, and honor unto him that sits
thereupon: and yet it belongs unto us also, O Lord, in what measure, and
proportion we are able, to do thy will on earth even as well, though not so
well as it is done in heaven. O let not Isaac only, but even Ismael live in
thy sight: let us sinners also live, and not go down altogether into the
chambers of death; not because we are worthy but to glorify thy holy name. For
the confession of Sinners, as of thine enemies, is most glorious.

Verse. 6. I am weary of my groanings, every night wash I my bed, and water my
couch with tears. DId holy David, a man after Gods own heart, feel the hand
of him, whose heart he so well pleased, so angry with him, that even in the
night season, when others eyes quietly reposed themselves, his flowed so
abundantly with tears, as if he would have washed both his eyes, and bed, (the
places where his Adultery began, and ended) from the defilement of his sin?
Oh then why should I be weary of my groanings? For what tears will serve to
wash out my Leopard spots, or cleanse my Ethiopian hew? If I had a fountain
running in my head, with Jeremy, to make up lamentations, yet wear it all too
little; but I, as if the very fountain were dried up, am become harder then
the rock in the wilderness stricken with Moses rod: for that gushed out with
abundance of waters, whereas I shed no tears when the Lord strikes. Thy
servant, O Lord, is a suitor for every plant, which thy heavenly Father
planteth, because it shall never be rooted up again: but let all thy plants O
God, be watered with the tears of repentance, and then they will be fruitful
indeed, and bring forth even an hundred fold. They are the most acceptable
drinke-offering unto thee, and more pleasing then if rivers of oil were powered
out before thee. These do, as it were anew baptize us in Christ Jesus, and
wash away the filth of our flesh, as the waters of Jordan did Naamans leprosy,
or as those waters of Bethesda, which, when they were troubled, every one knew
there was an Angel in them, and that some cure should presently be wrought. No
water so precious, and of such virtue, as tears distilling from a repenting
heart; it holds the next place to the water of life, and is as the water
powered out upon Elias sacrifice, which was consumed with fire from heaven, or
as a heavenly dew retourning thither from whence it fell, and falling down
again in showers of grace, and mercy. To other men, and in other causes,
tears are like the bitter waters of Marrah, but when the children of Israel,
Gods children drink thereof, they are streight-waies made sweet, and pleasant.
For what if they now sow in tears, they shall hereafter reap in joy, and the
eyes of the Spouse, that are now as doves eyes, over the rivers of water, ever
mourning and weeping, shall hereafter, when all tears shall be wiped away from
them, instead thereof, be filled with laughter, and anointed with the oil of
gladness above all others. How often is it mentioned that the tears of the
godly come up to the Lord, being only their property, whereas al other
tears do descend, naturally to move upwards toward heaven. And indeed
though the heavens be as moulten brass, these (much more powerful the^ the
drops of rain, whose often fall, does hollow, and pierce the hardest
stones,) would supple, and mollify them? We find in common calamities they
move the most obdurate heart to pity, yea even to a sympathy in our
sorrows, and one enemy forgiues another, and relents; if he seek it with
tears: much more will they move the Lord to mercy, who styles himself the
God of pity and compassion. Wherefore Christ professes himself wounded, and
overcome with the eyes of his spouse. No water, but the tears of repentance is
of force to quench the fiery darts of Satan, and put out the flames of Hell
kindled against us. Therefore I will be no more weary of my groanings, but
every night will vvash my bed, and water my couch with my tears.

Verse. 7. My beauty is gone for very trouble, and worn away, because of mine
enemies. ALl worldly beauty, alas, is nothing else but vanity; what more
goodly then that of the Lilly of the field? ( Solomon is not so glorious) yet
how soon it vadeth, and perishes? but, alas, the loss of this outward
beauty were nothing, though the sun look upon me in the heat of
affliction, while I keep thy vineyard, I may be black, but comely: but my
loss is of that inward beauty, wherewith thy Spouse, the faithful soul, is
all glorious within. I know, Lord, thou had once new made me after the image
of thy divine beauty, which all the beauty of the world cannot so much as
shadow, but I have fallen, and defaced it, that now it cannot be known whose
image, and superscription it is: and now that the beauty of my flourishing is
gone, what remains, but the old man, full of the wrinkles, and furrows, and
frosts of Winter, so exceedingly deformed, and so great a malefactor, that it
is time for him now to die, and I may with justice cry, Crucify him. In this
is the description of the natural old man rightly verified in a spiritual
sense. The Sun of righteousness is darkened in him, and the clouds return
after the rain, one sin after an other, one misery after an other: Eccl. 12.
the keepers of the house tremble, the strong men bow, and they wax dark
that look out of the windows: faith is weak, hope faints, and charity
fails. O grant, O Lord, that as the Eagle renews her youth, I may cast off
this old man, and put on the new Jesus Christ, thine, and thy Churches
well-beloved, whose countenance is all white, and ruddie, the fairest of ten
thousand, so exceeding aspectable, that it is able to change this vile body,
whose beauty is quite gone, and worn away, and make it like his glorious body.

Verse. 8. Away from me all ye that work vanity, for the Lord has heard the
voice of my weeping. BEhold here how the Lord after his whirlewinde that tore
all the mountains of pride in me, and burst in sunder my heart of rock,
comes at length in the still, and soft voice. The Lord has wounded, but lo
he binds up again, he has brought unto the grave, and lo he brings
back again. For when my tongue failed, I spoke unto him in the silence of my
soul, and when my soul fainted, mine eyes flowed out with tears to speak
unto him, and lo he has answered the request of my heart, and heard the voice
of my weeping. Now therefore since the Lord deigneth to come unto me in his
mercy, and build up my ruins, and dwell with me again, what have I to do
with my old companions the workers of iniquity, shall they, and my God keep
together? or shall I entertain my Sovereign Lord with such household servants?
no, they shall not enter into my house, or come within my roof. Now the Sun
is risen, it is time these shadows were parted away. For neither can thy light
dwell with darkness, nor their works of darkness abide the trial of thy light.
Therefore away from me, both all ye workers, and all ye workers of vanity. I
know, Lord, there will be a hard parting between my old pleasures, and my old
heart: the sirens will sing many a sweet song, and cast many a fair look,
and weep many a false tear, before they will part with me: but it is no
matter what the Harlots do* since thou have heard the voice of my weeping, I
have nothing to do with the voice of theirs; since my voice uttered in the
bitterness of my heart, was so well accepted of thee, nothing shall henceforth
pleasure me, but such bitter songs, wherewith they are little acquainted: and
though I cannot cast out these Iebusites, but they will still dwell with me,
yet, thorough thy grace, I will keep them in subjection, and if they grow
insolent in my body, the temple of thy holy Spirit, I will weep for their
sins, and so, crying daily unto thee with tears for pardon, will make them
serve me, at the least, to draw water for the house of the Lord. O that I could
make an integrall separation of my self from them, and might not carry my
greatest enemies in my bosom so near my heart, the lusts of it; but, in stead
of that fountain of death, be joined unto the Fountain of life, Christ Jesus,
in whom there is so inseperable an union between God, and man, that neither
death, nor hell, no not the strongest things of this world (weak unto thee)
much less the weakest, the vanities thereof, can ever be able to separate us
from thee.

Verse. 9. The Lord has heard my petition: The Lord will receive my prayer. IT
is a great grace of thee, O my Lord, to suffer dust, and ashes to speak unto
thee, but it is as common with thee, as it is great. For thou suffer many to
say unto thee, Lord, Lord, whom nevertheless thou know not. It is a
greater therefore that when we call upon thee in the time of trouble thou will
hear us: and yet this also may seem to be not so singular a mercy: for
whatsoever is spoken, shall not he that made the ear, hear it? but so to
hear our prayers, as to receive, and grant them, and then to hear the cry of
our petitions, when the louder cry of our sins would drown their voice,
this is a goodness as near unto thy nature, as it is far from our desert. O how
unlike are thy ears, that are always open to the request of the poor, and
needy, to those of the deaf Adder, that old Serpent, that stoppes his ears,
and is inexorable, charm the charmer never so sweet? how unlike to us, O
Lord, that (having ears) yet when thou call for our obedience, have none to
hear thee, where contrariwise, thou (having none) when we call to thee,
inclinest thine ears to hear us. But certainly, O Lord, it is impossible that
thy just ears should hear the prayers of such as we are: for we know God
hears not sinners. True Lord: and therefore thou have got thee new ears, and
least we should think these like thy other, have set them even upon our Head
Jesus Christ: with them thou hear us if we speak unto thee, and our words
passing through his mouth (as how can we speak unto thee, but by our head) are
set on fire by that Golden censor, and, like holy incense, make a sweet savor
upon thine Altar. So that henceforth though our works be all, like our selves,
wicked, though our rough hands be the hands of Esau, yet our voice is Jacobs
voice, and we have got the apparel of our eldest brother Esau, and therefore
we know that thou will bless us, we are sure thou will hear us, and spare us,
though more sinful, then ever Sodom was. What though Abraham, Moses and
Elias were now living, and prayed for us, we are sure thou would much less
hear them for us, then for their, and thine own people of the Jews: yet thou
have heard him for us, and without conditioning, as with Abraham, for the
sparing of Sodom, if fifty, twenty, or ten just men were found therein, have
spared us all only for one just man's sake. In him therefore, with boldness,
do all thy Saints offer up their golden vyals of odours, their prayers, before
thee. For he only is worthy to make our prayers well-pleasing unto thee, in
whom only thou art well pleased.

Verse. 10. All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed, they shall be
turned back and put to shame suddenly. BEhold the bounty, and severity of
God: severity toward mine enemies, that have fallen; bowntie toward me,
that when I, and they stood before thine Altar, as the two Goats, one of us to
be sacrificed, to appease thy wrath, and as Jonas with the Mariners, in the
tempest of thine anger, one of us to be cast out, have pleased to let the lot
of the scape-goate, fall on me, and to make them the sin-offring. Nor weart
thou content, O Lord, to repaie me good for evil, that rendered thee evil
for good, but after thou had pardoned me thou would not pardon mine
enemies, as though thou hate thy childrens enemies more then thine own, and
love them better then thy self: giving thy self for them when they were
thine enemies, and when we, for want of spiritual senses, had no sense of our
spiritual wants, then redeeming us: but confounding, and sore vexing, and
suddenly turning back, and putting to a perpetual shame those that hate us,
and not us, that hated thee. Now, Lord, taught by thy example, that art so good
to thine enemies, and having thine own word for it, I cannot but love mine
enemies, and pray for them, that curse me. If it be a fault, or a folly (as
the world esteems it) thou have taught it me, and I would willingly err with
thee my God; it is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master is. But yet
there are some of mine enemies, I confess, that made me first an enemy unto
thee, O Lord, whom I hate with a perfect hatred, who are grown now so ill, as
they are past my prayers, and have gone further then thy mercy will follow
them, even into the gates, and mouth of hell, that gap't so wide to devour me,
with the^. O let the sword of thy Justice be drunke^ with the slaughter of
these great, and arch-enemies of thy innocent, and little flock, and blessed be
my Lord for carrying away, like Samson, the gates of hell, that they should not
prevail over me, and so leading my captivity captive, and casting my souls
enemies into the pit they had prepared for me. Many far greater stars, and
fairer lights, then, I O God, has the tail of that dragon drawn down
after him from heaven, and had not thou (to whom only the fame belongs)
taken my cause into thine own hand, I had also been vvinnovved, and carried
like dust, and chafe before the wind. Therefore, as thou have broken these
mine enemies in pieces, so also scatter them, that the pieces of the mangled
Serpent may never come together again. O let not the deadly vvound of the head
of the beast be healed, to make war against thy Saints, and against the
Lamb for ever.

His daily Sacrifice.
HOw comes it to pass, O Lord, that thou art so mindful of man, man being
so forgetful of thee? Sure but that mercy is essential unto thee, and thou
can as soon forget to be, as forget to be gracious, it were impossible but
such a man of sins and sorrovves, as I am, rather a worm, and no man, or
more truly dust, and ashes, and none of all thy living creatures, nothing,
indeed, but a very bundle of vanity, vanity of vanities, should despair of
pardon, and think my sins greater then they could be forgiven. I that have
seconded the first fall of man with so many fallings from thy grace, (and if
that one were so powerful to condemn all, ah what are so many to convince
one) I that have as often denied thee in my deeds, as I have sinned, and that
not thrice, not seven times, but seaue^ty seven times in a day. I that have so
often when thou have by thy graces come in and lodged with me, for a vile price
of base peasures betrayed thee, I that whereas I should have mortified the old
man, and crrucified the lusts thereof, so often have grieved thy good spirit, and
crucified the Lord of life within me, and so buried, and sealed him up in an
obdurate, and stony heart, that it must be a great work of thy power, and
mercy to rise again in me, and roll away the stone: I that have thus filled
up my measure of iniquity with Sodo^, how dare I with Abraham, so often move
the Lord for mercy: I that have so often rebelled, how can I hope to be
received again to grace, and pardon: I that have no other plea, but guilty,
how dare I importune the just judge, unless, as that woman did the unjust
judge, for justice. Has my best service unto thee been betthen theirs, who
kneeling, and saluting thee, hail king of the Jews, yet crucified thee?
wherein have my prayers, and tears been better then those, of the hypocritall
Pharisees, only seeming for a time, and so full of sin, that when I have
prayed for forgiveness, I had need pray again for forgiveness of my prayers. Ah
my wretched soul mock not thy Savior any longer with thy kneeling, and
prayers, like those soldiers that crucified him; thou have gone already
further then Judas, not only betraying him, but being (which he denied to be)
guilty of the shedding of his innocent blood; think with thy self, how often
thou have grieved his holy spirit, turning the grace thereof into wantonness:
how often thou have, when he of this mercy had healed thee, presently fallen
into a relaps far worse then thy former disease; how often thou have walowed thy
self again in the mire, when he had washed not thy feet only, but thy head,
and hands also; how often, when thy heavenly Physician had purged thee, returned
to thy vomit. And now, Lord, with what fig leaves shall I cover the shame of my
sin, since I know thou have cursed the fig tree, that bore leaves only? Oh
tell me how with the Prodigal shall I return to my Father? or if I do
return, say, have thou any more kisses, and embraces lest, for such a riotous
Son? If the mountains, which yet offended not, did tremble, and melt away at
thy presence, and if even thy holiest Saints at thy presence fell down to the
ground almost for dead, troubled, and amazed, saying, surely they should die,
because they had seen the Lord, if the Cherubins, that stand alwaie before
thee, cover their faces, looking but upon thy Mercie-seate, O with what face
shall a guilty soul come before thee, when it appears before thy seat of
justice? Have I not reason to hate my sins, that are able to make the sight
of thee, which is so amiable, and beatificall, and to thy happy servants a
vision wherein their whole felicity consists, so full of horror to me? O how
the very thought thereof confounds me, and, as if now, like Balthazar, I saw
the handwriting against me, makes me tremble, and stand amazed, smiting my
knees one against another; what can I say for my self, or what can I do? what
sinne-offring, what peace offering shall I bring to make atonement with the
Lord? what Moses, or Aaron have I to stand between Gods destroying Angel, and
me? whom have I to make intercession for me? I dare not approach to my
Savior, whom my sins may justly make of a meek Lamb, an enraged Lion unto
me, I see no other but a two-edged sword proceed out of his mouth for my
destruction, and me thinks he is a providing whips to scourge me out of his
Temple, returning those stripes, those thorns, those wounds upon me, which he
has unworthily borne for me, denying any more to bear my cross: so that now
though I cry unto him Lord, Lord, he will not know me, nor suffer me any
more to have a part in the Son of Ishai. Since therefore thy sword is drawn,
O Lord, against me, what can I do but lay down my neck, and submit my
self to the stroke of that Axe, that cutteth down all unfruitful, and
ill-fruitfull Trees. For if even the death of a sinner, and ruin of a wretched
soul please thee, and may any way satisfy thy Justice (as indeed it cannot,
for thou delightest not in the death of a sinner) oh how willingly should I
cast away my self, with Jonas, to accalme the tempest of thine anger against
me: but, alas, it is not my sacrifice can expiate my sins. It were a good
fruit of my body, if it might be offered for the sin of my soul: but how can
that satisfy for sin, which it self is most sinful? O no, I confess, O
Lord, that I have no other sinne-offering but my repentance left, nor other
burnt-offering then an aggrieued heart, nor other drink offering then tears,
nor other incense then my sighs, nor other propitiation, or Priest, and
Mediator then thy self, O Christ. Thou art our King to protect us, our
Prophet to teach us, our Priest to make an atonement for us, and thou have
promised to make us also Kings, Priests, and Prophets unto thy Father; but such
is my unworthiness, O Lord, that often when I would take upon me the Priests
office, and offer my prayers (as thou have taught me) unto my Father, which is
in heaven, for pardon, that I am quite confounded, and have nothing at all to
say for my self, and though I know thou art able to cure my dumbness, yet it
is safer for me to hear thee open thy mouth to thy Father for mercy, then
let my mouth be opened to cry for vengeance against my self. For I, more
unnatural then Caine, have slain, not my younger brother, but my self, nor my
self only, but my elder brother, and therefore my blood cannot but, with
Abells, cry to heaven for vengeance against him, that spilt it: but when I
listen what the cry of thy blood, my elder brother, is, whom my sin has
slain, O how much better things do I hear it speak, then the blood of Abel,
Father forgive him: besides, if I speak for my self, my words are like the
wind, that pass away, and go I know not whither, but most likely with my
self into the Land where all things are forgotten: but thine are like thine
own essence, O Lord, who art the eternal word, such as heaven, and earth may
sooner pass away, the^ one tittle of the^. Do thou therefore, O gracious
Savior, speak, and mediat for me; let the many wounds inflicted on thee for
my sins be as so many mouths to crave mercy for me: O let thy blood, as
when thou were wounded it fell on the base earth, be distilled also by the
grace, and merit thereof upon me a vile, and unworthy sinner; how happy were I
if, as thou made Adam of red earth, so thou had made me of that fruitful
red ground which thou vouchsafedst to water with thine own blood. Let thy
stripes, O Christ, go for the many stripes wherewith I, as an evil servant,
deserve to be beaten, thy death for that eternal death my sins have as their
hire deserved, and thy descent into hell for mine to free me from thence.
Indeed if thou were, as man is, prone to anger, nay were thine anger kindled
but a little, and were not thy mercy rather as far above man's reason, as his
merit, how long since had I perished from the land of the living? If I look
upon my sins, me thinks I should always see thee before me (as thine Angel
in the way of Baalim) with the sword of thy justice drawn against me, upon
which (as mad men do upon weapons) my sins make me wilfully to run, and I
seem to my self to lie (as Isaac) under thy sword for sacrifie, still
expecting when thou should come by me in the whirlewindes, earthquakes, and
tempests of thy judgments: yet to see, how thou (that no man might deny it to
proceed only of grace, and not of merit) chusest rather to come in the still,
and soft voice of thy mercies even unto us sinners, and wilt that thy holy
spirit (the spirit of meeknes) come down rather in the form of a dove, without
gal, the^ of a consuming fire unto us. How far art thou from desiring the death
of a sinner, that when we were both branch, and root under the Axe of thy
judgments, and (as Isaac) ready to be sacrificed, and made a sin offering,
did provide thy self a Lamb, (yea thy self the Lamb) to save us, and to
set us free. How ready art thou to snatch the perishing brand out of the fire,
how soon entreated to forbear, and spare the fruitless figtree, not doing
that unto the dry tree, which thou have done unto the green? O see if ever
there were love like thy love! thy love and mercy, as thy self, transcending
all. If ever thou repentest, it is of thine anger, not of thy mercy, if ever
thou hear not our prayers, it is because they tend to our own hurt, if thou
hidest thy face, it is that we might seek thee, and if thou fliest from us,
that we might follow after thee more eagerly: if thy justice take vengeance, it
shall be only upon those that hate thee, and in the^, but to the fourth
generation, but if thy mercy begin to show it self, it will content it self
with no less then a thousand generations. O thou immortal goodness, and beauty
of heaven, draw me unto thee with the bands of thy love, and with the same
cords bind me, that I break not from thee, let me be ward unto the King of
heaven, and thy grace be my Guardian. Then shall mine inheritance, and my lines
fall unto me in a fair Land, even in the vineyard, and Paradise of my God,
whereof though the first could not, yet the second Adam with his blood (as
Nabaoth) has kept possession, out of which neither the serpent, nor all the
powers of darkness shall be ever able to expel me, so thou only but suffer the
weak hand of my faith to lay hold on thy cross, and to eat of the fruit of
that tree of life. For if thou be with me, I shall be safe, death shall have no
sting, sin no poison, hell no victory. For thou have overcome all the power
of hell, and death, not for thy self, over whom it could have no power, but
for us, whose weakness could make no resistance; but if thou absent thy
self, though but for a while, my weak faith which had the boldness to cast me
out upon the sea of thy mercy, that so, with Peter, I might meet thee walking
upon the waters, will never have the courage, if it see the waves rise, to
uphold it self. Lord stretch out thy hand, and save me from sinking, and so
henceforth bind the sacrifice with cords unto the Altar, fasten me unto thy
cross, O Christ, and spread thy self in thy merits, and mercies (as Elias)
upon me, that I may recover life, and though out of due season be borne unto
thee. O grant me any one of the menest places of the many mansions of thy
Fathers house, and when Israel, thy chosen children, and thy invited Ghests set
with thee, at thy great marriage feast, and many come from East to West to set
with Abraham in thy kingdom: when thy servants are placed, may but I take the
lowest place at thy table, and so when thou have fed thousands behold thee
breaking unto me, but of thy broken bread; or but be suffered to gather up the
crummes under that heavenly table, and my hungry and thirsty soul satisfied,
with that angelical Manna, and made drunk with the pleasures of thy house,
shall never hunger, or thirst more. In the mean time, while I dwell in this
corruptible Tabernacle, O let that grace of thine which shines upon thy
worthier Servants (if any worthy under whose roof thou should come) as thou
visitest other Publicans, and sinners turn in unto thy Servants house, and
dine with him.

FINIS.

