Fortune's BOUNTY: OR, AN Everlasting Purse FOR THE Greatest Cuckold in the
Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed; and are to be Sold by B. Brag, at the Blue-Ball in
Ave-Mary-Lane.

FORTUNE'S BOUNTY: OR, AN Everlasting Purse FOR THE Greatest Cuckold in the
Kingdom.
IN wicked Times, when wanton Wives
Led injured Husbands wretched Lives,
Blind Fortune in a generous Mood,
Resolved to do some Cuckold Good;
But being a purblind Female Creature,
And of a fickle wavering Nature,
She could not readily agree
What the kind Benefit should be,
Or, who have Title to receive
The Noble Prize she meant to give.
Thus puzzled as she Musing sat,
Confounded quite 'twixt, who and what:
At last remembr'ing it was a fau't
To do great things with little thought,
She to some lonely Cloud retired
To Think, as Matters well required.
The Wise use great deliberation,
Ever they bestow a large Donation.
Lord May'rs are seldom over speedy
In building Alms-Huts for the Needy;
But take seven Years Consideration,
About the Pious Works Foundation;
Nay little Benefits we find
Come slow, when done with half a Mind.
The Saint will Fumble near an Hour,
And have some Witness by before
He Will give his Farthing to the Poor;
That they may praise the Nigards Bounty,
And blaze the Wonder through the County,
But Fortune after some confusion,
Came in short time to a conclusion,
And made this following resolution.
Which was, that every Married Noddy,
Tongue Leas'd and Governed by his Dowdy,
Tormented with eternal Clamor,
More noisie than a Pewt'rer's Hammer;
And every peevish tortured Spouse
That wears his Corns upon his Brows,
And raves to think he cannot mend
The failings of his Wife's lower end:
Also the Patient and the Wise
Who smother all their Injuries
Committed 'twixt Adult'rous Thighs,
And kindly Father without fretting,
A Brood of G -- d knows whose begetting.
These Fortune had resolved to Summon,
But each t'appear without his Woman;
Least Female Tongues should spoil the sport,
And make the Crowd turn Dover-Court.
Her Edicts signed with her own Name
Were scattered all abroad by Fame,
Declaring what she had designed
For the most Wretched of Mankind:
As to the place of Rendezvous,
For every Horned unhappy Spouse,
She Bearing Cuckoldom in Mind,
Guild Hall was by the Dame assigned
Most fit above all other places,
For Cucks and Cots to show their Faces.
The merry time at last drew near,
On which the Bucks were to appear;
Dame Fortune at the hour appointed,
Attired like any Lord's Anointed,
In Robes of a Camelian Dye,
That changed in the twinkling of an Eye;
Was sometimes Red, and sometimes Blue,
But altered still to something new;
Showing by Colors variation
Women are subject to mutation.
Yet notwithstanding of their ranging,
They always are the same, that is changing;
A pair of Horns of wondrous size,
All Gold to dazzle Humane Eye;,
Made full of Antlers Buds and Sprouts,
In Foster-Lane or there abouts,
By some, if Folks don't falsely Jear 'em
That have no little Right to wear 'em;
Were carried on a lofty Pole
Before Queen Fortune to the Hall,
Just as his Custard Cap does bear
The Sword before the City May'r;
In mighty Pomp she past along
Attended with abnumerous Throng,
Gathered together by degrees,
From the Four and Twenty Companies.
At last into the Hall she came,
Where all paid Rev^rence to the Dame.
She gazed around, and as they Bowed
To the Horns, she Curt'si'd to the Crowd.
At last it pleased her fickle Grace.
To find her Jilting Bum a place:
The Court of Conscience being clear
Of Business, she Ascended there;
And on the Bench, O fie upon her!
She clapped her Tail, that is, her Honor.
For Female Honor you must know
Is humbly seated very low;
Therefore high Conscientious Places
Do not become a nunquam satis.
However, there the Gipsy staid,
And sat as modest as a Maid;
With her huge Gilded Mace before her,
Which caused the Cuckolds to adore her.
Thus seated on the Bench alone,
Like Playhouse Queen on slit-deal Throne:
Such Crowds came staring in and gaping,
Even from Westminster and Wapping,
That sure the Hall was never more full
Of City Stags at Sheriffs Poll.
Vintners and Vict'lers flocked in shoals,
Made graceful by their flowing Bowls;
Whose Heads became the noble Crest,
So far exceeding all the rest,
That the whole Herd aloud cried out,
They never ought to appear without.
Lawyers in Droves flowed in as fast
As if the Term had not been past,
But hid their Horns beneath their Gowns,
And so incurred Dame Fortune's Frowns;
But rather than they would spoil the Jest,
At last they wore them like the rest,
Which made the Black-Rob'd Tribe appear
Like Oxen driving to a Fair;
However they resolved to try
For Fortune's Favor by and by,
Well knowing that their Wedded Evils
Had Tails like Goats, and Tongues like Devils,
And that they would all the Plagues of Life
That Man could meet with in a Wife.
Our Teachers too their Horns exalting,
Some young and brisk, some old and haulting;
Flowed in from every part of the Nation,
As thick as at a Visitation;
All filled with hopes, and well prepared,
To show what cursed Shrews they would Married.
The angry Crowd, in great disdain,
Cried out the Clergy of all Men
Should not b'admitted to complain,
Because their Function were the first
That made us Mortals thus accursed,
And that they punished Fornication,
And brought D -- n'd Wedlock into fashion.
But Fortune minding not the Crowd,
Most humbly to the Clergy bowed,
And told them (though she never designed it)
She Would be their Friend, and they should find it.
They thanked her for the Grace she would done 'em,
But found 't was but a Jest upon 'em.
In numbers flocked Phisicians too,
Who knew not how to tame a Shrew,
Or cure for the ease of their own Lives,
The Falling Evil in their Wives;
Who when their Frensies were upon 'em,
And on their backs their Fits had thrown 'em,
They could not rise, least Folks belly 'em,
Whilst any Man was standing by 'em;
But heave and pant, and wink and pink,
And breath so short that one would think
Who did but see their Freaks transacted
That they were Dying or Distracted.
Besides the swarms I mention here,
All sorts of Traders did appear;
For no degrees of Men can be
From Cuckoldom and Avarice free;
Therefore most Husbands had pretense
To Fortune's kind Benevolence.
The Hall was crowded in a Minute,
That not one more could squeeze within it.
Then Fortune, loud as she could bawl,
Commanded Silence in the Hall;
And rising up, from off her Breech,
She standing made this generous Speech.
My Lords and Genrry that appear
According to my Summons here,
I Am hither come, with Joy to meet ye,
And with sincere Affection great ye,
I must confess, your good alone
'Twas brought me hither, not my own,
And you shall always surely find,
(Though some, perhaps, are so unkind,
To think me of a fickle Mind.)
My Heart not Foreign, but Domestic;
Not Popish, but Ecclesiastic.
With that the Churchmen standing ready,
Bowed low and cried, Your Servant Lady.
Hoping by this their good Behavior,
To win the Dame and curry Favor;
But they, alas, were at a loss,
In thinking to her Love ingross;
For Fortune's kindness wa'n't expressed
To them alone, but all the rest:
After some pause she thus again
Began, and made the Matter plain:
All you that bear the heavy Curse
Of, The Gray Mare the better Horse;
Or wear the Failings of your Spouses,
A small degree above your Noses,
Let every one his Grievance show,
That I the naked Truth may know.
And he who is in Wedlock joined
To the worst plague of Womankind,
And leads the most confounded Life
That ever did Man with hellish Wife;
Let her be either Young or Old,
Fair, Homely, Sluttish, Whore, or Scold;
Or he be Churchman or Dissenter,
A Trimmer, Puritan, or Ranter;
Or neither Whig, or yet a Tory,
But does in Moderation glory;
Let him be Libertine or Saint,
So that he is but a Protestant,
And he alone, to ease his Curse,
Shall have a neverfailing Purse;
Besides this forked golden Prize,
Of such a large and ample size
That 'twill adorn and grace the Hall
Of the best Noble of you all;
Therefore disclose the wretched Lives
You bear with your unruly Wives,
That I may judge among you all,
On whom my Bounty ought to fall.
The Dons and Coms could not agree
At first about Precedence;
But such Debates and Feuds arose,
As if their Words would end in Blows;
Each pelting each with all their Lies
Their Heat and Malice could devise:
Wise Men stood by and shook their Noddles,
To hear their Betters such Tom-doodles;
Whilst all the dull unthinking Rabble,
Seemed much delighted with the Squabble;
And thereupon the Fools divided,
And with the differing Parties sided;
Some for the Dons declared their Zeal,
Some for the Coms were Tooth and Nail;
Bad Words were scarter'd at no rate,
The Hall was turned to Billingegate
And every Blockhead in the Crew,
Espoused one Party of the two,
Though very few could tell for whi^
They roared down this, or cried up that.
But since ill Men had made a (...)
They would be of one side or other.
Just so it is in Hookley Hole
When Rose and Brindle fight the Bult:
Some on the Dogs will set their Heart,
Some take the horned Champion's part.
When thus disposed, the Rabble-Rout
Soon find occasion to fall out:
Then Fools and Dogs and Bulls and Bears,
Fall all together by the Ears,
Whilst wiser Men securely sit,
And overlook the wrangling Pit,
Keep silent Tongues, no Party take,
But view the Sport the Puppies make.
The Feud grew higher still and higher,
For Knaves and Fools increased the Fire,
Poets and Scriblers watched their Waters,
And plied them with Lampoons and Satyrs,
Each drew his Pen in Rhyme or Prose,
To serve his Friends or scourge his Foes,
Whose Follies yet were never shown
Apart, without the Author's own.
Which did to Men of Judgment's view,
Seem always greatest of the two.
However, rather than conceal
Their Faults, they would their own reveal.
The Reason's plain, for you must know it is
The Talent of our modern Poets,
With stupid Malice to delight ye,
Because the Jarring envious City,
Will not be pleased with what is Witty.
Thus Libels publicly were cried,
And flew about from side to side,
The common People to incense,
And aggravate the difference.
Dame Fortune, with her purblind Eyes,
Beholding such a Storm arise,
Grew Jealous that some Ill was meant,
To interupt her good Intent;
Therefore in hopes to heal the Breach,
She made this reconciling Speech.
My Dons and Coms I Am much perplexed,
To see your Gravities thus vexed;
And that the hopes of my poor Favor,
Should make you use this strange behavior;
What though I can bestow upon you,
A never failing Flux of money,
And as I Am Fortune, am the Donor,
Of Plenty, Power, Wealth, and Honor;
Yet since to my great Grief I find,
Such Avarice reigning in each Mind,
All you that hope to gain the Prize,
By spreading Calumnies and Lies,
And Rave and Quarrel so about it,
Upon my word shall Go without it,
For shame let me no more behold,
Such mighty Men contend for Gold,
After so turbulent a fashion,
That makes you Odious to the Nation;
For though you would fain persuade the Crowd,
You squabble for the public Good,
Yet to all wisemen it appears,
That Interest sets you by the Ears,
Therefore I beg that for the future,
You will not make this shameful Clutter,
Or widen such injurious Breaches
About priority of Speeches,
Since 'twill b'expected by the rest
He that speaks least, should speak the best;
Therefore, as you have often seen
At Crowning of a King or Queen,
The lowest Rank do first appear,
And leave the highest in the Rear;
So the same Mode they use in Walking
I hope you will observe in Talking.
Therefore proceed as I direct,
And you shall find I Will not neglect
To do that Justice you expect.
This Speech (although there is little in it)
Made them good Friends in half a minute;
That all cried out in voce una,
God save the mighty Queen Fortuna.
The whole Assembly being pleased,
And all their Heats and Feuds appeased,
A Fleet Street Vintner in the Crowd,
Opened his Case, but first he Bowed.
Madam, says he, upon my Life
I Have got the Devil of a Wife;
She Is Lustful, Ugly, and she is Old,
And besides these, a Cursed Scold,
Her Crabbed Looks, the Parish knows it,
Will turn new Milk into a Posset.
When I am kind she is still so base,
Her Eyes dash Verjuice in my Face,
Nay, Pepper dwells upon her Tongue,
Which she shakes over me all day long;
No Smithfield Cook sure ever abused,
Or used Roast-Beef as I am used;
Besides, I can with safety swear
The Jade confounds me every Year
A Hundred Pounds more than is fitting
In Dainty Bits for her own Eating;
And Drinks, I may with Justice say,
Two Quarts of Palm Wine every day;
But that which I resent most ill,
And is of all the bitterest Pill
When she is got Drunk, the Whore of Whores
Turns up her Honor to my Drawers,
And picks my Pocket of my Pelf,
To make them Richer than my self.
With that he Sighed, and wiped his Eyes,
And cried he hoped such Miseries
Might give him Title to the Prize.
When this his sad Complaint was heard,
All the Blue Squadron gaped and star'd,
And though the major party had
Such Wives that were profusely Bad;
Yet none could say he had a worse,
So every one concealed his Curse,
Sneaked off their Horns, as prudence bid 'em,
And underneath their Aprons hid 'em,
Believing their Cornuted Brother
Must bear the Bell from all the other.
Next him a Doctor of the Body,
A mighty Spruce Cornutede Noddy,
Advanced and humbly did beseech
Dame Fortune to observe his Speech.
Madam, says he, upon my Honor
I have a Spouse, a Pox upon her,
So Lustful, that I Am sure her Tail is
As hot as Lapis Infernalis.
It Is troubled with a Wolfish Evil,
And eats Raw Flesh like any Devil,
Gobbles up Handfuls at a time,
Yet thinks the Gluttony no Crime.
Though I must needs confess it is true
It has no Teeth and cannot Chew;
Yet will it mumble it so about
'Till it has sucked the Goodness out,
And that small Cud which does remain
It Spits as Nauseous out again;
Yet raves the next succeeding Minute
For more, as if the Devil was in it.
I Feed the Vulture all I can,
But it is too much for one poor Man.
It therefore will have change of Diet,
Yet all will not keep the Monster quiet;
And if these Plagues deserve no Favor,
Old Nick take Wife and Prize together.
The rest of the Aesculapian Grew
At this course Plea looked very blue;
They all expecting to have heard
A Speech becoming of a Bard.
Some hemmed and haw'd, whilst others vexed,
And no one cared to venture next.
A cunning Fox of great renown,
Wrapped up in Legislative Gown,
Finding the Quacks were not agreed
About what Brother should succeed,
Steping 'twixt Fortune and the Crowd,
Cly'd, Madam, by your leave, and Bowed;
Then upright as an Arrow stood,
Stuck Thumbs in the Wast-band of his Breeches,
And balked the Doctors of their Speeches.
Madam, says he (and looks upon her)
I Am much beholding to your Honor,
For I must needs confess in Truth
I Have been your Favorite from my Youth;
Yet though I Am now so highly mounted,
And have at Westminster been counted
So Just and Wise through all my Life,
I Am almost Gally'd with a Wife.
What though I Am learned in every Cause,
And long have doated on the Laws,
Yet could I never find out one
To make the Gipsy hold her Tongue,
An Age I Have Pleaded at the Bar
And am no puny Orator,
Yet though she is Old, my Jangling Gillian
Will still out-Talk me by a Million,
And for one Word I Speak, she musters
Whole Troops, and pelts my Ears by clusters.
Therefore kind Lady Fair, cries he,
I hope to ease my Misery.
You will to me the Purse impart,
For I love God with all my Heart.
Fortune replied she would be his Friend,
And do him Justice in the end.
A Parson next of wondrous Note,
Betwixt a Polecat and a Stoate,
Advanced with very Sickly look,
Hemmed thrice, and thus to Fortune Spoke.
Madam, I come not here to Preach,
Or show my Elegance of Speech;
Nor shall I now maintain that Schism,
Which some Men call Socinianism:
Or teach you how a Man that is Crafty,
May take Oaths pro and con with safety.
In short I Am come to give you notice,
In verbo vero Sacerdotis;
That no poor Mortal of my Function
Was ever under more Compunction;
Not for my own Erroneous Life,
But for the Failings of my Wife,
Who has a Tongue that Squalls and Bawls
As loud as any Bell in Paul's.
At meals instead of Grace she will sit
And scold before and after Meat,
Nay, find more seasons every day,
To rave than I can do to Pray;
And rants with such a taunting Air,
Adsnouns sh'would make a Parson swear.
Besides, as I Am a Priest and Sinner,
I dare not take a Friend to Dinner,
Or show that Love to a poor Brother,
We ought to bear to one another,
Least she, my good Intent to Cross,
Should give our meat such sower sauce,
That meeting with a Tongue so Evil,
My Friend should think me so uncivil,
To make him Mess-mate with the Devil.
Believe me 'twas alone her Tongue,
That awed my Conscience all along,
And made me such a wavering Priest,
That I became a Common Jest;
But who that is wedded to a scold,
Can blame me now the Truth is told?
For while Man's Man's so plagued and nettled?
How should his Conscience ever be settled?
With that the Crowd both hissed and smiled,
And all his quaint Oration Spoiled,
Crying aloud since he had hung
His Faith upon so vile a Tongue,
They hoped the Devil would adapt her,
To plague him to the end of the Chapter.
Besides they cried, it was not fit,
That he who had so little Wit,
To let his Wives tempestuous Tongue
His Reason sway 'twixt Right and Wrong,
Should in a Pious Christian Nation
Be trusted with a Congregation,
And that the puny Wretch that knew
Not how to teach and tame a Shrew,
Must needs before his Wife Preach Booty,
And often through Fear evade his Duty;
For how should he that has a Scold
Of's own, and dare not be so bold
To scourge her Failings any one day
Reclaim Five Hundred on a Sunday?
This Rub made all the Gown-men sneak,
Who found 'twas now in vain to Speak,
Touched with this close sarcastick Scoff,
They dop'd their Heads, and so slid off;
Renounced the Prize, and left the Hurry
Went some to Christen, some to Marry,
Some to Read Prayers, and some to Bury.
No sooner were the Black-birds Flown
But then the Mighty Dons came on,
Some smiled and snicker'd unperplext,
Whilst others looked disturbed and vexed;
Much Whispering passed from Mouth to Ear,
About no Good a Man may Swear,
Because Don Quirk was busy there.
Projecting Snap stood listening by,
Seemed sometimes free, and sometimes shy;
That Is Wrong, says he, and will not Nick'em,
But this is Right, and there we'll Trick 'em.
Whilst they were thus Caballing got,
About the Lord knows who or what,
A bold Heroic Don well dressed,
Stepped slyly from amongst the rest,
And Whispered Fortune in her Ear,
But what he said no Man could hear;
Whether he spoke about his Wife,
Or self, I know not by my Life;
But Fortune seeming much surprised,
Yet pleased at what he advertised,
Cried out aloud, if that is thy Curse
I think thou well deserve the Purse,
It Justly to thy Lot does Fall,
Here, prithee take it Horns and all.
Madam, says he, it is great Pity
Of such a Prize to Rob the City;
So took the Purse, but was so kind,
To humbly leave the Mace behind.
FINIS.

