THE GEOMETRICAL SQUARE: WITH THE USE THEREOF IN PLAIN and SPHERICAL
TRIGONOMETRIE. Chiefly intended for the more easy finding of the HOUR and
AZIMUTH. BY SAMUEL FOSTER, Sometimes Professor of Astronomy, in GRESHAM
Colleage, LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. LEYBOURN. M. DC. LIX.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE SQUARE.
THE whole superficies is divided into four lesser Squares, by the Diameters FG
and HI.

Each of the 4 Semidiameters OF, EH, EG, EI, are divided as the lines of Sines
upon the Sector, the Semidiameters being the whole Sine, And through the parts
of each Semidiameter are drawn right lines perpendicular thereunto, quite over
the face of the whole Square every 10th, 5th, etc. are to be distinguished from
the rest, for the more easy and speedy account.

Upon the limb are inserted several Scales, for several uses. The edges of
these Scales bordering close upon the sides of the inner Square, that it may be
discerned which lines and parts of the Scales do butt one upon the other.

On the sides AB, AC, are inscribed Scales of equal parts, the whole being
divided into 10, and subdivided as quantity will give leave. The parts are
numbered by 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10, and may stand, either for 1. 2. 3,
etc. or for 10. 20. 30, etc. or for 100. 200. 300, etc. as occasion requires.

To the lines BY and CG, are annexed Scales of right sines whose beginning is
at B and C, and the end at I and G, numbered by 10. 20, etc. to 90.

The other parts ID, GD, have Scales of Tangents from 0 gr. to 45 gr. numbered
either from G to D, and so to I. Or from I to D, and so to G, or rather both
ways, by 10, 20, 30, etc. till 90, and these divisions have respect to the
Center E.

Lastly, a Scale of larger Tangents, lying behind these last named, Parallel to
the sides BD, CD, beginning 0 gr. from B and C, and so proceeding to 45 gr. in
D and ending in 90 gr. at C and B, accounted both ways. These have respect to
their Center A.

(...)


There is further added a thread and plummet, which is to be used in every
practice, and must be in length equal to the lines AF, and FG. And if the
thread be found inconvenient in practice, because it will take up the use of
both hands, there may instead of it, be used a little Bow, the thread of it
being at the least equal to AD, which will perform the office of the other
thread by the help of one hand only, or a straight ruler may serve, if it be
thought convenient for that purpose.

If the Square be applied to the observation of Angles, it may be fitted
thereto one of these two ways, Either by placing two sights upon the side of
the Square, one upon the Center A, the other upon the line AB, which issues
out of the Center A. And a running sight contrived upon the utter edge of the
Instrument to move from B to C by D forward, and so from C to B by D, backward
again; Or else if this be thought inconvenient, or not feasible because of the
sights turning over at the Angle D, then this moveable sight may go only upon
one of the sides BD or CD. And for that purpose the sight at A, is to stand
precisely upon the Center, and both the sides AB, AG must have sights there
fixed, as precisely, upon their lines that come from A.

Of the use of the Square in General for the Solution of Spherical Triangles.
In any Spherical Triangle whatsoever.
By having the Legs and Base, to find the Vertical Angle.
THe Angle given or sought is the Vertical Angle, The sides comprehending it
are the legs. The side subtending it is the Base.

From the top of the Square, count the sum of the legs upon one side, the
difference of them on the other side, To this sum and difference apply the
thread, Then from the same top of the Square count the base also, And mark
where it cuts the thread, for the line passing through the intersection, and
standing Square to the top, (if it be numbered from that side of the Square
whereon the difference of the legs was counted) gives the Vertical Angle
required.

This is the general manner of work for this Proposition, which may be
illustrated by these particulars.
FIRST,
Having the Latitude of the place, the Declination and Altitude of the Sun, to
find the Hour of the day.
BY the declination of the Sun, may be had his distance from the elevated Pole,
By subtracting it from 90 gr. when the Declination is of the same denomination
with the said Pole; Or by adding the Declination to 90 gr. when the Declination
and elevated Pole are of several denominations.

In this case, we have the three sides of a Spherical Triangle given, and an
Angle sought.

The two legs are The complement of the Latitude, and The Suns distance from
the Pole. The base is, The complement of the Suns Altitude: The Angle is the
Hour required, which must be accounted from the Coast of a contrary name, to
the elevated Pole.

According then to the former general prescript, and this particular
declaration, For the hour take the sum and difference of the complement of the
Latitude, and of the Suns distance from the Pole, and from the top of the
Square, upon one side, count the difference, the sum on the other, to these
terms apply the thread; Then from the top of the Square also, count the
complement of the Suns Altitude, and where it cuts the thread, the line that
crosses it Square in the same point (being reckoned from that side whereon the
difference of the legs was counted) gives the hour from the Meridian or noon.

To make it plain by an Example.

In a North Latitude of 52 gr. 30 min. the Sun declining 20 gr. to the North,
the Altitude of the Sun being by observation 43 gr. I would know the Hour of
the day. The legs of this Triangle are the complements of the latitude and
declination, that is 37 gr. 30 min. and 70 gr. 0 min. The sum of them is 107
gr. 30 min. their difference is 32 gr. 30 min. Then from the top of the Square
at D upon the side DG, I reckon this difference 32 gr. 30 min. downward to k.
And on the other side of the Square from the top at B, I also count the sum of
the legs 107 gr. 30 min. downward to l. To k and l. I apply the thread. Which
done from the top of the Square, again, I count the base 47 gr. the complement
of 43 gr. the altitude observed, downward also to 0, and the line that there
meets me, I follow till it cut the thread, which is at n, and the line that
there arises Square to it is n r. I say now that nr, if it be counted from the
side DC whereon the difference of the legs was counted, shall give 44gr. 8 min.
which turned into hours and minutes of an hour, (allowing 15 gr. to an hour;
and 15 min. of a degree to one minute of an hour) will make two hours and 56
min. from the Meridian or South, And such is the Hour for that Latitude,
Altitude, and Declination.

So also, If in the same Latitude and distance of the Sun from the Pole, but in
the altitude of 10 gr. I would know The boure of the day. Here because the
legs, that is, the complement of the latitude and the distance from the Pole,
are the same, therefore the same position of the thread remains still, I
therefore only reckon the base (as before) which here is 80 gr. from D to p,
then I follow the line p, till it cuts the thread at m, and the line there
arising is m s, which counted from DC, whereon the difference of the legs was
reckoned, shall give 99 gr. 50 min. that is 6 hours 39 min. of an hour from the
Meridian or South.

Another Example.
In the same latitude of 52 gr. 30 min. let the declination of the Sun be 20
gr. to the South, where his distance from the elevated Pole is 110 gr. and let
the altitude of the Sun be by observation 10 gr. I require the Hour. The legs
are 37 gr. 30 min. the complement of the latitude, And 110 gr. the Suns
distance from the Pole. The sum of them is 147 gr. 30 min. The difference 72
gr. 30 min. which I count upon the sides of the Square down to u and t; and the
base which is 80 gr. the complement of 10 gr. I count also from D to p, then I
follow the line p, till it cut the thread at x, and the line there arising is x
y, which counted from DC, whereon the difference of the legs was reckoned,
shall give 38 grad. 56 min. that is, two hours and almost 36 min. of an hour
from the Meridian or South.

Note, That the thread in this situation, shows on the diameter of the Square
(which in this case represents the Horizon) the Semidiurnal and Seminocturnai
Arks, for where the thread crosses the middle line, the line there arising,
(counted from that side of the Square, whereon the difference was numbered)
shows the Semidiurnal ark, and counted from the other side, shows the
Seminocturnal ark.

Observe also, If you would known the Crepusculum or Twilight, the thread is to
be placed as before, according to the sum and difference of the legs, and if
you allow 18 gr. for the Crepusculin line (as they usually do) the base will
always be 108 gr. which in the two first Examples will not touch the thread at
all, and therefore in that latitude and parallel of the Sun, the twilight
continues all night. But in the last Example you shall find the Crepusculin
line to cut the thread, 6 hours and 15 min. from the Meridian, which shows
that the twilight begins at 5 a clock in the morning, and ends at 6 in the
evening, and the rest of the time is dark night which is 11 hours.

If the sum of the the legs be more then 180 gr. that is, if it would reach
beyond the bottom of the Square, you must when you have reckoned to the bottom,
count upward back again till you have ended the whole sum.

SECONDLY,
Having the Latitude of the place, the Declination and Altitude of the Sun, To
find the Azimuth of the Sun.
HEre also the 3 sides are given, the same with the former, and an Angle
sought. The two legs are the Complements of the latitude, and Suns altitude,
The base is the Suns distance from the Pole which is elevated above the
Horizon. The angle sought is the Suns Azimuth, from that part of the Meridian,
which is of the same denomination with the elevated Pole.

So then according to the former general prescript, and this particular
declaration, for the Azimuth, do thus.

Take the sum and difference of the Complements of the latitude and Suns
altitude, and count from the top of the Square, the one upon one side, the
other on the other side, and to these terms apply the thread; Then from the top
of the Square also, count the Suns distance from the Pole, and where it does
cross the thread, the line that there arises Square to the former, being
reckoned from that side of the Square whereon the difference of the legs was
counted, gives the Azimuth from that part of the Meridian which is of the same
denomination with the elevated Pole, and counted from the other side, gives the
Azimuth from the other coast.

To Illustrate it by an Example.
In a North latitude of 52 gr. 30 min. let the altitude of the Sun be 22 gr.
and the declination 10 gr. Northerly, By these given I would know the Suns
Azimuth, the two legs of the Triangle are the complements of the latitude and
Suns altitude, that is 37 gr. 30 min. and 68 gr. the sum of them is 105 gr. 30
min. the difference is 30 gr. 30 min. The sum of them I count on the side BA,
from the top at B down to k, The difference I count on the other side from D
down to h, and to these points k and h, I apply the thread k h, And lastly,
because the declination is 10 gr. Northward in a North latitude, therefore his
distance from the elevated Pole is 80 gr. which I count from the top D, down to
l, and follow the line at l, till it meet with the thread at n, where I find
the line m n, to cross it also, which numbered from the side DC, whereon the
difference of the legs was numbered, gives 102 gr 38 m. the Azimuth from the
North: And so also if it be accounted from the side BA, it gives the Azimuth
from the South 77 gr. 22 min. the residue of the former, or the complement of
it to 180 gr.

Another Example, In the same latitude and the same altitude, and therefore
also the same situation, of the thread, let the declination be Northerly 23 gr.
therefore the distance from the Pole will be 66 gr. which I count from D to f,
and following the line f till it meet with the thread at i, I find the line g
i, to cross there also, which being counted from the side DC, whereon the
difference of the legs was counted, shows 79 gr. 38 min. the Azimuth from the
North, Or counted from the other side, gives the residue of the former, 100 gr.
22 min. The Azimuth from the South.

A third Example. In the same latitude and altitude, and therefore also in the
same situation of the thread, let the declination of the Sun be 10 gr. to the
South, then shall his distance from the elevated North Pole be 100 gr. and
because this 100 gr. is the base, I therefore count it from the top D, down to
o, and following the line o, I find it to cut the thread at r, and the line r p
there crossing, shows me from DC, (the side whereon the difference of the legs
was counted) 146 gr. 32 min. for the Azimuth from the North, or if the same
line be numbered from the side BA, it shows 33 gr. 28 min. the residue of the
former, for the Azimuth from the South.

These Examples may suffice for this kind, and according to these patterns,
all others are to be framed.

In any Spherical Triangle whatsoever.
By having the legs and Vertical Angle, to find the Base.
From the top of the Square, count the sum of the legs upon one side, the
difference of them on the other side. To this sum and difference apply the
thread: Then from that side of the Square whereon the difference of the legs
was numbered, count the Vertical Angle given, and where it cuts the thread, mark
the line that passes there-through parallel to the top of the Square, for that
line, counted from the top, gives the base required.

This is general for all works of this kind, which may be illustrated in
particular: thus,

Having the latitude of the place, the declination of the Sun, and the hour of
the day, to find the altitude of the Sun, for that latitude, declination, and
hour.

HEre have we the two legs of the Triangle, with the intercepted Vertical
Angle, given, and the base sought. The legs are the complement of the latitude,
and the Suns distance, from the Pole; The angle intercepted is the hour whose
altitude we seek. And the base is the complement of the altitude sought for.

Wherefore by the former general prescipt, and this particular explication, we
may attain to the thing required thus, as in the former practice, so here;
Apply the thread to the sum and difference of the complement of the latitude,
and of the Suns distance from the Pole, Then reckon the hour given from the
Meridian, from the side whereon the difference of the legs was counted, and
where it crosses the thread observe the line that passes there-through
parallel to the top of the Square, for that line reckoned from the top, shows
the base, that is, The complement of the altitude, or reckoned from the middle
line of the Square, it gives the altitude it self of the Sun, for that parallel
and Hour; And so the thread (which now represents the Suns parallel:) lying
still, you may count the altitudes for all the rest of the hours for that
parallel.

For Example.
In a North latitude of 52 gr. 30 min. let the Sun decline 20 gr. to the North,
so that his distance from the elevated North Pole will be 70 gr. which is one
of the legs given, and the complement of the latitude, 37 gr. 30 min. is the
other, The sum of them is 107 gr. 30 min. The difference is 32 gr. 30 min. This
difference is the complement of the Suns Meridian altitude; and I count it from
D the top of the Square, to k: (in the first figure) thereto applying one end
of the thread And on the other side from B, I count the sum, 107 gr. 30 min.
down to l, thereto applying the other end of the thread. The thread thus laid,
resembles the Suns parallel, for that declination, Now from the side D k,
whereon the difference was numbered, I count the Vertical Angle, As first 15 gr.
for the first hour from the Meridian, either 11 in the morning, or one in the
afternoon, and where it cuts the thread, I observe the other line there
crossing also, which counted from the top, gives for the base, 34 gr. 32 min.
the complement of the altitude required.

Or rather. Count it from the middle line, which in this case represents the
Horizon, and then you shall have 55 gr. 28 m. the altitude it self, for that
hour and parallel, So the second hour from the Meridian (10 or 2) gives for the
altitude 50 gr. 4 min. The third hour (9 or 3) gives 42 gr. 31 m. The fourth
hour from the Meridian (8 or 4) gives 33 gr. 53 min. The fifth (7 or 5) gives
24 gr. 48 min. The sixth (6 in the morning and evening) gives 15 gr. 45 m. The
seventh (5 in the morning, or 7 in the evening) gives 7 gr. 6 m. And so
farrethe Sun is above the Horizon in that parallel, and then begins to go down.

And observe further, That the thread thus placed taken in that part below the
Horizon, gives the altitudes for the hours in the declination which is equal to
this, but to a contrary coast; so that the thread in this situation, gives the
altitudes for the declination of 20 grad. toward the South, for that part of
the thread that is under the Horizon or middle line, is the Semi-nocturnal ark
for the parallel lying 20 gr. from the Equinoctial Northward, and is therefore
equal to the Semi-diurnal ark that belongs to the parallel which lies 20 gr.
from the Equinoctial Southward, and is of like situation below the Horizon that
the other is above, wherefore the depressions belonging to the hours in this,
are the same with the altitudes of the same hours in the other. To go on then
where we left, The next hour counted from the Meridian of the Winter parallel
is the fourth, that is, either 8 in the morning, or 4 in the afternoon, and his
depression is 0 gr. 50 min. The next hour the third from the Meridian (either 9
or 3) is depressed 7 gr. 39 m. The second hour, (10 or 2) is 12 gr. 57 m. The
first hour (11 or 1,) is depressed in this North parallel 16 gr. 20 min. that
is, it is elevated so much in the like South parallel. Thus of each two
opposite parallels of declination may the altitudes be had at one and the same
situation of the thread. But if the other way seem plainer, do as before. Let
the Sun in the same latitude decline 20 gr. to the South, his distance from the
North elevated Pole, is then 110 gr. the sum of the complement of the latitude
37 gr. 30 min. and this distance is 147 gr. 30 min. The difference is 72 gr. 30
m. This difference I count from D to t, (in the first figure,) The sum I also
account as before, from B to u, And to t u, I placed the thread, Now from the
side D t, I count the hours as I did before, and find the altitude of 11 and 1,
16 gr. 20 min. of 10 and 2, 12 gr. 57 min. of 9 and 3, 7 gr. 39 min. of 8 and
4, 0 gr. 50 min. All the same that the former depressions were; And if now you
take the depressions of the hours upon the thread in this situation, you shall
find them all the same that the altitudes in the former parallel of 20 gr.
North declination were; So that ever, one side of the thread will afford the
altitudes for the hours in any two opposite parallels.

The Meridian altitude is the complement of the difference of the legs, And in
the opposite parallel it is the excess of the sum of the legs above 90 gr. And
as you have done for the Altitudes of the whole hours, so may you do for their
halves and quarters. Thus much for this also.

In any Spherical Triangle, whatsoever.
If the Proportions be in right Sines alone, they are resolved in this manner.
Count the first sine given (upon one of the sides of the lesser Square EIDG,)
from the Center E, and upon the line there arising count the second sine,
whereto apply the thread, Then upon the same side with the first, count the
third, and observe the line there arising, for from it does the thread cut off
the fourth sine required.

This general may be illustrated in particular thus.
Having the greatest Declination of the Sun, and his distance from the next
Equinoctial point* to find the Declination of the Sun for that distance.
THis particular belongs to the solution of a Rect-angled Spherical Triangle,
yet the manner of the work in this is the same with the work belonging to the
solution of the Obliquangled ones. The proportion stands thus; As the radius,
is to the sine of the greatest declination; So the sine of the Suns distance
from the next Equinoctial point, to the sine of the declination of that point.

For an Example.
Let the distance from the Equinoctial be 30 gr. The greatest declination 23
gr. 30 min. I would know the declination for that distance of 30 gr. The
Proportion is, As the radius, is to the sine of 23 gr. 30 min. So the sine of
30 degrees, to what sine? Count EG for the radius, and upon GD the line there
arising, reckon 23 degrees. and 30 min. up to a, and thereto apply the thread, Then
again upon EG, count e b, the sine of 30 gr. and follow the line there arising
which is b c, till it cut the thread at c, and the line c d, there crossing
also (being counted from EG) gives for the declination required, 11 gr. 30 min.
So that the sine of 11 gr. 30 min. is the fourth Proportional Sine to the
former three.

By the Hour of the Day given, with the Suns distance from the elevated Pole,
and the complement of his altitude above the Horizon, to find his Azimuth.
The Azimuth thus gotten is counted in North latitudes from the North, in South
latitudes from the South. Let the hour be 3 from the meridian. The Suns
distance from the Pole 66 gr. 30 min. The complement of the altitude, 44 gr. 20
m. By these things known, I would find the Azimuth. The proportion whereby it
is wrought is this. As the Sine of the hour, is to the Sine of the complement
of the altitude; So is the sine of the distance, to the sine of the Azimuth.
Wherefore upon the side of the Square EG, I count the sine of 45 gr. to h, and
upon the line there arising, I count the sine of 44 gr. 20 min. up to i, and
thereto apply the thread. Then upon the same side with the first I reckon the
sine of the Suns distance 66 gr. 30 min. from E to k, and following the line
there arising till it meet with the thread at n, I find the line nl, to cross
there also, which counted from EG, gives the sine of 65 gr. for the fourth
proportional, so that 65 gr. shows the residue of the Angle required, that is
to say, In our North latitude it shows me the Azimuth from the South; because
the Angle of the Azimuth from the North is an obtuse Angle, namely 115 gr. and
the same sine serves both to it and to 65 gr. his residue.

And here also is to be noted, That when any Proportion in right sines alone is
offered, and the radius is the first leader in the Proportion, that then I say,
it may be resolved by the former kind of work, by the sum and difference,
counting the complement of the arks of the two Sines given, for the legs of the
Triangle, and the ark of the radius or 90 gr. for the Vertical Angle, and the
base found out to be the complement of the ark required. As in the first
Example,

The two middle arks were 30 gr. and 23 gr. 30 min. their complements are 60
gr. and 66 g. 30 min. The sum of these is 126 gr. 30 min. there difference 6
gr. 30 min. to this sum and difference, I apply the thread, as in the former
Examples, and then count the Vertical Angle 90 gr. which falls in the middle
line and where the thread cuts it, there is the quantity of the Declination, 11
gr. 30 min. as before: And these degrees are counted from the Center of the
Square at E.

And thus may all others of this nature, having the radius in the first place,
be absolved. And not only these of sines alone, but with sines intermingled
with Tangents also, If it so fall out that these Tangents be less then the
radius, And if instead of their proper arks be taken the complements of the
arks of sines equal unto those Tangents.

And thus much for Exemplifying in this kind also. Those that follow are
appropriate to rectangled Spherical Triangles only.

In any Rectangled Spherical Triangle whatsoever.
If the Proportion stand between right sines (whereof the Radius is always one)
and Tangents, they are to be resolved in this manner.

Upon one of the sides of the lesser square EIGD. Count the first term, and
upon the line there arising count the second, whereto apply the thread. Then
upon the same side whereon the first was reckoned, count the third, and follow
it till it cross the thread, for the quantity of it comprehended between the
third term and the thread, gives the fourth proportional term required, always
remembering that every term be taken on his proper Scale.

Here because the proportions are diverse, we shall need more explication then
in all the rest. Yet the variety herein, may be reduced to three ways
according as one of these three, either the Radius; Sine, or Tangent, does lead
in the Proportion, the three ways are these: 1 As the radius, is to a tangent,
So is a sine to a Tangent. 2 As a sine, is to a tangent, So the Radius is to
another tangent. 3 As a tangent, is to the radius, So another tangent, is to a
sine.


But this variety is not all, for each of these three ways is subject to
variation, and that upon this occasion. -- Upon the square we have no tangent
greater then the radius, or tangent of 45 degrees. Wherefore the proportion
must be so contrived, as that no tangent greater then of 45 gr. be ingredient
into it. To that purpose serves this general direction, namely, -- If the
tangent which is co-partner, in the proportion with the sine, be greater then
of 45 gr. (always provided that the two tangents do never stand immediately
together, which if they do, may be brought into frame by transposition or
alteration of the middle term.) Then, In the two first ways the radius and
sine must change places; and for the two tangents must be taken the tangents of
their complements; In the third way, the co-tangents of the third and first
terms must remove into the first and third places.

To show this more particularly in the 3 former ways.

In the first,
If the tangent required in the fourth place prove greater then of 45 gr.
(which how to discover is showed hereafter) then by the former direction this
alteration must be made.

As the sine in the third. place, is to the co-tangent in the sesecond,

So is the radius in the first place, to the co-tangent of the fourth.

In the Second,
If the tangent in the second place, be greater then of 45 gr. then by the
former direction this proportion must be thus changed.

As the radius in the third place, is to the co-tangent of the second.

So is the sine in the first place, to the co-tangent of the fourth.

In the third
If the tangent in the third place, be greater then of 45 gr. then according to
the former prescript this proportion must thus be varied.

As the co-tangent of the third place, is to the radius in the second;

So the co-tangent of the first place, is to the sine required in the fourth
place.

Because in the first proportion it is unknown whether the tangent required in
the fourth place be greater or lesser then of 45 gr. and yet is necessary it
should be known before it can be found out, you shall therefore in practice
discover it thus.

If the line whereon it is to be accounted does not meet with the thread
rightly situated upon the Square, then is it greater then of 45 gr. and then
the proportion must be altered as before, but if it do meet with the thread,
then is it less then of 45 gr. as it should be.

Observ^ that the tangents are actually in the limb only, yet may be
understood to be all over the plain, for some line or other standing even
against them in the plain will supply them as well as if they were actually
there drawn.

And note that if such a Proportion as this do at any time happen, namely, As a
sine is to a tangent, So another sine, is to another tangent. And that these
tangents, be discovered to be one of them greater then of 45 gr. the other
less, That then the radius is to be brought into the Proportion, by saying, As
the first sine, is to the first, So is the radius to another Tangent; Then
leaving out the first sine and tangent, and using for them the radius and this
later tangent, say, As the radius is to the last found tangent, So is the sine
in the third place to the tangent in the fourth; Which Proportion suites with
those going before. But if both the tangents be either greater or less^r then
of 45 gr. then may the solution be made without the help of the radius.

According to the former Rules generally delivered are these following Examples
framed, and will fully illustrate every Case.

For the first of the three several ways there are three cases, For either
both the tangents are less then 45 gr. or both greater, or no less, the other
greater.

1 As the radius is to the tangent of 40 gr. So the sine of 50 gr. to the
tangent of what?

Upon the Square EIDG, I count EG for the radius, and upon the end of it in the
Scales of tangents I reckon G a, 40 gr. thereto applying thread. Then upon EG,
I count the sine of 50 gr. from E to b, and follow the line there arising till
it cut the thread E a, at c, So that b c is the fourth term required, which
because it is a tangent, must be numbered in the Scale of tangents, and
therefore by help of the line c e, I transfer it thither, and find that the
line lies even against 32 gr. 44 min. in the Scale of Tangents, and this is the
ark of the fourth proportional term required.

2 As the radius is to the Tangent of 60 gr. So the sine of 50 gr. to the
Tangents of what?

Upon the Square I count (as before) from G up to D and so forward to n, 60 gr.
among the Tangents, and thereto apply the thread. Then I count the third term.
E b the sine of 50 gr. and I follow the line there arising to the top of the
Square, and yet it meets notwith the thread, but beyond the Square I see that
it would concur with it at r, which shows that the fourth Tangent required,
is greater then the Tangent of 45 gr. and therefore standing as it does, cannot
be expressed upon the Scale of Tangents, wherefore I alter the Proportion, by
transposing the first and third terms into one another places, and for the
Tangents themselves I take their complement thus.

As the sine of 50, is to the Co-tangent of 60, So is the Radius, to a fourth
Tangent, which will be the complement of that which should be produced by the
former Proportion. By this alteration it comes to pass that the sine leads in
the Proportion, and so this Example now falls under the Examples of the second
General way, and therefore shall be resolved there.

3 As the radius is to the Tangent of 50 gr. so the sine of 50 gr. to the
Tangent of what?

Upon the Square I take EG for the radius, and at the end of it I reckon up to
D, which is 45 gr. and so forward on the other side to g, that is to 50 gr.
Then upon EG, I count e b the sine of 50 gr. and follow the line there arising
till it cut the thread at i, so that b i is the fourth term, and because it is
a Tangent, therefore by help of the line passing through i, that is, by the
line i m, I transfer it to the Scale of Tangents, and find that lies even
against 42 gr. 24 min. which is the fourth ark required.

For the second of the three general ways, there are two

1 As the sine of 50 gr. is to the Tangent of 30 gr. So the radius is to the
Tangent of what?

First, upon the side EG, I count the sine of 50 gr. and to the line there
arising, I transfer Gt the Tangent of 30 gr. by help of the line t s, and to
s, I apply the thread, which thread cuts the limb in u, so that G u I find to
be the Tangent of 37 gr. and this is the fourth term required in this
Proportion; But in the second Example going before, whereof this is also the
solution, this 37 gr. is the complement of the fourth ark there required, so
that the fourth ark there, should be 53 gr. which because it is greater then 45
gr. is therefore absolved this way, and not the other.

2 As the sine of 50 gr. is to the tangent of 50 gr. So the radius is to the
Tangent of what?

Here because the Tangent of 50 (being Co-partner in the Proportion with the
sine) is greater then the Tangent of 45 gr. and so cannot be expressed upon the
square, therefore the Proportion must be altered by changing the places of the
first and third terms, and by taking the complement of the second and fourth,
after this manner.

As the radius is to the Tangent of 40 gr. So the sine of 50 gr. to the Tangent
of 32 gr. 44 min. the complement whereof 57 gr. 16 min. answers to the question
in the former Proportion, and this last Proportion falls under the first general
way where the radius leads, and was resolved before in the first practice upon
the Square, As EG, to G a, So E b, to b c, or G e the Tangent of 32 gr. 44 min.

In the third of the three general ways, there are two cases, according as the
Tangent of the third place, which is Co-partner in the proportion with the
sine, is lesser or greater then the Tangent of 45 degrees.

1 As the tangent of 40 gr. is to the Radius, so the Tangent of 32 gr. 44 min.
to what sine?

Upon the side GD, I count G a, the Tangent of 40 gr. and thereto apply the
thread, then upon the same side GD, I reckon also the Tangent of 32 gr. 44 min.
from G to e, and follow the line meeting at e, till it cut the thread at c, and
the line there crossing also is c b, which counted from e, the Center of the
Square, gives the sine of 50 gr. which is the fourth term required.

2 As the Tangent of 60 gr. is to the radius, So the Tangent of 53 gr. to what
sine?

Here because the Tangent of 53 gr. being Co-partner in Proportion with the
sine, is greater then of 45 gr. therefore the first and third terms must change
places, and their complements are also to be taken, thus, As the co-tangent of
53 gr. or Tangent of 37 gr. is to the Radius, So is the co-tangent of 60 gr. or
Tangent of 30 gr. to the fourth sine required.

Upon GD the side of the Square, I count G u the Tangent of 37 gr. thereto
applying the thread. Then on the same side of the Square, I also count G t, the
Tanegnt of 30 gr. and follow the line at t, till it cut the thread at s, and
the line s b, there crossing being counted from e, the Center of the Square,
gives me the Sine of 50 gr. the fourth term required.

These Examples are sufficient to give light to the rest, For no Proportion can
fall out in these kinds, whereunto these Proportions and their Examples are not
suitable.

And so much of Spherical Triangles.
Of the use of the Square, in Right-lined Triangles.
IF the Proportions be between Tangents and equal parts, then are we to use the
equal parts on the sides AB, AG, as also the larger Tangents upon the two other
sides of the Square, and then the work will be the same, for form, that was
before in Tangents and sines, for the lines on the superficies will carry the
parts of either of these Scales to and fro, as they did before the parts of the
Scales of the lesser Tangents.

If the Proportions be between sines and equal parts, then are we to make use
of the sines inscribed upon the Scales BY, CG, together with the former equal
parts, the lines upon the superficies still acting their former parts of
carrying from the one to the other.

Examples in these kinds, And first of sines, and equal parts, or Numbers.
SUppose at the two stations DC, I had observed the angles BCA, 30 gr. BDA, 50
gr. and CD the difference of Stations 40 feet, and by these observations, I
require to know the altitude AB.

First, I must find the length of the lines CB, or DB, in this Example of CB,
after this manner, because BCA is 30 gr. and BD A 50 grad. therefore their
difference CBD is 20 gr. Now then, As the sine of CB D 20 gr.

Is to CD 40 feet, So is the sine of BDC or BDA, 50 gr.

To the length of CB required.

To resolve this upon the Square, from C, I count the line of 20 gr. to a, and
observe the line there meeting me, then upon the side AC, I count A d 40 equal
parts or feet, and thirdly, I reckon C c the third term, which is the sine of
50 gr. and follow the line there meeting me, till it cross the thread (which
was to be applied to b, the intersection of the lines a b, coming from the
first term, and d b rising from the second) at e, and there I find another line
concurring, namely, e h, which I follow down to h, and there it shows in the
equal parts A h 89 feet, and 58 centesmes or hundredth parts of a foot, And
this is the length of CB, now to get BA, by a second work, I say,

As CB the radius, to BA the sine of BCA 30 gr.

So BC 89 58/100 feet, to BA the altitude in feet.



To perform this Proportion, Upon the Square I take AH, equal to BY the radius,
and upon HE, I count H o, equal to C r the sine of 30 gr. thereto applying the
thread; Then from A to h, I count the length of CB, that is 89, 58, and so
follow the line there arising, up to the thread to s, where I find the line s
u, limiting out A u, 44, 79, that is 44 feet, and 79 centesmes of a foot, and
such is the altitude of AB required.

Thus by having the three Angles of a plain Triangle, and one side you may find
the two other sides; And by having two sides and an Angle opposite to one of
them, you may find the other two Angles and third side, in any Right-lined
Triangles whatsoever.

Examples of equal parts, and Tangents.
This kind of work may sufficiently be explained in the solution of this
Problem.

By having an Angle and the two sides comprehending it, to find the other
Angles.
First, if the Angle comprehended be a Right-angle the work is easy.
ANd here we are to use the Scales of equal parts, with the larger Tangents
only. Suppose then in the Rect-angle Triangle ABC, By having the two sides
including the right angle AB 30, BC 20 parts, I would find the angles at A and
C, because this Proportion holds

As AB 30, to BC 20

So AB the radius to BC,

The Tangent of BAC.

Therefore upon the Square I count A w 30 equal parts, and follow w f, till it
stand even with 20 equal parts counted on the side AB, and laying the thread at
f, I find it to cut in the limb of the greater Tangent C y, which is 33 gr. 41
min. And such is the quantity of the angle CAB. And the complement of it 56 gr.
19 min. is the quantity of the angle ACB.

Further more it is to be noted, That if by having the right angle with the two
including sides, you would find the sub tending side AC. In this case one of
the acute angles must first be sought, and then by the Proportions of sines and
equal parts, the side AC may be had.

So also, If by having the distance AB 30 foot, and the angle CAB 33 gr. 41
min. I would know the Height BC, Upon the Square I lay the thread from C to y
the Tangent of 33 gr. 41 min. then upon the equal parts I count A w 30, and
follow the line rising at w, till it meet with the thread at f, and at f, I
find the line f q crossing also, which followed to q, shows in the limb 20
equal parts for the altitude BC.

By these mixed Proportions of equal parts with sines and Tangents, may all
mensurations be performed, as also all conclusions upon the Common Sea-chart,
with Mr. Gunters corrections of it, to make it sufficient for Sea-mens use.

Secondly, in any plain Triangle whatsoever.
The former Problem may be resolved in general by this Proportion, As the sum
of the two sides, is to their difference, So is the Tangent of half the sum of
their opposite Angles, to the Tangent of the half difference of those Angles.
AS here, the two given parts, are AB 40 parts, and BC 20, the sum of them is
60, the difference is 20, the angle at B 120 gr. and therefore the sum of the
two other 60 gr. the half sum of 30 gr. Now,

As 60 the sum of the sides, is to 20 their difference,

So is the Tangent of 30 gr. the half sum of the angles at A and C, to the
Tangent of their half difference.

The best way for the solution of Proportions in this kind is first (as was
before admonished in the joint use of Sines and Tangents) to seek out a Tangent
whereon the Radius is in Proportion as the sum of the legs is to the difference
of them, which Tangent is ever less then the Tangent of 45 gr. or radius,
because the difference of the legs is always less then the sum of them. And
when the radius is brought in, the Proportion may be absolved upon the lesser
Square, which is fitted for the Proportions of Sines and Tangents, in the same
manner as was showed in the like Examples before. And the Proportion will then
stand thus.

As the radius, is to this new found Tangent, So is the Tangent of half the sum
of the angles, to the Tangent of half their difference.

To make it plain by the former instance, As 60 parts, are to 20; So is the
radius, to what Tangent?

Upon the Scale of equal parts, I account A k 60 and on the line there arising
I account k x 20, thereto applying the thread, and then I see it cut off in the
greater Tangents C 18 gr, 26 min. which is the Tangent sought. And now that the
radius is brought in, the next Proportion will be thus,

As the radius, is to the Tangent of 18 gr. 26 min.

So is the Tangent of 30 gr. half the sum of the angles, to what Tangent?

Upon the lesser Square, I take EG for the radius, and count G z the tangent of
18 gr. 26 min. thereto applying the thread, then upon ID, I count I x the
Tangent of 30 gr. and follow the line thence passing to the thread at s, where
the line s ph shows, in the limb the Tangent G ph, which is the Tangent of 10
gr. 54 min. the half difference of the angles required, which added to 30 gr.
the half sum, makes the greater angle 40 gr. 54 min. And taken from the same 30
gr. leaves 19 gr. 6 min. for the lesser angle.

By having the three sides of a plain Triangle, to find the Angles.
THe first work here will be to let fall a perpendicular, and to know where it
will fall, and so reducing the Triangle to two Rectangles, you may resolve them
as Rectangles, either by sines and equal parts, or Tangents and equal parts.

The manner of dividing a Triangle, into two Rectangles, as also to find the
place where the perpendicular falls, is showed by Mr. Gunter in the first Book
of his Cross-staff, and the Proportion for the solution of it, is a proportion
of equal parts or numbers only, the manner of which is hereafter showed in the
next use of the Square in numbers or equal parts alone.

Thus far of the use in Right-lined Triangles.
Of the use of the Square in Proportions of equal parts or Numbers only.
THe equal parts with the lines on the superficies to carry them along, will
perform them very sufficiently and expeditely, If any number be too great take
1/10 or 1/10 part of it, and count the rest as a fraction either decimal or
centesimal. And as in the former works, so here, the first and third terms,
must be counted upon one side of the Instrument, the second and fourth upon the
lines arising out of the terms of the former, so the thread applied to the
second, will limit out the fourth.

The manner of the work is always a like, and may sufficiently be declared in
this one Example, I would know that number whereto 60 bears the same
Proportion, that 40 does to 50: The Proportion stand thus As 40, is to 50: So
60, to what?

Upon AC the Scale of equal parts, I count AD 40, and upon the line arising out
of d, (by help of the Scale of equal parts upon the other side AB) I count 50
up to l, and thereto apply the thread, Then upon AC, I count the third term, 60
to K, and follow the line there arising, till it meet with the thread at p, and
there the line p m, meeting also, shows in the Scale AB at m, 75 parts, which
is the fourth proportional number required. And thus in all others.

Of the use of the Square in the observation of angles.
WHen the observation is made and the sight placed, then the thread from A,
applied to the running sight, will express the angle in the larger Tangent,
And for observing any altitude or depth, the thread alone, without the help of
the running sight, will express the Angle, if the observation be made as
usually it is by other Instruments. -- The Square at the greatest cannot
observe an Angle that is greater then 90. If therefore such an Angle come to be
observed, you must observe the residue of it, which is his complement to 180
degrees.

Hitherto we have had a general view of the use of the Square in all Triangles
and ordinary Proportions in Numbers. Now remains the bringing of it down to
particulars in every kind; which would be an infinite labor, and un-necessary
to those that are any thing experienced, in the use of Instruments, especially
seeing we have here a taste of every of them, and the particular Proportions are
every where extant. Hereafter I may add something more on the other side, for
the present I here make stay, and content my self with that which has already
been delivered.

FINIS.

