Sir Thomas Fairfax's LETTER FROM CORNWALL, Relating the whole business in the
WEST.

WITH The ARTICLES at large, concluded upon by his Excellencies Commissioners
and Sir Ralph Hoptons.

And an Order of both Houses for a day of Thanksgiving for the same.

Die Lunae, 23 March. 1645.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Letter with the
Articles shall be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, at the Kings head in the Old Bailey. March 24.
1645.

TO THE HONORABLE William Lenthall, Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House
of COMMONS.
SIRs
WHilst I lay at Bodman for the necessary refreshment of the Army, and to block
up the passages from Bodman to the North and South Sea, I sent a Summons with
Propositions to Sir Ralph Hopton, and the Army under his command: A true Copy
whereof I have here enclosed, being encouraged thereunto by some of the enemies
Officers and Soldiers, who came in to me, and informed of their
inclineablenesse to conditions; and hoping thereby either to bring them to such
terms as should be to your advantage, or would distract and weaken them; and
withal understanding by the intercepted Letters I sent you that an Irish
Infantry was ready to be shipped for England, I thought fit to try all means
which in probability might break their body of Cavalry upon the place: when I
had dispatched these Propositions to the enemy, I advanced upon Monday with all
the Army from Bodman toward Truro being then the enemies headquarters, and to
Treney, where I quartered that night: Sir Ralph Hopton sent a Trumpeter to me
with a Letter, desiring to have Commissioners appointed on both sides, to meet
at Tresilian-bridge the next day with power to treat and conclude, which I
assented to; The Treaty accordingly began, the Commissioners meeting about four
a clock in the afternoon, and I in the mean time advancing the quarters of the
Army to Truro and St. Alan: After some time spent between the Commissioners
this agreement was made, a copy whereof I have here also enclosed, and in
execution thereof this day we began to disband the French Brigade under Col.
Lapland: Tomorrow we proceed with three other Brigades, they having nine in
all, and shall endeavor to shorten this work as much as may be. Truly, Sir,
this must needs be acknowledged for an admirabled mercy from the same gracious
hand of providence, that has hitherto gone along with you, that so
considerable a force as this should be so baffled, first at Torrington, and
afterward should put themselves as it were into a Net; whereby they were
necessitated to take terms to the utter ruin of so great a body of Cavalry,
which according to all our information, and the confession of our enemies was
not less at the time of the Treaty then four thousand five thousand horse:
The Articles of agreement will speak the mercy, and needs no comment; yet I
hope I may make this observation upon them, that thereby not only so great a
body of Cavalry is broken, but so many both officers and soldiers disobliged
from taking arms against you, and this at such a season when a foreign aid so
ready as the Earl of Glamorgans Letters sent up formerly (and now sent you)
speak at large, the timely freeing of us for other services that remain, with
discouragement put upon the enemies garrisons in these parts, which we hope
will cause them the more speedily to come in, we trust will be good
consequences of this work: Its the desire of us all, the praise of all may be
returned to God, to whom it is only due: The reputation of this has already
produced a surrender of St. Maws Castle, wherein we found about 13 Guns and
good proportion of Ammunition, which place gives you a better interest in
Falmouth harbor then the enemy has; for by the advantage hereof you may bring
in shipping without hazard, which they cannot; It has also occasioned the
coming in of between 300 and 400 foot of the enemies with their arms to me,
and given the Countries such heart against them, That in Peryn (a Town formerly
not very well affected) and in St. Ive they stand upon their guards against the
enemy: For further particulars concerning this business, I refer you to M.
Peter's, who since he came into this County (where he was borne) has very much
furthered the service in the bringing of the Country in so freely to the
protection of the Parliament, I remain

Your most humble Servant Tho. Fairfax.

Truro, March 14 16^5.
Articles of Agreement concluded betwixt Comissary Genesis Ireton, Col. John
L^mbert, (...) J^hn S. Aubin. Comis^^ry Genesis Stane, Cap. Edward Herle, and
Richard Deane Com^^^^^r of the Ordnance, Commi^si^ners app^inted on the be^a^fe
of his Excellercy Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Parliaments Army,
on the one part: And Col. Ch^rles Goring Col. Marcus Trevor, Col. Thomas
Panton, Col. Jordan B^vill, Mr Richard Prideaux Knight, and Major Goterce*
Commission^^s appointed in the behalf of the right Hon urable the Lord Hopton,
General of his Majesty's Army, on the other part; as follows:

1. IT is concluded and agreed, That no person in the L. Hoptons army, not
formerly by name excepted by the Parliament from pardon shall be excluded from
the privilege of this Treaty, either as beng a Forraigner, or for having
formerly served the Parliament; but shall equally have the benefit of what
shall upon this Treaty be granted to other persons of that quality that they
are of in the army: and for any persons by name excepted by the Parliament,
they shall have present liberty (if they desire it) to go beyond Seas, with
like recommendation and equipage, as others of like quality; or if they desire
to live at bome in England* to make their addresses to the Parliament; for
that, or other purpose, they shall have leave and reasonable time so to do, and
the Generals protection to live quietly, and at liberty in any place they
shall nominate and choose within the Parliaments quarters, until they have
received the Parliaments Resolution; And if the Parliament shall not think fit
to grant such their desires, they shall then have leave and passes to go beyond
Sea, as before, or to any of the Kings armies or garrisons, as they shall think
fit.

2. That the Army and forces under the command of the Lord Hopton shall within
six days after the date hereof be wholly disbanded and discharged by the Lord
Hopton, and the General Officers, Colonels, and other Officers under his
command according to the several charges in manner hereafter expressed.

3. That all common Troopers, Corporals of Horse, Fariers and Sadlers, that are
mounted, being of or belonging to the Forces under the command of the Right
Honorable the L. Hopton, shall bring in and deliver up their horses, with their
Bridles and Saddles, and all their arms, unto his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax,
or unto whom he shall appoint to receive them, in manner, time, and place, as is
hereafter exprests Provided, that all Corporals, and such Common Troopers as
shall appear Gentlemen of worth, and such other Troopers as shall go beyond
Sea, shall be allowed to keep and carry away with them their Swords.

4. That upon performance hereof they shall receive 20 s. a man, or keep their
Horses, and shall have their Passes to go to their homes in England, or beyond
Sea with their Bag and Baggage, which they shall have leave to carry with them,
or dispose of them as they please; and those to whom Swords are allowed, as
before, to pass with their Swords.

5. That the Commission-Officers of Horse under the L. Hopton, for their
several Troops respectively, shall cause the said Horses and Arms to be duly
delivered in without changes, spoiling or imbezlement among themselves,
according to the effect of the first Article before-going.

6. That this being performed, all the said Commission-Officers of Horse in
present command, and all Trumpeters belonging to them, shall have liberty to go
away, either to their homes in England, or beyond the Seas with their Bag and
Baggages: And also, they shall have such number of Horses, and Equipage as is
hereafter allowed, according to their several qualities: That is to say,

I. For those that shall choose to go beyond the Seas, the full number of Horses
and Firearms, if they have so many of their own,

To Trumpeters one Horse a piece, and their Trumpets. To Quarter Masters, two
Horses and one Case of Pistols. To Corners three Horses and two case of
Pistols. To Lieutenants four Horses and three Case of Pistol, To Captains,
Majors, and Lieutenants-Colonels, six Horses and four Case of Pistols. To
Colonels eight Horses, and six Case of Pistols. To the Adjutant-Generall six
Horses and four Case of Pistols. To the other Adjutants of Brigades three
Horses a piece, and one Case of Pistols. To the Scout-master-generall six
Horses and two Case of Pistols. To the Quarter-master-generall six Horses, and
two Case of Pistols. To the Martial-generall four Horses and one Case of
Pistols. To the Deputy Quarter-master-generall two Horses. To the Deputy
Scout-master one Horse. To the Major-generall twelve Horses and six Case of
Pistols. To the Commissary-generall of Horse Provisions th^ee Horses and a Case
of Pistols. To the Commissary-Generall of Victuals three Horses one Case of
Pistols. To the Chirurgeon-generall three Horses. To Quarter Masters of
Brigades three Horses one Case of Pistols. To Surgeons of Regements two
Horses. To all these, except Surgeons, their defensive Arms, and Swords for
themselves and their Servants; and unto every Field-Officer one Carrabine, and
Surgeons their Swords.
II. To those that shall choose to abide in England, with the General Sir
Thomas Fairfax his protection, and to live at home, shall have their
proportions as follows.

The Trumpeters one Horse a piece, and their Trumpets. To Quarter Masters one
horse a piece. To Cornets and Lieutenants two Horses a piece and one Case of
Pistols. To Captains three Horses a piece and one Case of Pistols. To Majors
four Horses a piece and one Case of Pistols. To Lieut. Colonels five Horses a
piece, one case of Pistols. To Colonels six horses a piece, and two case of
Pistols. To the Major-generall ten Horses, three case of Pistols. To the
Adjutant-generall six Horses, one case of Pistols. To the Adjutants of Brigades
one Horse a piece and one case of Pistols. To the Quartermaster-generall six
Horses, and one case of Pistols. To the Marshall-generall three Horses, and one
case of Pistols. To the Deputy Quartermaster-generall two horses. To the
Scoutmaster-generall four Horses and one case of Pistols.
All these to have Swords for themselves and their servants.

To the Commissary of Horse Provision, two Horses and a case of Pistols. To the
Commissary of victuals two horses and a case of Pistols. To the Deputy
Scout-master one horse. To the Quartermasters of Brigades two Horses. To the
Chirurgion-generall two Horses. To Surgeons of Regiments one horses. To
Chaplains two Horses.
All these, except Chaplains, to have Swords for themselves and their servants.

7. That the precedent Articles concerning the surrender of Troopers horses,
etc. being performed; if any Officer in Command, that chooses to live at home
shall appear to have more horses of his own, then what he is before allowed by
the last precedent Article; the Commissioners of Sir Thomas Fairfax his part
will recommend it to his Excellencies favor, That they may enjoy the benefit
of such horses of their own to the same number as Officers of like quality
that are to go beyond Sea.

8. That of the Reformadoe Officers that choose to live at home in England,
Reformodoe Quarter Masters shall have the same conditions as Corporalls in
Command; Coronets and Lieutenants shall go away with one horse a piece,
Captains, Majors and Lievtenant-Collonels, with two horses a piece, and
Colonels with three horses a piece, if they have so many of their own, and
one case of pistolls; those Reformadoes that desire to go beyond Seas to have
half the proportion of horses and arms allowed in that case to Officers of
the like quality in present Command if they have them of their own, and all of
them to go with Swords, Bag and Baggage, or dispose thereof at pleasure.

9. That all Gentlemen of quality in Arms or not in Arms, hut living under
the protection of the said Army, shall have liberty either to go to their own
houses, or beyond the Seas, with Bag and Baggage, and Equipage according to
their several qualities, as follows, That is to say:

A Knight with four horses, three servants, one case of Pistols, and their
Swords. An Esquire with three horses, two servants, one case of Pistols, and
their Swords. A Gentleman with two horses, one servant, one case of Pistols,
and their Swords. A Gentleman of lowest rank with one horse for himself, and
a Sword. Scholars and Clergymen to have one horse at the least, or more
according to their different degrees at the Generals discretion.
10. That to all those who according to the effect of these Articles shall
choose to go beyond the Sea, passes shall be granted from (...) the General
Sir Thomas Fairfax accordingly, and to those who being English shall choose to
live at home, passes for that purpose and protections for their liberty of
their persons, and also for the freedom of their estates from all pl^nder and
violence of soldiers, and that such Gentlemen or others that have considerable
estates, may have the Generals Letters of recommendation to the Parliament (if
desired) for their moderate composition.

XI. That after the performance of these Articles so far to disbanding and
delivering up of what is to be delivered: All Officers and Soldiers that shall
according to these Articles choose to go beyond the Seas, shall have sufficient
quarters assigned them by Sir Thomas Fairfax, near convenient Ports for their
transportation, and that they shall have twenty eight days allowed to stay in
England, from the day of their several disbanding, and that the charge of
quartering their horses be discharged by themselves after the first fourteen
days for the time of their further stay, That the General will appoint men to
take care that shipping shall oec provided for transporting the thh persons,
Arms Bag and Baggage, they paying the accustomed rates.

XII. That acertain number of Officers of the L. Hoptons Army not exceeding
forty upon the Lord Hoptons Commissioners request shall be permitted to have
passes for themselves, and their servants horses and necessaries to go to
Oxford, provided that their servants exceed not the number of two, their horses
three, to every one respectively.

XIII. That the Lord Hopton shall be allowed for his own use all his horses,
provided they exceed not the number of forty, and Arms for himself and twelve
men; And that the Lord Wentworth shall have all his horses, provided they
exceed not five and twenty, and arms for himself and eight men, and places
assigned them for convenience of Quarters.

XIIII. That such English men as shall choose to abide in England at their
homes, and all Forraigners of the said Army, shall engage themselves by promise
in such form as is herewith agreed on, not to bear Arms any more against the
Parliament of England nor to act any thing wilfully, prejudicial to the
Parliaments affairs without first rendering, themselves prisoners to the
Parliament; And likewise all such English as shall choose to go beyond Sea,
shall engage themselves in the like promise for three years next ensuing the
date hereof or otherwise shall lose the benefit of these Articles excepting the
Lord Hopton and Lord Wentworth, and the number of Officers allowed to go to
Oxford in the twelfth Article before-going, who are by the intention of these
Articles left free from such engagement.

XV. That all Horses, Arms, and furniture of war belonging to, or in the
hands of any person, of the said Army, not allowed in the precedent, or
subsequent Articles, to be carried away shall be dilivered up to such persons,
and at such places near Truro, or Sir Thomas Fairfax his head quarters, as his
Excellency shall appoint, within six days after the date hereof without spoil
or imbezelment; At the care as well of the Geeneralls Officers of the said Army,
and all Commanders in their several charges, as by the persons themselves, to
whom such Arms or Furniture of war do belong, or in whose custody they were.

XVI. That whosoever shall after the conclusion of this Treaty, purposely
break, spoil, or imbezell any of the arms horses or furniture agreed and
concluded to be delivered up in this Treaty, shall forfeit the benefit due unto
him by any article in the Treaty. And if any of the said army after the
conclusion of this Treaty, shall plunder or wilfully do any violence unto any
Inhabitants of the Country, he shall give satisfaction unto the persons so
wronged, or lose the benefit of the Treaty, and that the Commissioners of both
parties, or any three of them, whereof one or more to be of Sir Thomas Fairfax
his party, and one or more to be of the Lord Hoptons, shall have power to hear
and determine all such cases accordingly.

XVII. That the said army and forces under the command of the Lord Hopton, from
the time of the conclusion of this Treaty, until the time of their drawing out
to be disbanded as in the ensuing articles, shall be quartered in such places
Westward from Truro as Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, which shall be large
enough for their accommodation, and that the Cessation of arms, and of all
acts of hostility betwixt the two armies, shall continue unto the time of the
complete disbanding of the Lord Hoptons army.

XVIII. That for the disbanding of the said Forces, and delivering up of
Horses, Arms, etc. in performance of the precedent Articles, Every Brigade and
Regiment under the Lord Hoptons command, shall by their respective Commanders
he drawn out into such places of Rendezvous, within two miles of Truro, or Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Headquarters, And upon such days as Sir Thomas Fairfax
shall for them jointly or severally appoint, notice of the same being given to
his Excellency in writing sixteen hours beforehand, under the Commissioners
of the Lord Hoptons part, or any of them, two or more of whom shall for that
and other purposes continue at Sir Thomas Fairfax his Headquarters, until the
disbanding be finished, and that the Quartermaster-generall, or Adjutant of the
Lord Hoptons with one horseman from every Brigade, shall also be th^re with
them, and that none of the said Brigades or Regiments shall be drawn out of
their Quarters, (which shall be assigned to them as before) otherwise then upon,
and according to such notice from Sir Thomas Fairfax as before, except to and
for their ordinary Guards.

XIX. That to or before the drawing out of the several Brigades or Regiments
such Rendezvous as before, the chief Commanders of them respectively shall
deliver, unto whom Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, a true and perfect List of
the Regiments and Troops in the several Brigades, and of all Officers and
Soldiers in their several Troops, expressing by name which of them do choose
to go beyond sea, and which do go to live at home; or also who are
Reformadoes, and in what degree of command they have served: and that at the
same times and places the Horses, Arms, and furniture by virtue of the
precedent Articles to be delivered up, shall be delivered up accordingly; and
all the Officers and Soldiers disbanded and discharged, and there shall
receive their Passes with Warrants for quarters by the way for one night in a
place, and be conve^^^^^^ toward their several homes, as far as Chard, if
they go so far, or unto Quarters assigned them for their transportation
according to the preceding Articles.

That for the further performance of these Articles, two Colonels of each Army
shall be mutually delivered and kept as Hostages.

H. Ireton. Jo. Lambert. Jo. S. Aubin. William Stane. Edward Herle. Richard
Deane. Charles Goring. Marcus Trevor. Thomas Panton. Jordan Bovill. Richard
Prideaux. Jean Goteere.


Die Lunae, 23. Martii. 1645.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That Thursday
sevennight be set apart for a day of public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for
the great success of the Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax
General, against the enemy in the West, in breaking and destroying their
Armies, and giving them up into the hands of the Parliament; to be observed and
kept in all the Churches and Chapels within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and Liberties thereof, and Lines of Communication, and ten miles
about, and that the Lord Mayor be desired to take care, that the respective
Ministers within the Limits aforesaid may have timely notice hereof.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.


