A Guide to the Blind Pointed to.

Or, a true TESTIMONY TO THE Light within.

Wherein some men are reproved, others counseled and encouraged, but all (who
are ignorant of their true Guide) directed to the path of Life.

With a Friendly CALL to all Notionists and high Professors of Religion, in
what Form soever, To come speedily down from their Pinacles, lest they fall
into temptation.

Also some Queries to the persecuting Ministers of the Church of ENGLAND.

Written for the Truths sake by T.F.

The darkness is past, and the true Light new shines,

1 John 2.8. See therefore that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise,

Ephesians. 5.15. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by G. Calvert,
at the Black-spread Eagle near the west; end of Paul's, and N. Brooks at the
Angel in Cornhil, 1659.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
ALthough I have bin for many years a true seeker of the kingdom of Heaven, yet
had I been one who had sat in the seat of the scorner, or been disobedient
unto the Light or motion of Gods Spirit upon those Waters in me, (which had
near overwhelmed my Soul) I should have remained (as most men still do) in
darkness, even until now; or else been like unto those who are a sleep in sin,
neither knowing, nor believing any other state attainable in this life, who yet
notwithstanding are bold to say, They see: But blessed be the Lord God, I am
not of their unbelief, but of that faith which overcomes the World, Sin, and
the Devil.

Friend, If thou art such a one, to wit, a sinner, and beleevest thou can not
be otherwise here, and yet will presumptuously say, Thouseest: Know thou, That
Christ Jesus came to make thee blind, and that those who are blind, (and
sensible of it) might see: And thou who art a sleep in sin, and dead whilst
thou live, Arise and listen thou to the voice of Christ, and to his knock in
thee, if thou will live, to God, open the door of thy heart unto him betimes.
He it is who calls to sinners to be pure, and to be perfect as our heavenly
Father is: He it is who cried out to Jerusalem to be gathered under his wing;
and he also if thou will be gathered, would gather thee: O refuse him not, for
he it is who has called me out of darkness into light, and caused me to listen
to his still voice within me; and he it is who calls to thee also to return and
live, saying to thee, as he did to Israel, Why will ye die, O House of Israel?

Now, that thou may know I am none of those that cry, Lohere, Or, Lo^hers;
nor of the many Sects and divided Judgments in this Nation, I shall briefly
tell thee how many by-ways I have past through, and how restless I was in them
all, till I came to own the light of Christ in me.

First, As to my Education, I must tell thee, it was such a was in the fear of
the Lord, into which I admonish thee to hasten, and therein continue all the
days of thy life: for I assure thee, there is no safety but in that state, and
in the pure life of innocence from which all men by disobedience are fallen:
It Is not talking of the holy life, but living it, that can give thee an
entrance into Paradise; for the flaming Sword is turned against the
transgressor, so, that he cannot touch the tree of life, much-less eat thereof;
but with the Serpent must feed upon dust all the days of his life: O, Make
haste Friend, to the life of Obedience, and come down from the barren Mountains
lest thou die, for there is no bread to be had there: Consult no longer with
the Serpents carnal reasonings in thee, nor with his numerous and busy Agents
without thee, persuading thee, that purity is not to be attained here. Oh! that
thou would consider, that the Soul which sins must die; and that, as the
tree falls, so it lies: that there is no Repentance in the Grave; nor any other
Way to life, but by keeping the Commandments of God.

Friend, Thy Enemy is within thee, therefore look at home, keep the Watch well
there, and (if thou caust) pray that thou enter not into temptation: for the
Devil now goes about roaring like a Lion, and is seeking whom he may devour Oh!
believe not those that say, The best of Gods Children cannot be free from sin
in this life; for I declare to thee, they are all of the black Army of Satan,
and for the support of his kingdom are they come to fight, and to make War with
the Lamb and his followers, who walk with him in white. Remember thou, That
without holiness no man shall see God, and that the pure in heart, and they
only, can see him.

And thou who art flown high in thy comprehension of aerie Notions without
life, thou must descend and dwell in the Low-valley, where once thou had some
sooting; for thy safety is there, and no where else: Come thou into the cool of
the day, and hear Gods voice unto thee, who charge thee with eating of the
tree of knowledge of Good and Evil: Thou have lost thy state of happiness by
harkening to the Woman [thy fallen Reason] who is not to speak in the Church,
for thou have suffered to be marred the holy Creation of God in thee, and there
is no way lest now for thee but to come to Christ Jesus, the light of the
world, and life of man; He it is, though thou have despised him [because his
appearance is low in thee] who must repair the breach between God and thee: but
if thou reject him who is thy light, and who would be thy leader, thy stare is
worse then fallen Adams was: thou art now one with the Angel of false light:
Darkness will be thy portion [as it is his] for evermore.

Friend, What I have further to say in this Preface, may give thee some light
of the crooked-wayes thou art not to walk in, and therefore shall proceed to
give thee an account of my wandering steps, which the Lord has now brought to
my remembrance, even from my Child hood.

The fear of God, I say, was before me, even from my Youth, so that when I was
but a Schoolboy, I durst not omit my Morning and Evening Sacrifice of Prayer
to God, upon any pretense whatsoever: Never did I swear an Oath but once, since
I was born, and that was upon great provocation by a lewd Boy, when I was about
twelve years of age: But such was the goodness of God to me then, that
presently after. I had spoken the word, I found trouble in my Conscience, and
condemnation for it many years after.

My Companions were mostly such as were sober, and freest from scandal; and I
can truly say, I remembered my Creator in the days of my Youth, and was a true
seeker of the Kingdom of Heaven from such time as I had an understanding to
believe there was such a Kingdom to be sought after.

And when I came to be about 16. years of age, I then began to Pray out of my
usual Form, as finding naught but deadness in my Form of Prayers, which I had
got, so that by little and little I Prayed by rote; and I increased in years, I
applied my self to Reading Sermon-Books, and often to Hear and Write Sermons
after the choicest of the Presbyterian-Way, whom I conceived then were most
Orthodox. Early did I rise, to Read and Meditate of God, whom I then looked on
at a distance from me, [as most men do] but he was in this place, and I knew if
not: the Lord was with me in all my crooked-wayes and preserved me, but I saw
him not, nor what it was that breathed in me after God: I did not know it was
the seed of God which was in bondage and groaned to be delivered into the
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

Often did I with Tears beg for pardon of my sins, and assurance of my
Salvation, which I prized above all the world, and did often say within my
self, That if I could but gain Assurance of that, I could be content to be
miserable in this World as long as I should live in it. Company, was many-times
a burden unto me, and to be retired and much alone was my great delight, that
so I might freely breath forth my Soul to God for the assurance of his Love,
and to be freed from everlasting burnings. The consideration of Eternity was
often in my mind, and many-times would this voice sound in me, Arise ye dead,
and come to judgment.

But alas! What hope of Assurance could I have of my Salvation, whilst I gave
Faith to such Teachers as affirmed, That, the best of Gods Saints cannot be
free from sin in this life: and in the same breath also said, That the least
sin deserved the torments of Hell fire for ever. May not a poor Soul [who
presses after holiness,] truly say, They are miserable Comforters? Oh! who can
be assured of his Salvation, or gain Assurance thereof, that believes false
Doctrine to be true, and instead of living the Holy life, believes it is not
attainable? Can any man be assured of his Salvation whilst he is a sinner?
surely no: and if no Assurance, then surely no Salvation: for the Soul that
sins must die, and without holiness, no man shall see the Lord.

By this and such like Doctrine, was my life made very uncomfortable: and
though I knew little by my self to deserve the torments of Hell. [being always
of a sober life, and free from the gross pollutions of this world.] Yet the
fear of Hell was a contimsa(...) torment unto my mind, insomuch, that I often
wished I had never been born, or that there had been no God to punish me. Yet I
can truly say, Religion was my chief businss and my great delight was in
hearing Sermons, receiving the Sacrament, (as they call it,) to be often
conversant in Fastings, and frequent in outward Worships, and carnal
Ordinances, (all which perish with the using) so that I never could have enough
of them, Tears was my delight, and mourning in secret was a refreshing to my
Soul and when I could not weep, I prayed: and when I could not pray, I wept;
and sometimes I prayed and wept, till I had wept my self to silence before the
Lord: and when I neither could weep nor pray, then trouble and perplexity
seized on my Spirit, and I should begin to fear the danger of a hard heart, and
that the Spirit of Prayer was taken from me. Blasphemeus thoughts would
sometimes surprise me, and the terrors of Hell get hold upon me, and how to
escape I knew not No comfort could I receive from any of my Teachers, for when
by the best of their marks and signs I judged my self in a safe condition, yet
the witness of God would rise through all that false peace which they had spoke
to me, and accuse me of being a sinner.

And this was my case for many years, and my condition was very unsafe, (as all
theirs is, who are yet in Egypt, leaning upon men, and forsaking the Lord.) But
the Lord God after long seeking to him in secret, seeing my integrity, and that
the desire of my Soul was after him, and to be holy as well as happy, He
mercifully brought me out of Egypt, and delivered me from those cruel
Taskmasters and Builders of Confusion, and set me at liberty to travel toward
the Holy Land: for in all the Land of Egypt I found no outward Guide to lead me
out of my Egiptian darkness, though something within me would often groan, and
say, Return unto thy rest O my Soul: thus, I say, the Lord pitying my soul,
pardoning my sins, winking at my ignorance, and bottling up my tears, set me
free from bondage.

That, being delivered out of Egypt, and journying toward Canaan, I met with
diverse sorts of Travelers, with whom I had converse and acquaintance: As,
first, with those of the Independent-way, but finding, after a short time, that
there was little difference between them and the others, and that the path they
went in was too broad, and would not bring me to rest: I forsook them and
traveled forward toward those men of the Baptized-way, who for some season I
heard and observed: but finding that the main stress of their Argument (that
their Way was right) was, because they submitted to the Ordinance of Baptism,
pleading difficulty (if not impossibility) for any to come to Canaan unless
they were rebaptized, I searched into the Doctrine of Baptisms also, wherein I
found, That Water Baptism, or John's Baptism was but onto Repentance, which was
effected in me already, and that it could not wash away my inward ^ilth, and
therefore must decrease: And I considering, that the Apostle says, There is
(now) but one Baptism; to wit, that of the Spirit: and that, that is the only
Baptism for every Christian to be Bapized with, (if he will be cleansed, and
purged from sin.)

And considering that Jesus himself Baptized none; and that Paul says he came
not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel. And that this Ordinance was only
Apostolical, and not relating, to Christians now. I left them and their Water,
and traveled toward those called Notionists with whom, after I had traveled
a while, I began to conclude them to be the men that I must walk with; and so
followed them as seeing more of truth, (to wit, in the Notion of it) then in
any I had met with before, and was much enlightened: but after I had been with
them a while, I found I could not Pray as I was wont to do, and so began to
fear I was now further from the right way, then ever I was before; and being
now come to the red Sat, I had a lingering and secret longing to the Garlic and
Onions of Egypt again, yet the Lord kept me from going back into Egypt, (where
was no light at all) but I walked in the Wilderness to and again for many years
together, filling my head with Notions, and comprehending of Mysteries, which
were very pleasant and delightful unto me. Thus I wandered up and down from one
tree of knowledge to another, and in many a by-path I trod, seeking for rest,
but found none: and though the Spirit of innocence often cried in me, Return,
return, and come into the narrow-way which leads to life; yet I flattered my
self that I had been there already, and that I was now come to the Borders of
Canaan: one while, conceiving my self there, and set down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob in the Kingdom: but by and by, a branch from the old Root would arise
in me, and break forth into passion, rash, and hasty words, and overturn all my
Confidence again, and give me to understand I was not in that Kingdom, for that
there was nothing of Pride, or Passion, selfconceit or vain laughter, or
foolish and idle talking and jeasting, but giving of thanks, and rejoicing in
the Lord continually: and that they who were in that kingdom were led by the
Spirit, lived in the Spirit, and walked in the Spirit, and were at rest in the
Lord, enjoying the fellow ship and society of just men's Spirits.

Now, that I was not here, I was clearly convinced often, and instead of
enjoying this state; I had the other set before me, as my Condition; and the
Lord let me see how my poor Soul was be-wildred: And then after 14 years
wandering up and down, I began to see and find my way out and not till then:
Then I saw my self at a loss, and in the dark; and was made to confess, That if
I had perished in the Wilderness, yet the Lord was righteous in my destruction,
because that when he would have led me by the gentle motions of his Spirit, and
Light in me yet I Refused it, and went forth to men, choosing the tree of
Knowledge, and neglecting the tree of Life, for my ^ood.

But, blessed be the God of Israel, (who is not a barren wilderness to those
that seek him in truth and singleness of heart) He showed unto me the way that
I should walk in, to wit, The strait and narrow ^ath, which leads to Canaan;
and that by a foolish people in the Worlds esteem, was I directed the way to
eternal life. But after I was persuaded of the way to life, and convinced of
the truth as it is in Jesus, and after the seed of the Kingdom began to stir in
my earthly tabernacle, and to take root to my heart, then the Enemy came in the
form of an Angel, and set me on a sudden upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, where
I was made to believe, I saw over all the Children of truth, and was ready to
sit down there also: But after the Lord in his rich Mercy had let me see my
danger, and how I had been misled by the Angel of false Light: He directed me
to the low valley, there to abide, and assured me, that if I would be a true
Disciple of Christ indeed, I must take up the Cross daily and follow him, and
be obedient to his Light in my Conscience which convinces of the most secret
sin.

And now, that I may bring in my Testimony to the truth which was once
delivered to the Saints, and which now is again made known to the Children of
the most High; and, That I may set to my Seal to the Doctrine of the Cross: I
here Declare, to all the Sects up on earth, and to all people, high and low,
Professor, or Profane, That the despised people whom the scorners of this age,
call QVAKERS, are the true Disciples of Christ Jesus: viz. Such amongst them as
are faithful followers of the Lamb, and obedient Children of the Light, which
lights every man that comes into the world. By them is the Everlasting
Gospel preached again to the Sons and Daughters of men: and blessed are all
those that hear and obey the sound thereof.

The glad tidings of Salvation I say is preached by them, and whosoever he be
that shall bring any other Gospel, is disowned by all the true Disciples of
Jesus, and Sons of the Light. They are the Sheep of Christ, and amongst them is
the true Shepherd of Israel known, and he goes in and out before them. To them,
and in them has the Light of the world appeared, and the life of men
communicated himself; and I must say, I sat in darkness till I heard them.

These are they who having past through all forms, are come into the power, and
are knit together into one body, whereof Christ Jesus is head. These are they
who take up their daily Cross, and follow him. These are they who pass through
great tribulation, and through many and fiery trials. These are they who are
the true Worshippers, who worship the Father in spirit and in truth, and love
not their lives unto death.

These are they who are Redeemed from the Earth, though upon it: These are they
that are come to Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, and to the
innumera (...) of Angels, and to the Spirits of just and (...) and to the
General Assembly of the fir(...)se Names are written in Heaven: These are (...)
who are Sons of God, and are led by the infallible spirit into all truth: These
are they who are joint-Heirs with Christ whose fellowship is with the Father
and the Son in the Spirit, and they shall Reign with him for ever and ever:
Glory be to his Name for evermore

Friend, by these, I say, was I directed to obey the light in my Conscience,
which convinces of sin, when nothing else can, and to which they direct all
men (who are in the dark) to follow: In so doing was I brought out of darkness,
into his marvelous Light, Glory be to the Light, and to the La^^ for evermore.

Thus I have given thee a short account of my journey so far, and now can
boldly say with David My hearts is fixed; my heart is fixed, and I have naught
to do now, but to give thanks, and to follow the Lamb of God whithersoever he
goes.

And now Friend, let me ask thee, Is the Lord the desire of thy soul? And do
thou pant and breath after him, as the Heart does after the Waterbrooks Is
truth in the inward parts the thing thou would have? And art thou indeed and in
truth a true seeker of the Kingdom, and restless till thou findst it? Then let
me advise thee, Seek the Lord where he may be found, to wit, in thy own heart,
for that it his Temple, and there will he dwell if thou be upright: I say, the
tabernacle of the Lord is with men, and there only will he be found: Scourge
then out those Buyers and Sellers that dwell there; suffer not the House of God
to be a den for Thieves and Robbers to reside in, for whilst thou give
entertainment unto them, the Lord will not make his abode with thee: Put
therefore the evil thing out of thy Camp, that so thou may receive a
blessing, enjoy the good, and live for evermore.

Thine for the Truths sake, THO. FORSTER.

THE CONTENTS.
1. THat God is now known by his Name Light, as heretofore by his Names
Jehovah, Elohim I am, etc. And that God's First days work in the dark Soul of
Man is, the creating of Light. 2. That man true Guide is within him, Or the
Light of Christ in Man, is the true guide of the Soul. 3. A word of Reproof to
all that say, The Light of Christ in man, is natural, carnal, or an
insufficient Guide. 4. A word to all that say Revelation is ceased, and that
the Saints must not expect such glorious manifestations now, as were in the
primitive times: With a few Queries for the enlightening the blind Eyes of such
as say, That No man has the infallible Spirit now. 5. Counsel to him that
feels the wright of sin, and groans for deliverance, but yet complains for man's
of power. 6. A word of Hope for the Persecuting Magistrate, if his day of Grace
be not already past; also some it is. 7. A view of false Doctrine, and a
Reproof to false Teachers, who beast that they have the Original, and yet are
ignorant of the Word of Life, and quickening Spirit within. 8. Direction for all
those that wait for the coming of their Savior, and how they may know him when
he appears. 9. Encouragement to the weary Traveller, (whose journey is toward
Canaan) To follow the Light and Lamb of God to the Holy Land of Rest; But not
to go before it. 10. A Word touching the Resurrection, and who they are that
are risen with Christ, and shall reign with him: And by whom (...) is seen, in
his spiritual appearance, and where.
A GUIDE TO THE BLIND Pointed to.
That God is now known by his Name LIGHT as heretofore by his Names Jehovah,
Elohim, I am, etc. And that Gods first days work in the dark Soul, (or little
world of Man) is creating of Light.
THE Message which the beloved Disciple of Christ has declared to the Saints,
is this, That God is ^^ght, and that in him is no darkness, 1 John 1.5.

This also is my Message unto thee, God is Light; and whatsoever is to be known
of him, is manifest in man, Romans 1.19. To thee then who art still in the dark,
and know not this truth, or if thou know it, obeyest it not, to wit, the
Light within; Thou (I say) art not yet come to the first days work of God in
the dark Chaos of thy own heart; for the same way does the Lord proceed with
his creature Man (in the creation of him to good works) as he did with the
whole Universe, to wit, First bring him out of darkness into his marvelous
light.

God when he made the World, created the Heaven and the Earth, and the Earth
was without form, and darkness was upon the face of the deep; And in this state
is man in his first Creation (through the fall) without form, and darkness is
upon him: But when the Spirit of God moved upon the Waters, and said, Let there
be Light, there was light; and the Light he called Day, and the Darkness he
called Night and the Evening and the Morning were the first Day.

Now consider Friends, all you who disown the Light, calling it natural,
carnal, darkness, and insufficient to guide you; What do you judge of your
present state and condition? Are you not like the Chaos? And is not your little
World without form, and void? And is not darkness upon the face of your deep
imaginations, until the spirit of God move upon your Waters of instability, and
his Light spring forth in your understandings from his holy Spirit?

Oh that you who reject the Light would consider this, that you are so far from
rest, that you are not yet come to the first days work of God in your own
hearts! How can you say as the Disciples and followers of Christ do, That it is
God that works all his works in you, and for you? How can you number your
selves amongst the children of Light, when you refuse the Light to work in you,
and rebel against it?

Have you not read in the holy Scriptures, That Christ did not work many
miracles in his own Country, because of the peoples unbelief there? I do not
say, he could not work them; but this I affirm, The Lord compels none to serve
him in the dark; but when he has enlightened man with his own Light (with
which he enlighteneth every man that comes into the World) man is at his
choice whether he will follow and obey the light, yea or no: I say, the Lord
does not force the Will of man to obedience, but woes him, and beseeches him
to be reconciled, knowing the great misery which will justly and inevitably
follow the rebellious and disobedient soul.

Oh! that I could persuade all men to obedience, that so they may eat of the
Tree of Life, which by transgression man is fallen from, and which he cannot
touch lest he dye.

And now let none say that he is not enlightened, or that he wants power, upon
the penalty of condemnation for ever; for the Lord requires nothing of man but
what he has given him full power to do, all power in heaven and in earth being
in the Son, and this Son of power is freely offered to every man that will
receive him; For God so loved the world, that he gave his own Son to dye for
lost man, that he might live; I say, he is freely given a light to the
Gentiles, and a Guide to them, as well as a Glory to his people Israel, and
none are excluded who are willing to come unto him. And thou that deniest the
Light, Whose workmanship art thou? And whose Works are wrought in thee? Are
they not Works of darkness, and thou the son of perdition? Oh! suffer not the
Devil any longer to delude thee by his evil Instruments, and to work his works
in thee; but endeavor thou to be made light in the Lord; for thou were not
made to serve the Devil, but to be a Temple for Gods holy Spirit to dwell in.

Man's true Guide is within him; Or, The Light of Christ in Man is the true
Guide of the Soul.
PAUL that eminent Apostle of Christ, and Son of the Light, has declared, That
whatsoever is to be known of God, is manifest in man, (as is said already) Romans
1.19. Let none then say, Lo here, or lo there; but if they should, hear what
our Savior Christ faith, Go not after them, nor follow them, for the kingdom
of God is within you, Luke 17.21. Now if the Kingdom be within, then of
necessity must man's guide be there also.

That Christ is the Light and Guide of man, see Joh. 1.9. and Joh. 14.6. and
that he is in his Saints, read Col. 1.27. And in Romans 8.10. the Apostle says,
If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; and again, If the spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, be that raised up
Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that
dwells in you, Ver. 11. and Ver. 9. If any man has not the spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. And again, If Christ be not in you, then are you reprobates,
2 Cor. 13.5.

By all which places it is most evident, That Christ is the light of man, and
that he lights every man that comes into the World, of what Country or
Nation soever, and none can deny this unless he will unman himself, and say he
is not of the race and generation of manking. So then it is clearly
demonstrated to him that can read the Scriptures, That Christ is the Saints
Guide, and that he is their hope of glory, in them. And thou that deniest
Christ in man to be his Guide, thou art either a reprobate, or no man: For
Friend, this is my Testimony for the Lord, (and it is the Testimony of
thousands at this day, blessed for ever be his Name) That Christ within is
man's true Guide, and also man's true Light to walk by, and that in him is
life, and the life is the light of men, and that this light shines in
darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it; read 1 Ioh. 4.5. Yet now if
any shall say he is in the light, and hates his Brother, he is in darkness,
and knows not whether he goes.

To thee then who art a hater of thy Brother, assure thy self that thou art
none of the Children of Light, not have I any thing to say to thee but this,
Thou art condemned already; as well by the Light within thee, as by the
children of Light without thee; For God is love, and he that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16.

But to the poor soul who is ignorant of his true Guide, and is willing to
follow him if he knew where to find him, my counsel to him is this, Look at
home; for thy Savior is near unto thee, and blessed art thou if thou can
believe it, and obey him.

To thee I say, that art seeking thy Savior with all thy heart, and art
restless till thou find him, Know for thy comfort that he is near to thee, and
to every one that is of an upright heart, and is even in thy heart, and in thy
mouth, Romans 10.8. Seek him not then at a distance from thee, or in any outward
thing, for he that justifies thee, is near unto thee; and if ever thou find him
in truth, thou will say as Jacob did, That he was in this place, and thou
knew is not.

Would thou have thy Savior and thy Guide to lead thee by his un-erring and
infallible spirit? Then cease from man, (whose breath is in his Nostrils) and
turn to the living God with whom only the Well-springs of life are to be found.

Salvation is not to be had from the Hills, nor from the Mountains, neither
from this divided judgment, or that; but from Jesus alone, who is in his
Saints the hope of glory, and is the Savior of all men, but especially of them
that believe.

I say, The Tabernacle of God is with men, and though he be the High and Holy
one that inhabiteth Eternity, yet is his dwelling also with him that is of a
lowly heart, and trembles at his Word.

The spirit of Christ in man is the true Guide, all others are false ones; his
Light in man is the true light, al others are false ones. Oh be not so
willingly blind as not to see it, nor so wilfully ignorant as not to know it.
He it is that condemns sin in the flesh, and reproves man for a vain thought,
or wanton look, when nothing without him can. Turn in the eye of thy mind than,
and hearken to his checks and daily reproofs in thee; Know thou not that the
state of reprobation belongs to him that has not Christ in him? Friend, thy
Savior is within thee, and if ever thou know him aright, it must be there; for
there, O there it is that thee and I have crucified him that is Lord of life;
and this is that Jesus whom the Jews crucified at Jerusalem, but is now
crucified by the false Christians, within them, and by them put again to an
open shame, as their Streets, Marketplaces, Cities, Towns and Villages do
declare, by stocking mocking, stoning, cruel whipping, long imprisoning, and
persecuting unto death, his Members.

But now is come (and is coming) a day of trial upon all prosessions
whatsoever, and all professors must now be tried whether their faith be true or
feigned none must escape the siery trial, but the judgment of the Lord will
pass upon all, high and low, great and small, poor or rich, airy notions as
well as carnal Ordinances, (which all perish with the using) and now seen
thorough in this day of light; for the Sun (which has long sat in a Cloud) is
arisen to discover the inward subtilty and hypocrisy, as well as the outward
superstition and idolatry of all hearts.

Bring thy Works then to the light of Christ Jesus in thy own conscience, that
so they may be manifest whether they are wrought in God or nou; for he that
hides his sin, shall not prosper.

And thou who art a sinner, and believe that thou can not be freed from
them, because the blind guides have told thee so, there is little ground for
thee to hope for mercy; for the sinner cannot stand before the Lord, nor the
wicked in the Congregation of the righteous; nor can any unclean thing enter
into Heaven: Know thou, that it is sin that crucifies thy Savior, who though
he bear with patience the sinners burden for a time, (being pressed therewith
as a Cart with sheaves) yet thou will one day find he will cast off the heavy
burden upon the sinners own back, which (when the Lord has done striving with
him) will be too unsupportable for him to bear.

Oh that no poor soul would suffer himself to be mislead and deceived by blind
Guides in a matter of so great concernment as the everlasting salvation or
damnation of their immortal souls; for the Light of Christ Jesus has appeared
unto thousands and discovered their Egyptian darkness and false Doctrine, and
can prove them to be such builders as reject the Cornerstone, and declare lies
in the Name of the Lord: And for which appearance of Christ in his Saints,
glory be given to the Father, and to the Son, through the blessed Spirit for
evermore.

Christ Jesus is to be known within by all who will approve themselves no
reprobates, and so to be within them, as to live his life of meekness, of
patience, of long-sufferance, of mercy and compassion, of goodnese, of
gentleness, of wisdom and godly fear, of self-denial, of perseverance, of
faith, of hope, of love, and whatsoever else are the fruits of his spirit and
presence in us.

Friends, It Is not a Christ without that will save you, but the same Christ
which dyed at Jerusalem, must live in us, and we in him; and so must we know
him even to lead and guide us out of all error, sin and vanity, into all truth,
righteousness, and stability, if we ever know him to salvation; I know your
minds have been abroad, and peradventure yet are, (as mine was) but I never
knew my Savior (whom I sought without) until I turned my mind inward, and
found him there; No more can ye. If them art still abroad wandering upon the
barren Mountains, O come down, for l am well assured there is no food there for
thy hungry soul; The day I say is far spent, and the night at hand, wander no
longer in the coasts of Egypt, and Land of darkness, where no Light is, nor
true Guide to lead thee, but hasten into the low Valley, search deep into the
bottom of thy heart, come to Meekness, Patience, and humility of spirit, and
there, O there will thou meet with thy true Guide, and that Light which alone
can lead out of darkness all the faithful followers of it.

Reproof to him that faith the Light within is natural, and that the Light of
Christ was carnal and darkness, (as some have affirmed.)
THou know not what thou say, O man, that say the Light is natural,
carnal, or insufficient, nor whereof thou affirmest: Have thou been a Teacher
or Hearer in England for many years, and a professor of Religion, and yet
know not Jesus? Take this for thy portion (thou who despisest the riches and
goodness of the Lord in his Son Christ) The Light or Talent (which thou now
have shall be taken from thee, and thou (the unprofitable servant) cast out
into outward darkness, where shall be nothing but weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth, because thou have rejected the Light within, which is Gods
Witness in every man, and have judged and denied it; Know this, That thou by it
shall be condemned for ever: I say, the day of Grace and longsuffering of the
Lord (which would now lead thee to repentance) will not always last; the
Light, or Candle of the Lord in thee will not always shine, but the night of
darkness (in which thou shall ever remain) will overtake thee, where thou shall
be shut up in Chains for evermore; then, oh then it will be too late to vvish
thou had not slighted the light in thy conscience, and called it carnal,
darkness and insufficient; for it now is, and then will be more then a thousand
Witnesses against thee.

The Light of Christ (I say) is not carnal, is not darkness, is not
insufficient to lead blind man out of darkness into the marvelous light of the
Lord; for by it, and it alone have I been lead from the one into the other, and
can set to my seal of a truth, That God is light, and Christ is light, and that
his light is in every man, and it is, and will be the condemnation. That Light
is come into the World, but men love darkness rather then light, because their
deeds are evil and full of darkness.

Friend, This I am bold to declare, as in the Light of the Lord, That there is
no other way to be saved from eternal darkness, but by coming unto Christ the
light of the World, and walking in his light; if so thou do, as he is in the
light, then, and not till then shall thou have fellowship with the children of
Light, and the blood of Jesus will cleanse thee from all sin.

Some Queries to them that say Revelation is ceased, and that the Saints must
not now expect such glorious manifestations as were in the primitive times; and
that say no man has the infallible Spirit now.
MAny there are who in this state of darkness do believe and say, That
Revelation is ceased, and that the infallible Spirit is not now known amongst
the Saints; and that they are not to expect such glorious manifestations now,
as were in the primitive times: The ignorance and gross darkness of such I
cannot but bewail, and for the opening of their understandings, shall propound
unto them some Queries. As first:

Whether is not Christ the same to day, yesterday, and for ever? and the holy
Spirit the same, and as operative, quick and powerful now, as ever? Or has it
lost its powerful operation now? Is the Lords love to his Saints less now, then
before? Or is his hand shortened that he cannot save to the uttermost as well
now as ever? Where is it said (which ye so boldly affirm) That Revelation is
ceased, or shall ever cease, from the Saints or Spouse of Christ? Has not the
Lord promised that in the later days he will pour out his Spirit upon all
flesh, and his sons and his daughters shall prophecy? And has not John said,
That the light of that day shall be as seven days, and that there shall be no
need of a Candle, nor light of the Sun, for the Lord God shall be the light
thereof.

What is it that in the night of darkness (when thou art lying upon thy bed of
Adultery and carnal pleasure, sporting thy unsatiable soul in the lusts of the
flesh) discovers and reveals the wickedness of thy heart unto thee? What is it
that in the day time checks thee for thy wanton eye and pride of life, when
none without perhaps dares accuse thee?

What is it that discovers unto thee (in thy Chamber of Imagery) the secret
Adultery of thy heart, when no outward eye sees thee? What is it that brings to
thy remembrance things past, as if they were but yesterday, and sets thy secret
sins in order before thee? What is it that tells thee thou have committed the
sin against the Holy Ghost, and for which thou can never receive pardon when
committed?

Oh! how is it that thou should suffer the instruments of Satan to work such
a belief in thee, and so far to put out the eye of thy Faith, and of thy
reasonable soul also, as not to see thy self in a delusion, when the Scriptures
do positively say, That no man knows the Father but the Son, and him to whom
the Son will reveal him, Matthew. 12.27. Tell me (poor soul) whether thou can be
so ignorant of the Scriptures as not to know this, That he that worships the
Father, must worship him in spirit? Do thou not know that the holy spirit is
a spirit of Revelation wheresoever it is? Do thou not know that, that is its
work in man, and that if thou have not this Spirit of Christ, thou art none of
his? Friend, it is an infallibly sign thou deniest the spirit, that say
Revelation is ceased, it being its proper Work.

And thou that say, No man has the infallible Spirit now; Let me ask thee
also, Has the Lord no people in this Age to bear testimony to his Truth? Do
none know the Lord now? And are none in the Way of Truth? Is this thy Faith?
Then know thou for certain, thou art led by a spirit of delusion; and whilst
thou thus believe, thou can never come to the truth, nor be led by the
Spirit of Truth; for the Children of God are all guided by the infallible
spirit so long as they be faithful followers of it, and they live in the
spirit, and walk in the spirit, and talk in the spirit, and act in the spirit;
all which is a Riddle to thee, and impossible for any to open, unless he have
the gift of Faith to believe in the mighty Power of God, which is the Son of
God.

Friend, whosoever thou art that art of this persuasion, I must declare unto
thee from the Lord, Thy Faith is but Faney, thou art still in Egypt, and like
to perish in the Wilderness. O be persuaded to search the Scriptures, and to
believe in Jesus who is the Author and Finisher of the Faith of his Disciples,
of Whom thou art none, as thou now stands; forbear thou to make mention of the
holy and infallible Spirit of Truth; (which (in their several measures) all
possess who are taught of God) until thou are freed from the spirit of Error,
and come out from the fleshly apprehensions of the Divine Truth, to see the
infallible things of God by the eye of living Faith; and if you come to know
the Lord and his truth, your rotten foundations must be removed, and your Faith
built upon the Rock of Ages.

Do thon think that because thy heart is filled with unbelief of the mighty
Power of God, and because thou know not the secrets of the Lord revealed
unto thee, (in regard thou art not come into his fear) that therefore the Lord
does not reveal his secret to any? No, no, thou are miserably deluded and
berest of the right use of thy understanding by Satan and his Minister; for
know thou, the Lord is as merciful now as ever, as good now as ever, and as
free to reveal himself and his secrets unto those that fear him, now, as ever
he was. Can thou be ignorant of this, That the Lord reveals his secrets to
them that fear him? Or that the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear
him, Psalm. 25.14, Or, ( Prove. 3.32.) That his secret is with the Righteous; And
Amos 3.7. That the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his
servants. Friend, There is no way to come to the knowledge of God, but by the
Revelation of the Son of God in us, witnessing with our spirits, whose children
we are: And all that I shall say further to thee herein, is this, My soul shall
weep in secret for thee, and and thy Teachers who have caused thee to err,
(they themselves not knowing the truth) by saying, Revelation is ceased, when
there is no other way to know God by.

A Word of Counsel to him that feels himself laden with his sins, and groans
for deliverance, but complains that he wants power.
ART thou laden with the burden of thy sins? And do thou mourn in secret,
praying to God for case and pardon? Or, Art thou black with lying in the mire
and filthy pollutions of this, World, so that thou art ready to say, From the
crown of my head, to the sole of my foot, I am full of wounds and putrified
sores, and would fain be made clean? Art thon possessed with the spirit of error,
and ignorant of the truth of God? And would thou be acquainted with the
Spirit of God to guide thee into all truth, and lead thee into the path of
holiness? Would thou be freed from the spirit of pride, self-love, passion,
and emulation toward thy Neighbor? Art thou covetous of gain, and
earthly-minded, and do not do to another as thou would be done unto,
wanting the Royal Law of Love to be thy Rule? Art thou possessed not only with
one evil spirit, but Legions, and see no power to resist the least assault of
the Enemy?

Then be thou counseled (by one who has felt the weight and burchen of most
of these evils, and seen deliveranee in a measure) to own the light in thy
conscience, and that will open unto thee a door, of hope, and show thee a
Fountain where Judah and Jerusalem Jew and Gentile, Christian and Heatheu,
Profane and Professor, high and low, rich and poor, may wash in, and be made
clean, yea, and from all their filthiness may they be cleansed: And if thou do
so, viz. own the Light in thy conscience, and obey it, it will lead thee to
holiness.

And thou that complainest for want of power against sin, I tell thee, and do
affirm unto thee, whoever thou art, Thou have power, unless (with the unjust
Steward) thou have buried it in thy corrupt heart, and made no improvement of
it, and the Lord for thy unsaithfulness has taken it from thee, and given it
to him who has been a better husband of his gift then thou have been: For this
I say, That the Lord has given a Talent (or measure of himself) to every one
to profit withal, which is his light in every conscience, the which whosoever
does not improve, shall have it taken from him, and he be cast into utter
darkness; for there is a day when the Candle of the Wicked shall be put out,
and he shall have no light to walk by, though he seek it, and that with
tears: Remember Judas, and be warned by him to be faithful to thy Master, and
to obey him, even whilst the Light shines upon thee, and would guide thee,
least thy repentance be too late, as his was, and thou be with him called a Son
of Perdition; but if thou obey the Light in thy conscience which convinces
thee of sin, I declare unto thee as a Word from experience of the mighty Power
of God, and of its powerful working there, That it will not only give thee
power against gross corruptions, but against vain thoughts and idle words; and
though thy sins be red like crimson, they shall be as Wool; and as red as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow: Be willing therefore, and obedient,
and thou shall eat the good of the Land; but if thou refuse, and rebel, thou
shall be devoured with the Sword: The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Some Hope left for the persecuting Magistrate of England, (if his Day of Grace
be not past already.)
PEradventure thou may say unto me, I have been a Civil Magistrate and a
great Persecutor of the Saints ((...) the Most High God) who bave few or none
on earth to plead their cause; how shall I find mercy from the Lord, for I am
the greatest of sinners? That when the Servants and Messengers of the Lord have
come into our Cities, Towns, Villages, or Marketplaces to preach repentance,
and declare against sin, and to bring the glad tidings of the Gospel into our
quarters, (where it was never preached before) I have not been so sober unto
them as the Gadarenes were to Christ, who (when he came to cast out unclean
spirits, and to do them good, they) entreated him to depart out of their
coasts; but I instead of entreating, have compelled them, not with mild
persuasions, but with cruel and merciless stripes upon their naked bodies, with
stockings, stonings, beatings, long and tedious imprisonmets, and other bitter
usage which for shame I cannot mention; And (as if this had been too little) I
have caused some of them to be scourged twice or thrice for not bowing to my
corrupt Will, and worshipping me with their Hats off; or for speaking to our
blind Guide, (who calls himself a Minister;) And all this I have done contrary
to the Law of the Land too; and when I have so done, I have with Passes sent
them away as Vagabonds and Wanderers, not suffering them (though sufficient
men, and of good Estates near us) to have a place in our quarters to dress
their sore stripes and deep wounds which my bloody Executioners. have made upon
their innocent and harmless bodies; nor yet a place wherein to rest their aching
heads, except in stocks, dungeons, close holes of little ease, or filthy and
stinking Goals amongst thieves and murderers, where many of them have finished
their testimonies by death.

Now says the guilty Magistrate, This is the truth of my condition, and thus
have I served the Ambassadors of Christ Jesus, (whom the malicious World cannot
accuse of evil) and my case is lamenable, and the worse, because what I have
done was through the instigation of our Gospel-Minister, (as he called himself)
and to please him, who otherwise would not suffer me to be at rest, crying out
against them, that they will undo us, and our generation after us, and render
our Gospel to be Antichristian, and our selves false Prophets, (as indeed we
are) and will make our nakedness and ignorance appear to all sober men if they
be tolerated; But that which is more considerable then all this, I am afraid I
have sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, which can never be forgiven, and
how shall I escape the damnation of Hell.

Friend, Is this thy case indeed? And art thou guilty so deeply, as this in
truth makes thee? It Is sad indeed: Yet consider, and for thy comfort I have
this to say unto thee, St. Paul was as great a Persecutor of the Saints as thou
possibly have been, and as mad against them as the most of you have been, or
can be; yet when the Light appeared to him, and struck him from his horse or
beastly nature of persecution, he presently fell to the earth, and with
trembling and astonishing, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? He did not
(as the blind Guides of this age) say, That the Light of Christ was natural and
insufficient to guide him out of his darkness, but he became obedient to the
Light immediately (though he saw no body) consulting neither with flesh nor
blood, nor yet running to Gamaliel a great Doctor (under whom he had been
brought up) for counsel; but forthwith ceased from the sprit of persecution,
and obtained mercy: So he being obedient to the Light, became a true Disciple
of Jesus, and Preacher of the everlasting Gospel, Acts 9.

And now (oh Magistrate) know this, That though thou have been the greatest
persecutor of the Saints amongst thy numerous Brethren, and have persecuted
them until death, (as many in England have been for conscience sake within
these few years, under a pretense of maintaining the Popish and Antichristian
Law for Tithes, and suppressing of Heretics) yet there is some hopes of mercy
for thee also, if thou can in truth say, That what thou did, then have done
ignorantly.

But if this be not thy case, but have wilfully transgressed and rebelled
against ^he Light in thy conscience, then, O then ^hy condition is sad indeed,
and thou with the blind Guides) art of all men most to be pittyed; Examine
therefore ^y own heart in secret, and if thou find that thou have been a
wilful Persecutor of Gods Servants, cry mightily unto the Lord that the
iniquity of thy heart may be forgiven thee, and possibly thou may find hopes
(upon thy unfeigned confession and resolution to turn to the Lord, and obey the
Light within thee) to obtain Mercy. Cease, I say, from that Spirit of
Persecution, and become obedient for the future, if peradventure thy fins may
be blotted out.

A view of false Doctrines, Or, A Word of Reproof to false Teachers, who boast
that that they have the Original, and yet are ignorant of the word of life.
FRiends, to you all I speak, (who disown the Light of Christ within, and count
it a low thing) a woe is pronounced unto you, for your light is turned into
darkness, and your sweet into bitter, and for the present see not your way
before you; the whole World lies in wickedness, and darkness is upon the faces
of all who are led by you, who preach for hire, and divine for money, contrary
to the prophets phets and true Ministers of Christ) you preach false Doctrine,
and practice persecution, and therefore are you none of the children of Light,
nor Ministers of the everlasting Gospel. You say, That the best of Gods
servants cannot be free from sin in this life; whereas the holy Scriptures say,
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord: Christ himself has preached
perfection, and has commanded his Disciples to be perfect as their heavenly
Father is perfect; but you say, No, perfection is not to be attained here; You
say, (many of you) That the Light of Christ in the conscience is natural, not
considering that he himself is spiritual, and that his Light must of necessity
be so too.

You say, Revelation is ceased; not considering this, That no man knows the
Father but the Son, and him to whom the Son will reveal him. You say, No man
has the infallible Spirit now; not considering, That he that has not the
Spirit of Christ, is none of his; For wherever the Spirit of Christ is, it
must needs be infallible; and you that have not the infallible Spirit, you are
none of Christ's; and if so, then consider with your selves whose childrern you
are, and what spirit guides you, and whither; for it cannot lead you into all
truth, nor any part thereof.

Some of you have been heard to say, That the Devil is the Power of God, and
that the Gospel is not the Power of God no more then a Rose Cake; and further,
That the Light of Christ Jesus is carnal and darkness. Friends, I hope better
things of many of you; but assuredly, this Doctrine is damnable and pernicious
to the souls of men: And therefore I warn you to forbear preachihg in the Name
of the Lord, whilst you are of this Faith, which I affirm is of the Devils, and
not of the Saints, (whose faith overcomes the World) and who believe they must
be holy as God is holy, and perfect as their heavenly Father is perfect, in
their several measures: They know that the Son of God is the Light of the World
and life of men, and is not darkness, carnal, natural, or insufficient to lead
them to purity, as you declare. And because I will not bore the ears (as I may
say) of the hearers, or bring to the Readers remembrance your multitude of
Errors, Heresies and false Doctrines; nor trouble him with a view of all your
ungodly practices at once; I shall be sparing, as hoping you may return from
whence you are fallen, and repent, but shall hereafter, if God will, propound a
few queries unto you, whereby you may see your selves in some few particulars
of your Doctrine and practice.

Friends, Is preaching for hire, and persecution of your Neighbor, for
conscience sake to be miantained by Scripture? Is throwing men into Gaols, and
stealing of their Goods, to be maintained by the Scriptures? Is your taking up
the carnal Weapons to defend your Gospel with, when your spiritual Weapons
will not do, to be maintained by Scripture? Did Christ's Ministers ever rebel
against the Civil Magistrate, and teach men so to do, as many of you have done
of late, instead of being subject to the higher Powers? For my own part I
wonder not hereat, as knowing that that spirit which at present guides you,
teaches rebellion and disobedience as well to God as to man.

Furthermore: You say you are Ministers of the Gospel, and yet have persuaded
people to believe that the Commandments of God cannot be kept.

Reader, to thee who art of this persuasion with them, be but moderate, and let
me ask thee this question; For what end (think thou) were the Commandments
given by God? Were they to be read only, or to be painted upon the
Steeple-house Walls? Will that please the Lord? Or were they not given to be
kept by his servants, who enter into life? Has not the Lord said, He will
write them upon his peoples hearts, never to be blotted out? Or can any man be
blessed that does not keep them?

Tell me, Does any man require that of another, which he knows be cannot
perform and do? And will thou make the Lord so hard a Master, as to require
obedience of man if it were not in his power to give it, or that the Lord had
not empowered him? Friend, even as the Serpent beguiled Eve, so art thou by
blind Guides; He drew our first Parents into disobedience by going out to
hearken to his subtilty, and so left their innocence; and thou being now in
disobedience, he would keep thee there by his evil instruments.

O take heed of the Serpents brood, who say, The Commandments of God cannot be
kept, for they are false prophets that so teach; but assure thy self, That if
ever thou enter into life, thou must keep the Commandments: David could keep
them under the Law, and said, That the Commandments of the Lord were not
grievous; My soul (says he) has kept thy Testimonies, and I love them
exceedingly: And again says he, I have done thy Commandments: And again he
says, I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: Read Psalm. 119, 166, 167,
168.

Now Friend consider the promise of the Lord concerning his people, by the the
mouth of his Prophet Zechariah, That in the day of the Lord, He that is feeble
amongst them shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, Zech.
12.8.

And as the keeping of the Commandments is the entrance into life, so are they
pronounced blessed that keep them, Rev. 22.14. and psalm. 119.2. and Prove. 8.32.
And says St. John, Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments, 1 John 2.3. But he that says, I know him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, Ver. 4. And again,
Whatsoever we ask (says he) we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do, those things which are pleasing in his sight, 1 John
4.22. and he that keeps his commandments, dwells in him, and he in him,
Ver. 24.

Such then as say that the commandments of God cannot be kept, are hereby
proved to be Liars, false prophets, and deceivers. Come out therefore from
among them, and be thou separate from such unclean men, for the liar shall not
enter into the Kingdom, nor any unclean or imperfect thing.

Friends, I even tremble to think on your condition, who break the Commandments
of God, and teach men so to do, you are so far from the Way, the Truth and the
Life, that unless you speedily repent and turn to the Lord, you will have your
portion with hypocrites, where is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth for
evermore.

My direction then to you also (before it be too late) is, To own the Light in
your consciences; and submit to its checks when you are reproved by it; and
know this, That whilst it reproves you for your fins, the day of Grace is not
yet past, nor has the Lord given over striving with you; but when you feel no
checks of conscience when you do evil in thought, word, or deed, then be
assured your day is past, and you are sealed up for destruction.

I say unto you therefore again, Own the Light within you while you have it,
and take it for your Guide, for you are gone a whoring from God, and the Spirit
of Truth and Holiness you know not.

O do not any longer abuse this Light, this Lamb of God, for you will one day
find him to be the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who when his Wrath shall be
kindled against you, you must be consumed for ever.

And now to you who say, We are the Learned Ministers of England; We have the
Tongues; We have the Originals, and we have the many Languages, and therefore
we are best able to interpret the Scriptures.

To you I say this, That the holy Scriptures are a sealed Book to all that are
not taught of God by the Revelation of his spirit, which you falsely and
ignorantly say is ceased; therefore it is that the unlearned Doctors and
others, the University-men of this age, wrest them to their own destruction;
therefore it is, that there are so many Errors, Heresies, Opinions, Sects, and
divided Judgments amongst you, and those who are called Christians.

Friends, if you be ignorant of the true Original of all things, to wit, the
infallible and unerring Spirit of God by which the holy Scriptures were wrote,
you want the key of true knowledge which should open them unto you, and you
(with all your learning) must stay without, when the simple whom God teaches,
and whom you despise, can give you the true meaning and mind of God's Spirit,
shall enter in.

Oh! remember that the Jews had the Original Tongues before you, and spoke them
naturally, and more then that, they had amongst them the true Original himself,
even Christ Jesus, the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, and yet they
crucified him, and chose a Thief and a Robber before him; I wish from my very
soul it were not so with you, choosing Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and other Tongues,
before the naked and simple truth of God; I say, Christ Jesus was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the wise Greeks foolishness; So is he this day to you,
whilst you are crying up Learning and humane Wisdom, and despise the still and
low voice of Christ in you, which speaks not in the Words of man's Wisdom.

Oh ye men of Learning in all the Wisdom of this World! When will you cease to
tumble over your many and dusty Volumes of corrupted Authors, to find out that
Truth which lies buried within you? Oh cease a while from searching into them,
and try whether you can find your Names written in the C^mbs Book of life; if
not, mourn and ^^^^^nt, for your condition of all others is most to be pittyed,
in regard of the great loss that is to come upon you (you having much to lose)

Now that I may not leave you without hope, as those who perish in their sins,
my advice to you is, To turn to the light in your consciences, and be obedient
unto it for unless ou so do, you can never come to the Key of David, which
opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens; Wait at Wisdoms Posts,
(which is the true fear of the Lord) from which you are all departed, who are
gone from the light within, and are seeking Salvation in outward things; for
the least Babe of Light sees thorough you, and can discover your darkness.

A Direction for all such as wait for the coming of their Savior in spirit,
and how they may know him when he appears.
CHrist's first appearance to the World was in flesh, and the fleshly eye saw
him, but his second appearance is in spirit, which no fleshly eye can behold
and live; for as the Lightning comes from one part of Heaven to lighten
another part under Heaven, so shall the coming of the Son of man be, and
blessed are all they who wait for his second coming, to wit, without sin, unto
salvation; for his second, coming is to put an end to sin, to finish
transgression, and to bring in everlasting righteousness. He that has an ear
to hear, let him hear.

Now if thou would plainly know the signs of his coming unto thee in
particular, then know this, That when he comes it is to convince thee of sin,
and to make a separation between thee and thy former Lovers, (be they who or
what they will be) there is not a darling or dalilah to be spared, though never
so dear or near unto thee, but all must be crucified, yea, and thy own life
must be lost too, if ever thou will find it in God. Friend, the life of a
Christian is hid with Christ in God, and there is no finding of it but by going
out of self; for know this, That before Christ Jesus proclaims peace to the
soul, he sets the man at variance with himself, and makes him war against the
Enemies of his peace within him, (not without him.)

To thee then who art at ease in the flesh, hugging the spirit of self-love,
and of this World, (which lies in wickedness) and art courting the great men
thereof for private respects, as honor and preferment, or the like; know thou,
thou art not yet come to the spiritual Warfare, nor do thou know the coming
of Christ to thee, as a Savior, which every man must witness before he can be
a true Soldier in the Army of the Lamb, or witness redemption from the Spirit
of Bondage.

My direction then unto thee, is, To watch for the coming of Christ, (who
comes as a Thief in the night) that when he comes, thou may not be found
sleeping in sin, nor suorting in the vain delights and pleasures of this life,
(which are but for a moment:) Christ stands at thy door, and knocks, O give him
entrance and suffer not his Locks to be wet with the dew of the morning; Suffer
not (I say) the evil one to make such a noise in thy soul, as to drown the low
voice of Christ in thee, who says, I am meek and lowly of heart, learn of me.
Let it not be said of thee, He came unto his own, and his own received him not.

Encouragement to the weary Traveller (whose Journey is toward Canaan) to
follow the Light and Lamb of God to the Holy Land of Rest; but not to go before
it.
Whosoever thou art that art come out of Egypt, (the land of darkness, where
the blind lead the blind) and have a purpose and good will to travel to the
holy Land, thou must gird up the loins of thy mind, and with a holy Resolution
be content to pass through all the fiery trials thou may meet with, and never
sit down until thou shale arrive at perfect rest in God: And that thou may
not loosethy Way, be thou advised to follow thy Guide, and go not before him;
for no longer then thou art a follower of the Lamb, can thou go aright, or
walk in safety.

Many there are who be come out of Egypt, and have made some progress toward
Canaan; but because the Guide to rest makes no haste, he being meek and lowly,
and is a gentle Leader of his Lambs, (and those that are with young) therefore
it is that many times the followers go before their Leader, and through haste
lose their Way.

Be thou warned therefore, who art but a young Traveller and follower of the
lamb, that thou leave not thy true Guide, nor wander from him, lest thou come
into Egypt again, (as some have done) and so peradventure never find thy Guide
more. Friend, if ever thou think to be victorious, thou must follow the
Lamb; for assure thy self, the Enemy will assult thee on every side, and
endeavor thy destruction; for know thou, That it is through sufferings and
often conflicts with the Enemy, that thou must pass, yea and become a Conqueror
too, befoer thou must come to reign; The daily death thou must witness, and the
daily Cross must be born, before the Crown of Victory can be obtained; I say,
Thou must follow thy Leader and Captain of Salvation, through all difficulties,
if thou will be victorious.

And for thy encouragement, be assured of this, He will never leave thee nor
forsake thee.

In the light of the Lord then, and as faithful followers of the Lamb, let us
jurney toward our Land of Rest with unwearied minds; for assuredly, The Land
is good, and will abundantly reward the Traveller upon his arrival there, above
what he could ask or think.

Many there are whom I believe are gone forth with an honest intent to travel
ehither, and finding the Way strait, and the journey long, and the Difficulties
many, have sat down by the way; but let such know, there is no truerest on
this side Canaan.

Others there are who have gone forth to view the holy Land, and as the false
spies of the Land of Canaan did, so have these, even brought up an evil report
upon the good Land, and have told people, There is no attaining of it in this
life, for that the Cities are walled, the Enemies are mighty and numerous, and
too strong to be overcome, These have told people, the holy life is
unattainable, and that as long as they live, they cannot be free from
corruption; and these sit down without hope, and shall never enter.

But yet notwithstanding there is encouragement enough for the faithful
Traveller, when he remembers that there were two, to wit, Caleb and Joshua, who
were true Spies, and that notwithstanding the multitude of false Spies that
went forth to view the Land, these as faithful Witnesses For God brought in
their Testimony, and said, Let us go up at once, and possess it, for we are
well able to overcome it. And these for their faithfulness to the Lord
(notwithstanding the false Spies ill report of the good Land) were brought to
possess the Land which flowed with Milk and Honey, but the rest perished in the
Wilderness for their unbelief, and their children were wanderers there forty
years.

Now Friend, It is observable and very remaakrble, That Caleb and Joshuah (who
did enter) had another spirit then the false, Spies had, (and followed the Lord
fully) to wit, the Spirit of Faith, which overcomes the World, and all the
Enemies therein, to the soul of men, so that the Believer and his Seed shall
possess the holy Land, when all the unbelievers shall perish in the Wildcrness,
Numb. 14.

And as for the glory of this holy Land, or New Jernsalem, (of which Canaan was
a Type) and the Riches thereof none will doubt, but all Will confess the Land is
good, though some say too good to be obtained here, or possessed in this life;
I say as to this I cannot but bring in my testimony, and declare, They are all
false Spies, and false prophets, that say the Enemies of man's soul are not to
be overcome in this life, and that the holy life is not attainable; for he that
gives Victory over one sin, (which I witness) will give victory over all sins
if I and thou be faithful Warriers in the Army of the Lamb. I say, our Captain
is able to make war with the Enemy, and not only give us victory, but also an
entrance into the Holy of holies within the vail here, where no false prophet
can enter, but him who is the Priest for ever after the order of Melehizedeck.

Therefore friends, go cheerfully on your way in believing; the Enemy is as
well before as behind; look not back, neither turn to the right hand, nor to
the left, but press forward, and in due time you shall reap, if you faint not.

It Is the Faith of the Saints which overcomes the World, and all difficulties
which the honest Traveller shall find in his Journey toward the holy Land. And
that none may be discouraged that he meets with troubles and trials, let him
remember, The greater his trials are, the stronger had his Faith need be; and
the bitterer his Travels are, the sweeter will his Rest be. If some of the
Servants of the Lord have through experience said, That the sufferings of this
present life are not worthy the glory that shall be revealed, what will they be
able to say when in is revealed?

It is better to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season.

Therefore let us proceed on our journey with unwearied minds, and in the
strength and power of the Lord make war against all the Enemies of our Souls,
following our Leader, and in the end we shall be more then Conquerors.

And because there are many pretenders to holiness, who with fair speeches do
deceive the hearts of people, and by enticing words of man's Wisdom seduce many
a well-meaning and honest-hearted Traveller, who is ever and anon ready to
question whether his way be right. I do advise thee as thou love life, and
tenderest the true rest of thy weary soul, keep close to thy Leader, whose
voice is low, speaking in thee, saying, Go not forth, wander not; for this I
declare, That whilst thou art unturned to thy Guide within thee, or art
listening to the loud Voice and found of big Words without (as I have been)
thou can find no rest, though thou travel hard to obtain it.

A Word concerning the Resurrection.
THE Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared unto many, among whom I am come to
give you notice, (though a most unworthy Messenger) That he is now come to
exalt his Son in his saints. and set him upon his holy hill; glory for evermore.

But many there are who with Martha do look for the Resurrection at the last
day without, and so put the day of his Resurrection in them, far from them, (as
believing no such thing) and saying, How can this be? when in the mean time
Christ lies slain in some of them; and others are so far from the holy Life of
Christ, that they are dead in trespasses and sins, and some twice plucked up by
the roots, neither knowing their Savior within them, nor Without them.

Art thou one that know nothing of the resurrection of Christ in thee, then
know that thou art not to look out to a day without thee, for the resurrection
of Christ, but in Spiritual Sodomand Egypt, where he lies still crucified, art
thou to expect his resurrection, to wit, in thy own wicked heart.

Christ before his resurrection from the Grave, told Martha, and said, I am the
the Resurrection and the life; he that believes in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live; and that he that lives and believes in him, should not
dye: Do thou believe this?

Arise then, thou that art asleep in thy grave of sin, fleshly ease, or carnal
delights, and hearken to the voice of the Son of God in thee, and live; for he
who called Lazarus out of his grave of earth, (being naturally dead) to life
again, will raise thee also, and call thee out of thy spiritual grave of sin
and denth, if thou hearken to his Voice, and obey his Call in thoe.

Christ Jesus after his resurrection, appeared unto many of his Disciples with
out them, and they knew him not (he being spiritual;) and after he had by many
signal Testimonies made himself known unto them to be Jesus, a Cloud received
him out of the sight of those that stood looking after him; Whereupon it was
told them by two men who were in white, that said, To men of Galilee, why stand
ye here gazing? The same Jesus which has been taken up from you into heaven,
shall in like manner come again to wit, in a Cloud; for so he went up.

Now this (Friend) is a Mystery to the wise and learned men of this World, (oh
that they knew it) That the light of the World, and life of men should come in
a cloud; but so it is, and they are utterly ignorant of this mystery, though
to the children of Light it is made manifest and revealed by the Spirit. They
can tell you that as Christ's first appearance to the World was in the flesh,
and the fleshly eye saw him; so his second appearance is in Spirit, and no
fleshly eye can behold him, he being now a spirit.

You then who are looking for the Resurrection of your Savior with the eye of
the first Adam, (which is natural, and to come without you) know you, that your
eyes will fail you, and your expectations be in vain; for him whom you look
for, is a spirit, and invisible to all but to the Spiritual man. And While you
are looking for his coming to be hereafter, the spiritual man can tell You he
is already come, and converseth with him daily; and this is the reason that the
Saints and Servants of Christ (who do his Will) can endure stocking, stoning,
mocking, cruel whipping, and tedious imprisonment: Why? Because they have seen
and conversed with Jesus, who by his power enables them to suffer what man can
do unto them; He that has an ear to hear, let him hear. But thou may say
unto me, Is there no other Resurrection of Christ then what is in man? And are
we not to look for the coming of Christ, and the Resurrection of our Bodies
also at the last day?

For an answer to this, Friend, consider that the resurrection of Christ
without, was there where he had been entombed or buried, and there was he to
rise again, that so a testimony thereof might be given to the unbeliever, and
as encouragement and strengthening to the Faith of those that did believe
therein. Now Friend, so it is, Christ is risen in his Saints, and has appeared
unto them there, even as he rose from the Grave, and appeared to his Disciples,
and others without; and though thou would give large money to us to make
false Reports of his Resurrection, yet we cannot but must tell you all, Christ
is risen from the grave of our souls, where he was once, buried with
earthly-mindedness and the cares of this World; but the Grave being able to
hold him no longer, he is come forth, and is manifest to thousands in this age,
who at first when he appeared to them without, to wit, in carnal Ordinances,
they knew him not, but he being now come in spirit according to his promise, we
cannot but declare it unto you, being the things which our ears have heard, our
eyes seen, and our hands handled of the Word of Life, that so ye might have
fellowship with us.

And thou who look for the resurrection of thy carnal body, I shall not
contradict thee in thy faith, nor do I deny the resurrection of the body, nor
shall I say to thee any other thing then what Paul said to to the Corinth, THOU
FOOL, That which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye; and that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, perchance of
wheat or some other corn; but God gives it a body as it pleases him. First
come to the life of Jesus in thy self, and when thou can say, Now I live, yet
nor I, but Christ lives in me, thou shall better understand the Resurrection
of the Body; For the natural man discerns not the things of God, because they
are spiritual; Then, and not till then thou shall know the first and second
Resurrection.

A Friendly Call to all Notionists, Separatists, and high Professors of
Religion, in what form soever, (or out of form) to come down from their
Pinacles of imagination, lest they fall, and rise no more.
Friends, Come all down from your seats, you sit in slippery places, and are in
great danger and peril of your lives, who though you have had many Allarums to
call you away, you are still asleep in spiritual pride or airy notions, without
life. What do you mean? Will you suffer the Angel of false light to be your
guide, whilst the glorious light of Christ, and glad tidings of the everlasting
Gospel (declared almost every where in the Nation) to pass by you, and take no
notice of it? I cannot but pity your souls, seeing the great delusion you are
in.

Poor hearts! you are got too high to sit in safety, for the God of Heaven and
Earth will dwell with none who are not poor in spirit, and tremble not at his
Word: I say, if you would have the Lord to dwell with you, you must all become
Tremblers. O remember that self-exaltation was the fall of Lucifer, (that Angel
of false Light) and so will be the fall of all who are not meek and lowly in
heart, and abide not there.

It Is the Devil's Work to elevate the mind of man above his measure, and that
he may accomplish it, he persuades the man he can show him all things in a
Mystery, and set him where he may see beyond the reach of others on a sudden,
deluding him with this old bait, That he shall be as God, knowing good and
evil. Thus he deluded Eve, and so he will do every simple heart who keeps not
in the pure fear of the Lord, but goes forth to hear the voice of the stranger;
For, had Eve kept to her measure, and been contented therewith, the Devil could
not have beguiled her; but she going forth, was by a temptation mislead, and so
lost her innocent state, and her true Guide within her.

And now the Serpent being the subtillest of all the Beasts of the Field, and
perceiving that man is eager of knowledge, and desirous to comprehend all
things in himself in a mystery, (it being too low a thing for so noble a
creature to go out for knowledge) he sets himself in the seat of God, and
exalts himself in man, lifting him up also above the pure Seed of God which
lies buried in man, and sets at naught poverty of spirit, persuading him he is
beyond the first Principles of Religion, and above the Doctrine of the Cross,
and that he is now at rest in God, when indeed, and in truth, poverty of spirit
the man has (peradventure) never yet known, nor the true fear of the Lord
neither, or if he has, he is made to believe that there are higher things to
be known then the mystery of the Cross, and so suffers the Devil to delude and
blind him.

Poor heart! Thy delusion is strong indeed, and thy condition most to be
lamented: Where do thou find that the fear of the Lord is a low dispensation,
whenas man is to abide therein all the day long? I say, though it be day with
man, yea noonday, where the Flock of Christ are at rest; yet the fear of the
Lord is never to be left, it being part of the Everlasting Gospel which the
Angel preached, saying, FEAR GOD, Rev. 14.6.7.

What Is the reason (Friends) that you stand so far off, and keep at such a
distance from those that dwell in the Valley, where the cross is daily to be
born, so long as you have a vain thought to be subjected, or a high look to be
brought down?

Is it not because you think your selves higher, and taller by the head and
shoulders then your Brethren? and that they are but dwarfs in knowledge in
comparison to you? Is it not because you look on the Cross to be a low
attainment, and that you are wearing the crown? Friends, let me be plain with
you; How came you into the fear of the Lord? Did that which brought you in,
lead you out again? Surely no, the Work of the Lord is perfect, and stands for
ever; and the true Members of Christ Jesus call not this high, or that low, but
they know that if any man will be great amongst them, he is to be servant to
all; I say, the Members jar not, nor clash not one against another, but there
is a most sweet harmony in the body, without any discord at all; the highest
does not say to the lowest, I have no need of thee; nor the lowest does not say
so to the highest: But friends, is it not because you have felt the Cross too
heavy for you to hear, having once taken it up, and laid it down again? Or is
it because you would shun judgment, which you must come to again, and love it
too, before you can meet with the Lord in peace?

Peradventure thou think thy self some wise man in knowledge, and so have
been accounted in thy generation; and for thee to become a fool, or to come
back again after so great a profession of Christ as thou have made, would be to
thy dishonor, and shame would cover thy face. If thus thou reasonest, know
this, Thou art thy own Enemy, and thou love the praise of men more then the
glory of God, or the salvation of thy own soul. And since you cannot deny but
the poor receive the Gospel, and the rich are sent empty away, (with all their
words of man's Wisdom) How comes it to pass, that the plain and naked Truth of
God preached in power, and practiced in simplicity, is of no more account
amongst you?

Friends, be not deceived in your selves, for you cannot deceive us: The Light
of Christ Jesus in us has discovered you all to be out of the way, who own it
not.

Are you sent of God who cry, Lo here, or low there, as some of you do, and
creep into Chambers and private places, and there speak with your doors shut?
Is this (in times of freedom) like the practice of the true Ministers of the
Gospel, who preach the glad tidings thereof to all, inviting all, and
beseeching all to receive it, that so all might come in, or be left without
excuse?

Can any of you say, you preach the everlasting Gospel by the Revelation of
Christ Jesus in you? Or do you not confess your selves to be fallible, and such
as preach from a large comprehension of what you have heard or read,
(peradventure from H. N. or Jacob Behem) etc? Is what you preach, of God? And
are all your springs in him?

If yours be the everlasting truth of God, come forth, and declare your Message
to all; for truth seeks no corners: The Kingdom of Heaven is like a draw-net,
which being cast into the sea, receives all that comes in, but treasures up
none but the good fish; if then you would be Fishers of men, come to the
seashore, stand in an open place, and cast in your Nets into the seas of
Confusion of this World; prick people to the heart by your powerful
Ministration, and convince thousands of their Errors, Heresies, and false
Opinions, (which they received and sucked in by the false prophets and Ministers
of Antichrist) as the true Ministers of Christ in the primitive times did, and
still do.

But if you doubt whether yours be the true Gospel, or another, My counsel to
you is, CEASE to declare it in the Name of the Lord; for nothing shall profit
the hearers but what is declared in the eternal Spirit of God without doubting.
Wait in silence then until you have received power from on high, which when it
is received and declared, shall put to silence the gainsayers, and stop the
mouth of the evil doers.

Friends, for the Seed's sake in you I desire to speak, therefore suffer me
(though a fool) to be free with you.

Have you known the fools state, (which all that will be truly wise must come
to?) if not, hasten thither apace, for man's Wisdom is foolishness with God, and
and keeps him truly in that which is but folly: Oh! What will all thy carnal
Wisdom (though in a mystery) and high notions avail thee, so long as thou art
got above that which leads to true Wisdom, and makes wise unto salvation those
that are fools for Christ?

Are you those that have got in thorough the strait Gate? and do you walk in
the narrow path, which leads to life, and which few find? Or are you not indeed
those who have striven (for a time) to enter, but could not? Take heed you be
not left out.

Have you bid Farewell to the friendship of this World, and to the manners,
fashions, vain customs, and delights thereof? Or are you not still alive in
them all?

Have you born the cross till every idle world and vain imagination be slain
and crucified? Or are you not those who have felt it too heavy to bear, and so
laid it down again?

Are you as Beacons upon a Hill? And do you give light to all that see your
conversation? Or have you not put your light in a dark Lanthore not suffering
it to shine forth, lest you your selves should be discovered?

Are you not those who preach and hear from a large comprehension, but your
selves far from the life of what you hear or speak?

Have you the power as well as the words of truth? Or are you uot those who
have lost the power you once had, (as the Devil has done) and retained the
notion only, which he is the supporter of?

Are you indeed, and in truth arrived at the dispensation of Love, as you
pretend, or third degree, of the holy life (as you call it) which loves its
Neighbors good as its own, and stoops to the meanest Babe in Christ, as well
as walks with the grown man.

Friends, the Well of Life lies low, and you must dig deep to find it; high
words without the power, are as the blustering winds, which do more harm then
good; but its the still low voice where God is heard, and the sheep of Christ
follow it. It Is true, the Doctrine of the Cross was once in my esteem, but a
low and mean dispensation, and the disciples thereof, (as I thought) in a
pitiful and sad condition, but this was in the time of my exaltation with you,
when I had got above the pure and meek seed of Jesus which was kept under in
me, but blessed be the Lord, who has brought down the Mighty from his Seat,
and set me on the Rock of ages. On which, if ever you know stability, you must
be brought; which Rock Christ, which followed the Israelites the wilderness and
refreshed them; wh(...) Rock is the food of Angels, as well as every hungry
soul. If any of you h(...) this bread, you know that in the m(...) of famine
you shall have enough, a(...) that your water is sure (coming out the rock) if
so, I say, Eat, O friends, drink abundantly O beloved, Go no more forth. But
you who are still upon the Mountains, you must come down, and dwell in the low
Valley before you can find safety. You must walk in the narrow path which leads
to life, before you can come to rest; and to the spirits of just men made
perfect you must be joined.

Peradventure some of you may say, you are now upon the Mount with Jesus and
have seen his transfiguration, and do say in your hearts, It is good to be
here: if so, yet boast not; For you must all come down from the Mount, as the
Disciples of Christ, and as Christ himself did, and live here below. Nay though
you have been wrapped up into the third heaven, as Paul was, and heard things
unutterable, yet the cross must be born, and the Thorn in the flesh felt by all
who are lifted up above their measures. To your measures herefore, of the gift
of God all come; Boast not of any thing, which you have ^t attained through the
death of the Cross; for if you do, you will suffer loss. ^any of you have set
your selves at the ^pper end in the room, Oh be sure you be not without your
wedding garments left the Master send you forth as unworthy guests; you seem to
be eager to taste of the Supper of the Lord, and some of you are giving and
taking it in beggarly elements. All such are to know they are not yet past the
shadow, be their pretense what it will be, much less come to the substance of
all things which puts an end to types and shadows.

The voice in me cries, keep low; abide in the fear of the Lord; for there is
the beginning of true wisdom. High words will no longer beguile the true
Israelite; for in him there is an eye open, which sees and can discern spirits,
and an ear that can hear the shepherds voice from the stranger.

The stranger or false messenger's voice says, I comprehend all mysteries; I
am past the first and second dispensation (to wit the fear and the faith) and I
am arrived at the third, which is Love; I have born the cross, and now wear
the crown. Is this thy voice indeed? then know, thou art the Antichrise whom
God will destroy with the breath of his mouth; whosoever thou art that cryest
up one dispensation by way of boasting, and sets it against another, thou art
doing the Devils work, and endeavoring to make a rent, where nothing but unity
and peace ought to be; for one man's state in Christy (though but the babe) is
not to be set against another, no more then Christ is to be divided.

But now on the contrrary the true Shepherds voice says, I am meek and lowly
of heart, learn of me, and be little in your own eyes: This voice calls out of
the world, it stills the waves when they rage it binds the strong man in
chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron, by its meekness, patience, gentleness
and long-suffering; Therefore friends, come all down into the true fear of the
Lord, where this is to be witnessed, and no where else. Your knowledge in
mysteries and large comprehensions of divine things, unless your practice be
answerable, does but fit you for the scourge with many stripes. I say while you
are upon your Pinacles, the inward beauty of the Temple, you can never behold,
nor see the glorious presence of the Lord who fits therein. Hasten therefore to
the porch, where wisdoms voice is to be heard, and become Doore-keepers
therein (which keeps out sin and vanity) that so an entrance may be made unto
you into the holy of ho-lies. For this I declare to you all, That no more of
the true knowledge of God have yon attained, then what you have learned and
known through the death and daily cross of Christ Jesus.

And now to thee who have been once enligtened, and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and been made partaker of the holy Ghost, and tasted of the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come. Content not thy self with these
refreshments, nor feed thou upon them; for they will pass away as the
lightning, but live thou upon the bread of life it self, from which these
refreshings have proceeded; for that is it, and it alone, which can nourish the
Soul up to eternal life. I say again, keep low, and patiently run the race that
is set before thee, and through perseverance thou shall gain the Crown.

Some Queries to my old friends, the Ministers of the Church of England.
FRiends, I come not now to question you, (as to my self) nor yet your Faith
and Hope in God, being fully satisfied concerning you and your Ministry, and
also of your Call thereunto, having well known and heard the chief amongst you
for many years together; Yet for the sakes of those heaps of people that pin
their faith upon your sleeves, and take all for granted that you declare unto
them for truth, believing your lives also to be unblameable; I shall mildely
propound unto you these ensuing Queries, charging you as you would be accounted
Ministers of Christ, and are willing to observe the Apostles direction of
rendering a reason of your hope to every one that shall ask you; to make it
appear in your answer, by what fruits you may be known.

1. Whether was your Call to your Ministry from God, yea or no? (as the true
Ministers of the Gospel ever was, and will be.) Or was it not a place of
preferment to a comfortable maintenance, (as you call it) and to get a Trade to
live by, that called you? And whether if that maintenance were removed, you
your selves would not soon come to silence, and your Ministry quickly fall to
the ground? 2. Whether or no did ever the true Ministers of Christ, or any of
them, go to the Arm of Flesh for aid, to uphold their Doctrine, and force a
Maintenance from people contrary to their consciences, as you do? 3. Whether
are you not respecters of persons, honoring and fawning upon those men most,
who can promote you to the greatest Benefices? And do you not remove from one
quarter to another, where the greatest gain is to be had, often leaving your
flock when you are assured of greater wages from other Masters) or because you
may not sheer them to their very skins? 4. Whether do you not rend and tear
men's Goods from them, to the value of ten times more then your unreasonable and
Antichristian demands are, (under a pretense of a Popish Law for maintenance
and trebble damages) and yet come forth, and say you are Gospel Ministers, and
the workman is worthy of his hire, though the true Husbandman never set you to
work? 5. Whether is the spirit of cruel and bitter perjecution, (in which many
of you are found and which none of you (that I hear) have declared against) be
the spr^^^ of a true Minister of Christ, or the spirit of Antichrist? 6.
Whether have you not stirred up the Beast, and instigated the corrupt
Magistrate {by the Rage, Envy and Malice of this persecuti^g spirit, (in you
both) to stock, beat, mock, and most cruelly whip, and imprison until death the
freeborn people of the Na^^on, because they could not for conscience sake sat
is fie your Lusts and greedy appetites with that Popish Maintenance by Tithes;
or otherwise, because they have spoken to you as they were moved of the Lord in
your places of idolatry and false Worship? 7 Whether are you not the greatest
Opposers of Authority, and Disturbers of the public peace that are in the
Nation, obstructing the settling of the Commonwealth, and Reeping it from being
a free Nation, when as you take up Arms and carnal Weapons to fight against the
civil Magistrate, whom in all just things you ought to obey, and preach
subjection unto? 8. Whether is it not the height of ingratitude, pride, and
rebellion in you, to kick against your Governors and Feeders, and set them at
naught who are your supporters in your Trades, for filthy lucre? Oh ye seed of
Evildoers! when will you you see your wickedness against the Lord, ( your true
Husband, from whom you have gone a whoring, and entertained strange Lovers) and
return to him by true repentance for your many great and crying sins? 9.
Whether is your Gospel free, and without charge, as the true Ministers of
Christ's was and still is, or do you no buy it (and your abilities to preach) at
Schools, Colleges, Universities of Arts, Sciences, and humane Learning? 10.
Whether is the incorruptible seed of God in all men yea or nay? And 11. Whether
is that seed of God in Man sufficient to guide man to his true rest? Or is
there any thing besides that, which can lead man into the path of life, and
enable him to walk therein? 12, With what did the Lord say he would search
Jerusalem, and where was it? 13. Whether is not the Spirit of God in man, the
Candle of the Lord, with which he Will search all men? and whether if once it
he put out or removed, the soul be not left in eternal darkness? 14. Whether
if man obey not the Light, or Candle of the Lord in him (which shows him the
evil of his way, and judges him for a vain thought, when nothing else can) it
will not be his condemnation for ever? 15. Whether do you know the word of life
in the heart, and quickening Spirit within, from the dead letter without? 16.
Whether of these two, (viz.) the writings of the holy men of God and their
experiences of God declared unto others, or the Spirit it self, by which those
writings were penned, is man's true Guide, and infallible Rule to walk by. 17.
Whether is the quickening and powerful Spirit of God in man (by which he became
a living soul) subjected to a dead letter? Or is that which was from Eternity
of less esteem, because it is in man, then the thing which has proceeded from
it, and in comparison thereof, is but as yesterday? Oh blush, and be ashamed,
ye Builders of Babel, etc. that you have refused the Corner stone, and Well of
life, and hewn unto your selves empty cisterns that will hold no water, I mean
your University-Learning, and have prefe red a d ead letter, before the living
word of God. 18. Whether do you in deed and in truth own the holy Scriptures?
If so, how comes it to pass that you preach so contrary thereto, saying,
Revelation is ceased, And that the Saints cannot be free from sin here: That
perfection is not attainable in this life; And that the Commandments of God
cannot be kept: And that no man now has the infallible spirit? Can any one of
these be proved by Scripture: if so make it appear, if not, stop your mouths,
and forbear to take the holy name of God into your polluted lips, till you have
learned the truth as it is in Jesus. 19. Whether can man by all his Learning
open the holy Scriptures, yea or no? or can he by all his study, pains or
humane industry get the true knowledge of God in Jesus Christ? 20. Whether is
the Knowledge of the whole body of your Divinity sufficient to empower man to
conquer the least sin, or subdue the smallest corruption in him? 21. Whether is
the learning of the two Universities of Oxford and Cambridge (on whose legs you
yet stand) necessary for the begetting, increasing or perfecting in the truth,
the true Disciples of Jesus Christ? if not, whether are they now employed to a
right use? 22. What have you to say, why the said Universities, and all the
Colleges therein, should not be converted to pions and charitable uses, as
Hospitals, Almshouses, and places to set the poor at work in, when as instead
of being Universities of Piety, they have been places of contention, pride,
idleness, ignorance and idolatry. 23. Whether are not the two Universities
Cages of unclean Birds, and of foul and hateful Spirits, when as those who
proceed from thence are so infections as to hold forth a necessity of living in
pollution, whilst they live, saying, it cannot be otherwise? 24. Whether
instead of seeking the Kingdom of heaven within you, and teaching men so to
do, Yot do not seek and teach it to be sought without? And whether you be not
searching into the fallible sayings of old authors, and sweeping your
University- Libraries and Temples made with hands to find the lost groat, which
lies hid in your own houses, or earthly Tabernacles? 25. Whether are not false
Teachers, the Cause of so many Errors, Heresies, Sects and divided judgments,
as are in the Nation? and whether it is like to be otherwise, whilst false
Doctrine is so frequently preached, and the Fomenters thereof upheld by a Law?
26. Whether do you not take upon you to be Heads of Colleges, Churches,
Congregations, and Assemblies, and so make many heads, and many Masters, when
as Christ Jesus says, his Spouse or Church is but one, and he is the Head
thereof? 27. Whether do you not (as much as in you lies) divide the body of
Christ by your many Sects and select Societies, when as the Saints, though many
Members, are but one body, united in Christ? 28. Whether in truth and
singleness of heart can any of you say, That the fruits you are known by, are
love, joy, peace, meekness, long sufferance, gentleness, self-denial, faith,
patience, temperance, moderation, and the like? or are not your fruits contrary
to all these, and the root of the first Adam still growing in you? 29. Whether
have you been born again of the incorruptible seed? and are you entered into the
Kingdom of heaven, where none comes but such as are dead to this world, and
the friendship thereof? or are you not still shut out, as unbelievers, etc? 30.
Whether are you not those that shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men, and
neither go in your selves, nor suffer others? And whether insted of preaching
the Gospel, and glad tidings of salvation, you deny it not, and preach down
that which should give an entrance thereinto, which is the Light of Christ in
every conscience, and which is the true light which lights every man that
comes into the world.
Know ye not, that the whole Creation groaneth to be delivered from under the
power of the Beast, and false Prophet, to wit, the corrupt Magistrates, and the
persecuting and Antichristian Ministers of the Nations? Do ye not know that
these have had Dominion over the Saints of the most high God, for many hundred
years past, doing and executing their own pleasures upon the bodies and estates
of the children of God as well in our days by cruel tortures until death, as
in Queen Mary's days, upon the Martyrs that suffered, burning then, who ye
notwithstanding could not worship the Beast nor his image, nor give their power
to the Dragon, which all the world have wondered after.

Do ye not know that the Man-child has been caught up to God, the wo^an fled
into the Wilderness, and the Devil had the power over all Nations? If not,
then know, the time is now hasting, that the Man-child is coming to rule the
Nations with a rod of iron (and to some he is already come) and all must bow to
his righteous Scepter; for he will rule in righteousness, and all the sturdy
Oaks must be hewn down, the proud and lofty looks of man must fall, and his
tyrannical and unjust power be taken from him; The Lilly of the Valley must be
exalted, and the Beast and false Prophet cast alive into the Lake where they
shall be tormented for ever and ever.

Let none of you now (for my love to lost man) be so scandalous, as to say, I
disown Magistracy and Ministry; for if you do I here again in the presence of
the Lord, and before all the world pronounce you to be Liars and false
Prophets; for I so far own both the true Magistracy and Ministry, which is of
God, that I well know and am assured, the Nations cannot be happy till both are
established in righteousness and true Judgment, in the fear of the Lord, I
say, till truth and, righteousness be set up, false Doctrine, error and
heresy disowned by those men in power, and the false Prophet and the Beast
cast alive into the Lake, The truth Will be suppressed, and the Ministers of
the Gospel persecuted, yea though Christ Jesus himself should come again in the
flesh, the Professors of this age would call him deceiver, and be as ready to
whip, scourge, and imprison him to death, as they have done his members, But
blessed for ever be the holy name of our God, the false Prophet is known by his
life and Doctrine, and the beastly nature in all persecuting Magistrates is
seen and discovered, so that let their Profession be what it will be, they are
made manifest and cannot hide themselves from the eye of the Lord, nor from the
discerning Spirits of his Saints, who do his will, and who worship him in
Spirit and in truth.

Friends! the dreadful day of Gods fiery indignation hangs over your heads,
and will inevitably fall upon you without speedy Repentance, and this the
servants of the Lord see, and forwarn you of in love to your souls; but you
like blind Balaam see not the sword drawn against you, and ready to cut you
off: You are blinder then the dumb Ass, who saw the sword hang over his
Masters head, when he himself did not; Oh read your portion in the 11. Zech.
17. and take it to ye; for unless you spedily repent and turn to the Lord, you
will surely have it; where the Prophet of the Lord pronounces a Woe to the
Idol-shepherd, saying, The sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye,
his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

Friends, every man's work must be tried by fire, of what sort soever it be,
therefore let none of you think to escape the fiery trial; for our God is
righteous, and will reward every man according to his work.

THE END.

