ENGLANDS INTEREST AND IMPROVEMENT. Consisting in the increase of the store,
and trade of this Kingdom; BY SAM. FORTREY Esquire. one of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Chamber.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. 1663.

To The most High and mighty MONARCH, CHARLES the II. BY The grace of God King
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty;
BEcause it is the duty of all your Subjects, to pay continually to your
Majesty, all faithful service, and whereas, most are desirous to express
their forwardness, in such things especially, as they judge most pleasing, and
acceptable to your Majesty; I have chosen this subject; well knowing, that as
becomes a most gracious King, your Majesty's greatest delight, and chiefest
care, is, to advance the welfare and happiness of your people.

This indeed always has, or at least ought to have been the greatest aim, and
design of all Princes, and those that have with best success, proceeded
furthest therein, have deservedly chronicled their names, with fame, to all
posterity.

The often experience I have already had of the excess of goodness, inherent
in, and inseparable from your Majesty, has encouraged me to this bold attempt,
wherein, if I obtain only your Majesty's pardon, and favorable protection, it
is I am sure the height of the ambition of

Your Majesty's most loyal, and faithful servant, and subject, SAMUEL FORTREY.

To the Reader.
PErceiving the genius, and disposition of the times, to study more the
Interest and Improvement of the nation, then usually heretofore: I thought I
might be excused, if amongst others, I presumed to show my good will, toward
the advancement of so worthy a design.

I do not pretend to say any thing, that every ingenious person does not
already know; yet perhaps, what I say, may not prove unserviceable to some, who
have not had the leisure. to reflect so particularly upon this subject.; and if
this my endeavor, prove but in the least measure beneficial to any, I have
attained to my end, and accomplished my design.

Sam. Fortrey.

ENGLANDS INTEREST AND IMPROVEMENT.
ENGLANDS Interest and Improvement consists chiefly in the increase of store
and trade.

Store comprehends all such commodities, Of store and trade in general.
as either the soil, or people of this nation are capable to produce, which are
either useful at home, or valuable abroad.

Trade is the means; by which a nation may procure what they want from abroad,
and vent to the best advantage, what ever may be spared of their own increase
at home.

Of store there are properly two sorts, natural and artificial.

Our natural store may also be divided into three parts.

First the annual increase of the soil, which consists chiefly in corn of all
sorts, and all the best sorts of cattle.

Secondly, the product of our mines, of lead, tin, iron, coal, alum, and the
like.

Thirdly, the great plenty of fish our seas naturally afford, of which we might
reap unknown advantages, were our fishing trade rightly improved.

Our Artificial store consists in the manufacture and Industry of the people,
of which the chiefest in this nation are the manufactures of woollen clothes,
and all other sorts of woollen stuffs, linen cloth, silk, stuffs, ribbandings,
stockings, laces, and the like.

In trade there may be likewise said to be two kinds.

The one trade at home, one with another: the other our trade, or traffic
abroad with strangers.

And in each of these particulars, by the bounty of nature and divine
providence, this nation does not only equal any neighbor country, but far
excels in all the most profitable advantages.

France we know to be a nation, Of the trade of France.
rich, populous and plentiful; and this only by the increase of its own
store, raised both by the fruit of the soil, and industry of the people;
consisting in corn, wine, and many sorts of fruits, and great manufactures of
all sorts of silks, linenclothes, laces, and many other rich commodities, which
do not only store them at home, with what they need, but by the overplus
provides for all things else, they necessarily want from abroad; with plenty of
money to boot.

Holland has not much of its own store, Of the trade of Holland.
especially not answerable to supply the wants of that nation; and yet by their
industrious diligence in trade, they are not only furnished with whatsoever
the world affords and they want, but by the profit of their trade they excel in
plenty and riches, all their neighbor nations.

Two things therefore appear to be chiefly necessary, Riches and people
necessary to increase the greatness and power of a nation.
to make a nation great, and powerful; which is to be rich, and populous; and
this nation enjoying together all those advantages, with part whereof only,
others grow great and flourishing; and withal, a Prince, who above all things
delights and glories in his peoples happiness: this nation can expect no less
then to become the most great, and flourishing of all others.

But private advantages are often impediments of public profit; The prejudice
private Interests often are to public advantages.
for in what any single person shall be a looser, there, endeavors will be
made to hinder the public gain, from whence proceeds the ill success that
commonly attends the endeavors for public good; for commonly it is but coldly
prosecuted, because the benefit may possibly be something remote from them that
promote it; but the mischief known and certain to them that oppose it, and
Interest more then reason commonly sways most men's affections.

Whereby it may appear, how necessary it is that the public profits should be
in a single power to direct, whose Interest is only the benefit of the whole.

The greatest thing therefore that any Prince can aim at, How to increase the
people of this nation.
is to make his dominions rich and populous, and by what means it may be
effected in this nation, beyond all neighbor countries, I shall endeavor to
demonstrate: People and plenty are commonly the begetters the one of the other,
if rightly ordered.

And first to increase the people of this nation, permission would be given to
all people of foreign countries, under such restrictions as the state shall
think fit, freely to inhabit and reside within this kingdom, with liberty to
buy or sell lands or goods, to import or export any commodities, with the like
privilege and freedom that English men have.

This would quickly increase the number of our people, and multiply our riches:
for those people that would come from other countries to inhabit here, would
also bring their riches with them, which if they laid out in the purchasing of
estates, or improvement of our trade, or were only their persons rightly
employed; it might very much increase, both the riches and power of this nation.

But it may be demanded why we should expect that people should leave their own
native countries to come and inhabit here, Why foreiners desire to inhabit here.
when they enjoy already as many privileges as here are offered them.

These reasons may be given,

First, The first reason.
that this country in it self is as pleasant, or more pleasant, healthful,
fruitful and temperate then any other.

Secondly, (...) second.
that our laws, government* (...) disposition of the people I may say, are not
^^ly as good, but much better then any (...) for the ease, quiet, peace and
security of the people*

Thirdly, The third reason.
if our trade and manufactures were but improved to that advantage, as they are
capable of, there would be no country in the world, where industrious people
might improve their estates, and grow more rich, then in this; and the hope of
gain commonly bears so great a sway amongst men, that it is alone sufficient to
prevail with most*

Fourthly, The fourth reason.
this being the most eminent and entire country of all others, that profess
the Protestant Religion (which profession is very numerous in most of the other
countries of Europe, but many of them under constraint and danger, and the free
liberty of men's consciences with security to their persons, being above all
things most desirable) it cannot be doubted, or denied (were those impediments
removed, that now may hinder) but we might be sufficiently stored with wealthy
and industrious people, from all parts of Europe. Reasons showing the
advantages the Prince of this nation has, by preferring the Protesta^^
Religi^^ only.


And were there not so many divine reasons to prefer the Protestant Religion
before all others, as being doubtless above all the most free from vain and
superstitious beliefs and ceremonies, being the only model of true piety (...)
virtue, without those allays of pretended (...) evils, that some abound with;
contriving (...) murder, treason and mischief, to advance their opinions, I
say, if there were not these reasons for it, but that the Protestant Religion
wanted this unvaluable worth, to prefer it before others, and suppose it only
equal with the rest; yet in humane prudence it is most eligible, and to be
preferred by the Prince of this nation before all others.

First, The first reason.
because thereby, he remains the only Supreme, under God, in these dominions;
and controllable by none: whereby his power in government is much confirmed,
and the peace of his people secured; when if it were otherwise (as in some it
is) that men's consciences were at the dispose of others; who use their power
only to the advancement of their own wealth, pride and greatness; it cannot be
avoided, but that the Princes Interest and theirs may often differ; which can
never happen but to the Princes great hazard, and peoples ruin; of which
truth, there has been already too many sad examples in this kingdom; so as I
conceive, there needs little more be said to persuade a Prince, to prefer his
own peace, security and freedom, above the persuasions of any, that only seek
their own private Interest, and advantage.

Secondly, The second reason.
for the Prince of this nation, to profess the reformed Protestant Religion, is
a matter of greatest policy and prudence, for the advance of his own power and
greatness: For as it is said before, considering how desirable the country is
in it self, and the only chief in Europe of this profession; and the hazardous
and dangerous condition of those in other countries, and the power that the
persuasions of men's consciences have, to prevail with them, he may always be
assured of this, that where any of this profession in other countries, shall
happen to be persecuted or injured, by a stronger party of a contrary belief,
their refuge will certainly be to him, either to be received as his Subjects in
his own country, or else to offer their service to help him to become Lord of
their own; or otherwise, if quarrels or differences should happen to arise
between this Prince and the Prince of any other neighbor country, if they
should make war upon him, he would be assured of friends abroad to help to
divert them, or if he should find it fitting to attach others, he cannot want
confederates and assistants in the prosecution of his design, especially if
there be any thing of pretense of Religion in the case: which is seldom
wanting, where it is any ways serviceable to advance a design.

But by the way it is to be observed, that as this may be of certain advantage
to this Prince against others, so would it be of like mischief to himself or
worse, should he suffer the Interest of any other Prince to have the like
advantage against him; and in this kind there is but one profession which is
so considerable, either amongst our selves at home, or in countries abroad,
that is worthy the taking notice of, and it is so Catholic as I shall not need
to name it. The danger for the Prince of this nation to tolerate any other
Religion.


And though Christians ought not to persecute one another, and that only for
small differences in opinion, when what is right or wrong for the most part
remains a doubt and uncertain; whilst the evils are only certain that such
disputes produce.

And as it may be truly said, morality may be short of true Religion, yet it is
most certain, that no Religion can be pure that wants true morality; I shall
only therefore make this short observation, That that Religion which shall
endeavor to advance it self by all immoral and wicked ways and means, must
needs be in that particular much defective. And though this be commonly
practiced by most, yet certainly the danger is greater from that whose professed
principle it is, then from such others, who (though often guilty) yet wholly
disown it. And what Prince, or state is likely to escape mischief, or be
secure; when opportunity is offered to those, who by ties of conscience are
obliged to ruin it: and have Interest and subtilty enough to contrive the
same? all which being rightly weighed and considered, it is evident, how
perilous, and desperate a thing it might prove, if it were only on account of
policy, and self-preservation, for a Prince to admit or countenance such
things, which have not the least show or appearance of good, or advantage, but
in all likelihood, of most certain hazard and ruin, both to himself and State.

But granting what is said to be true, yet what can be objected against the
countenancing, or at least toleration of all such other sorts of Christian
professions, who pretend they have not the will, nor probably can have the
power, to contrive or act any thing considerable to the damage, or disquiet of
the Prince or State.

It may be answered, that the toleration of all such in it self does not appear
altogether so dangerous to the Prince, or State: But if nature of man be
rightly considered, together with the common zeal in matters of Religion, you
shall find, that commonly things of the smallest consequence make the greatest
differences, and as the same faith and belief, does very much increase love and
affection, so contrariwise difference in opinions, do only beget and engender
contempt, and animosities toward one another; by which means the Prince shall
at no time be either quiet, or secure. For should the Prince suffer all
indifferently, and not elect some one which should always be countenanced, and
maintained as the chief, and most universal profession of his kingdom: the
confusions would be so great, and the Princes Interest so small amongst them,
for want of any dependency on him; that a kingdom so divided against it self,
could not stand.

And on the other side, should the Prince first settle a government in the
Church, as it is at this day, and then give toleration to all others; the
mischievous consequence would not be much less; for first, all such as would
withdraw, would not without grudging pay their dues to parsons, from whom they
receive no recompense, nay rather, whom they contemn and hate.

Secondly, upon all invasions from abroad, or rebellions at home, the Prince
shall be sure to have all such for his enemies, as shall be so tolerated.

First, because of their certain hatred to the present Church Government: by
which they conceive, that they receive many injuries, and oppressions.

Secondly, in hope every one to advance their own party, could they remove the
power in being; each imagining their own opinion as the most worthy, would
first take place.

And lastly, where such advantages are offered, to strengthen any discontented
party, no Prince can hope, or expect to be long quiet or secure.

These mischiefs and inconveniences, having of long time been so obvious; it
has been thought by some, that a strict uniformity in Church Government, is
the only means to prevent all the aforesaid inconveniences.

I conceive it cannot well be denied, What is chiefly regarded in settling a
strictt uniformity.
but then care would be taken, that what is so imposed, be only such things as
are barely necessary and such as may agree best with the quiet and preservation
of the State. And in this also good regard would be had, to the most sober way
of the same profession in other countries; which would much advance the design
aforesaid, and in all likelihood would preserve the Princes power more entire,
and his people in greater fidelity, love and peace.

Bnt to return to the cause that first moved this discourse, as a means to
multiply people, and enrich the kingdom, it may be objected;

First, Objections against the ways and means to multiply people.
that it does not appear that people are wanting, but rather that we have
already too many, if we consider the number of poor people that are found in
every place; and it might be prudence, first, to employ these, before we
endeavor to multiply more.

Secondly, that to give the like liberty and privilege to foreiners, that
Englishmen have, might be a means to undo the natives; for foreiners by their
Correspondents abroad, and industry at home, will gain all the trade to
themselves, and also by purchasing of estates, will make our land much the
dearer.

It is answered first, The Objections answered.
it is true considering our present condition, how trade is decayed, and the
little encouragement people have to industry we have already more people then
are well employed; but I conceive, it is so much the greater damage to the
Prince, to have his people both few and poor; but if the manufactures and other
profitable employments of this nation, were rightly improved and encouraged,
there is no doubt but the people, and riches of the kingdom might be greatly
increased and multiplied, both to the profit, and honor of the Prince.

Secondly, that any Englishman, of the like ingenuity as a stranger, will have
the like advantage of trade, as any stranger can have, as to the exportation or
importation of any commodities, for they may have their correspondents abroad
as well as the other, yet suppose they could not, it would be no damage to the
kingdom, but an advantage, if the Subjects by this means be more plentifully
and cheaply provided with all foreign commodities, and may gain a better price,
and vent for their own, and the number and Interests that can pretend to suffer
hereby, are so few, and inconsiderable, that it bears no proportion with the
advantage.

And further, by this liberty to foreiners, we should quickly attain to the
perfection of those manufactures, which now we so highly value and purchase so
dear from abroad: for many of the best Artists of other countries, no doubt in
short time would be transported hither, perhaps no less to the benefit of this
nation, then the like encouragement has been in former times, by the
improvement of our art of clothing; and by which practice the Hollander at this
day reaps unknown advantages. And as for raising the price and value of our
lands, or of any thing else that is our own; it is of so great an advantage,
that it might be wished, nothing were cheap amongst us but only money.

But to proceed in order, Of our natural store.
and first of our natural store, and annual increase of the soil, the annual
profit and increase of the soil of this kingdom, consists chiefly in corn of
all sorts, flax, hemp, hops, wool, and many more such like; and also the best
sorts of cattle, as bullocks, horse and sheep, and the greater our increase is
of any of these commodities, the richer may we be; for money, and all foreign
commodities that come hither, are only bought by the exchange of our own
commodities, wherefore by how much our own store does exceed those necessaries
we want from abroad, by so much will the plenty of money be increased amongst
us.

Our care should therefore be, Those things to be chiefly increased that are
raised at least charge, and are of greatest value abroad.
to increase chiefly those things which are of least charge at home, and
greatest value abroad; and cattle may be of far greater advantage to us, then
corn can be, if we might make the best profit of them: for that the profit we
can make of any corn by exportation, is much hindered by the plenty that
neighbor countries afford of that commodity, as good or better then we have
any. Wherefore, could we employ our lands to any thing of more worth, we could
not want plenty of corn, though we had none of our own; for what we should
increase in the room of it of greater value by exportation, would not only
bring us home as much corn as that land would have yielded, but plenty of money
to boot.

Of cattle, the most considerable are horse, sheep, and bullocks, in all which
we do not only excel in goodness all other countries, whereby we can vent the
profits of them at far greater rates, but we may also by our singular
advantage, in the increase of those cattle, have the sole trade, being able so
far to exceed our own wants, as to furnish all our neighbors, who must be
forced to good rates, no other country affording the like for goodness, or
scarce sufficient for their own use.

And might we freely have the liberty to export them, or so much of them as may
be fitting, we should need no laws to hinder the exportation of corn; for we
should find thereby a profit, so far exceeding that which might be raised out
of every acre, that we might better afford to give a far greater price to buy
it, then we can now sell it for. For the profit of one acre of pasture, in the
flesh, hide and tallow of an ox; or in the flesh, wool and tallow of a sheep;
or in the carcass of a horse, is of so much greater value abroad, then the like
yield of the earth would be in corn; that the exportations of this nation might
be at least double to what it is, if rightly disposed. Wherefore it is to be
wished, that the Supreme power would so far tender the public good, in which
it is so much concerned, as to remove all impediments, and promote all
endeavors, which tend to so great and public an advantage.

The greatest impediments in this Improvement are chiefly these. The
impediments of this Improvement.


First men cannot make the best of their own lands.

Secondly, when they have, they cannot fell the increase of it to the best
advantage. And these may be thus amended.

First, How to remove them, and first by enclosure.
by a liberty for every man to enjoy his lands in severalty and enclosure; one
of the greatest Improvements this nation is capable of; or want whereof, The
damage that happens for want of enclosure.
we find by daily experience, that the profit of a great part of the land and
stock in this kingdom, as now employed, is wholly lost. And this appears, in
that the land of the common fields, almost in all places of this nation, with
all the advantages that belong unto them, will not let for above one third part
so much, as the same land would do enclosed, and always several. And on the
great commons, a house with commoning, will not let for one quarter so much, as
it would do were its proportion several unto it. And all this by reason of the
many several Interests: whence it is, that men cannot agree to employ it to its
properest use, and best advantage: whereby much land is tilled with great
labor, and small profit; and much land fed, to the starving of the cattle, and
empoverishing the inhabitants; to the increase of nothing but beggary in this
nation; all which inconveniences, would by enclosure be prevented.

But it may be objected, Objections against enclosures.
that many other inconveniences would happen by enclosure; and chiefly, it
would cause great depopulations and scarcity of corn, as has been conceived by
former Parliaments; which appears by their opposing, rather then advancing of
it; upon this opinion, that enclosure would convert the land to pasture; one
hundred acres of which, will scarce maintain a shepherd and his dog, which now
maintains many families, employed in tillage; and by experience it is found,
that many towns, which when their lands were in tillage had many families, now
they are enclosed, have not so many inhabitants in them.

To this I answer,

First, The objections answered.
that enclosures would not have been opposed, had it not appeared, that most
landlords endeavored it; which is a greater argument of Improvement; for did
not the landlord suppose it would improve his land to a higher value; he would
never have been persuaded to do it; and the reason why it would have been of
greater advantage to the landlord, is because the tenant could make more profit
of it, or else we should not find them so greedy after pasture, at so high a
rate, when they may have arable enough for half the value; and this proves
enclosure is profitable, since the same land is thereby raised to a far greater
value.

Secondly, as for corn, it would be nothing the scarcer by enclosure, but the
rather more plentiful, though a great deal less land were tilled: for then
every ingenious husband would only plow that land that he found most fitting
for it, and that no longer then he found it able to bring him profit: so as he
would out of one acre, raise more corn then in the common field can be raised
of two, whereby one acre would be saved for other uses, besides the charges of
men's and cattels labors; whereas in the common fields, where the tenant does
not plow, the profit of the land is lost; whereby he is forced to a continual
plowing, though to the ruin and damage both of the land, and of himself: so as
that land, labor, and charge is lost, which otherwise might be employed, to
the profit and advantage of the kingdom.

Thirdly, as to depopulations by enclosures, granting it increases plenty, as
cannot well be denied, how increase and plenty can depopulate, cannot well be
conceived: nor surely do any imagine that the people which lived in those towns
they call depopulated, were all destroyed, because they lived no longer there;
when indeed they were only removed to other places, where they might better
benefit themselves, and profit the public.

Certainly they might as well think the nation undone, should they observe how
London is depopulated in a long vacation, when men are only retired into the
country, about their private and necessary employments; and the like might
they think of the country in the Term time, yet a man is not thereby added, or
diminished to the nation.

Fourthly, as many or more families may be maintained and employed, in the
manufacture of the wool that may arise out of one hundred acres of pasture,
then can be employed in a far greater quantity of arable; who perhaps do not
always find it most convenient for them to live, just on the place where the
wool grows; by which means cities and great towns are peopled, nothing to
the prejudice of the kingdom.

Wherefore then if by enclosure the land it self is raised to a greater value,
and a less quantity capable of a greater increase, and if really it causes no
depopulations, but at most a removal of people thence; where without benefit to
the public, or profit to themselves, they labored and toiled, to a more
convenient habitation, where they might with less pains greatly advantage both:
And if the manufactures and other profitable employments of this nation are
increased, by adding thereto such numbers of people, who formerly served only
to waste, not to increase the store of the nation, it cannor be denied, but the
encouragement of enclosure, where every man's just right may be preserved, would
infinitely conduce to the increase and plenty of this nation, and is a thing
very worthy the countenance and care of a Parliament.

In the next place, Of our mines.
the product of our mines of lead, tin, iron, coals, alum; and the like may
also be accounted amongst the annual increase of the soil, and the product of
these are only obtained by the labor and industry of the people, and are very
serviceable at home and profitable abroad; and therefore the increase of them
does very well deserve all just encouragement.

Lastly, Of our fishing trade.
the great plenty of fish our seas naturally afford may be accounted amongst
our other annual increases, and the profit of these only depend on peoples
labor, and that in such a kind as it does not only increase the plenty and
wealth of the kingdom, but also may be very serviceable to preserve and
increase the honor and safety of our nation, by increasing our shipping;
especially if some course were taken to prevent others from robbing us of so
great a treasure, and therefore very worthy the public care to maintain and
encourage; but the concernment of this is already so well known to every one to
be so great, as it is not needful to discourse it further.

In the next place, Of our manufactures.
our manufactures are to be considered, on which chiefly depends both the
wealth and prosperity of this kingdom; for by the increase and encouragement
thereof, the Subjects are employed in honest and industrious callings,
maintained and preserved from want, and those mischiefs which commonly attend
idleness: the people furnished at home with all things both of necessity and
pleasure; and by the overplus procure from abroad, what ever for use or delight
is wanting.

The chief manufactures amongst us at this day, are only woollen clothes,
woollen stuffs of all sorts, stockings, ribbandings, and perhaps some few silk
stuffs, and some other small things scarce worth the naming; and these already
named so decayed and adulterated, Our manufactures very much decayed.
that they are almost out of esteem both at home and abroad.

And this, The reasons.
because foreign commodities are grown into so great esteem amongst us, as we
wholly undervalue and neglect the use of our own, whereby that great expense of
treasure, that is yearly wasted in clothing, furnitures, and the like; redounds
chiefly to the profit of strangers, and to the ruin of his Majesty's Subjects.

And this will more plainly appear, if we examine the vast sums of money the
French yearly delude us of; either by such commodities as we may as well have
of our own, or else by such others, as we might as well in great part be
without: whereby no doubt our treasure will be soon exhausted, and the people
ruined, as this particular may make appear, which not long since was delivered
in to the King of France, upon a design he had to have forbidden the trade
between France and England; supposing the value of English commodities sent
into France, did surmount the value of those that were transported hither.

1. A catalogue of French commodities yearly transported into England.
There is transported out of France into England, great quantities of velvets
plain and wrought, sattins plain and wrought, cloth of gold and silver,
Armoysins and other merchandises of silk, which are made at Lions, and are
valued to be yearly worth one hundred and fifty thousand pounds.

2. In silk, stuffs, taffeties, poudesoyes, armoysins, clothes of gold and
silver, tabbies, plain and wrought, silk-ribbands and other such like silk
stuffs as are made at Tours, valued to be worth above three hundred thousand
pounds by year.

3. In silk ribbands, gallowns, laces, and buttons of silk, which are made at
Paris, Roven, Chaimont, S. Estienes in Forests, for about one hundred and
fifty thousand pounds by year.

4. A great quantity of serges, which are made at Chalons, Chartres, Estamines
and Rhemes, and great quantities of serges made at Amiens, Crevecoeur,
Blicourt, and other towns in Picardy, for above one hundred and fifty thousand
pounds a year.

5. In bever, demicaster and felt hats made in the city, and suburbs of Paris,
besides many others made at Roven, Lions, and other places, for about one
hundred and twenty thousand pounds a year.

6. In feathers, belts, girdles, hatbands, fans, hoods, masks, gilt and wrought
looking-glasses, cabinets, watches, pictures, cases, medals, tablets, bracelets
and other such like mercery ware, for above one hundred and fifty thousand
pounds a year.

7. In pins, needles, box-combs, tortois-shell combs, and such like, for about
twenty thousand pounds a year.

8. In perfumed and trimmed gloves, that are made at Paris, Roven, Vendosme,
Clermont and other places, for about ten thousand pounds a year.

9. In papers of all sorts, which are made at Auvergne, Poictou, Limosin,
Champaigne and Normandy, for above one hundred thousand pounds a year.

10, In all sorts of iron-mongers wares that are made in Forests, Auvergne and
other places, for about forty thousand pounds a year.

11. In linen cloth that is made in Britainy, and Normandy, as well course as
fine, there is transported into England, for above four hundred thousand pounds
a year.

12. In household stuff, consisting of beds, matresses, coverlids, hangings,
fringes of silk and other furnitures, for above one hundred thousand pounds a
year.

13. In wines from Gascoigne, Nantois and other places on the river of Loyer,
and also from Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nante, Roven and other places, are transported
into England for above six hundred thousand pounds a year.

14. In aqua vitae, sider, vinegar, verjuice, and such like, for about one
hundred thousand pounds a year.

15. In saffron, castle soap, honey, almonds, olives, capers, prunes and such
like, for about one hundred and fifty thousand pounds a year.

16. Besides five or six hundred vessels of salt, laden at Maron, Rochel,
Bouage, the isle of Oleron, and isle of Rhee, transported into England, and
Holland, of a very great value. So as by this calculation, it does appear, that
the yearly value of such commodities as are transported from France to England,
amount to above six and twenty hundred thousand pounds.

And the commodities exported out of England into France, consisting chiefly of
woollen clothes, serges, knit stockings, lead, pewter, alum, coals, and all
else, do not amount to above ten hundred thousand pounds a year. By which it
appears that our trade with France, is at least sixteen hundred thousand pounds
a year, clear lost to this kingdom:

Whereby the King of France, finding it would prove to his loss, to forbid the
trade with England, soon laid aside the design; however raised the customs of
some of our English commodities, by which means the vent of those commodities
is very much lessened and hindered.

Hereby it may appear how insensibly our treasure will be exhausted, and the
nation beggered, whilst we carelessly neglect our own Interest, and strangers
abroad are diligent to make their advantages by us.

But most of these evils would be easily prevented, Means to redress this
mischief.
if only his Majesty would be pleased ^o commend to his people, by his own
example, the esteem and value he has of his own commodities, in which the
greatest Courtier may be as honorably clad, as in the best dress, Paris, or a
French Taylour can put him in; besides it seems to be more honorable for a
King of England, rather to become a pattern to his own people, then to conform
to the humors and fancies of other nations, especially when it is so much to
his prejudice.

This alone, without further trouble, would be at least ten hundred thousand
pounds a year, to the advantage of his people; for the Courtiers always
endeavor to imitate the Prince, being desirous to obtain his favor, which
they can no way better do, then by approving his actions in being of like
humor: and the Court being the copy that the Gentry strive to write after, and
the rest of the people commonly follow; it appears of what great consequence
and advantage the good example of a Prince, is to the benefit of his people.

And whereas it sometimes has been thought prudence in a Prince, Expense in
apparel to be countenanced under some restrictions.
to forbid and discountenance the excess of apparel in his Subjects; whereby
many of the nobility themselves have ruined their families, and most of the
Gentry have been impoverished; whereby the great expense, and waste of treasure
in that vanity does appear: yet I conceive, in a convenient manner it rather
ought to be maintained, and encouraged, only observing these rules.

First, that the vanity of the expense do not depend on such commodities, as
have too much of the substance of gold, silver, or silk; whereby the public
treasure is wasted and lost.

Secondly, that we impoverish not our selves to enrich strangers, by that
unnatural vanity, in preferring foreign commodities though worse, before our
own, that are better.

Thirdly, that the excess of this expense consist chiefly in the art,
manufacture and workmanship of the commodity made in our own country; whereby
ingenuity would be encouraged, the people employed, and our treasure kept at
home, so as the Prince would be nothing damnified by the excess: for the ruin
of one would raise as much another of his Subjects; and money would thereby be
more moving, which would be a great encouragement, and satisfaction to the
people.

To name the particulars of such commodities as would hereby be increased,
would be endless and needless, when in a word it is, whatever at present we
purchase from abroad, which we might as well raise of our own at home. But some
perhaps may say, that this would destroy our trade abroad, for many of our
commodities are vented, by the exchange of them for other commodities we bring
home in return.

I answer, it is no prejudice to lose that trade, which is a loss to keep; and
if our importations of foreign commodities be of far greater value then our own
exportations, our treasure must needs be wasted to even the balance; and so our
own people remain idle and poor, for the vent of one thousand pounds worth of
commodities abroad, is of little advantage to the people, if thereby they are
hindered of the vent of two thousand at home.

Wherefore these particulars considered, The Interest of the Prince, to
increase the manufactures and trade of his people.
it is evident of what great concernment it is to a Prince, to encourage and
increase the trade, and manufacture of his own people. And so much concerning
trade at home.

In the next place concerning our trade abroad with stangers, Concerning our
trade abroad, and what is freely to be exported.
and this would also be encouraged, and increased by all means possible, and
when any commodity is raised to the greatest height it is capable of, it should
be free for exportation, under so reasonable customs, that the Merchant may
afford his commodity abroad, as cheap as others, or else he would not be able
to vent it.

Secondly, What freely to be imported.
all foreign commodities that are useful, to improve our own manufactures and
trade abroad, and cannot be raised here, should be brought to us under easy
customs, the better to enable us at an easy exchange, to vent our commodities
abroad.

Thirdly, What to be hindered and prevented.
all foreign commodities whatsoever, that are only useful to be spent within
the nation, and that have already all their perfection, as fruits, sugars,
wines, linen cloth, laces, silks, and what else can receive no addition here,
and are not to be again transported; such commodities should pay extraordinary
customs, but should not be forbidden to be brought in: For by this means, these
commodities will be so dear to the people, that it will much wean them from so
lavish an use of them, as might otherwise be, and for such things as we are
capable to raise, it will much increase it of our own; whereby the State will
raise a good revenue, and the country save their wealth, that would be
wastfully spent abroad, and so increase our own manufactures at home.

Fourthly, the increase of our land in any kind (except sheep alive and mares)
that have already all the perfection that we can add unto them should be free
for exportation, The exportation of horses of greatest advantage.
under reasonable customs; and of all things this nation is capable to raise,
there is not any one of so great profit, as the exportation of horses, which of
all commodities is of least charge to be raised at home, and of greatest value
abroad. But to this may be many objections.

First, Objections.
that it will make horses dear.

Secondly, that the exportation of stone-horses may be prejudicial, by
furnishing others with our breed.

Besides, it may enable our enemies who may invade us, and we shall also weaken
our selves by sending away our best horses; with other such like objections.

But to these it is answered,

First, The objections answered.
as for the dearness of any thing we sell to strangers, the more money we get
for it by how much the dearer it is, and the only way to be rich, is to have
plenty of that commodity to vent, that is of greatest value abroad; for what
the price of any thing is amongst our selves, whether dear or cheap it matters
not; for as we pay, so we receive, and the country is nothing damnified by it;
but the art is when we deal with strangers, to sell dear and to buy cheap; and
this will increase our wealth.

Secondly, to vent stone-horses, would be of far better profit then to vent
geldings; for that a stone-horse will give far more money, with the same charge
to us, besides the loss of many horses in gelding; and as for any prejudice to
our breed, I conceive it no danger, if mares be not transported; for one horse
will cover twenty mares as well as twenty horse may do: wherefore the increase
of the horses do nothing increase the breed; and in France where we should best
vent our horses, they have always horses enough, and of very great value and
goodness, sufficient for stallions; but they have neither mares nor convenience
to breed; for the country generally is all champion, cornfieldsd, and
vineyards, and also so unsafe to venture any cattle of such worth without stone
walls to guard them, that scarce all the summer, either horse or cow is left
abroad in the night, without a guard; besides, if they could breed, the breed
of it self would prove degenerate, and soon be lost, the country being
naturally improper for it.

As for enabling our enemies to invade us, I conceive there is but little
danger in that. At present we have amity with all those countries that desire
our horses, and if at any time it should be found fitting, to forbid the
transportation of them, the prejudice that might happen by those already
transported, would soon be past; for of five hundred horses that should be
transported, I verily believe in less then five years, there would scarce be
five remaining.

Yet further, it does not concern us to fear any such power in our neighbors,
we having no frontiers subject to sudden incursions; but our defense consists
chiefly in another strength, which is our ships at sea, which should they be
insufficient to guard us, I doubt the enemies want of our horses would be but
small security.

And as to the weakening of our selves, by sending away our best horses, whereby
we may want for our own use, this I conceive is a groundless fear, and wholly
mistaken; for the good profit we should make by a free vent of this commodity,
would encourage every ingenious husband, to be well provided with what is so
profitable; and every man would endeavor, not only to increase his breed, but
also to be curious in the goodness of them; so as it will rather be a double
advantage to us; for as by the profit of those we send abroad, we shall greatly
increase our wealth, and far more by this means then by any other this country
is capable of, out of its own store; so we shall also have more choice, and
plenty of this so serviceable and profitable a creature, both for use and
pleasure. Concerning the return of money by exchange.


By the improvement of our trade as aforesaid, both at home and abroad, whereby
our exportations of commodities would exceed our importations, a very great and
signal advantage would accrue not commonly taken notice of, and it is the
profit we should then make of our returning money, The prejudice at present.
by bills of exchange, in which at this present we suffer an unvaluable loss;
for as it is said before, our importations exceeding our exportations, our coin
and treasure must needs be wasted to even the balance, and consequently more
money drawn by exchange out of the country then is returned back again;
whereby we are forced to give far more then the intrinsic value of the thing,
to receive our moneys beyond the sea, to supply our occasions, the number being
greater of those that desire to receive moneys abroad, then of those that want
it at home: for it is in this as in all other commodities, where the commodity
is scarce, and the vent great, the purchase is always dear; Our coin and
bullion transported, and the reason.
and the foreign Merchant finding our necessity, makes his advantage upon us
incredibly to our loss; so that by this means it also happens, that our coin
and bullion is transported; it being found more profitable then returns by
exchange, for the reasons aforesaid; Our gold transporttd, and the reason.
and our gold being of less value at home then it is abroad it has been all
conveyed away within these few years, and laws to prevent it shall always prove
fruitless, when it is advantageous to do it, there being means sufficient to be
found to effect it, by such as shall find it profitable. Laws to prevent it
fruitless.


Wherefore to make laws to hinder the exportation of coin or bullion, I
conceive altogether useless.

First, because it does nothing prevent it where it is intended, and Secondly,
in many cases it is most advantageous to do it. For in some countries, some
commodities are no way to be purchased at cheaper rates, then by money in
specie, and if by the right ordering and disposing of our trade, our
exportations did exceed our importations, in value, our coin and bullion would
be daily increased; there being no other means to even the balance of trade.

And here it may not be altogether improper, Concerning our money and coin.
to speak something concerning our money and coin, which is also a commodity as
well as the rest; in which these particulars are chiefly to be respected.

First, How chiefly to be considered in relation to other nations.
to consider and examine if the gold, to silver, in England, be of the like
proportionable value; as the gold, to silver, in France, Spain, Holland, and
other foreign countries.

Secondly to consider the allay of gold, and silver, in England, to that of
other countries.

Thirdly, to consider if the coin be of equal value, with the current price of
bullion, the charge of coining only deducted.

Lastly, how to order our coin, so as may be most honorable and profitable to
the nation.

To the first, it does appear that the gold in England does not bear so good a
value to silver as it does in France, and other foreign countries; whereby all
our gold is exported, and not our silver.

Secondly, the allay both of gold and silver in England, is finer then in other
parts; which is rather a prejudice, then an advantage, it giving no more in
foreign countries, then only according to the weight by their standard, without
consideration to the pureness.

Thirdly, our coin is not equal to the true value of the silver, the coinage
only deducted; for by the imperfection of our mint the pieces of the same
value are made so various, that some shillings will weigh fourteen pence, and
some not above eight pence; which afterward, being new weighed over, and
culled by the goldsmiths, through whose hands, most of our bullion passes, the
heavy ones are picked out, and only the light ones, and those of under value,
pass for current; which is a most eminent abuse and wrong to the public.

Wherefore lastly, in prevention to these inconveniences, First, our gold would
be raised in proportion to silver, at least equal with what it bears in France,
and other countries; and if it be desired to increase, chiefly that species, a
small addition to the value will soon do it.

Secondly, The imperfection of our mint and abases here at home.
the allay would be made the same, with that in other countries of Europe, with
whom we chiefly traffic.

Thirdly, the abuses happening by the imperfection of our mint, as light and
false money in abundance; How to order our mint so as to prevent most of these
abuses and inconveniences.
any ill-favored and imperfect false stamp, being hardly to be distinguished
from the true, might easily be prevented, by a more exact and curious stamp, as
may easily be made by the way of milling; whereby not only the coin will be
more beautiful, but also more equal in weight, and much more difficult to be
clipped and counterfeited: especially if care be taken, to make the pieces
large and thin; which will not only show more great and noble, but will many
ways be more easy to be distinguished from false, as by the sound, stiffness,
weight and color: it being both so difficult, and chargeable to counterfeit
money so formed, as few will hazard to undertake it.

Next, Concerning our shipping and navigation.
in order to our trade abroad, and safety at home, our shipping and navigation
is to be considered; the increase and preservation whereof, is of great
concernment to the Interest, safety, and well-being of this nation; for which
the late act for trade, by the late pretended Parliament, did wisely provide,
by ordering that no foreiner should bring any commodity hither, but what was
the growth of their own country; Whereby the Hamburger and Flemming, that run
hackney all the world over, were a little stayed from coming hither crowding so
thick, with all foreign commodities as they were wont to do; whereby little, or
no employment could be found for our own vessels; every thing being so
plentifully brought hither by them; and at cheaper rates, then we our selves
could fetch them.

But some perhaps may object, Objections against it.
that sure, it was an advantage to us, to be so cheap and plentifully stored
with foreign commodities, when we cannot be so cheaply furnished by our own
shipping; for that we are at far greater charge, both in goodness of shipping,
number of our men, and chargeable maintaining of them more then others.

I answer, The objections answered.
it is true, that the same commodity brought hither in any of our own vessels,
cannot be afforded so cheap as what might be brought by others; by reason
indeed, that our shipping is much more chargeable, and better manned then any
other; but this being rightly considered, it is rather an advantage then a
prejudice to the public; for, if commodities be thereby any thing the dearer,
here at home, yet, we buy them as cheap abroad as any other; and all that
others would have gained of us by the carriage, will now be earned of our own
people; and whatever it costs the dearer to the purchaser here, is no prejudice
to the public, when our own nation receives the profit of it; especially it
being by the increase of that, in which consists the greatest honor and safety
of the kingdom. Some might therefore think, that it might be of no less
advantage, to forbid other nations to fetch any of our commodities, but to keep
to our selves the benefit of the portage of them by our own shipping.

I answer, should we do this, we can expect no less, but that other nations
would do the like toward us, whereby we should be very much prejudiced.

First, in that we should then lose the advantage which now we have, in
bringing foreign commodities home; and besides, we should perhaps, want the vent
of our own commodities, which certainly will always sell best, where most
chapmen are found to buy them; so as by how much the cheaper they can transport
them, so much the more they will be contented to give us here; moreover, the
greatest part of our manufactures, are of so great value, and so light of
carriage, that a small advantage in the price, or a little better vent, will
soon compensate the loss of the portage of them; but indeed, if the Hamburger
and Flemming, were prevented in the carriage of some of our more sluggish
commodities, as sea-coal, lead, iron, alum, fish, or the like where the charge
of the carriage many times is greater, then the whole value of the commodity
it self, this might possibly increase something our navigation, and yet hinder
nothing the vent of those commodities, which others cannot at all be without;
and we shall not much need to fear their requiting us in the same kind; for
neither the Hollander, nor Hamburger, have any such commodities of their own;
as we need care to fetch; who are the only nation, that employ themselves in
this kind of trade.

It may not also be improper, Of fore^^ plantations.
to reflect a little, upon the benefit this nation does, or may receive by
foreign Plantation^*

I conceive, What chiefly to be considered in the increasing and preserving
them.
no foreign Plantation should be undertaken, or prosecuted, but in such
countries that may increase the wealth and trade of this nation, either in
furnishing us, with what we are otherwise forced to purchase from strangers, or
else by increasing such commodities, as are vendible abroad; which may both
increase our shipping, and profitably employ our people; but otherwise, it is
always carefully to be avoided, especially where the charge is greater then the
profit, for we want not already a country sufficient for double our people,
were they rightly employed; and a Prince is more powerful that has his
strength and force united, then he that is weakly scattered in many places. But
to descend to particulars, viz. what commodities are most desirable and of
greatest advantage, and what countries and climates are most proper to increase
them, would be too tedious to treat of here.

There yet remains something to be said concerning Merchants, Concerning
Merchants associating themselves in companies.
associating themselves in companies, the benefit or prejudice whereof has
been often controverted, but something difficult to determine.

It is true, Objections against it.
it is opposed by many, conceiving the free liberty of trade, The objections
answered.
would be much more advantageous in the general, because these companies,
keeping the trade to themselves only, will have what commodities are to be
vented abroad at their own price, and at an under value; none having occasion
to buy them but themselves; whereby the workmen are many times discouraged, and
sometimes undone; and on the contrary, what commodities are brought home in
exchange, they sell at what unreasonable rates they please, the whole
commodity remaining in their hands; whereby the people in general, are very
much damnified, and the companies only enriched; whereas, if the trade were
free, our own commodities having more chapmen, would sell at better rates, and
what is brought home in return, would be distributed at much cheaper prices
amongst the people.

This is for the most part a truth, yet rightly considering the thing, it
rather seems an advantage in the whole, then the least prejudice; for indeed,
as they make their profit at home, so they make no less advantage abroad; for
the whole commodity being in their hands* they will make the most that can be
made of it; none having the like commodities to undersell them; and the like
advantage they have again in what they buy; whereby in truth our own
commodities are sold the dearer to strangers, and foreign commodities bought
much the cheaper; when both would happen contrary in a free trade, where each
will undersell the other, to vent most, and also purchase at any rates, to
prevent the rest: besides, many times the trade is wholly lost, particulars
being often too weak to maintain and undergo it, and there is nothing less of a
commodity vented by a company, then by single persons; for they will always
furnish, as much as the trade requires; the more they vent, the more being
their profit. Whereby it may appear, that companies, both vent our own
commodities to the best advantages and buy cheapest what we want from
strangers; and the prejudice that may happen by them to the workmen, or home
chapmen, is fully recompensed by the clear profit they return to the public;
of which they are members, as well as others. But if their particular profits
be thought too great, it may be something moderated by a free liberty, that
every one that please, may be admitted of the company, on fit and reasonable
terms.

In the last place, What Interest most proper to be allowed for the use of
money.
concerning the use of money; which being the life and sinews of trade, it has
been the opinion of some that the greater use were allowed for money, the more
would be the profit of the public; for that strangers, finding a greater
benefit to be made of their money here, then other where, would send it hither;
whereby money would be much more plentiful amongst us.

Indeed, I should be of their opinion, if as soon as by this means, great sums
of money were transported hither, all their money should be confiscate to the
public; but if otherwise, sure it cannot be denied, but the greater the use
the more the profit to the usurer, and loss to the debtor; so as in a few
years, we should find our selves so little enriched thereby, that when the
principal should be again recalled, we should find but little money left; all
our own being wasted in use: wherefore indeed the true benefit to the public
is, to set the use of money as low, or rather lower then in our neighbor
countries it is; for then they would make no profit out of us, by that means;
but rather we on them. And it is the clear profit that we get of our own, that
will make this nation rich; and not the great sums we are indebted to others.

Many particulars more might seasonably be discoursed of, and this already
touched, possibly by some other might be more exactly and amply treated on; but
these being the most material things that I could call to memory, and most
conducing (in my opinion) to the emprovement and prosperity of the nation, and
consequently to my present design; I shall satisfy my self with this essay;
hoping the subject being so worthy, some other more skillful and knowing pen,
may be provoked to enlarge it further.

FINIS.
The Summary.
OF store and trade in general Page 1 Of the trade of France Page 2 Of the
trade of Holland Page 3 Riches and people necessary to increase the greatness
and power of a nation ibid. The prejudice private Interests often are to
public advantage ibid. How to increase the people of this nation Page 4 Why
foreiners desire to inhabit here Page 5 The first reason, the pleasantness and
fruitfulness of the country ibid. The second reason, the excellency of the
laws and government, and the good disposition of the people ibid. The third
reason, the advantage of trade ibid. The fourth reason, the Protestant
Religion. ibid. Reasons showing the advantage the Prince of this nation has,
by preferring the Protestant Religion only Page 6 The first reason, because
thereby he preserves his authority more entire ibid. The second reason, because
thereby he gains an Interest in other Princes dominions Page 7 The danger for
the Prince of this nation to tolerate any other Religion Page 8 What is chiefly
to be regarded in settling a strict formity Page 11. Objections against the
ways, and means to multiply people Page 12 The objections answered ibid. Of our
natural store Page 13 Those things to be chiefly increased, that are raised at
least charge, and are of greatest value abroad Page 14 The impediments of this
improvement Page 16 How to remove them ibid. First by enclosure ibid. The
damage that happens for want of enclosure ib. Objections against enclosures
Page 17 The objections answered ibid. Of our mines Page 20 Of our fishing trade
ibid. Of our manufactures Page 21 Our manufactures very much decayed ibid. The
reasons ibid. A catalogue of French commodities yearly transported into England
Page Page 22 Means to redress this mischief Page 25 Expense in apparel to be
countenanced under some restrictions Page 26 The Interest of the Prince to
increase the manufactures and trade of his people Page 28 Concerning our trade
abroad, and what is freely to be exported ibid. What freely to be imported
ibid. What to be hindered and prevented ibid. The exportation of horses, of
greatest advantage Page 29 Objections ibid. The objections answered Page 30
Concerning return of money by exchange Page 32 The prejudice at present ibid.
Our coin and bullion transported, and the reason Page 33 Our gold transported,
and the reason ibid. Laws to prevent it fruitless ibid. Concerning our money
and coin Page 34 How chiefly to be considered in relation to other nations
ibid. The imperfections of our mint and abuses here at home Page 35 How to
order our mint to prevent most of these abuses and inconveniences ibid.
Concerning our shipping and navigation Page 36 Objections against it Page 37
The objections answered ibid. Of foreign plantations Page 39 What chiefly to be
considered in the increasing and preserving them ibid. Concerning Merchants
associating themselves in companies Page 40 Objections against it ibid. The
bojections answered ibid. What Interest most proper to be allowed for the use
of money Page 42
FINIS.

